THE ORIGINAL CAUSE OF Temporal Evils.

The opinions of the most Ancient Heathens concerning it, examined by the
sacred Scriptures, and referred unto them, as to the Sourse and Fountain from
whence they sprang.

By MERIC CASAUBON D.D.

Orig. contra Cells. lib. IV. (...). If any Argument, fit for humane
disquisition, be of difficult investigation to humane industry, among such may
this which is concerning the Original of Evils, well be reckoned. LONDON,
Printed by M. F. and are to be sold by Richard Minne, at the sign of S. Paul
in Little Britain. 1645.

The Preface.
ARistotle in his Rhetoricks where he treats of the properties of men according
to their several either ages, or conditions of life, has a notable
observation concerning those he properly calls (...), or fortunate men; That
among a greater number of bad qualities, they have one that is commendable and
makes some amends; which is, that they are commonly (...), lovers of God; or,
piously affected toward God. It may well seem strange, if not altogether
false, it being more generally received, and apparently more probable, that
(Bonae mentis soror paupertas) Virtue and Poverty (poverty and piety, the
virtue of virtues, especialy) are of a kind. It were no hard thing with such
distinctions and limitations of circumstances, as in cases of this nature must
always be presupposed, to reconcile these two. Neither indeed does Aristotle
simply say, that they are (...), religious, in point of life, which may prove
quite another thing; but this only, that such are (...), (...): that is, that
They love God, (whether really, or in their opinion only, is the question: See
S. John Chap. XIV. ver. 15.21, 23, 24. and the same S. John I. Epist. Chap. V.
ver. 1, 2, 3.) and have a kind of confidence in him, (or, trust in him after a
sort) because of those goods Fortune has cast upon them.

And this is further confirmed by S. Basil also (for herein the common saying,
that Contrariorum eadem est ratio, will hold well:) where he discourses of the
original of Atheism: When men, says he, at first are crossed in their
worldly affairs, then begin they, for want of patience, to doubt in
themselves, whether God in very deed regards the things of this world;
whether he take care of particular men; and whether he reward every man
according to his deeds. But afterward when they see no end of their troubles
and miseries, but one evil continually attended with another evil, they
settle in themselves that wicked opinion, and absolutely resolve in their
hearts, that there is no God. So Basile in his Homily, (...): That God is not
the cause of evils. The words therefore of the Psalmist are very emphaticall,
Psalm. 44. ver. 9, 10, etc.
Thou have cast off and put us to shame, etc. All this is come upon us, yet
have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our
heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy ways.

At such times then especially, has that question been most rife, (and
pertinent indeed) (...): Whence are evils, and what brought them forth into
the world: of which so much has been written by ancient Philosophers. The
Scriptures indeed, not in positive assertions only, which in diverse places are
to be found; but even by the whole stream and series of Ecclesiastical
stories and events of all kinds, afford so bright and resplendent a light in
this point, that he sees not the Sun in the firmanent at noon day, who makes
not this conclusion from them, That as all evil of sin is from man, by the
instigation of the Devil; so all evil of punishment is from God, for the
amendment of sinners. These two, malum culpae, and malum poenae, (as they are
commonly discerned,) the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment, (though
this latter be not evil absolutely, but rather good, in regard of the end and
consequents of it, as heathens themselves have well acknowledged:) being the
two springs, from whence not Illae, as it is in the Comic, but omnes
lachrymae; whatsoever Adams wretched posterity groaneth under, and through
which the very frame of this lower and sublunary world labors, does flow. So
that were all that profess Christianity, and consequently, to embrace the
Scriptures as divine Oracles, truly and really what they profess; as the
resolution of this point would be easy and obvious, so the arguing of it,
among Christians, needless. But by books that of late have been written as
well by Protestants as by Papists, it may easily appear that many among
Christians are to be found, who in their inward are nothing less then what
outwardly they profess themselves; yea, and not a few, it should seem, that
dare freely enough profess what they believe. Libertins, as I take it, is
their name in some countries. And besides this, it may further appear by holy
David, (or whoever was the composer of the 73. Psalm.) that in time of either
public extraordinary confusion, or private distress and extremity, it may be
the case of a man, religious otherwise and godly, to be at a stand for a while,
and to entertain some doubts.

Of all opinions in this kind, contrary to the truth, and destuctive of all
godliness, I find two chiefly to have prevailed in the world. That of
Epicurus (so I call it, because from him chiefly propagated to afterages;
though long, in part at least, in the world, before him:) as more known, I
shall first name; which was, (as he openly professed it: for some ancients make
him to have been an arrant atheist:) That there is a God, an excellent Nature,
whose happiness and perfection is to enjoy himself free from all troubles and
cares, not regarding or heeding any thing at all but himself: That it is a
folly to believe that God had created the World, as either Sun or Moon, or any
other part of this Universe: and not folly alone, but impiety to believe that
God either regarded what is done by men, or was the cause of any whether good
or evil that happens unto them.

This opinion, though it might and did in the later ages of the world, when God
ceased by strange apparitions, and otherwise, so familiarly to reveal himself
unto men, as before; yet in the first ages of it, (impious enough otherwise)
when the memory of the Creation, and other great and miraculous works of God,
was so fresh, and his presence (by Angels and the like) so frequent among men;
it could not possibly take place. The Devil then in those days, when God did
so manifestly interesse himself in the affairs of men, because the time for
Epicurisme was not yet come, in stead of it, he poisoned men with an opinion,
That God was of an envious nature: which was (as is showed in the ensuing
Treatise) the very argument he used to our first father and mother, Adam and
Eve, to make them transgress, and so to forfeit their first happiness. And when
some men by the very light of natural humane reason that remained in them,
began to discern the impiety and absurdity of this opinion, they fell into
another, not altogether so impious, but more absurd, that God is not
omnipotent, and wanted not will, but power to amend what they conceived to be
amiss in the world: or, that there were two Authors and Creators of all things,
the one good, and the other evil.

These were the first errors and extravagancies of men against the true
doctrine of Gods Providence, and administration of the world, as it is taught
by the holy Scriptures. Most men that have written of and for Providence, fall
upon Epicurus and his opinions copiously enough; as indeed it is a large and
copious argument, especially since that by so many it has been beaten and
trodden. But I know not of any that has examined and refuted that more ancient
error, or scarce taken notice of it: which nevertheless is not less, yea, in
some respect I may say, more considerable. For as it is more ancient, so it may
more clearly be derived from its first spring, mistaken Scripture: which
affords us a good argument for the antiquity and authenticknes of the
Scriptures themselves, against atheists and infidels; as good, almost, as any
can be. This is it therefore, that in this ensuing Treatise I have proposed to
my self, and endeavored. I intend it (I confess,) but as a part of a greater
work, concerning Divine Providence, in general, which long ago I have had in
my thoughts. But whatever becomes of the rest, this either as a part (if it
shall please God to spare me life, and other opportunities shall serve) may
begin; or if otherwise, stand by it self as a supplement to what has already
been written by others of that argument; and either way, give some
satisfaction, I hope, in this maine point, to His glory, to whom whatsoever is
not referred, I never thought much considerable.

Errata.
Page 14. Lin. 33. Soon after. p 16. l. 26. he did so. p. 20. l. 25. in his XV.
Iliad. p. 22. l 6. heterogeneous. p. 50. l. 2. Thou shall know. p. 61. l. 6.
(...).

THE ORIGINAL CAUSE OF TEMPORAL EVILS.
THat the life of man in this world is full of troubles and miseries, is so
common a complaint in the mouths of all men, of what rank and quality soever
they be; and so obvious a subject in Writers of all Ages, Nations and
Professions, as that it may well be reckoned among those (...), or known
Principles, which common sense teaches, and Artists ground upon as
indisputable truths. Yet he that will see this common and beaten subject, most
exquisitely even in the judgment of humane reason, setting aside the credit
and authority of divine inspiration, handled, needs but go to Ecclesiastes;
the excellency of which discourse he shall best understand, who judiciously
compares it with the choicest, and most approved pieces, either old, or late,
concerning that argument. The truth is, there has been little said by others
upon that Theme, either for wit or wisdom much considerable, which may not
both be found here, and probably be supposed originally to have proceeded
hence. I will give one instance. What among the Ancients, upon this subject of
man's misery, more famous, then that old saying, whereof they made one of their
Sileni, (a degree above Philosophers, among ancient Heathens) to be the
author, That it was the chiefest happiness, not to be born; next to that,
quickly to die? Diverse expressions of this saying by several Greek Poets (if
any shall desire to see them together, and compare them) have been collected by
Erasmus. The matter is by Tully in his Tuscul, briefly thus recorded: Fertur de
Sileno fabella quaedam, etc. There goes an old tale (or, story: for so the word
fabula sometimes is taken) of a Silenus, who being taken by Midas the King, is
said to have given him a ransom (or, reward) for his dismission: which was,
that he taught him, how that it was a most happy thing not to be born; but in
the next place, to die very soon. And this long before any memory of any either
Midas or Silenus, Eccles. 4. ver. 1, 2, 3.
was thus delivered by wise Solomon: So I returned and considered all the
oppressions, that are done under the Sun, and behold, etc. Wherefore I
praised the dead which are already dead, more then the living which are yet
alive. Yea, better is he then both they, which has not yet been, who has not
seen the evil work that is done under the Sun. These words, Better is he then
both they, etc. misunderstood, might probably occasion that opinion of the
ancientest Philosophers, (of which we shall have occasion for to say more
afterward) that the souls of men had a subsistence long before their
incorporation, and were thus driven into this lower world, and confined into
bodies, as Cages or Prisons, for some miscariages in their former and better
condition. Pliny the eldest, who had studied the world as much as any man, and
has written of the world, (his Natural History I mean) more then any; who for
his parts of nature, (wit, and curiosity) and other great advantages of fortune
might be supposed to know as much as any other man; his observation is, that
nullum frequentius votum, no wish more frequent among men, then the wish of
death; and thereupon his conclusion is, that Natura nihil brevitate vitae
praestitit melius: and elsewhere he calls death, pracipuum naturae bonum, the
greatest benefit of nature, or the greatest blessing that heavens have
vouchsafed unto mankind. Yet all this notwithstanding, if any judging of this
life by what has hitherto happened unto themselves, and not much sensible of
what they have known to happen unto others, be of another mind, and think
better of the world then so; I might tell them of Croesus, and others, who once
thought themselves the happiest of men, and afterward became notorious
examples of man's misery; I might also tell them, that among the miseries of
this life, those that are public, and extend unto many, (such as are the
miseries of wars, slaughters, slaveries, plagues, famines, and the like; of
which that of the Poet, (...),
That both Sea and Land are full of miseries,
has generally been true, and visible at all times) are the chiefest, and
those which most affect a man, that is a man indeed; that is, truly sociable,
and communicable, (...), as the Greek Philosophers express it: this I say, and
much more to this purpose I might tell them; but that, not the consideration of
our miseries be they more or less, or what opinion men have of them, is the
subject by me here undertaken; but the original cause of our miseries, and
what was the opinion of ancientest Heathens about it; and how consonant and
agreeable it is with the truth of the holy Scriptures: such consonancy either
of humane reason, (in times of Paganism) or ancient traditions with the
Scriptures, having been accounted by ancient learned Christians no small
evidence of the truth of the Scriptures themselves, and by them therefore upon
all occasions with all possible care, and curiosity, sifted, and inquired into.
But before I come to what I have more directly proposed to my self, I must be
way of introduction take notice of some other opinions of theirs, that have
much affinity with the former subject; and what relation they have to my main
scope, will appear in the progress and conclusion of our discourse.

It is a common observation among the Ancients that there is no worldly good,
which is not either tempered with some present evil; or at least, has the
seeds in it self of some evil consequence, and future inconvenience: (...):
or as some others, (...), that no worldly good, or pleasure, is pure, and
sincere; unmixed, and untainted of the contrary. I know not any other subject
that ancient both Historians and Philosophers (Greeks especially) more
frequently insist upon, if it come in their way; or more willingly digress
into. Theophrastus in that excellent fragment of his Metaphysics, handles it
with admirable wit, and profundity; showing, that such is the nature of this
sublunary world, as to consist of contraries; and how one contrary does beget
another: a curious speculation; curiously handled and speculated no^ by
Theophrastus only, but by the author of that polite Treatise De mundo, (too
polite I doubt for Aristotle's style, though ascribed unto him by diverse
ancients, besides Apuleius, as Justin Martyr, and Philoponus) the which
Apuleius of old, and Budaeus of late have turned into Latin. One of the first,
if not the very first now extant, in whom this observation of the mixture of
sweet and sour in worldly things, is to be found, is old Plato, who records
how his Master Socrates, that very day that he drank his last and fatal cup,
which made him immortal to all ensuing generations, having casually rubbed his
thigh or knee to allay the itch, which the fetters had occasioned; and
perceiving a kind of pleasure to ensue upon it; took that occasion to instruct
his friends and auditors then present, concerning the nature of all worldly
delights and pleasures in these woe ds: How incongruous in my judgment, O
friends, is that thing, which men usually term sweet? how marvellously (or,
naturally) inclinanable it is to that, which because they cannot be together at
one time, seems contrary, pain? Yet nevertheless, such is their nature, that
if a man pursue after the one and obtain it, it shall go very hard but he shall
be constrained, as if both hanged by one string, to have part in the other
also. And certainly had Aesop thought of it, he would have made a Fable of it,
how that God purposing to reconcile these two, sweet and sour, together, and
not being able; he did chain them together by the head (alterum ex altero
verticibus inter se contrariis deligavit, as Aulus Gellius expresses it;) so
that whosoever is partaker of the one, cannot be long without the other also;
as now it has happened unto me, the same fetter having caused first pain, and
now pleasure unto my thigh. So Socrates in Plato. What Aesop did not, learned
and ingenious Camerarius has since done; he has contrived it into two fables,
the one of the^ with the text of Plato, the Reader shall find, if he please at
the end of this Treatise. This was the practice of the Ancients, (I note it by
the way, because we have many examples of it in the holy Scriptures) by fables
and parables, to work upon men: and they found it a most powerful and
effectual way; whereof Plutarch in his Consolation to Apollonius, has a
notable instance; and it is in an argument of much affinity to this. But to
return, it would be long even to name those several ancient Authors, who have
descanted upon it, and applied it to several occasions. Pliny the latter among
the Latins, in his incomparable Panegyric, in few words, but as elegant and
pithy, as they are short, thus: Habet has vices conditio mortalium, ut adversa
ex secundis, ex adversis secunda nascantur, (nascuntur, not noscantur; as it is
in some editions:) Occultas utrorumque semina Deus, and plerunque bonorum
malorumque causae sub diversa speci^ latent.

But that which concerns us to take more especial notice of, is an other
observation of the same Ancients, concerning all extraordinary worldly
successes, and more then usual prosperity in any kind, which they held
generally to be very ominous, yea very unlucky; in so much as they were
accounted wise and prudent, who could, if not altogether prevent, (which is not
in the power of man) yet by certain art and cunning, temper and allay such
excesses of fortune. Whether this was intended by Menander, or no, (that famous
Comic) I know not; for he might have another aim: but his words are pertinent:
(...),
(...).
Of all unhappiness among men, the chief cause is, Much (or, too much)
happiness.


The opinion may seem strange, but the practice of many of them, upon it, much
more; and the grounds both of the one and of the other, when well weighed and
considered, most of all. Herodotus shall be the first from whom we will take
our information about it, as being the first of ancient Historians, now extant;
and in that respect, for his antiquity, to us most considerable. He touches
upon it often, upon diverse occasions; but most fully and positively (though not
as from himself there, but in the person of Amasis, King of Egypt, a Prince
of great renown, among the Ancients) in his third book, and fortieth chapter,
as it is usually divided. Polycrates, King, or rather Tyrant of Samos; (an
Island of the Egean sea, bordering upon Asia, once so flourishing, that even
the hens of it were proverbially said to be milked; but now in a manner
altogether forsaken of inhabitants) having had for a long time more then
ordinary success in all his enterprises, his felicity all that while not
crossed in any other kind either at home or abroad; Amasis King of Egypt, his
great friend and confederate, is reported to have written a Letter to him about
it; the copy whereof according to Herodotus was this:

Amasis to Polycrates, ((...), haec mandat. as Camerarius renders it) says
thus: That thou do well and prosper, is no small joy unto me, as thy friend
and confederate; but I must tell thee plainly, that these great and overflowing
successes do not please me, who know full well, the nature of the Deity, how
envious it is. It is my wish concerning my own self, and the same I wish to all
that are dear unto me, sometimes to prosper, and sometimes to miscarry; and in
this vicissitude of fortunes to pass my life; rather then without any
alteration to prosper. For I never yet could hear of any, who having thus
prospered long, did not, at the last, end in an universal destruction. Be thou
therefore persuaded by me, and take this course with thy prosperity: Consider
seriously with thy self what thing thou have thou most esteemest, and for the
loss of which then would be most grieved: this, whatever it be, cast away,
that it may never be seen again: And for the time to come likewise, if thy
successes shall not interchangeably be varied, help thy self in the same
manner that I have now showed thee.

So Amasis to his friend Polycrates: And Polycrates being before, as is
probable, possessed with the same principles of the nature of the Deity, as
Amasis was, was easily persuaded. He threw a ring, which of all his (...), or
precious jewels, he most valued, into the Sea, never likely, as a man would
have thought, to see it more; but his good luck, or ill luck rather, as they
apprehended it, was such, that he could not find occasion of grief, though he
sought it; not when he sought it, at least. For his ring was soon after brought
to him again. How this happened, and other particulars of the story, but
especially the lamentable Catastrophe of his life, according to his friend
Amasis his praediction, may be read in Her^dotus at large: and more briefly in
others, (as Strabo for one by name) that had it from him. This narration to
some that know nothing but their own times may seem ridiculous. I cannot
peremptorily undertake for the truth of it: but for the probability, (that one
particular of the miraculous return of his ring excepted) I can easily, both
from the opinion and practice of diverse others in afterages. Some write of
Epaminondas, a famous Theban; some of Philippus, King of Macedon; that after
high and unexpected victories, they became (in their outward carriage and
deportment, at least) very sorrowful, more like mourners, then triumphers, for
no other reason, then through fear of some great eminent disaster, which they
by this provident sensiblenesse, and voluntary humiliation hoped they should
prevent: Of this latter, Niceph. Gregoras; of the former, Isid. Pelusiota, (not
to mention others) bear record, and commend them for it: Christians both, the
one an Historian of later Greece; the other (Isidorus) an ancient Father, one
of S. Chrysostomes Disciples. Augustus, that great Monarch, (in whose days the
Savior of the world was born, and took upon him the form of a servant) stipem
quotannis, die certe, emendicabat a populo, (says Suetonius of him) cavam
manum asses porrigentibus prabens: that is, in plain English, that once in the
year he was wont to turn beggar, and ( cava manu, that is, in the most
ignominious way of taking) received alms of such of the common people, as
would give him. Suetonius says no more of it then so, neither in those days
needed he, to be understood; but learned men, and well versed in antiquity,
that have written upon him, show the reason. He mistrusted his own long
continued felicity, (though varied by many cross chances and accidents,
whereof Pliny the elder has made a whole Chapter in his History of the world)
and dreaded (upon the same supposition as Amasis in Herodotus) that so
dreadful, in those days, invidiam Numinis. So Camillus a Roman Captain,
having with mavelous success delivered his Country from miserable thraldom,
he made it, say ancient Historians, his request unto God, that if such hap and
success was too great to escape the strokes of Heavens envy, himself, and not
the Public might be the object of those strokes: which they say befell to him
according to his desire; first, a sudden light fall; and afterward,
persecution from those whom he had delivered.

To these I shall add but one passage of Plutarch, in his Paulus Aemilius,
that it may be compared with Herodotus, because the one will not a little give
both light and credit unto the other. Herodotus, according to the supputation
of most accurate Chronologers and Historians, publicly (as the manner was in
those days) recited his Histories about the year since the Creation, 3504.
Plutarch, all know, lived under Trajan; so that the distance of time between
Herodotus, and Plutarch, is of about 600. years. Plutarch then having related
the particulars of this Paul. Aemil. his triumph, (according to the Roman
fashion) for his wonderful success against Perseus, a Potent King, (the last
of Macedonia, and the last of Alexander the great his successors,) having in a
very little time got both King and Kingdom into his own hands; and now passing
to the narration of those sad accidents, that befell him about the same time;
to wit, the sudden death of two of his children which he kept at home, as
dearest unto him, the one whereof died five days before; and the other four days
after this public triumphing:

In all this, Aemilius (says he) was admired by all men, envied by none that
were good and virtuous: but that there is a certain Deity, whose proper task it
is to bring down lower ((...), as it were by pumping) all great and
overswelling prosperities, and so to mix and temper every man's life, that no
man may be happy in this world, without a rub, or a stain: So that according to
Homer, those are to be accounted most happy indeed, and to fare best, whose
fortunes are varied with a vicissitude of events in both kinds.

The place of Homer to which he refers, are those noted verses in the last of
his Iliads, (elsewhere cited by Plutarch at large) (...), etc. where the Poet
fains Jupiter to have two barrels or vessels by him, the one of good, the other
of evil luck; out of which he distributes unto every man his several fortune.
Those men, says he, to whom Jupiter deals out of both vessels, they are
happy: but those unto whom he deals out of one only, they are most
unfortunate. It is not so expressly said by Homer, that they are unhappy unto
whom Jupiter deals out of either vessel without mixture; but he is so
interpreted by Plato, (whose words are not so clearly rendered by the Latin
Interpreters, as they might have been) in his Books, De Republica, the 11.
Book: which exposition is here followed by Plutarch.

These few examples may serve to show both their practice and their opinion,
(...), that such is the nature of the Deity (of some Deity at least) to envy
men. It was a thing so frequent in their mouths upon all occasions, that hardly
shall you read any ancient Author, either Greek or Latin, where you find it
not, or some traces of it. We shall meet with diverse passages as we go on,
which I forbear here, to avoid repetition. There be some ancient Authors who
seem to derive it from Herodotus, as the first of that opinion; others, from
Simonides, a Poet of very great antiquity: we shall produce their words, and
show the contrary, before we have done. A strange thing it is to observe how
apprehensive some were (none of the meanest neither, but men learned, and
reputed wise and sober, in common estimation of men) in this kind: so
apprehensive, that they durst not acknowledge their own, though but ordinary
welfare, without an excuse, left they might seem to boast, ^lin. Epist. lib. v.
Ep. 6.
and so provoke envy. We may observe it in Pliny, the latter, plainly: In a
place, commending the wholesome situation of one of his Country houses, Mei
quoque (says he) nusquam salubrius degunt, usque adhuc certe neminem ex its
quos eduxeram mecum, venia sit dicto, ibi amisi. So in the VIII. Book, and the
eleventh Epistle, having spoken of his wives miscarying of a child, and her
great danger upon it, Fuit alioquin, (says he) in summo discrimine; impune
dixisse liceat, fuit. He durst not acknowledge her to be past danger (to which
purpose the word fuit, is very emphaticall) without some such qualification, to
deprecate envy, impune dixisse liceat; as before, venia sit dicto: being both
to one effect. Many such passages occur in ancient Authors, where
Interpreters and Commentators not aware of this so generally received opinion,
are much put to it; as it seems Dio Cassius was, though within less then two
ages after, about that fact of Augustus his yearly begging, which out of
Suetonius we have spoken of. But besides this, that which sometimes breeds no
small obscurity, is the variety of terms used by Authors in this argument:
(...), and the like: we shall say somewhat of the chiefest of them at the end
of this Treatise; that we be not too long upon words, before we come to the
matter it self.

Now when they thus complained of the envy, or malignity of superior powers,
that some of them understood such powers, as they worshipped for gods, is not
to be doubted, (...), or, (...), (which is all one) that is, God, or, the
Deity, being the word often used in this argument; not by Herodotus only, but
diverse other Greek Authors; as Deus is, by Latin Authors, not a few. But
because (...), demon, or, (...) is the more usual word upon this occasion;
whether God, or the Devil, or somewhat equivalent to what we call the Devil,
was by them that used the word intended, is a question not very easy to be
resolved, if well sifted, and thoroughly canvassed. Ancient Grammarians and some
others observe of it, that by Homer and other Ancients it is promiscuously used
for (...), that is, God: which I think no man will make a question of, that
has ever but looked into any of them. The same Grammarians, or some of them,
do also observe, that the word is otherwise used by Hesiod, for an inferior
kind, once men, and afterward immortalized, and deified to a certain degree of
Deity, different from the first kind; which will not concern us: but, whether
of old, originally; or, if not originally, when then the word (...) and (...)
began to be used in that worst sense we now spoke of, either by some,
sometimes; or commonly and generally by most; is a question both among ancient
and later Writers; and it will concern us much to know the truth of it; if by
any means it can be known. I shall therefore endeavor to say what may be said
of it upon good and satisfactory grounds.

First, then it must be granted that soon after Christ the word demon in
question, began generally, not among Christians only, but even Heathens, in
common use to be taken in the worst sense. This we learn from Tertullian, whose
words in his Apologetick, are: Tertul. Apologet. ca. 22.
Sciunt daemonas Philosophi, etc. Etiam vulgus indoctum in usum maledicti
frequentat. Nam and Satanam principem hujus mali generis proinde de propria
conscientia anima eadem ex sacramenti voce pronuntiat. So I find the words set
forth in the last Paris edition of the year 1635. which pretends to follow
Rigaltius his Text, per omnia, but does not here, I am sure. The common
exposition of the words, grounded upon that false reading, is much contrary to
Tertullian his aim and intention; which was to tell us, not what Christians
thought, or were taught in their Sacraments concerning demons: but what even
Heathens themselves that worshipped them did in their ordinary language,
unwittingly and against their wills, as it were, acknowledge of them: as is more
fully declared by S. Augustine, long after Tertullian; whose words will give
much light to those of Tertullians. S. Augustine then in his De Civit. August.
in De Civi^. Det l. IX ca. 19.
Dei, having first spoken of the acception, or use of the word in holy
Scriptures, and among Christians, goes on in these words: Et hanc loquendi
consuetudinem in tantum populi usquequaque secuti sunt, ut eorum etiam qui
Pagani appellantur, and Deos multos ac daemones colendos esse contendunt,
nullus fere sit tam literatus and d^ctus, ( Tertullian goes no further then
vulgus indoctum: but now as Christianisme prevailed, the word grew more
infamous every day) qui audeat in laud vel servo suo dicere, Daemonium habes:
sed quilibet hoc dicere voluerit, non se aliter accipi quam maledicere voluisse
non dubitare non possit. So elsewhere, why Apuleius did entitle his book De
Deo Socratis, and not De Daemonio rather, whereas in that very book he disputes
at large, and maintains it to have been a Demon, (not a Devil, but one of
those subordinate powers to the Deity, in Hesiod's acception) and not a God;
the same Augustine gives this reason, Ita enim per sanam doctrinam etc. because
through the Gospel of Christ the word demon was become so generally odious,
and abominable, that whoever had read the title, De daemone Socratis, before he
had read the book it self, wherein the demon is commended as one of the
better kind, would have thought Socrates by that title, to have been possessed
and out of his wits. Hierocles also, a Heathen Philosopher upon Pythagoras (so
commonly called) his Golden verses, acknowledges almost as much, in effect: but
so obscurely, that without S. Austins help I should hardly have understood him.
This Hierocles when he lived, I know not certainly; this we are sure enough of,
that he lived since Christ a good while, and before S. Augustine. (...) in
those verses, which in former times would have passed current enough for (...),
(often occurring in ancient Inscriptions, in Latin Dii Stygii called) he
expounds of men eminent in knowledge and virtue, taking (...), for (...),
contrary to the common use of that word. For (...) of it self sounding then but
ill in the ears of most men; he knew well enough if (...) in its ordinary
acception, (for subterraneos, or infernales) were put to it, it would be a hard
thing to persuade men to take it in the better sense, for any other then mere
Devils, Therefore not content with this bare interpretation, he adds withal
for further prevention, (...), etc. For God forbid, that is, any should
conceive that the author of these verses would bid us worship any evil kind,
((...) he means, or, evil spirits) (...), that is, as some perchance might
surmise according to the more vulgar use of that word. Had learned Salmasius
thought well of this, and better considered of the text of Hierocles, he would
have been, I believe, of another opinion concerning the right meaning of these
words, then that he is of in his Preface to the Arabic Translation of Cebes
his Table.

Now to return to Tertullians words, (which I must desire the Reader once more
to look upon) it has been observed by some, that exsecramenti, in one word,
and not exsacramenti, is the reading of some ancient Manuscripts; and
exsecramentum, or rather, execramentum, in Tertullian his African Latin, for
execratio, or maledictio, is by some others well expounded also; who, so far,
saw the right meaning of the words, but did not, or could not sufficiently
prove it; which now I think no man will make any question of. But whereas
Tertullian both here and elsewhere, in his book De Testimonio Animae, does seem
to affirm (which has most troubled Expositors, and made them to understand him
of Christians) that not only the word Demon but that of Satan also, was even
by Heathens frequently used in detestation, or by way of cursing; whereof I
know no vestigium in any other Author extant, but much against it extant in
diverse; I therefore conceive that the word pronuntiant (which is the word in
both places) must be understood, not of words expressed or uttered; but of a
sense, or rather sentence (and so the word pronuntio, is very proper) that may
be inferred, as implicitly contained in the common use of that other word
demon, which was spoken of: as if he said, That whilst they commonly used the
word demon in detestation, to express their averseness from a thing; they did
at the same time implicitly subscribe to the truth of the Scriptures, which set
out unto us Satan, the Prince of demons, as the author of all evil. The very
word proinde in the Text of Tertullian (by which his denique in that other
passage must be expounded) does imply some such thing, that it is but by way of
collection or inference that Satan is thus pronounced against. Nam and Satanam
principem hujus mali generis proinde de propria conscientia anima, eadem
exsecramenti voce pronuntiat; as it was well before in some former editions.
And Rigaltius his edition varies but very little from this. In stead of anima,
it has animae, which comes all to one: but that he that reads Tertullian in
De Testimon. Animae, cap. 2. will, as I conceive, judge that the righter. But
now for the sense of the words, he that shall read that learned man his
Observations upon this and that other passage of Tertul. De Testimon. Animae.
(cap. 3.) will I hope (if he mark well Tertul. his words) think the better of
what has here been said of them.

We take it then for granted, that the word demon, or (...), soon after
Christ, began to be taken in the worst sense; of the time before is all the
question, not yet resolved. There be, who because the word (...), is taken
sometimes in the worst, and sometimes in the better sense; for a happy,
sometimes; and sometimes for a wretched unfortunate man; infer upon it that
therefore the word (...) likewise was originally vox media, as they call them,
as properly signifying an evil, as a good spirit. But why not rather (...), so
taken and used on both sides, upon a supposition, that all man's happiness, or
unhappiness, (as by diverse Heathens is maintained) is (...), that is,
(according to some) from God immediately; according to others, (taking the word
(...), for fortune; as frequently) from fortune; and that the endeavors of men
in that kind can but little, or nothing. Whence Eustathius upon a place of
Homer, The words, says he, may also be understood of Jupiter, who is (...). So
Orpheus, (though not that ancient Orpheus, often mentioned by Plato, and by
ancient Fathers; yet an ancient Poet, yea perantiquus, as some very learned and
judicious speak of him) in his hymn or prayer entitled (...), he makes the
same (...) the author, as of happiness, to some; so of misery, to others.
There is as much ambiguity in the word (...), which by Christians is usually
taken in the worst sense for daemone corript, vel agitari, to be possessed: but
by heathen Authors for the most part, in the better sense, for numine afflari,
to be inspired: and so it should be translated indeed, in diverse places, where
Christian Interpreters impose, unwittingly I believe, their own sense upon
hea^hen Authors, wrongfully. Again, whereas ancient Heathens, Historians and
others speak often of hurts, and mischiefs done or occasioned by demons, it
is no good argument to infer thereupon that therefore the word demon of it
self, is sometimes taken in the worst sense, it being as ordinary with them to
ascribe such things to their best gods, as is at large proved by Clemens
Alexandrinus and some others; and that in those very places sometimes, where
they tell us of either their evil demons, or evils done by their demons, they
forbear not the word (...), but use it promiscuously, calling the same
sometimes (...), and sometimes (...), as I could show by diverse instances: so
that we can infer no more, upon this, of the word (...), then may be inferred
of the word (...) also. The word Angel, is a good word of it self, always
taken in the better sense when absolutely used; yet Psalm 78. ver. 49. we are
told of evil angels. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath,
and indignation and trouble, by sending evil angels among them. Some Expositors
by these evil angels understand devils, or evil spirits: but others with no
less probability, good angels. Good angels may be the instruments and
ministers of temporal evil, and in that respect called evil Angels. But as
for this place, I for my part rather incline to them, Rabbis and others, who
by evil angels understand the evils, or plagues themselves, which were sent
upon Egypt; and this the rather, because I find that kind of expression to
have been familiar to the Hebrews of old. So for example, where Psalm 89.49.
according to the Hebrew it is, What man is he that lives, and shall not see
death; the Chaldee Paraphrase renders it, (...). What man is he that lives,
and shall not see the angel of death? And Hab. III. v. 5. according to the
Hebrew: Before him went the Pestilence: the Chaldee, (...), from before him was
sent the angel of death; and so elsewhere. These kind of expressions, whether
used the better to teach us, that all things life, death; good, evil, that
happen to men in this world, are from God originally, whose ministers these
Angels (called (...) spirits, in the New Test.) are; or by a kind of figure,
called by the Grecians (...), whereby things insensible, incorporeall, are made
to live; virtues and vices (which some Stoics really believed) represented as
animals, and the like; I shall not here inquire fu^ther. But it seasonably puts
me in mind of an interpretation of the word (...) much to this purpose, which I
remember to have read in Dio Chrysostomus, in a long Oration of Diogenes the
Cynick, to Alexander the Great. It is a very considerable interpretation, but
not to our purpose here: and therefore it shall serve to have mentioned it.

Hitherto we have found nothing, that could induce us to believe that the word
(...) was of old (as is affirmed by some) and before Christ vox media, and
taken sometimes even by Heathens in the worst sense: much less, that it
originally signified a Devil, or an evil spirit, as is by others affirmed. If
Plutarch help us not, I doubt no man will: out of whom I find two passages
quoted to this purpose. The first is, out of his De I side and O siride, (to
which they might have added another passage of the same author in his (...),
where he has the same words again) where speaking of the opinion of many,
(which it seems was Plutarchs opinion too, as appears, not by this only, but by
other Treatises and paslages of his) concerning two contrary principia, or
creators; the one good, and the other evil: (...)* (says he) (...). etc. that
is, Of these two, the better they call, (...), god: the other, they call,
(...), demon: as Zoroaster the Magus, etc. Here first it must be observed,
that (...) and (...), are Plutarch's own words, or interpretation: for the
words used by them he speaks of, Zoroaster and others, were, (as himself soon
often tells us) Oromazis, (Oromaides rather, as it is in that other passage we
told you but now of) and Arimanius. Secondly, that Aristotle long before
Plutarch writing of the same thing, expresses it otherwise, and it is not
unlikely that Plutarch, though he kept not precisely to his Authors words,
might take it, if not out of Aristotle, yet of some other (for diverse are named
by Dio. Laertius that write the same) that related it as Aristotle does. Now,
Aristotle in his first De Philosophia (they are Diog. L^ertius his words in his
Proem to the Philosophers lives) writes that the Magi were ancienter then the
Egyptians; and that according to them, there be two principles, (or authors)
the one a good, and the other an evil demon; (or, God) and that the first, is
called (...) (or, Jupiter) and Oromasdes; and the second, (...), (or, Hell) and
Arimanius: which Hermippus, Eudoxus, and Theopompus, etc. From which words, it
is evident, that (...) and (...) in Aristotle's language is all one: and that
all we can inserre from Plutarch's words, is but this, (which is no more in
effect then has already been granted and proved) that in his days, who was
some 100. years after Christ, and some 40. or 50. before Tertullian, the word
(...) began in ordinary language to be taken in the worst part, and sometimes
in the writings of learned men also.

The second passage out of Plutarch, is out of his (...), or, Table-talk of the
seven wise men at a solemn Feast, where to a question proposed by Amasis King
of Egypt, (...); What is most profitable, or beneficial? answer is made,
(...), God: again, (...); What most pernicious in the world? it is answered,
(...): a demon, or the demon. But what is the censure even there upon this
answer? that (...) that it is a bold, insolent, unheard of answer and
distinction; (...); as the word is used oftentimes upon such occasions: or if
you take the word (...), as ordinarily; that it is a bold Answer, and of
dangerous consequence: of dangerous consequence indeed, as making Devils of
those who^ they believed, and worshipped as Gods: an answer then, not grounded
upon any publicly known and approved difference, or different sense of the
words, but upon the conceit of one single man. That this is the sense of the
words may further appear by another passage of the same Plutarch, in his
tractat De defectu Oracul, where at the mention of evil demons, one of the
interlocutors is much scandalized, as at a thing unknown, and absurd. And yet
the question there was not whether (...) of it self, or absolutely, was ever
taken in the worst sense, (which is our question here) and must needs have
offended much more; but whether there were any such indeed as evil spirits, or
demons. Besides what may be suspected not without some ground, that here also
Plutarch might alter, not of purpose, but heedlesly, the ancient words, and fit
them to the dialect of his times. And this I must also answer if another place
of the same Plutarch should be objected, where speaking of Pythagoras his
opinion concerning the first principles of all things, he writes that he the
said Pythagoras called (...) that is, the unity, God; and the (...), (duitie)
demon. And indeed it is observable, that speaking of the same thing in diverse
other places, I do not find that any where else, but in this, he tells us of
this difference; no not in his Treatise De Iside and Osir. where nevertheless
we find diverse other names and appellations collected, whereby the Pythagoreans
extolled their said (...), and as much vilified and reviled the (...).

Having therefore taken some pains to satisfy my self, as not willing to
pass by so notable an advantage to my cause, if I might have sound grounds to
convince me; I must now desire to be excused, and that I may not be thought to
prevaricate, if I dare not ground either upon S. Augustine his bare assertion,
who somewhere does peremptorily determine that demon was at the first taken in
the worst sense for a Devil: or, evil spirit; and does acutely divise the
reason both of the different, with some; and promiscuous use of the word, with
others: not upon him I say; nor upon Clemens Alexandrinus in his Admon. ad G.
(not to name others) his observation, who because Homer calls some of their
chiefest Deities (among Heathens) (...); and (...) (even among the Heathens of
his time) were taken ordinarily for evil spirits, conversing about Tombs and
Sepulchers, etc. therefore he conceits that of purpose he did did so call them
((...)) to dishonor and vilify them. In the Edition of Clemens it is printed,
(...), and translated, (then which nothing could be more contrary to his
meaning) qui illos improbe honoravit: whereas it must of necessity be read,
(...) ((...) being here for (...), or (...); that is, of purpose, and not
casually, or unwittingly) (...). Though the very context well weighed, and
other considerations will enforce this correction; yet to prevent all cavil
and opposition, I shall make Clemens to be his own Expositor, whose words in
this very book, some 8. or 9. pages after are these: (...): that is, And not
Menander only, but Homer also and Euripides, and diverse other Poets freely
reprove your Gods, and make no scruple at all as freely to revile them. Other
such conceits of Homer, and Plato's oblique reproofs of the superstition of
their times, other Fathers, besides Clemens, have, which compared with this
might add further light unto it, if it needed it; which it does not. To return
therefore to our word, and to conclude somewhat; Upon all that has been said
hitherto about it, I conceive that from books now extant and remaining, (
Clemens and S. Augustine perchance might see many in their days that are not
now to be seen) it cannot peremptorily be affirmed, or made good, that the word
(...), or demon used by the Latins, before Christ and Christianity, was taken
in the worst sense, being put absolutely and simply, as Crammarians speak; that
is, without any addition, or limitation; but either indifferently taken for the
very same as (...), (which is the more ordinary use:) or if for an inferior
and subordinate kind, even then, for good, and not evil spirits. Which use of
the word after Christ also remained among the learned Heathens, as may appear
by their writings, very common, even then, though not altogether so common as
before; but among the vulgar, it soon began to alter, and in time, quite lost
its first use. However, nothing that has hitherto been said does hinder, but
that the word many years, yea, and ages perchance before Homer might be taken
otherwise then in his time and afterward, and originally signify a devil, or
evil spirit, there being in all languages examples of diverse words, which in
process of time have lost their primitive use and signification, and usurped
another, far different, yea sometimes contrary. This may be supposed, but
supposed only. And here the e^ymology of the word, if certainly known and
agreed upon, might happily stand us in some stead: but neither are ancient
Greek Grammarians and others that speak of it, altogether of one opinion about
it; and among the learned of these later times, since the knowledge of tongues
has flourished more then ever, it is not agreed whether it be originally a
Greek word or no, some fetching it from the Hebrew, and some from the Arabic;
so that in such variety of opinions, and dissonancy of judgments I shall not
take upon me peremptorily to determine, so as to build upon it: Nevertheless
what I think of the right Etymology of the word, and upon what grounds, (which
will require more words then I can think seasonable in this place) shall have a
place by it self at the end of this Treatise.

In the mean time, what need we so much to stand upon words, if the thing it
self can be proved? to wit, that there was an old tradition among ancient
Heathens of certain (however called) evil spirits, who envied mankind, and out
of mere envy and malignity did what they could to mischief and annoy them.
Somewhat to this purpose we shall have occasion to say when we shall treat of
the Etymology of the word, what opinion the Ancients had concerning those they
called heroes. But without it or any thing else, one single, but very pregnant
and pertinent testimony of Plutarch may serve to do the deed. I shall
therefore first set down his words, for their sakes that are not so well versed
in the Greek tongue, in English; and then in Greek: rather here, then at the
end of this Treatise, with some others, because they are words of so much
consequence to us: and not only set them down in Greek, but also with some
Notes and illustrations make them plainer, and clearer, and more
unquestionable, then otherwise they would be to every Reader. Plutarch then in
the beginning of his Dio, having spoken of some apparitions of spirits, and
taken notice of some men's opinion, that deny all such apparitions to be really
what they are pretended, but merely to proceed from conceit and fancy,
incidentall to children, and women, and such only who through sickness, or
any other distemper of the body, are not well in their wits; But on the other
side, says he, if such as Brutus and Dio, grave men and learned in Philosophy,
not apt easily to be be moved, or to be wrought upon by any passions, were
nevertheless so affected with these apparitions, that they did acknowledge it
unto others; we shall, I doubt, be enforced to allow of that very ancient
opinion (though it may seem to some no less ridiculous then it is ancient)
that there are certain wicked and envious demons, (or, spirits), who envy good
men, and oppose their actions, by sudden fears and troublesome phancies,
endeavoring to supplant them in their virtuous courses: and this of purpose,
lest if they should continue unshaken and untainted unto the end in the pursuit
of that which is right and just, they should after their lives attain to more
happiness then themselves have obtained.

Thus Plutarch in my English; his own words are these, (...).

(...). Those that have passions, (says Aristotle somewhere in his Politics)
cannot judge of the truth. where by (...), as here also in Plutarch, we must not
only understand those stronger affections, as anger, love, hatred, joy,
sorrow, and the like; but all disordinate appetites, all vicious exorbitances
from right reason, as vainglory, covetousnes, pride, self-conceit, and the
like; all which come under the notion of (...), or passions, and have been
noted by best writers, not Philosophers only, but Historians and others, some
more violently, some more insensibly, but as dangerously, to corrupt reason,
and partially to sway the judgment, even of the most rational otherwise, and
quick-sighted.

(...)] (...), may be also translated, absurd, incredible, or strange: and this
may be referred partly to their opinion, who laugh (as he told us before, and
whereof you may read more in Lucian's Dialogue inscribed Philopseudes, or
(...):) at all apparitions, as mere fables and fopperies: and partly to what
here follows, of the envy, wickedness and opposition of some demons. As for
apparitions, it is a large subject, and of great consequence. I purpose to
treat of it hereafter by it self, God willing, and shall endaevour to satisfy
all that are not yet satisfied, as about Apparitions, so about Witches. In the
mean time I shall refer them to what learned M. Vossius (my worthy friend)
has written in his elaborate Commentations De Origin Idololatriae, lib I. c.
VI. But it is more probable that this (...) here must be referred to that which
follows of wicked spirits, or demons. For eve^ since Christ, and Christianity
far spread in the world, there were eminent Philosophers, that thought it much
inconsistent with reason, to believe any such. Will you have some of their
reasons? (...). It is not easy to make these words run as smoothly in the
English as they do in the Original; but the sense is this: If any believe
that there are any evil demons, (or, that the demons are evil) I ask, if
they have their power from the Gods, how then evil? If not from them, then are
not the Gods authors of all things. If not authors, then either because they
would, but cannot; or because they can, but will not, neither of which is
agreeable to the nature of God. They are the words of Sallustius the
Philosopher in his De Diis and Mundo, the XII. Chapter. Much to this purpose
are the objections of Celsus against the Serpent that beguiled our first
parents. You may see, if you please, what answer is there made to him by
Origin. Or, if he satisfy not, there be store of others Fathers, and Christian
writers that will. Our author here (Plutarch) in his Discourse, Of the
cessation of Oracles, takes it upon him to prove that it was the opinion of
diverse Ancients besides Empedocles, as Plato, Xenocrates, and others, that
there were evil demons. I wish he had set down their own words. I make no
question of the thing, that diverse ancients were of that opinion, that there
were evil spirits; but what word they used, because we have found Plutarch
before to relate the opinions of ancients not in their own, but his words, or
words of his age rather; I would gladly have known from themselves. However
even there Plutarch does acknowledge that the opinion would seem strange to
most men, and full (the very word here used) of absurdity.

(...)] There was an ancient tradition among heathens, that certain (...),
insolent, or rebellious Gods, or demons; (Angels, indeed:) had been cast out
of Heaven. The Original of which tradition some that understood not, grounded
it upon a passage of Homer (from whom, and from Hesiod, they did ordinarily
fetch all their Theology) in his XVI. Iliad, where Jupiter severely rebukes
his wife Juno, and bids her remember what she had formerly suffered. Celsus in
Origin, out of ancient Commentators upon Homer, as is likely, does produce a
pregnant testimony out of Pherecydes (one of the first Philosophers, of whom
there is any memory extant, Pythagoras his Master) concerning these (...), and
their punishment. And it is his conceit, (or theirs rather) that Pherccydes
understood Homer as they did, and grounded his words upon him. But it is a
ridiculous conceit; as their allegorical exposition of Homers words is also,
as ridiculous and impertinent, as any I have met with in that kind. Many men
both later, and ancient, have been deceived (as is well observed by learned
Holstenius, in his Notes upon Porphyrius) in the country of Pherecydes, making
him Syrum, instead (a vast difference) of Syrium. However, Pherecydes, though
not an Assyrian, yet he is one of them that are recorded by the Ancients, (
Plutarch and Numenius) to have conversed with the Hebrews, and to have been
instructed by them. It is very likely that Plutarch here had respect to some
passages as of others, doubtless, so of this Philosopher also. But more of
him, or out of him rather, upon the last words. Of Empedocles there is no
question at all to be made, but that he had written of these kind of demons,
and of their fall and banishment from Heaven, very plainly and copiously, as
may be collected out of diverse places of Plutarch. In his Treatise (...), Of
the inconveniences and miseries of taking money upon use, he mentions (...),
certain demons, pursued by the divine vengeance, and cast out of Heaven;
described by Empedocles; part of whose verses he there produces.

(...).] Plutarch certainly does here allude to Plato's words in his V. De
Legibus, where Plato would have all men earnestly exhorted (...), etc. to make
this their chief study, neither in time of adversity, when cross demons arise
against them, nor in prosperity, when their own good demon (such was their
opinion in those days) stands for them and prevails, through immoderate
either joy or sorrow to misbehave themselves, but in all fortunes and
conditions to carry themselves as becomes men, according to the rules of good
order and decency. His words are many: but the chiefest to our purpose are
these: (...), in Plato, and (...) in Plutarch here, opposite cross demons;
that is in Hebrew, Satan's; (...). Of these evil cross demons, Porphyrius,
that arch-enemy of Christianity, in his De Philosophia ex Oraculis, (quoted by
Theodoret, Therapeut. III. where the Latin, electorum, for, ex oraculis, (...),
must be corrected) and in (...), and elsewhere, has pregnant passages: but
because he lived long after Christ, when Heathens began in many things
cunningly to temper their Philosophy with Christianity; I meddle not with him.

(...).] It is very likely that Plutarch had a respect to those words,
(elsewhere by him excepted against, as we shall see afterward) of Herodotus,
that (...). Now (...) what it properly does import here, may best be learned,
as I conceive, from Plutarch in his De Poetis legendis, where he expounds that
old proverbiall speech, (...) (that is, In the head of a Polypus, there is that
which is good, and there is that which is naught) (...): Because, says he,
this fish Polypus is pleasant to the taste, but it disturbeth sleep with
troublesome and heterogenous (or, unnatural) phancies, As also from Plautus,
Plautus in M^^^t. and in Rud.
Miris modis Di ludos faciunt hominibus Mirisque exemplis: nam somnia in somnis
danunt. Ne dormientes quidem sinunt quiescere. And elsewhere, Miris modis, etc.
as before: then follows, Velut ego hac nocte hac quae praeteriit proxima, In
somnis egi satis, and fui homo exercitus. It is taken otherwise, passively, by
Aristotle, where he defines (...), in men, to be (...), etc. Molestiam
turbulentam: though there also it may bear an active construction. See also, if
you please, Oracul. Chald. (...), etc. and there Psellus.

(...)] Herodotus again, lib. VII. ca. 10. (...). By him, says he, a great
army may easily be overthrown by a small one, when God, envying them, shall
send upon them a sudden fright or thunder, (as upon the Marcomanni in Marcus
Antoninus his time; a famous story among Christian writers) through which the
most worthy have unworthily been defeated.

(...)] without falling, properly: which puts me in mind, (and I must have
remembered it however) of Adam's fall. Now as we have here an ancient tradition
concerning the envy and malignity of certain evil spirits to mankind; so was
there among them another tradition of no less antiquity, concerning the fall
of man, or men, from their primitive estate of Angelical happiness: both
which traditions being put together, will make it evident, (which is a great
part of our task) that the fall of Adam, as it is recorded in holy Writ, by the
temptation of the Devil, was not altogether unknown unto ancient Heathens. Of
this latter, (besides Plato, and all Platonicks after him, who speak of it
often, but more obscurely, and allegorically) Tully writes in this wise: Ex
quibus humanae vitae erroribus and aerumnis fit, ut interdum veteres illi sive
vates, sive in sacris initiisque tradendis divinae mentis interpretes, qui nos
ob aliqua scelera suscepta in vita superiore poenarum luendarum caussa, natos
esse dixerunt, aliquid vidisse videantur: verumque sit illud q^od est apud
Aristot. simili nos affectos esse supplicio atque eos qui quondam, quum in
praedonum Etruscorum manus incidissent, crudelitate excogitata necabantur;
quorum corpora viva cum mortuis, adversa adversis accommodata, qua aptissime
colligabantur; ea nostros animos cum corporibus copulatos, ut vivos cum mortuis
esse conjunctos: that is,

From these many errors (or wanderings) and miseries of this mortal life, I am
ever and anon much inclined to believe, that those ancient, whether Prophets,
or Ministers and Interpreters of the divine will, by whom sacred rites and
mysteries were instituted; who taught that we were born and brought forth into
this world to suffer for some crimes by us committed in our former life; did
speak the truth indeed: as also for the same reason to subscribe unto that of
Aristotle's as most true, who writes that our punishment is not unlike that
which was used by some Etruscan robbers (elsewhere by S. Augustine called Reges
Etrusci; and Thusci Tyranni: Contra Cresconium Grammat. l. 4. c. 49. and contra
Parmen. l. 3. cap. ult.) who to show their cruelty toward some who were fallen
into their hands, devised this kind of death; to fit their live bodies with
other dead bodies, and to bind them up very artificially, the one opposite to
the other, face to face, and so of other parts: that even so our souls are
coupled and joined with our bodies, as those live bodies were joined with the
dead. We owe this excellent passage of Tully unto S. August. by whom, out of
his Hortensius, in his IV. book against Julianus the Pelagian, it is cited, and
so preserved; the whole book from which it was taken, some few fragments
excepted, being since perished. Orpheus is the man intended by Tully, who was
both vates, and (...) too, a great contriver of sacred mysteries, who first, as
we are told by Plato in his Cratylus, called the body, (...), quasi (...), a
tomb, or sepulcher. This Orpheus is very ancient: according to Eusebius his
computation, he lived about twelve hundred years before Christ was born; long
before Homer. There is very little of his (some few verses, collected from
several Authors) now extant, that is truly his: but of old, even in Platoes
time, as himself witnesses, there were diverse counterfeit books that went
under his name. Di^g. Laertius thinks him not worthy the name of a Philosopher.
Neither do I, if he did write indeed such things, as he lays to his charge.
Now whereas those ancients ( Orpheus, and since him, Plato and others) who
speak of man's happiness before this life, seem to make man in that state of
happiness, merely spiritual; a pure soul, I mean: this will easily be
reconciled with the truth, if it be considered that the same Ancients, ( Plato
I am sure) did attribute unto man, (that is, unto the soul of man) (...); an
immortal, bright, resplendent, and (...): a material mortal body: of which
they th^^ desire to know more, may read Synesius in his De Inso^^^^^, and the
Greek Scholiast there: as also Hierocles, upon Pythageras his ve^ses; who treat
of it at large. So that according to them, the soul even before it was joined
unto this body, was not without a body, but so different in qualities from
this, that it seems it was mistaken for another quite different, as well in
substance, as qualities. And as for the place where this former life was, not
mentioned here by Tully, but expressed by Plato and others, to have been
Heaven; we know that Paradise, the place of our first Parents abode during
their innocence, is even in the Scriptures taken for Heaven, sometimes; or at
least, for a place of bliss, different from the earth: and even S.
Chrysostom, who sharply censureth those that turned the situation of Paradise,
as it is described in the Scripture into allegories, yet himself spares not
to say, that our first Parents in Paradise, (...), inhabited the earth, as a
kind of Heaven; styling man in the same place, (...), a Terrestiall Angel. S.
Basil is yet more free in his expressions; and so are other Ancients, whom I
shall not need to name.

(...).] Pherecydes his words in Origin against Celsus are these; (...): that
is, Of that portion is the Tartarean portion, (or company) kept by the
daughters of Boreas, Harpyes, and Thuella, (or, Tempest) and thither does
Jupiter cast whoever of the Gods (or Angels; which word of Angels, was not
unknown to ancient Heathens, as Pythagoras, and others: and Angels in the
Scripture also, we know, are sometimes called Gods:) does grow insolent; or,
rebellious.

And so I have done with this place of Plutarch; which together with that of
Tully, being unquestionable, deserve to be much made of by them who had rather
a little genuine truth, though they labor for it, then plenty of specious
impostures. The Sibyls, and Mercurius Trismegistus, we purposely decline to
meddle with in this case; yea, and the Oracula Chaldaica too: which though I
do not altogether reject, yet I am very suspicious that there is in them more
of Porphyrius, then his bare (as himself pretends) collection.

All this that has been said well pondered, S. Austins assertion, that we
spoke of before, (with little variation) that the word (...), at the very
first, (long before Homer) was taken in the worst sense, for an evil spirit;
and afterward, when evil spirits began to be worshipped, (which how it
happened, Justin Martyr, and others that have written against the Gentiles, do
show) for a good spirit; goodness and bountifulness (as Tully well argues
against Epicurus) being if not the only, yet the chiefest object of divine
worship; this assertion, I say, so qualified, though we cannot for want of
proofs, and evidences of those times, affirm it certainly true, yet certainly
it may be supposed and granted not improbable. But however, take the word in
either sense, for a God, or for a Devil, the opinion we have spoken of, of the
envy and malignity (...), will equally, but in different respects appear to
have proceeded originally from the Scriptures. And besides this, that the very
word (...), God, by Greek writers, as the Latin Deus, by the Latins, is often
used upon this occasion, has been observed before, and must here be remembered.
The Text of the Scriptures that we must ground upon, is that unhappy conference
between our first mother, Eve, and the subtle Serpent, which we therefore
think fit to set down here at large, as we find it recorded in the third
Chapter of Genesis, and the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses of the Chapter. The words
according to our last English Translation are these:

Ver. 1. Now the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field, Genesis III.
which the Lord God had made: and he said unto the woman, Yea, has God said,
Ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden?

2. And the woman said unto the Serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees
of the garden:

3. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has
said, Ye shall not cat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

4. And the Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die.

5. For God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil.

Let the words, first in themselves; and then compared with the event, and
other circumstances, be well considered, and these two inferences will of
themselves, as I conceive, without the help of a comment, offer themselves to
any ordinary judgment. First, that the Devil does object unto God, their
Maker, envy and malignity toward men. Secondly, that it was mere envy and
malignity toward mankind, that moved the Devil, thus to set upon the woman,
and to counsel her as he did. As I will not therefore altogether decline them,
so neither will I trouble my self and my Reader with multiplicity of
Commentators upon the place. I think it will not need; and I must confess, I
have not, at this time, many by me to look upon. We shall treat of those two
inferences in the order they were but now set down.

Of all Ancients that have written upon Genesis, Chrysostom, for the most
literal and genuine Expositor. Upon the 4. verse, And the Serpent said, etc.
he has these words, (upon the fourth verse, as I said; but his words concern
the fifth rather) (...): that is, Afterward not content to have contradicted
the words of God, that he might the better make way for his imposture, and by
foiling the woman, fulfill his own designs, he does traduce their maker as
envious.

Of later Commentators, Junius, (as most generally received among Protestants)
and learned Diodatus, (lately set out in English: I wish more care had been
taken both in the version and printing) will suffice. Junius upon the place,
Videtur enim ex multis rationibus, etc. Among other arguments, which he (the
Devil) used to persuade them, that men were not so loved of God, as they
thought, but hated rather, and that happiness was envied unto them, he brings
this as the chiefest, because they were forbidden to eat of that fruit, from
which depended man's chiefest happiness, the knowledge of good and evil.

Diodatus, upon the fifth verse, God does know, etc. He does wrest (I make use
of the translation set out) into a wrong sense the name of that tree, as if it
had power to confer divine knowledge, and the understanding of every thing:
accusing God of envy, and provoking the woman to pride and curiosity.

Before I proceed, I will by the way impart unto my Reader a certain passage of
Aristotle, which I have often admired, and do still, as often as I think of
it. The opinion being current in his days, that God was (...), or, envious;
which by the vulgar, who have little sense of any other happiness, but such as
is to be found in the fruition of worldly goods, was applied accordingly;
Aristotle in his Metaphysics takes notice of both; both of the opinion, and
how applied: and as for the opinion, he does protest against it; (...), it is
not possible it should be so: but secondly, were it so indeed, that such is the
nature of God, as to be (...), then in all probability (says he) his envy does
especially consist in this, that he does not afford unto men the happiness of
perfect knowledge, and contemplation, He speaks it of the Metaphysics
particularly, as absolutely being the noblest of all sciences; by himself
therefore, and by others often called, (...), Divinity. His words are not many,
(as his manner is to be short) but contain fully the substance of all I have
said; we shall have them afterward upon another occasion. I think no man has
ever labored to any purpose in the search of any truth, either divine, moral,
or natural; or ever observed with himself how prone men are generally, and
always have been upon all occasions both of themselves to mistake, and to be
misled by others; who will not acknowledge Aristotle, (though hardly censured
by diverse) as well deserving that glorious title of (...) (divine) as his so
much admired master by ancient, both Christians and Heathens, ever did, for so
many lines. Especially if to this be added his complaint in another place, that
men knew so little of those things that belonged unto God; De part. animal. l.
1. c. 5.
professing withal his readiness to prefer a little true Divinity, well
grounded, before all humane knowledge and philosophy.

But now to return to the words of the Devil, as they are recorded in the
Scripture: though there recorded to his shame, and for our instruction; yet the
Heathens that had but parcels of it, and those too by tradition (whereof there
be many examples in the ancient Fathers) much adulterated; no wonder if they
made a contrary use of it, and by sad experience finding the effects of Adam's
fall, and Gods curse; and not well informed of all particulars: the Devil also
being as busy with them, upon all occasions, as he had been with our mother
Eve, to promote error and impiety: no wonder I say, if they made a contrary use
of what is written and recorded, and believed of God, many of them, as our
first Parents (upon the Devils persuasion) believed. Even since Christ and
Christianity, some Heathens, no vulgar men, that had read the Scripture very
diligently, from these very particulars of Adam's fall, as they are there
recorded, framed matter of blasphemy; and from Moses his words objected envy
and mal^gnity unto that God, whose goodness and glory Moses intended to set
out. So Porphyrius, a Philosopher, among Heathens, of prime note; by Christians
justly surnamed (...), the impious; speaking of the forbidden tree, (...),
says he, (...): that is. Questionless out of mere envy that tree was
forbidden them, God envying men knowledge, and purposing that they should
continue fools, (or, idiots). He is answered by Greg. Naz. in his 38. Orat.

However, the opinion was not among Heathens so generally received, but that
there were ever found some that opposed it. What Aristotle said of it, we heard
but now; and before him, Plato in his Timaeus very peremptorily concludes it
that God being (...), good, ((...), good in the highest degree, is his word a
little before) (...). he is not at all capable, or ever was of any kind of
envy. And in the II. of his De Repub. he is very copious, and as earnest, as
copious, upon that subject, that God is not the cause of any evil: which (with
him) comes all to one as to say that he cannot envy. But then among them that
were agreed concerning the goodness of God, there was no small controversy
concerning his power. For, said they, were God as omnipotent, as he is good,
why has he not made all things as goodness would have prompted, for the best?
Why not the world, (those that did not believe it so, as the Stoics) eternal:
men, immortal: good and virtuous, all, naturally? Hereupon the most (even of
their wisest) tell into this gross conceit, that God was not a^together
omnipotent: that he had done what he could, and wanted power, not will, to do
all things as their own bold phancies and imaginations suggested unto them they
should have been done: They did put all the fault of all that was done a^isse
in the world upon the (...), or, materiam, that God was to work upon, and was
not able (so they) to rectify. Se^^^a Ep^st. ^8. Mittamus animum ad ea quae
aeterna su^t, miremur, etc. D^u^^que inter illa versantem and providentem,
qu^madmodum qua immortalia facere non potuit, quia materia prohibebat, etc. And
in his Cur bonis mala, etc. cap. V. Quare tamen Deus tam iniquus in
distributione fati fuit, ut bo^is viris paupertatem, vulnera, and acerba funera
adscriberet? Non potest artifex mut^re materiam. Haec passa est. Quaedam etc.
And again in the next Chapter; At multa incidunt tristia, horrenda, dura
toleratu. quia non poteram vos istis subducere, animos vestros, etc. So
elsewhere, more then once. And so indeed most of them, Philosophers,
Historians, and others: even Epictetus himself (who comes nearest to us in most
points) in Arrianus, he sticks not to say very peremptorily, (...), he could
not certainly. I cannot excuse Plato, though some have taken great pains to do
it; how ridiculous soever the opinion may seem, his words are plain, that
(...), or, materiaprima, as eternal as God himself, did concur with him, to
the making of all things: and that God (...) (so he speaks; and Alcinous out of
him, (...)) that is, Did his best, that all things might be (...), for the
best. Sometimes he speaks very doubtfully. I confess, and cannot be excused
from contradicting himself (as by Plutarch is well observed in diverse places)
in words, at least, whatever he intended: which also made the Ancients not to
agree among themselves about his opinion. Dio. Laertius acknowledges but two
principia, according to Plato; Plutarch, Apuleius, Alcinou^, and others, reckon
three. And of them that reckon three, some give them far different
appellations from those that others do: So that in very deed, let a man be
never so well versed in Plato, he shall find it a matter of great obscurity and
difficulty absolutely to determine what was his opinion. However, what we have
now cited out of him, he has in diverse places.

Others again there were, who took upon them to maintain, as the goodness, so
the omnipotency of God, as Simplicius, (one of the later, but not inferior
unto many Philosophers) in his Commentaries upon Aristotle De Coelo, where he
has a long contestation with Alexander Aphrodisiensis about it. Whether all
his reasons and solutions (in point of humane reason, I mean, by which only he
goes) be satisfactory or no; especially, where he handles the point of moral
evil, why permitted by God; because it is not my purpose here to engage my
self, (elsewhere I may perchance) in that obscure and intricate Argument, I
must leave to the learned and judicious Reader, who will not repent him his
labor if he read him attentively. All I shall say of it is this, that what he
answers concerning moral evil, is the very same that is answered by diverse
ancient Fathers upon this occasion: but extremely disliked, slighted, and
scoffed at by Plutarch in his Treatise, Of common notions against the Stoics.
Indeed as Plutarch relates that matter from Chrysippus, it cannot but seem very
absurd and ridiculous: But he that shall read Simplicius not upon Aristotle
only, but upon Epictetus his Enchiridion also, where he handles it (in two or
three places) very largely, may perchance be of another opinion, and think that
Plutarch might have spared some of his jests, and rather have taken more pains
to understand the state of the question better then it seems he did.

Of Chrysippus his opinion Aulus Gell. also has a Chapter in his Noctes
Atticae, which in the latter Editions of Aulus Gell. is set out as imperfect,
or defective in the beginning: it was not so in the old Editions; and why it
should be so in the new I know no reason, but that, as I conceive, those that
first so set him out did not understand him, and chose rather (as many in that
ease to the great prejudice of good Authors) to place the defect upon the
Copies, then to acknowledge it in themselves. I shall be very willing to bestow
some pains to do that good Author some right, who has taken so many pains to
benefit posterity; and we shall find it to our purpose too. Nevertheless,
because all men are not for that kind of learning, it shall make no further
interruption here, but shall be added at the end. The place of Gellius that we
mean, is lib. VI. cap. 1. Homines fecisse dicitur, etc.

Lastly, besides these we have spoken of, there were yet others, who upon
grounds of natural reason stood for the goodness both and omnipotency of God
as peremp^orily as any; yet durst not upon the same grounds of natural reason
take upon themselves to answer all objections against their opinion, which
(their natural reason) they modestly acknowledged weak and desective, and
incapable of such high mysteries and speculations. Plotinus the Philosopher, as
I remember, (I might say Aristotle too, but that what he says of the defect of
humane reason, which he compares to the eyes of Bats, is upon another occasion)
has an excellent passage or two to that purpose. Antoninus (a great and
glorious Monarch in his days; by many, as deservedly as ever Heathen was, both
for his learning and goodness, surnamed* The Philosopher) has I am sure,
which may be read in his Meditations concerning himself, lib. II. n. 8. but
especially, lib. XII. n. 4. How so many came to pitch upon this (...), or
materiam, and partly to join, partly to oppose it unto God in the creation,
might easily be conceived if we compare what diverse of them write of it with
the words of Moses, Genesis 1. v. 2. of the Chaos, which very Chaos some of them
called (...), Necessity. Though they say not altogether what Moses says, and
added to it much; yet a man may in Moses's words see some ground for their
errors. In so obscure a subject ( darkness is in the Text, and caligo is the
word used by some of them also for the Chaos) they might easily mistake him;
they especially that had him but by tradition. But I will say no more of it
here, because it is but upon the by.

And so much concerning the original of the opinion, that (...), Demon, or,
The Demon ((...), and (...); that is, God, and the Deity, in the language and
more clear expression of diverse others, as by diverse examples has appeared) is
of an envious nature.

There be other places of Scripture, I know, (besides that of Genesis) which
upon this occasion, and not impertinently perchance, might have been considered
of. As for example, those Ironicall words (though possibly not Ironically taken
by all that might light upon them) of Almighty God, Genesis III. 22, 23. And the
Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good or evil.
And now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, and eat,
and live for ever. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of
Eden, etc. And again, those, Genesis XI. 6. And the Lord said, Behold, the people
is one, and they have all one language, and this they begin to do: and now
nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do, etc. But
especially, that ambiguous signification of the word (...) which as it
signifies to be jealous (Exodus XX. 5. XXXIV. 14. and elsewhere frequently:) so
Genesis XXXI. 1. and elsewhere, to envy. But since we have, as I conceive,
sufficiently discovered and laid open the main spring of the error, I shall be
less solicitous about the Riverets and smaller streams.

We will now suppose that Demon was originally taken for a Devil or
Evill-Spirit. against men, to do them what mischief they could. Now how
consonant it is to the Scriptures to adscribe all temporal evils to the malice
and envy of the Devil, as the first and original cause, is so apparently
obvious, as little shall need to be said about it.

(...) Through envy of the devil came death into the world, says the author
of the book of Wisdom, (Chap. 11. ver. ult.) attributed unto Solomon; In
which words by death must be understood not bare death only, but all the
consequences of it: all the changes and chances to which this our mortality is
liable; which make our very life, (as diverse ancient heathens have taught)
rather a daily death, then life, properly, (...), says S. Chrysostom, (...),
etc. that is, Behold the envy, and manifold, (or deep) subtlety of the wicked
demon. For when he saw man created to highest honor, and little inferior to
Angels, etc. The word he uses here, and some lines after, is (...); but
afterward both here, and upon the seventh verse, it is (...). S. Basil in his
Homily, (...), That God is not the cause of evils, has both the words
together. (...). Being (the Devil) the receptacle of all wickedness, he
labored of envy also. Our honor became an eyesore unto him. So Basil there:
but in his XXI. Homily, Upon diverse (so inscribed) places of Scripture, having
occasion to speak of envy in general, he falls upon this particular of the
devils envy, and man's ruin through it, and handles it very rhetorically, So
Gregor, Nyssen, as pathetically, though not so largely, in his, De vita Mosis.
Diverse more might be added. Hardly shall we find any Ancients that either
speak of Adams fall, or his posterities miseries in this life, but have a
touch of the Devils envy. As for modern authors, in so obvious, and so
unquestionable a subject among all Christians, I shall for bear their
testimonies, and proceed to other matter.

We have presumed that time out of mind such an opinion was among the heathens
concerning this invidia daemonis, the subject of our Discourse. We think we
have said enough to make it probable. We will now see what can be said against
it: to wit, whether his Name can be produced that first either said it, or was
observed to say it among heathens: which though it might, yet it does not
follow but that originally it might be from the Scriptures, since that it may
as probably be supposed, whoever that first was, by so many ages either nearer,
or farther from the spring, that he had it from the Scriptures, which all
antiquity believed that Pherecydes, Pythagoras, Plato, and diverse others in
their times by traveling into Egypt, and other far countries, and there
conversing with some of the Jewish nation, had some knowledge of.
Nevertheless, to give the reader all satisfaction I can in this point, I will
(as we promised before) see what can be said about it. There be two, (more, it
may be; but two that I remember) who seem to make Herodotus the first:
Plutarch, sufficiently known unto all men, and Eustathius, who has commented,
or rather abbreviated and contracted the ancient innumerous Commentators upon
Homer. Plutarch, among other many tractats, in that part of his works, which
is called, his Morals, has one entitled (...), Concerning the malignity of
Herodotus; and in that tractat, among other things, as well became him, he
takes notice of his malignity toward the Gods: His words are, (...), etc. In
the person of Solon he reproacheth the Gods in these words: Do thou, o
Croesus, consult me about humane affairs, who know full well that all Deity
is of an envious and unpeaceable (Gr. (...), that takes pleasure to disturb,
and to create troubles: we have spoken of the word before) disposition.] For
what himself conceited of the Gods, in fathering it upon Solon, he adds
malignity to blasphemy. This is all he says of it; and it is very observable
he says no more. First, that whereas Herodotus four several times at least,
upon several occasions does so blaspheme, he should take notice but of one.
And secondly, that he should say nothing (copious enough, if not exuberant upon
most other particulars) against the opinion it self by way of confutation, and
in vindication of his gods; knowing well, that if Herodotus were the first, he
was not the only that had said it. The truth is, it is not likely that
Plutarch did believe Herodotus to have been the first; neither indeed does he
directly say it, though his words might seem to import as much. But besides
this, Plutarch was conscious unto himself, that himself had said as much, or
little less. There be diverse places to be found in him, that might be pressed
to this purpose: I shall instance in one. In his Consolation to Apollonius,
Philip King of Macedon, (says he: we had somewhat of this Philip before) upon
the hearing of three several happy tidings, all in one day, lifting up his
hands unto heaven, he said, O demon, unto these my good haps, oppose I pray
thee, some tolerable misfortune: Knowing that such is the nature of fortune, to
envy great successes. So Plutarch, who does not indeed use the word (...), as
Herodotus does; but how common and ordinary it is to all sorts of writers,
(professed Epicureans and Atheists excepted) to use the word fortune in stead
of God, is not unknown, and has been, even by heathens, observed. We shall,
not long after, quote a passage of Diod. Siculus, where (...) fortune; and
(...), the Gods, are apparently in one and the same sentence, put for the same.
Perhaps the generality of the assertion, that all Deity, etc. was it that
Plutarch excepted against in Herodotus: and so he might be the only perchance
that so generally, and peremptorily (take them both together) does affirm it.
Certainly, whosoever was the first that durst publicly so blaspheme; so
easily to entertain, and so often to inculcate the blasphemy as Herodotus
does, even this was enough to evince his impiety; and it was not, I believe,
without some providence, that his malignity, in general, should be so sifted,
and as it were, publicly in the eyes of all men, and that by the heathens
themselves cited, arraigned, and condemned; (as it is there in that accurate
Invective, or Indictment rather:) who had showed so little ingenuity in the
cause of God.

As Plutarch, so Eustathius, he also seems to make Herodotus the first author
of this blasphemy; but seems only. His words upon the last of the Iliads,
are these: (...) etc. The Poet making, or setting out, or bringing in the gods,
(...), generally, as often has been observed, adscribes unto them such
affections, as men in such cases would probably be affected with. Among which
this is one, that those who in other things are far eminent, would not have
those of a lower condition to be equal unto them in point of happiness:
whether, ((...)) because they spite them; or, as Herodotus would say, ((...))
because they envy; or for some other cause. I translate the words as they must
be read, and not as they are printed (in the Basil. edition, at lest) (...): of
which no sense can be made* (...) and (...), imply but one thing, and it is
likely some either Poet, or prose author upon this very subject, had the word
(...). However, (...) being the word (and the only, as I take it) often used
by Herodotus upon this occasion it can be no wonder if Eustath, (or whoever;
some ancienter Commentator in him perchance) having now occasion to use it
himself, name him: thereby rather alluding to his word, as I conceive, then to
his opinion, as either proper to him, or derived from him.

But may not Eustathius be thought to derive it here rather from Homer him
self? I think, not: for all that can be made of his words is not that Homer
does directly say so; but this, that the Poet does adscribe such affections
unto the Gods, as may be thought to proceed from such a cause. Homer's own
words in that place are these; (...)
(...) --
That is, How have the Gods appointed unto miserable men, to live in grief?

Which is no more then the Scripture says in diverse places, not of gods, but
of God: and yet the cause, nevertheless, according to the Scriptures, not
envy, but justice, and just judgment, yea, and mercy, in some respect; as
heathens themselves, upon this very subject, acknowledge. Besides, it is well
known, that Homer elsewhere, (we shall have occasion to produce his words upon
the passage of Aul. Gell.) brings in Jupiter complaining of the iniquity of
men, who lay the cause of their miseries upon the Gods.

But were it so that Plutarch and Eustathius should directly say it either of
Herodotus, or Homer; yet there would be other Ancients found of no less
anthority then they, to contradict them. Simonides, an ancient Greek Poet, was
since Homer indeed, but before Herodotus, one full century of years, at least.
Now Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, speaking obiter of this matter, and in the
very terms as Herodotus does, he quotes this Simonides, and might be thought
to make him the first author. But he does not* he takes notice of the saying
from Simonides the Poet, indeed, and because from none but him, disapproving
the saying, he is content to say, that Poets will lie. That no body said it
before him he does not write, neither will it follow. Lastly, how easily either
Aristotle, or any other, in case they had spoken more peremptorily, might be
mistaken in this point, since neither all books were extant in any age, that
have formerly been written, be it the happiest age that ever was; nor all that
are extant, likely to come to any one man's knowledge, be he never so careful
and curious, I leave it further to be considered. Aristotle's words in English
(those memorable words we mentioned before) are these: Therefore it may well be
thought that the possession (or purchase) of this ingenuous noble science (the
Metaphysics) does not belong unto men: For the nature of man, in many
respects, is slavish: so that according to Simonides this blessedness does
peculiarly belong unto God; neither is it fit for man to seek that science
which is above him [or which is not granted unto him. Gr. (...): that is, as I
conceive, such trajections being very usual, to Aristotle especially; (...).]
And if that of the Poet be true, that God can envy, I think it appliable to
this especially: [Gr. It is probable that it so falls out in this especially:]
whence it will follow, that all men are unfortunate [Gr. (...): he alludes to
those verses of Euripides, as I take it, cited by him in his Ethics, lib. VI.
c. 8. (...): which is divinely confuted by him in the said Ethics, the 7. and
8. Chapters of the X. Book] who aspire to such excellency. But neither is it a
thing possible that God should envy, but according to the Proverb, Poets will
feign many things (or often lie:) neither ought we (though but men, and not so
capable of it as of other things, that is,) to make more reckoning of any other
science then of this.

These words of Aristotle may give light to an obscure passage of Clemens
Alexandrinus, who in his fifth Stromat. having discoursed at large, and to that
end, brought proofs out of the Scripture also, That God had not revealed the
truth unto men, but in mysteries and allegories, in dreams, and symboles:
(...), says he, (...), etc. that is, not out of envy, since that to fancy
God subject to passions, (so the word (...) must here be rendered, not as it is
translated, patibilis: in which sense it is taken, Acts XXVI. v. 23.) is
impious, but, etc.

I have done with my main subject, the original of that opinion of ancient
Heathens, De invidia Daemonis. I must now remember an observation of the same
Ancients, spoken of at the beginning, concerning unusual, overswelling
prosperity; for which there being sufficient ground (in ordinary construction)
upon daily experience, the opinion de invidia Daemonis (especially by them of
remoter times from the beginning, who were less acquainted with ancient
traditions) may be thought as well to be grounded upon the same experience.
This tradition, de invidia Daemonis, being once up, and generally received
among men, though originally grounded, as we have said, and derived from the
particulars of Adams fall: yet afterward, when the revolution of many Ages had
partly adulterated, and partly altogether obliterated the truth of things, it
was applied by men diversely, according to the several opinions men had of the
Deity, and as they stood differently affected (some placing happiness in
knowledge, some in greatness, in pleasure some, and some in some other thing)
to the things of this world. But the most general application of it being, as
we have said, and partly showed, to all eminent worldly prosperity; it will be
requisite therefore, and consequent to our first intention to show, what
further probable grounds (besides experience) either from certain words of
Scripture, seemingly importing some such thing; or from relations of Scripture
Histories (from which, as ancient Fathers prove, most of their fables were
derived) ancient Heathens might have for this observation. Passages of
Scripture which by them might easily be drawn to that sense, are many: the
effect of all which is by Christ comprised in these words, (...): Whosoever
shall exalt himself, shall be abased: and he that shall humble himself, shall
be exalted, Matthew. XXIII. v. 12. There was a saying among ancient Grecians,
attributed by them unto Aesope, as Author of it: but certainly, whether by
Aesope first, or any other, taken out of the Scriptures originally, that it was
the proper work of God, and his chiefest occupation, (...): To abase the things
that are high, and to exalt those that are low. It is thus expressed by
Euripides: (...); that is, Euripid. in Troad.
I see the Gods, (or the ways of the Gods) those things which are low, they
exalt aloft, (Gr. they make to tower on high) and those that are eminent (or
highly prised) they cast down. See if you please Job V. 11. and XL. 10, 11, 12.
Psalm. CXIII. v. 6, 7. I Sam. II.3, 4, 5. etc. all pregnant places to this
purpose as I take it, and many more may be found: but of all, I conceive that
of Esaias concerning Tire, to be most emphaticall; Tire, that once renowned City,
whose Colonies, pene toto orb diffusae, had spread themselves throughout the
whole World almost, as ancient Historians testify: Carthage, the once
Imperial City of Africa, (that so long contested with Rome about the Monarchy
of the World) and diverse other great Towns owing their original unto it. Of
this Tire the Prophet Esaias, Isay XXIII. 8, 9
among many others, has these words, (I must crave leave that I may set them
down in their original language, because of the elegancy,) (...) 8, Who has
taken this counsel against Tire, the crowning [City] whose Merchants are
Princes, whose traffiquers are the honorable of the earth.

9. The Lord of Hosts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and
to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth.

Though Tire were the occasion and principal object (and well it might then be
for the pride and stateliness of it) of the words, yet the sentence I take to
be general, extending to all, as times, so places equally.

I have no thought that ever Lucretius, a notorious Epicurean, had any
knowledge of the holy Scriptures; and his thoughts I dare say were far enough
from what the Prophet, or the Holy Ghost by him, aimed at in these words: yet
it cannot be denied that he is an excellent Poet, and that his words come very
near to the literal sense of those of the Prophet, where he says, Vsque adeo
res humanas vis abdita quaedum Lucret. I ib. v.

Obterit, and pulchros fasceis saevasque secures,
Proculcare, and ludibrio sibi habere videtur.


Of Scripture Histories, that of holy Jobs more then ordinary prosperity, as it
is recorded in the first Chapter; and the sudden alteration, which upon Satan
(there said to have appeared among the sons of God) his wicked and malicious
suggestion and crimination ensued; so ancient and so remarkable, as it cannot
be conceived that it should altogether be unknown unto them, so what they might
ignorantly infer upon it, they that are versed in their mythologies may
easily guess. Through the instigation of the same Satan (as is expressed I
Chron. XXI. v. 1.) David King of Israel, would needs have the people numbered:
whereupon Gods wrath and a great plague upon the people of God ensued. Of this
there is no question, the Text is plain, that God was angry, and the people
plagued; but what was David's crime, does not so clearly appear by the Text;
neither are Expositors of one mind about it. Josephus of old, and some Rabbis
since him, make this to have been David's trespass, because he did not impose
the redemption money (half a sicle) commanded by God, Exodus XXX. v. 12, 13. upon
such occasions. Learned Diodatus his opinion (slipped over in the late English
Edition of his Notes) upon II Sam. c. 24. is, that David (besides some other
concurring provocations) offended in that he did not observe the law concerning
the right age, to wit, 20 years, from which and upwards, the people was to be
numbered, Exo, XXX. 14. Number. I. 2.

So they: but the current opinion of Interpreters, says P. Martyr, upon the
place, is, that elatio animi and superbia, was his fault. God, says he, had
given him peace. He had got a Catalogue of his valiant men, and now he sets his
mind upon it, to know the number of his thousands of Subjects. So Rev. Dr.
Rivet also, Quando tuleris summam filio^um Isr. etc. When thou take the sum
of the children of Israel: that is, When thou shall number them, either by me
commanded, or of thy self when thou shall think it expedient for the public
good. For the numbering of the people upon such occasions was not displeasing
unto God, which nevertheless in David for other causes was reprehended. Not
certainly, as some Hebrews are of opinion, because he took no care for the
tribute money, which was to be paid unto God: this could not be the reason why
Joab dissuaded him from it: but because he saw that it was not done out of a
good mind, but rather out of vanity and pride, as may appear from the whole
context, II Sam. XXIV. So he. And this indeed, all circumstances, as he says,
of the story well weighed, will appear the most probable conjecture: multitude
of subjects, (according to that of Solomon, In the multitude of people is the
Kings honor, but in the want of people is the destruction of the Prince, Prove.
XIV. 28.) being a very likely object of a Princes pride and carnal confidence.
Now if pride was the cause both of this anger and plague, and the matter so
publicly noysed and construed; it is very likely that the fame of so memorable
a judgment (the sudden operation and cessation of it, if not the plague it
self, being apparently miraculous) spread it self to many parts of the world,
then inhabited by Heathens. Of Ambassadors sent by the Princes of Babylon to
enquire of the wonder in the land vouchsafed unto King Hezekiah, in
confirmation of his recovery and prolongation of days by the immediate hand of
God, we are told expressly II Chr. XXXII. v. 31.

And since I have mentioned this of Hezekiah, I cannot pass by, being so
pertinent to our purpose, Isidore Pelusiota, Isid. Pelus. Epist. l. 11. Ep. 74.
that elegant and witty Writer, his observation concerning him, as it
follows: [ In the reign of King Hezekiah, the King of Persia came with all
his power against Jerusalem, and was overthrown by a divine miracle, one of
the greatest that ever was. Whereupon Hezekiah being puffed up, and now through
immoderate joy entertaining thoughts of himself above a man, God with a
sickness, as with a bridle curbed him, to compose his swelling mind, and to
make him sensible of his natural frailty, and to cure him of that disease
which his soul had contracted through excess of joy.] So Isidore: and it is
in that Epistle that he writes of Epaminondas, the Theban Commander, of whom we
had somewhat in the beginning. What ground this Isidore might have either from
the Scriptures themselves (by way of inference:) or from tradition for this
observation, I know not: But in my judgment, Hezekiah's miraculous (in some
circumstances of it) recovery of that sickness he speaks of, and upon it, his
vain ostentation of all his treasures and precious things in all his Kingdom
before those Ambassadors whom foreign Princes had sent to congratulate him, so
particularly noted in the Scripture, II Kings XX. 12, 13, etc. and upon this
ostentation that dreadful denunciation of future heavy judgments upon his
posterity, do sufficiently evince, that Hezekiah in his prosperity (after his
recovery at least) did forget himself; and that God in mercy to him did use
means to recall him, before he should be too far gone. These words (besides the
story) seem to me to import as much: II Chr. XXXII. 25, 26.
But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him: for
his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart
(both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem) so that the wrath of the Lord came
not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.

These, and the like passages of Scripture might, and did as I conceive, at the
first (in part) occasion that observation of the Heathens, of the danger of
more then ordinary worldly prosperity. But their ignorance of the Scriptures,
or want rather of perfect knowledge of them, made them upon this observation to
infer (in the manner I have said before) this wicked and impious conclusion,
that God was of a malign and envious disposition. I see here a large field
open, but I will not enter into it, as not being within the compass either of
my undertaking (which was only to show the original of the opinion:) or my
leisure and opportunity at this time. I shall only take notice of two reasons
which are touched upon by ancient Heathens, not Philosophers I do not mean,
who have written of purpose, and more generally concerning Providence: but
Historians, upon the by, and in this very subject of either great prosperity
suddenly blasted, or sorrows intermingled with joys; their reasons, as I
conceive, being very agreeable to the doctrine of the sacred Scriptures.

Herodotus, That God will not end^re that any other should think well of
himself, but himself. Indeed it cannot be denied that the holy Scriptures
both of the Old and New Testament do set out God unto us, as very jealous of
his honor in that particular, in whose eyes nothing is more odious and
abominable, then high looks, and high thoughts; who opposes himself against
all pride and self-conceit (in point of wisdom especially) as direct invasion,
or usurpation upon his sovereignty. I do not remember that God is said in the
Scripture (...), to resist any other sinners but the proud. He disappointeth
the devises of the crafty, says holy Job; so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. He takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job V. 12.13.
and the coursell of the froward is carried headlong. This, I think, no man
should wonder at; but rather wonder that any mortal men should so much forget
themselves, their beginning, their end; their frailty, mental and corporal,
whilst they live; as to grudge God, their maker (who of mere dust and clay
has made them what they are:) this prerogative of being The only wise: either
impeaching his goodness, because men are but men, and not Gods; or contesting
with his wisdom, as very Gods themselves, and not men. Such men (prodigies of
ingratitude) have been, and are yet in the world. Est aliquid quo sapiens
antecedat Deum. Sen. Ep. 53.
Ille naturae beneficio, non suo sapiens est. Ecce res magna, habere
imbecillitatem hominis, securitatem Dei. And again, Jupiter, Id. Ep. 73.
quo antecedit virum bonum? diutius bonus est. Sapiens nihilo se minoris
aestimat, quod virtutes ejus spatio breviore clauduntur. And few lines after,
Deus non vincit sapientem foelicitate, etiamsi vincat aetate: Non est virtus
major, quae largior. Such was the language, not of Seneca only, but of those
wise men (not of all, some were ashamed of it, but of most) that were known
from other Philosophers, by the name of Stoics. I could instance in some of
our days also, who though professing Christianity, come not short of these (if
they have not exceeded them) in their way of boasting: but I will leave them to
the censure of posterity. Now if men, notwithstanding so many threats, and so
many judgments against the proud and haughty, be nevertheless so apt to take
upon themselves: What then (it is S. Chrysostomes observation somewhere,) would
they do, if God did use no such means, no such examples to refrain them? So
that upon due consideration, what in the judgment of blind and corrupt nature
seemed envy and malignity, will appear mercy: being used by God as a
profitable medicine or antidote against the greatest and most dangerous
infection of the soul: and to teach men (wherein, even in the judgment of
diverse Heathens, consists their chiefest as wisdom, so happiness) wholly to
depend of God, and in all things to acknowledge him all in all.

Jobs words that we but now mentioned (or others to the same purpose) are in
Esaias also, Esaias XLIV. 25. and XXIX. 14. Out of one of them Homer it may be (or
some other before Homer, of whom he might borrow them) had his: for they
contain the very sense, the words are these (it is a woman, Penelope, that
speaks.)

(...)
Homer Od. PS
(...),
(...).
So much of the first reason. It is Herodotus his reason, that God of purpose
does often confound the (carnal) wisdom and glory of men lest they should
think too well of themselves. So far Herodotus is in the right, and agrees well
with the Scriptures themselves: But his inference upon it (even in the judgment
of more sober humane reason) most wicked and absurd, That therefore God does
envy to men their happiness and prosperity.

Another reason is given by Diodorus Siculus in his III. Biblioth. Hist. where
having discoursed at large of the manifold blessedness of Arabia Foelix; and
particularly of the excellent odours and perfumes that Woods and other parts of
the Country do yield, he adds, (...): that is, Nevertheless God (so I
translate here the word (...)) has not afforded unto men any entire happiness,
without some blemish (or envy, (...):) but to these his blessings he has
annexed somewhat that is hurtful, which might serve to admonish them, who
through continuance of worldly blessings are wont to grow into a contempt of
the Gods. Here first I shall observe, that whereas this seems to contradict
what by some others is affirmed, that men are worse in times of extremity; it
is easy to reconcile them by distinguishing, as of degrees of temporal
crosses, so of differences of tempers and dispositions, some naturally being
better able with patience to bear, though much more adversity; then they can
prosperity, with moderation and sobriety: and some on the contrary, but this by
the way only. That plenty and long prosperity would be apt to beget pride, and
impiety, or neglect of religion, the Israelites, and in them, all men generally
were forewarned by God himself, Deuteronomy. VIII. from the tenth verse, to the end
of that Chapter. Clem. Alexand. in the V. of his Stromata, not far from the
beginning, has collected out of ancient authors some passages, which say
almost the same. But let me give this caution to those that shall have recourse
unto him about this matter first to read the passage of Thucydides in
Thucydides (lib. III. in Cleo's speech) himself: which in Clemens is printed
very imperfect. And so may Philistus, who does so imitate Thucydides, as that
he does almost transcribe him verbatim, be understood, his words, for want
either of this caution, or of diligence, are much mistaken by the Latin
Interpreter. But to proceed, That troubles and afflictions on the other side,
are apt (of themselves, for diverse circumstances may alter the case) to stir
up zeal and devotion, and to bring a man to himself, is not only observed by
sacred writers, and by Philosophers, but even by them acknowledged that
professed Atheism, or (which comes all to one, as Tully of old has proved)
Epicurisme: as by Lucretius, in these words, -- Multoque in rebus acerbis
Acrius advertunt animos ad relligionem.
Quo magis in dub^is hominem spectare periclis
Convenit, adversisque in rebus noscere qui sit.
Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Eijciuntur, and eripitur persona, manet res.


If therefore that be the nature of adversity and prosperity, or rather, if
that be man's nature, so to be wrought upon by adversity and so by prosperity;
then upon their own grounds it might easily be maintained against heathens
that crosses and afflictions in this world, are not effects of envy in the
supreme Dispenser of all things, but arguments of his goodness and providence.
For what was ever more generally received and admired among them, then this
divine (so they believed) praecept or admonition unto men, written upon the
doors of that famous Church in Delphus, (...), Know thy self? Of which words
though many different interpretations have been devised by the ancients, (so
many as would make a good large Tractat, if they were all collected into one:)
yet that the maine drift and purpose of the words was to persuade men to (...),
as Plato teaches in his Charmides; that is to humility; or, ad minuendam
arrogantiam, as Tully in his Epistles ad Q. Fratrem; is generally acknowledged.
Humility, not toward men only, in ordinary conversation: but toward God
also, as in matter of action and religious worship, so of thoughts and
apprehensions concerning the Deity. Of humility toward God the Latin Lyrick
Poet speaks well, Diis te minorem quod geris imperas: Hinc omne principium,
huc refer exitum. and elsewhere again, Quanto quisque sibiplura negaverit,
(contrary to the worlds wisdom, which teaches men to think highly of
themselves, that others may so think of them, and indeed not without ground,
among worldly men) A Diis plura foret. I know that of old it has passed very
current among Christians, that humility was altogether unknown unto ancient
heathens either Philosophers, or others, under the notion of a vettue. And well
indeed may it be termed and deemed the proper virtue of Christians, (or to
speak more properly, of the Chirstian faith) if it be taken in it is full
latitude for religious, (or spiritual:) for intellectual and moral, (or
civil) humility: and again, if it be considered as the virtue of virtues, as
by Christ our Lawgiver, and his Apostles it is proposed unto ^s, and generally
acknowledged by all Christians. However, it was not altogether unknown to
heathens as a virtue. The words indeed, humilis, and humilitas in Latin,
(...), and (...), in Greek, are by them most commonly used by way of reproach:
but even by them as by Christians, in the better sense sometimes. Witness this
admirable passage of Plato: (...). that is, God, according to old tradition,
having in himself the beginning and the end, and the midst of all things, in a
straight and direct course, according to his nature, passes on from place to
place. And after Him follows always Justice, the punisher of all that forsake
the Law of God. Of which whosoever aspires unto happiness, holding fast,
follows with humility and modesty. (Gr. humble and modest.) But he that is
puffed up with pride, trusting either in riches or honors, or comeliness of
body, through youth and foolishness also boiling in himself with arrogance,
as one that needed neither governor nor guide, but able to be a guide unto
others; such an one is altogether void of God. (...) must here be understood
spiritually, (not metaphysically;) for what we say commonly, void of Gods
grace. For otherwise, Aristotle (so is this very place cited by Philoponus) De
mundo, teaches well, that (...): there does not, nor can any thing subsist in
the world, altogether void of God. The same Author of that exquisite Treatise
De mundo, who ever he be, (for Aristole's certainly for diverse reasons, though
otherwise not unworthy his name, it cannot be) has the same passage of Plato
that we have before, concerning humility, the first part of it at the end of
his book, and concludes with it: and though he name Plato, yet he is mistaken
by many, who refer Plato's name, not to these words that follow there, but to
them that go before, which be not Plato's. And whereas in Plato, as we saw
before, it is, (...). there it is, (...): which words I know not how to save
from a direct tautologie, though Budeus in his translation has made a shift to
avoid it. How the old translator of that Treatise Ap^letus found them, because
of the liberty he commonly takes, is doubtful. But however his translation
comes much nearer to Plato's sense, then that of Budeus, or then indeed, (that
I may not be thought to lay the fault upon him) the Greek words themselves, as
now printed in that Treatise, would bear. I can easily believe that the Author
of it might alter somewhat in Plato's words: the word (...), it may be did not
please him: but that he should alter them into mere tautologie, or indeed into
nonsense, I do not believe. Bonau. Vulcanius, who has written learned
Commentaries upon this Author De Mundo, passes this place over in silence,
which made me the more willingly to take notice of it.

But now to return to our word again; there be others besides Plato, who have
used the word (...) in a good sense. Aemilius Paulus in Plut. having had a
great King, whom he had lately conqueted and taken, at his feet his humble
suppliant; and observed, it seems, among some of the younger sort (brave and
gallant spirits otherwise, whereof diverse of his own kindred) much exultation,
if not insultation; presently retired to his Tent, and having sent for them,
after a long and sad silence, which was much wondered at, he began very pithily
and gravely to discourse of the changes of fortune, and instability of all
humane prosperity, and concluded his discourse with these words; (...); that
is, Away therefore with your vain boasting and bragging for this victory, o
young men, and rather with humility stand amazed, and fixing your thoughts
altogether upon the future, consider with your selves with what kind of
unexpected accidents Fortune [Gr. Daemon] may requite every one of you
hereafter for this present prosperity. Antistthenes, says Theodoret, (...),
maintained, that in humility (modestia and humilitate, so the Latin there:
which may also be further confirmed by what Dio. Laertius writes of him) man's
chiefest happiness consisted. In Plato but a little before, (...), I have
translated, humility. I know the word of it self admits of other diverse
interpretations; but there I conceived that sense most proper. And so Plutarch
I am sure, speaking of the same thing that Plato (that famous Oracle (...))
uses the word, in (...). Not to be proud, but humble, is the readiest way [Gr.
best provision] to Philosophy. So according to Philo (of whom a man may almost
as soon learn what Plato maintained, as by Plato himself) in his De vita
contemplat. (...). Which excellent saying is thus expressed in Latin by S.
August. Ep. 56 ad. Diosc.
Augustine, Ad capescendam and obtinendam veritatem via, prima est humilitas,
secunda humilitas, tertia humilitas. All which tends to the illustration and
confirmation of this second reason, that if humility be the end of Gods
judgments, and in true humility be happiness, then those judgments not the
effects of envy, but of mercy rather.

There remains now nothing but Aulus Gellius his words of the opinion of many
(opposed by Chrysippus) concerning the original of evils; and the Etymology
of the word (...) (as we promised) to be considered.

We shall begin with Aulus Gellius, upon whose words if we be long, yet we
shall not digress from our subject. We shall say little upon him, but we might
as well without him, and still keep to our Text. His words then, wherewith be
begins his sixth book, in ancient editions of Gellius, I find thus printed:
Homines fecisse dicitur tantam vim esse aerumnarum and malorum. Adversus ea
Chrysippus cum in libro (...) quarto dissereret, etc.

So in the Colon edition, Opera and impensa Ioannis Soteris, Anno 1526. mense
Junio. I know there were many editions of Aulus Gellius before this; but this
is the ancientest that I could find at this time. He that took care of it,
whether Soter or any other, professes (at the end of the two Tables, or
Indices; Ad Lectorem, etc.) to have compared it with diverse former impressions,
as particularly that which he calls Veneta impressio; and observes some
differences of less moment; but not any here: so that we may probably suppose
this to have been the reading of ancienter editions also. And this the rather
because Petrus Mosellanus in his Annotations upon Aul. Gellius, added to that
impression, he also is altogether silent about it. In another edition by the
same Ioannes Soter a. d. 1533. mense Sep. and another, Coloniae Agrippinae a.
d. 1563, and another, Basileae a.d. 1565. all which I have lately seen, I find
no difference, but that in some of them, the dicitur is parted, or divided from
the rest of the words, with two comma's on each side, thus; Homines fecisse,
dic^tur, tantam vim esse aerumn. etc. But now, if we come to later editions, in
some we shall find it thus, Homines fecisse dicatur: tantam etc. dicatur, for
dicitur, and a colon, or two points, after it. So in the Francford edition, Ex
officana Zachario Paltheniana, a. d. 1603. much improved by the learned
lucubrations (which he calls his Noctes Parisinas) of that great improver of
learning, Henricus Stephanus. In others, as particularly in that of Leyden,
apud Hieronymum Vogel, a. d. 1644. it is set out as imperfect with three
asterises (as they call them) at the beginning, thus, * * * homines fecisse
dicatur: tantam vim esse aerumnarum and malorum, adversus ea Chrysipus, etc. I
hope I shall make it appear clearly enough that the words before (as in
former editions I mean) were very right and full: but what might make some men
to deem them imperfect, and thereupon, as is most probable, rashly to
stigmatize them for such, if any desire my opinion, it is this. First I
conceive that they stuck at the Latin it self, as either not congruous, or too
course, to be owned by so polite a writer as Aul. Gellius is generally
acknowledged. Those words of the second period or sentence, adversus ea, might
also move them as importing (in their construction) much more to have gone
before, then that short sentence. Besides, they might light upon a Manuscript
(it is very likely they did) that wanted, if not the whole first word of the
book (as I have seen some Latin Manuscripts,) yet the first letter of the
first word (then which nothing is more ordinary,) and a void space before it:
which was done, where the first whether word or letter was intended
artificially to be set out in colors, and beautified with figures, to be an
ornament unto the Book. I have seen it in some old printed books also: as for
example, in a Virgil and an Horace of Aldus his Edition, printed a. d. 1501.
But if either word or letter were for any such reason omitted in the sixth
Book, were they not at the beginning of other Books as well, where no such
imperfection is noted? They were certainly; but they that stuck at this
beginning, and did not at others, might unconsiderately fancy more here, then
they did elsewhere. But I will not take upon me to give a reason, such an one
as may be satisfactory, for that which I conceive to have been done without
reason. However, they that know what inconveniences, yea, mischieves sometimes
both to Church and State from such mistakes have issued, will not think such
observations altogether inconsiderable.

But now to proceed; whether, as I say, it were done without reason or no; we
shall first begin with the sense: as for the Latin of the words, we shall say
more of it afterward. The sense then of those words, Homines fecisse dicitur,
etc. I take to be this: That men themselves were generally said, or supposed,
to have been the cause that this world is so full of troubles and miseries.
Many, if not most ancient Heathens that were of this opinion, did also
maintain, that God did not intermeddle with humane affairs. And that which
lead them into this conceit, is, because they could not conceive how so much
wickedness and misery, as is apparently seen and acknowledged among men, could
be the fruit of his administration, who, as he can do no evil himself, so he
is of purer eyes then to behold (with patience and approbation) iniquity in
others. The Stoic Philosophers (which Sect Chrysippus was a prime, if not
sounder, yet propagator of) stood for providence, and a fatal necessity of all
events; a fatal necessity, and yet a freewill too; none more eager and
peremptory for it then they. It was indeed the main fundamental of all their
philosophy. But whilst they went about to reconcile these two, how they did
involve and puzle themselves; has sufficiently by Tully and other Ancients
been observed. But to this particular of evils, that which they maintained, is,
that they partly proceeded from God, and partly from men. From God, and yet he
good nevertheless: because, said they, such is the nature of worldly things,
that good here below cannot be without evil. How this business is stated by
Plutarch, and how by Simplicius, I must refer the Reader to what has been said
of it before: which gave us occasion to mention this place of Aul. Gellius.
This, and the next Chapter of this sixth Book (of the said Aul. Gellius) are
about it; I mean, concerning the original of evils, both moral, and others,
according to Chrysippus (anciently famous for the multiplicity of his writings)
his opinion. But I will not meddle with any particulars of the Stoic
philosophy, that are not to our present occasion. So much as has been said of
it was necessary for the better understanding of these words we are now upon.
For therefore says Gellius that Chrysippus in his books opposed that common
opinion.

That we have next to do, is, to show that such an opinion was, though not
approved by all, yet generally known and agitated among ancient Heathens, that
men themselves had been the cause of those evils they commonly complained of:
And that this was the opinion of some, (though not of them only) who either
brutishly denied the providence; or blasphemously, the goodness of God: which
opinion, as commonly known, being here by our Author but briefly set down, and
not understood by some that read him, principally, as we conceive, occasioned
this imaginary at the first, but now real (as the words are printed)
imperfection. Homer shall lead, not for his antiquity only, but for his credit
also among ancient Heathens. In his first Odyssie he makes Jupiter himself to
expostulate the matter with mortal men, in these words: (...).
(...)
(...).


The sense of which words is, That men do wrongfully accuse the Gods as the
authors of their evils, whereas they may thank their own (...), wretchedness,
or wickedness, through which they bring griefs upon themselves, which never
were destinated unto them. So the Golden verses (as they commonly call them)
containing the chief doctrine and instructions of Pythagoras, (...), etc. He
shall know, (he that takes a right course to knowledge and wisdom, that is:)
how men by acts of their own free-wils bring mischiefs upon their own heads,
etc. Crantor, an ancient Academick, Xenocrates his Scholar, in his Consolation
to Hippocles (cited by Plutarch in his Consolation to Apollonius) had these
words; [ All these things does that ancient philosophy well teach and admonish;
all which if we shall not altogether allow of, yet this that concerns the
troubles and travels of this life, is certainly true. For if it be not so by
any order of nature ((...), are his words) yet by our selves it is brought to
this degree of wretchedness and corruption.] Now these, (and so diverse others
whom we may spare,) though they derive the chiefest miseries of men from men
themselves, yet do acknowledge certain (...), unavoidable chances, or
casualties, which proceeded from another cause; as by Crantor his words that
follow in Plutarch, and by other passages not of Homer only, but even of those
Aurea carmina, though not many, may appear. The Stoichs might be thought to say
the same; but do not. That concourse of free will and fatal necessity they
speak of, is quite another thing: as will appear to them that shall examine the
particulars of the opinions, which we shall not now stand upon.

But Seneca in his Natural Questions, comes off more roundly, and charges men
to the purpose. Never did man, I think, (upon one single subject, as that is,
the benefit of winds) with more wit or Rhetoric plead for providence, then he
does in that Chapter. His words (some of them) that chiefly concern us here,
are these: Ingens naturae beneficium, si illud in injurtam suam non vertat
hominum furor, etc. Adeo quicquid ex illis utile and necessarium est, non
potest his repensari, quae in perniciem suam generis humani dementia excogitat.
Sed non ideo non sunt natura sua bona, si vitio male utentium nocent. And
again, Non tamen, ut paulo ante dicebam, queri possumus de auctore nostri Deo,
si beneficia ejus corrumpimus, and ut essent contraria efficimus. And
afterward more generally yet; If we shall weigh (says he) the benefits of
nature by the perverseness of them that use them, we may say, we have received
nothing but to our hurt. Who uses his eyes that he may be the better for them?
who his tongue? to whom is not his very life a torment? There is not any thing
so apparently good and profitable, which abuse (or vitiousness) may not turn
to a contrary use. Much more to the same purpose is there to be found.

Later Philosophers that have written of this subject; to man's wickedness they
join Gods justice, punishing or preventing: which how conformable it is to the
Scriptures, no Christian need to be told. So Hierocles upon the Aurea
Caerminae, in few words: (...). Our wickedness (says he) and Gods
righteousness, these two concurring are the cause of all our calamities. It is
very well said: but it is not unknown to them that are versed in these
Philosophers that lived since Christianity began to spread in the world, that
they borrowed, even those that were their greatest enemies, (as Porphyrius, and
this very Hierocles) diverse things from Christians, and so might in diverse
points come nearer to our doctrine then former Philosophers did. There is not
any thing that I more admire in this this kind then what Virgil has to this
purpose, in his fourth Ecloge, Sicelides Musae, etc. which ( consideratis
considerandis, what he was, when he lived, etc.) I conceive to be a very good
comment upon GODS words, Genesis III. v. 17, 18, 19.

But to return to Aul. Gel. or rather (for we have not digressed) what has
been said, to apply to him; as it often falls out that men may speak the same
thing, but upon different grounds, and, which much alters a case, to contrary
ends; so we noted before, that many who derived the evils and miseries of this
life from men, did it not to maintain, but to overthrow providence so far as
in them lay: which must now again be remembered; because to such, especially,
these words of Gellius seem to have reference. Those many I speak of were for
the most part Epicureans; professed Epicureans I mean, who positively
maintained, That God had nothing at all to do with the affairs of men, no nor
with the World in general, which they did not acknowledge to have been created
by God: and consequently what either good or evil happened unto men in this
World, they must needs fetch from some other cause. Epicurus (as Dio. Laertius
witnesses in his life) made this very thing to be the chiefest occasion of
evils among men, that men adscribed the cause of their goods and of their evils
unto God. So Diogenes of Epicurus; so Tully, Plutarch, and diverse others. But
the Latin Interpreter of Diog. Laert. as if he had studied how to make him
ridiculous, and to speak contradictions, he turns it to a quite contrary
sense, and makes Epicurus, of the worst of Heathens, by Heathens thens
themselves for his opinions extremely abhorred, rather a Christian, then a
heathen. The same Epicurus, as the same D. Laer records, maintained, (...).
that is, That most evils men suffered (or, were subject unto in this life)
proceeded from men themselves; either hatred, or envy, or comtempt being the
cause. Upon which foundation, was that famous saying of his erected, that
Fortuna sapienti raro intervenit, as his words are translated by Seneca: that
is, That Fortune (sudden evil chances and alterations) had little or no
power upon a wise man: because he held none wise, but such as did altogether
sequester themselves from all such employments, and courses of life, as were
liable to either hatred or envy. What religion Pliny the elder was of, may
easily be known from himself. It appears clearly by him, that his religion,
in point of doctrine and opinions, was Epicurus his religion: and therefore we
may probably suppose that his aim was no other then that of Epicurus, where he
makes this observation, (it is in the Proem of his seventh book) that Homini
plurima ex homine sunt mala.

Now all this that has been brought from several authors, of men being the
cause of evils, well considered, let us see what there is in Aul. Gellius his
words justly to be excepted against, why they should not pass for perfect, as
in former editions: Homines fecisse dicitur (says he) tantam vim esse
aerumnarum and malorum. Adversus ea Chrysippus cum in libro (...) quarto
dissereret, Nihil est inquit, etc. that is, It is commonly said that men
themselves have been the cause that this world does so abound with evils and
miseries. Against which opinion Chrysippus in his fourth book of Providence,
disputing, There is nothing, says he, etc. That this was the opinion of many,
has sufficiently been showed, and that Chrysippus writing of, and for
Providence, had reason to take notice of the opinion, may also as clearly
appear by what has been said.

If the Latin of the words were it that they stuck at, (a poor business to
be stood upon, when the meaning is known) then this happily, fecisse tantam
esse vim, for, ut tanta vis esset: which indeed is more ordinary, as facere ut
numerarent, and facere ut scirent, in Cornelius Nepos, and the like: and there
is an old Grammarian (whether Servius, or Priscian, I know not well) who
somewhere passes his judgment, that one Infinitive to govern another, is
against the custom of the Latin tongue: but how much the good man did
overshoot himself in so saying, let latter accurate Grammarians, ( Alvarez,
Vossius, and others:) or rather let any ancient Latin authors be looked upon,
and it will easily appear. If all that is not ordinary, may be suspected, that
I say not condemned, I durst undertake out of this one author to produce five
hundred places, that may seem more strange then this: such as these, Ibi
scriptum est, tum multa alia, etc. Faceret me, ut earum rerum essem prudentior,
etc. and Omnia quae pater jusserit, parendum, and the like. Or was it, because
adversus ea, they thought was improper, after a single sentence? But if so,
they should have considered that antea, postea, praeterea, and the like, before
that through much use they did coalescere in one word, were so taken and used
divided, as now joined they are commonly: antea, after one single thing spoken
of, as well as after many, and so of the rest. I say commonly: so I take it:
though I find that Hadrianus the Cardinal in his learned Observations, De
sermon Latino, and modis Latin loquendi, dedicated Carolo Principi
Hispaniarum, makes it a particular observation of the word praeterea: Haec
quoque clausula (praeterea) observatione praecipue digna videtur: nam certo
modo loquends non post multa solum connumerata a perfectis illis autoribus
ponitur, verum etiam post singularem aliquam vel personam vel rem. Cicero, etc.
And so is postilla to this day, sometimes joined, and sometimes divided, to be
found in Plautus. And so much to that passage of Aulus Gellius. we are
beholding to him that he gave us the hint of so much pertinent matter; and we
hope we have in some measure requited him.

We are now come to the etymology of the word (...): and it is more then reason
that Grecians themselves, of whom we received it, should be first heard about
it. Plato in his Cratylus where he does purposely entreat of the derivation of
ancient Greek words, among others, he takes this into his consideration; and
his opinion is, (which has since been followed by most,) that (...), is so
contracted of (...), which is as much as (...), wise or prudent, as Plato
himself there expounds it: or (...), (as Hesychius, and the Etymologist) that
is, skillful, well experienced. And so indeed we find the words (...), and
(...), the contrary of it, used by Homer and others, so that of that word or
what it signifies, no question at all can be made; though Plato mention it, or
at least the sense of it, as out of use, and in a manner antiquated, in his
days. And this etymology of the word (...), taking it in the worst sense for
an evil spirit, would very well agree with what is written, Genesis III 1. and
elsewhere, of the subtilty of the Serpent. Some question may be made whether
(...), (which would much confirm this derivation) were ever used for (...).
Some passages perchance yet to be found in ancient Greek authors, might induce
some to believe that it has. As for example this distich of the Anthology,
(...)
(...).
Some, to whom the Greek tongue has been much beholding, produce this very
passage to prove that (...) (whereof much has been said before) is sometimes
taken for cacodaemon, that is, a devil, Whether they were led into this error
by those that first wrote upon those Epigrams, or led them into it, I know not:
but an error it is, as will easily appear to any that shall well examine the
construction of the words, which cannot stand with that interpretation: neither
is the jest or acumen of them any ways improved by it, but rather obscured and
impaired. I did wonder, says the Poet, to see a black Maure Professor of
Rhetoric; such eloquence from such lips, (in another Epigram to the very same
purpose called (...), triple lips) to proceed, so white an attire, (such was
the custom of those times) upon so black a skin. (...) therefore here must of
necessity be translated either peritus, or Deus: but the latter being not only
more warrantable, because common and ordinary; but also, (in that sense that
Tully calls Plato, Deum philosophiae) far more emphaticall here, is
doubtless to be preferred: and so indeed I find the word by some others that
have written upon the same Epigrams well rendered.

And so much I had to say concerning this Etymology, which makes the word
originally a Greek word. Others there be of the same kind, mentioned by Greek
Grammarians, and others, but obvious enough, and in my judgment so little
considerable, that I think it needless to insist upon them here. Neither
indeed would I eagerly contend with any man about this matter, the original of
the word in general, whether Greek or Hebrew, but that it may be lawful for
any man to believe what himself shall think best about it. Nevertheless,
because it is generally agreed upon by the learned that are skillful in the
tongues, (whereof I shall have occasion to speak more at large in a Discourse
that I intend shortly, God willing, to publish, concerning languages,) that
most ancient Greek words, the sacred especially, came originally from the
Hebrew, (the Mother of all ancient Tongues) and thence ought to be fetched; I
doubt I should not give the learned Reader that satisfaction that he may
perchance expect from me, should I not take notice of what has been said by
others to this purpose concerning this word; and also impart unto him what I
can say my self.

I have read somewhere (in Lilius Gyraldus, as I remember) that Steuchus
Eugubinus, a man well versed in this kind of learning, did fetch this word
(...), by an Apheresis of the first syllable, from the Hebrew (...) Devils:
which must be upon a supposition that (...) at the first was taken in the worst
sense. For otherwise if for (...), or God, he would rather upon the same
grounds have said from (...); that is, God, often used in the Scriptures. There
be examples I know (in all languages, some) of such apheresis, or contractions
of words: and what other considerations Eugubinus might have besides to
persuade him, I know not, because I have him not at this time, nor indeed know
certainly in which of his Books to seek it. Hugo Grotius, that incomparable
man, in his Annotations upon the New Testament is of opinion that the word is
ex Arabica Origin (...): from (...) probably, which signifies to endure and
continue: a fit word to express Gods eternity, then which nothing is more
proper unto him, and in that respect a plausible derivation. But that any such
word as (...) to express either God or a good Spirit (which his words seem to
import) is used in that tongue, is more then I can yet learn, though I have
done my best to satisfy my self. Neither in Herodotus or any other ancient
Author that mentions the Deities anciently worshipped by the Arabs, do I find
any thing that approaches to it. Ludovicus Vartomannus indeed (cited by Mr.
Vossius, in his first. De Origin Idolol. cap. 8.) in his Navigations relates
that the Calecutenses call the Devil Deumum, which comes somewhat near; but
what affinity their tongue has with the Arabic, or of what antiquity that
appellation with them is, I know not. Petrus Texera in his Relationes, as he
calls them, of the Kings of Persia, lib. l c. 5. witnesses that the Persians,
besides other names, call the Devil, Diu; which comes near (and probably came
from it) to the Syriack, not (...) (as some write it, which signifies not
Demon, but Daemoniacus) but (...): as in the Syriack Translation of the New
Test, it often does occur. Somewhat here might be said of the Latin Deus, and
the Greek (...), also: but I will keep me to my task, the etymology of (...);
which for those reasons that have been intimated, I would rather derive from
the Hebrew, then Arabic. And because I cannot pitch upon any particular with
any warrantable certainty, I shall therefore propose to the Reader some
variety, that he may have some choice and please himself.

If then neither that of Eugubinus, from (...); nor what we have intimated of
the Syriack (...) be allowed, I would have (...) sanguis, taken into
consideration, because most of the Deities worshipped by ancient Heathens, were
observed, (a subject much insisted upon by ancient Fathers) or at least
believed generally to delight in the blood both of Men and Beasts: or rather
(...) similem esse, from whence come (...), Chaldaik words, signifying, shapes,
figures, images, and the like. And among these should I reckon (...) (sit honos
auribus:) stercus, etc. the same reason might be given for it as is commonly
(and is as currently received) for (...), Idols, from (...) of the same
signification as (...).

I doubt my Reader by this has enough, and perchance he thinks more then
enough of this stuff. Yet I will crave leave that I may touch upon one etymon
more, because it will give us occasion to impart somewhat that is not vulgarly
known, nor impertinent to our maine subject. (...) in Hebrew, a very common
word, ordinarily signifies, to keep silence: from whence also proceed (...),
taken for a Sepulcher sometimes in the Hebrew: and (...) (the very same word)
the name of a certain Angel of death (as they call him) in the Chaldy Dialect.
But (...) alone, as it signifies silere, would excellently well fit ((...) and
(...), according to Hesiod, being often taken for the same) an observation of
Hesychius concerning the Heroes; which is this: (...). That is, (...), The
better, (or, excelling.) So do they call the Heroes, who seem to be a
mischievous kind. Whence it is that those that pass by the Heroa, (or,
Temples consecrated to the Heroes; or, any Heroes) use to keep silence, lest
they be hurt by them. So ((...), that is,) are also the Gods called, as by
Aeschylus in his Aetna. The same observation is in the Sholiast. upon
Aristophanes his (...), and a pregnant passage of Menander concerning the
mischievousnesse of these Heroes (besides Aristophanes his own words about it)
is there also. In Eustathius also upon the second Iliad, but more imperfectly,
it is to be found. I will make no further application my self, but having now
done my part, as I conceive, concerning the etymon of this word, leave all to
the Reader, as his own judgment, or fancy shall incline him.

I remember somewhat concerning some other words ((...),) was promised and
referred to this place. Of the first, (...), all that I intended about it, was
my opinion only concerning the right etymon of it, which because I hope to have
another opportunity for it elsewhere, and would not be overlong here upon that
argument of Etymologies, I shall now forbear. As for the second, (...), I have
since found so much already observed of it by others, as namely by Henry
Stephen, partly in his Thesaurus, (a Book well known to all that aspire to any
perfection in the Greek tongue) and partly in his learned Animadversions upon
Erasmus in his Adagies, that I shall but need to refer my Reader to him: this
only briefly added, That whereas he quoteth some ancient Grammatians and
others, concerning the etymon of it, it seems far more probable to me, that
(...) ( vehemens Dea, as the Poet Catullus speaks of it: (...), the punisher
of overswelling, unbridled, whether speeches or actions, as the Grecians) is a
pure Hebrew word, (...), or (...); from whence comes (...), and so (...): the
same difference of spiritus (the one aspirat, the other lenis) being in the
Hebrew, as well as in the Greek words.

The last is (...): this also, (and so acknowledged by all men) a pure Hebrew
word: but that is not it that I would say of it. It is sometimes taken for
(...), the envy of the Demon: which I think few men have observed. As for
example, in Clemens Alexandrinus, upon a very observable occasion, the
divisions of Christians among themselves, by both Jews and Gentiles (as
Clemens there witnesses) objected to Primitive Christians, as a main argument
against their faith. Among other things that are answered by him, he has these
words, (...): which words are rendered by the Latin Interpreter, Hujus aut^m
cousa quod quicquid est pulchrum sequitur reprehensio. He had need to be very
sagacious, if not a very Oedipus, that shall understand Clemens by these Latin
words. His purpose was to answer them according to their own principles, who
upon all occasions (as before we have showed) of any extraordinary either
felicity, or excellency in any kind had this still (...), the envy of the
Demon, in their mouths, and the dread of it in their hearts. And indeed the
very word used by other ancient Christians, Historians, and others, upon this,
or the like occasion (as the peace of the Church disturbed by persecutions) is
(...). So Gregory Nazianzen in his 21 Oration, in the praise of Athanasius,
(...): This peace and prosperity of Gods Church, envy (says he) could not
end^re. Where it is apparent by the words immediately following, that by (...),
envy, must be understood (...), or (he being a Christian) (...), the envy of
the Devil: So Eusebius, but more fully, after he had spoken of the peace and
tranquillity of the Church for many years: (...), etc. These things (says he)
no envy did restrain, no evil Demon either by fascination, or any plots and
machinations of men was able to hinder, etc. In which words, what at the first
is briefly contained in (...), envy, is afterward more fully declared and
expressed in the words following; as will yet more clearly appear to them that
shall observe many such expressions of ancient Fathers upon other subjects
also, where the word (...), envy, will not admit of any other interpretation.

Neither will it be wondered that Momus, in Clemens Alexandrinus, or any where
else should be taken for an envious and spightfull Demon, if it be remembered
that according to ancient mythologie, Momus was he that gave that pernicious
counsel to Jupiter against mankind, to cast the seeds of divisions and
dissentions among men, that they might destroy one another (Neque hic lupis
mos, nec fuit leonibus Vnquam, nisi in dispar, feris:) by wars and mutual
slaughters. It is said (so I find it in Eustathius upon the first of Homers
Iliads) that he did it to save the earth from a general deluge or
conflagration, which Jupiter was about; he suggesting to him, that this would
be a more plausible and methodicall way, and offering himself to contrive the
business for him. It is very likely that what we read in Genesis of the
confusion of Languages, and scattering of men (before knitted and united in one
Speech and one Language, as is expressly noted, Genesis XI. v. 1.) upon the face
of the Earth, might be the first occasion of this Fable. But I have not further
to do with that here. If I have done (in any reasonable proportion) what I have
undertaken, I am glad, and heartily say,

Soli Deo gloria.
Imprimatur,

Na. Brent.

Some Passages of Authors before mentioned, and, here at the end, promised.
See before Page 4.

Plato in Phaed. (...). Joach. Camerarius, Elem. Rhetor. cap. De Fabulis, p.
36. Quo tempore exacto Saturno atque pulso coelestibus regnis, Juppiter
imperium constituere ac ordinare coeperat, affuere coram illo voluptasque and
dolor cum gravissimis criminibus and postulationibus, quibus se mutuo
incessebant. Jupiter ratus e re maxim esse and sua and rei publ. inimicitia
and odia deleri, operam dedit ut dissensionem litigantium componeret, and
gratiam inter illos conciliaret. Sed frustra expertus omnia, tandem renitentes
and invitos vinculis insolubilibus astrinxit atque colligavit, ut quamvis
dissiderent, una tamen perpetuo atque simul traherentur, and essent. Itaque si
tu, etc. Page 5.

Herodotus, in Tbalia, sive lib. III. cap. 40. (...).

(...).

Page 8.

Homerus Il. O vel, uit. (...)
(...). 1. Alii, (...). Ita and Plut. in Consol. ad Apol.

(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
Plato De Republ. lib. II. (...)

-- (...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
-- (...).
(...), etc.
Page 27. and 35.

Aristoteles Metaphys. lib. I. cap. 2. (...). Page 39.

Isid. Pelus. Epist. lib. II. Ep. 74. (...). (...), etc. FINIS.

