A SERMON Pressing to, and Directing in, that Great Duty of Praising God.

Preached to the PARLIAMENT At Westminster, October: 8. 1656.

BEING The day of their Solemn Thanksgiving to God for that late Success given
to some part of the Fleet of this Commonwealth against the Spanish Fleet in
its return from the West Indies.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Minister of the Gospel at Magnus near London Bridge.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by John Hancock at the
first Shop in Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhill, 1657.

Thursday, October: 9. 1656.
ORdered, That the thanks of this House be given to Mr. Caryll for his great
pains taken yesterday in his Sermon preached before this House in Margarets
Westminster, being a day set apart for public Thanksgiving, and that he be
desired to Print his Sermon, and that he have the like privilege of Printing
as has been allowed to others in like Cases.

And that the Lord Broghill be desired to give him the thanks of this house
accordingly.

Hen: Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.

TO THE PARLIAMENT OF England, Scotland, and Ireland, AND The Dominions
thereunto belonging.
THese are times of Action, as well as of Consulation; and this has been your
happiness, that while you have been consulting how to settle and assure (as an
earthly felicity may be called sure) peace and Government at home, God has
prospered those with a very signal success, who are acting in a war abroad.
And though success be no infallible argument of a good cause, yet a good cause
receives a very comfortable encouragement by success. And as a neglect to go
on in doing good is not excusable, even while we find that the good we are
doing, does not go on; So when it does, our neglect is altogether inexcusable.
When God seems to stand still or (as the Scripture sometimes says) to be a
sleep, it is our duty to awake and work, how much more when he appears eminently
awake and at work for us? It Is not good to outrun providence, and it is as bad
to loyter and lagge behind it. The Arm of the Lord (as the Prophet long since
prayed hard it might, Isa: 51. 9.) has lately awakened for us (The occasion of
this Sermon is his witness) it has awakened and put on strength as in the
ancient days, in the generations of old, it has cut Rahab and wonded the
Dragon in the Sea; It has broken (some of) the heads of Leviathan in pieces,
and given him to be meat to his people inhabiting the wilderness (Psalm. 74.
14.) And is not all this bottom enough for me to cry, Awake, Awake O arm of
man, O arm of the Parliament put on strength and be clothed with a holy care
and courage for God and for his people, though as yet but in a wilderness
condition, wherein we are much entangled with briars and thorns, and sometimes
engaged in unbeaten paths? many thousands will bear this witness with me, that
it is. And my hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, That your Counsels
both in reference to this particular mercy for which you have so solemnly given
thanks to God, as also in reference to all those important affairs of these
Nations that are in your hands, may bear this witness also. Else I must take
the boldness (with much submission) to say, That your own Thanksgivings will
give witness against you.

It Is an act of high favor from God to bestow a mercy, and it is an act of much
grace and faithfulness in man to improve it. It Is easier perishing for want of
help from God, then for want of a heart for God. It Is better to be in such
streights, that we know not what to do, then to make such little use of our
enlargements, as not to do what we know. And what an Obligation is there upon
these three Nations, and upon your Selves, especially, who are the
representative of them, to be more then active, even very zealous for the
public good, seeing we daily find Sons of Beliall rising up, who are active to
the utmost against it? It Is honorable to imitate their industry, whose
undertakings we abhor, and that their zeal in a bad matter should provoke ours
in a good. As therefore the Nations have reason to pay you many thanks for your
unwearied labors, and the issues of them to this day, So the Lord give you to
increase more and more* A good man may be weary in well doing, but he shall
never be weary of it. And it should mightyly uphold our spirits not to be* (as
the Apostle admonishes the Galatians Chap: 6. 9.) weary in well doing: because
(as it follows there) we shall reap if we faint not. That you may sow without
fainting, and reap with rejoicing, is the vote of

SIRS, Your most humble Servant, in this work of the Lord, JOSEPH CARYL.

A SERMON Pressing to, and Directing in, that great Duty OF Praising GOD.
PSALM 111. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Praise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my
whole heart in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.

The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

His work is honorable and glorious, and his righteousness endures for ever.

He has made his wonderful works to be remembered, the Lord is gracious and
full of compassion.

He has given meat unto them that fear him, he will ever be mindful of his
Covenant.


THIS Psalm is King David's order for a day of Thanksgiving. In which we may
consider four things.

First, the matter of the duty.

Secondly, the encouragement to the duty.

Thirdly, the manner and qualifications of the duty.

Fourthly, the grounds of the duty.

The matter of the duty is laid down in the first words of the first verse,
Hallelujah, praise ye the Lord.

And lest any should think that their chief Magistrate invited them to a duty
which he had no mind to himself, he adds

Secondly, his own leading example in the next words for their encouragement, I
will praise the Lord. As if he had said, I will not call you to this duty, and
withdraw from it my self; my purpose is to bear a part and join with you in
it. It Is a beautiful and blessed thing, to see those who give the rule, to be
the example of it; Praise ye the Lord (says David to the people) I will praise
the Lord.

As he gives both the rule, and the example of the duty, so

Thirdly, the manner of it, in a twofold qualification, and that also from his
own example in the same verse. First, He would praise the Lord, not formally,
not because it was a custom to do so when fresh mercies came in; But because
he loved to do so, for (says he) I will praise the Lord with my whole heart,
that is, I will praise him heartily and most affectionately: There Is the first
point in the manner. Secondly, he tells us that he would do it very openly, he
would not be ashamed to praise God, he would not do it in a corner; Though he
would do it with all his heart, yet he would not do it only in his heart,
but (says he) I will praise him in the assembly of the upright. Nor is that
all, he would do it yet more openly, I will praise him in the congregation, I
will praise him not only in the assembly of the upright, or in a meeting of
some choice and select ones, but among good and bad, even in the mixed
multitude. As if he had said, As the Lord has owned me and my cause, and my
people, in the eye of all the world, by his signal mercies, so also will I own
the Lord with signal praises.

Fourthly, we have here the grounds of the duty. And these are twofold, or of
two sorts.

First, his experience of what the Lord had already done for him, and his
people.

Secondly, his assurance of what the Lord was to them, and would further be to
and do for them.

The first sort of grounds, upon which David gave order for a day of
Thansgiving, or the experience of what God had done, is set down under four
distinct adjuncts, or attributes of his works.

1. The Lord had not done small matters for them. The works of the Lord are
great, at the second verse.

2. The Lord had not done some obscure thing for them. His work is honorable
and glorious, at the third verse.

3. The Lord had not done some ordinary and common work for them. His works
are wonderful, at the fourth verse.

4. The Lord had not done some unprofitable wonders for them, his work was
beneficial and advantageous. He has given meat to them that fear him, at the
fifth verse.

These are the four characters of the Lords works* He had done great, and
honorable, and wonderful, and beneficial things for them; and were not all
these enough to call up their hearts to the high, to the highest praises of God?
All these make the first ground of David's order for Thanksgiving.

The second ground of his order arises from the assurance of what God was to
them, and would further be to and do for them. This is set forrh in three
particulars.

1. Praise the Lord, for we have this assurance of him, he is righteous and
will be righteous, His righteousness endures for ever, (v. 3.)

2. Praise the Lord, for we have this assurance of him, He is gracious and full
of compassion, (v. 4.)

3. Praise the Lord, for we have this assurance of him, He is faithful and
will be faithful always. He will ever be mindful of his Covenant, (v. 5:)

I am fallen upon a very rich mine of holy truths, here is that which is
precious, and here is plenty of it, greater plenty of precious and golden Oar,
then I shall be able to mint and stamp out into particulars at this time; and
therefore I purpose to propose but one general point of duty from this large
text, and draw all the particulars of it together in a way of application for
our better improvement of the occasion of this great and Holy Solemnity.

The point is plainly this:

It is our duty to pay the Lord special praises, when he is pleased to bestow
upon us special and remarkable mercies; or, special praises are due to the
Lord for special mercies. Here is special and special, I express it so,
because to praise God is every days duty; Thus the Apostle directs ( Heb. 13.
15) By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually,
that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name. But though praise be
an every days work, yet there is a day of specialty in prasing God. For as it
is our duty to pray continually, to continue in prayer (Col. 4. 2.) yea, to
pray without ceasing (1 These. 5. 17.) yet there are some special seasons for
prayer, or peculiar praying times. Call upon me in the day of trouble (Psalm.
50. 15.) And we have the same rule ( James 5. 13.) Is any among you afflicted?
let him pray. It Is both our duty and our interest to pray though we are not
afflicted; but the duty of prayer is most incumbent upon us in affliction.
Trouble drives us to God; and God only can drive away our troubles. Again, it
is our duty to repent continually, yet there are some special seasons for
repentance, as when we have fallen into great sin^ or when we are under the
fear of great calamities ( Isa 22. 12.) And in that day (a day of common
danger) did the Lord God o^ Hosts call to weeping and mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sack cloth, all which are the most significant
acts of repentance and soul humilition before the Lord. So (I say) though to
give thanks be every days duty, and that upon a threefold consideration. First,
because every day we receive new mercies, and have our former mercies renewed.
Secondly, because every mercy is a witness of the goodness of God to us, and
of his power put out for us. Thirdly, because every the least mercy is more
then we have either deserved at Gods hand, or could get alone with our own
hand; and therefore we are bound by this threefold cord, to praise the Lord
every day, yet upon some days we are bound more to praise him, and that upon a
fourfold consideration.

First, Some special mercies show forth more of God then our every days
mercies do; more of the power, more of the wisdom, more of the love, more of
the mercy and goodness of God is stamped and impressed upon them, then upon many
other mercies. Now the more of God appears in any mercy, the more and the
louder it calls us to this duty of praising him. The least appearance of God is
praise worthy; His great appearances are infinitely more then worthy of our
greatest praises.

Secondly, We have more urgent need of some mercys then of others; Some are
only accessory mercies, others are extremely necessary; Some concern only the
well being or bettering of our estate, others the very being of it; Some are
only ornamental mercies, others are substantial; some respect only the honor
and flourishing condition of our affairs, others the very life and subsistence
of them; they are such as we know not how to spare, nor what to do without
them: such special mercies urge us unavoydably to special praises.

Thirdly, For some mercies the Lord has been more then ordinarily sought to in
prayer, and with a greater exercise of faith and patience, then ordinary,
waited upon for the receiving of them. They that know the Lord and have
acquaintance with him, would not have any mercy without asking, they pray for
every morsel of bread they eat, they love to see all come in a way of prayer,
through the promise. But there are some mercies for which there has been
abundance of striving in our own hearts, and much striving and tugging with God
that we might attain them: we for some mercies have wrestled all night, like
Jacob, before we could prevail, and be Isreal's, Princes with God. Now when
such a mercy comes in, as has been thus specially prayed for, and of which we
may say, when we receive it, (as Hanna said to Eli about her son Samuel) for
this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition which I asked of
him (1 Samuel 1. 27.) So for this success I praid, for this mercy I fasted, and
mourned, I wept and made supplication before the Lord, and he has given me my
petition which I asked of him, when a mercy has been thus gained by prayer, it
ought and will be worn and enjoyed with praise and thankfulness. Every answer
or return of prayer, calls for a return of praises, much more when it is an
answer to many prayers, to much prayer. Then, if ever, praise waits for God in
Zion, (Psalm. 76. 3.) when in Zion, that is, in answer to the supplications made
in Zion, the Lord break^th the arrows of the bow, the shield, the sword, and
the battle. I grant, those mercies which have stood us in little pains, in few
prayers, which have come in for little asking, yea without asking, oblidge us
to praise God most, because of his readiness to hear and speediness in
granting, when God answers before we call, how great a call have we to praise
him after such an answer? yet those mercies which have been most costly to us,
as to the duty of prayer, are most sensibly constrayning upon us as to the duty
of praise. And although, when through the free grace of God we find our prayers
even prevented by our mercies, the heart cannot but be stirred up mightily to
the duty of praise, yet when, through our own sloth we have neglected to fetch
in our mercies by prayer, we usually find our hearts little pressed unto praise.

Fourthly, Because when we pray much and wait long for eminent mercies, we
always implicitly and sometimes explicitly vow praises to the Lord, and so
bind our selves by vow to praise him. And hence we find often in Scripture that
praising God is expressed by paying vows to God, ( Psalm. 50. 14.) Offer unto
God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high, that is, offer that
thanksgiving unto God, which thou hastvowed to pay unto him. And as we have it
in that Psalm laid down in a proposition, so in another Psalm we have it laid
down in practice, I will offer to th^e the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will
(...) upon the name of the Lord, I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the
presence of all his people, (Psalm. 116. 17, 18.) Our praises are debts, and
Solomon tells us it is very dangerous being in this debt, When thou v^west a
vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools, pay that
which thou have vowed (Eccl. 5. 4.) Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another (says the Apostle, Romans 13. 8.) that is, Owe no man any thing to his
prejudice, or in his wrong. And though we can never come out of Gods debt, and
therefore must be always paying, yet when he finds us to our utmost paying, he
looks upon us as if w^ owed him nothing. Mercy received brings us in debt, and
praise returned brings us (in Gods account) out of debt; The Lord (through
mercy) takes praise, as payment for his mercies. We have reason to be very
careful in making this payment, not only because we owe so much, but because
we can pay no more.

So then, if special mercies have the clearest manifestations of God in them,
if we have an urgent necessity to receive them, if God has been more sought
that we might obtain them, if the vows of God are upon us to praise him, when
ever they should be obtained? who can be unconvinced, That special praises are
due, and to be paid, for special received mercies. And if so,

Then consider,

First, How sinful it is to with hold and imprison the praises of God in a day
of eminent and special mercy. There are two things which we should take heed
we do not imprison; First the Truths of God, Secondly the Praises of God. And
I may freely say, It is as dangerous to imprison the Praises of God, as it is
to imprison the Truths of God. To imprison or hold the Praises of God in
unthankfulness, as it is to imprison or hold the Truths of God in
unrighteousness. There are many that hold the Truths of God in
unrighteousness; O take heed, take heed, that no such prisoners be found among
you! For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against those that do so (
Romans 1. 18.) Now as it is dangerous to imprison the truths of God, so it is as
dangerous to imprison the mercies and the praises of God. To hold them in
unthankfulness has not only this danger in it, that God will give us no more
mercies, seeing we use those he has given us so hardly and unworthily, but it
has this danger in it also, that it may provoke the Lord to pour out wrath
upon us. Eliphaz charge Job with imprisoning prayer, Thou castest off fear
and restrainest prayer before God (Chap. 15. 4.) That's a sad frame of heart, if
when the spirit moves and urges to pray, and there are workings of conscience
which provoke to prayer (even a natural conscience may do it) then to
restrain prayer notes a very ill habit of the soul; for such give witness
against themselves that they have cast off the fear of the Lord. Now as to
restrain prayer, so to restrain praise, is an argument that men have cast off
the fear of the Lord. And when once it is so with man, his heart is at worst and
his sin at full. Therefore the Apostle Paul (2 Timothy 3. 2) gives this as one of
the blackest caracters of those perilous times, of which he there prophecyeth,
Men shall be lovers of their own selves, etc. unthankefull, unholy, without
natural affection. They who have no spiritual affections to perform duty to
God, are often punished with a want of natural affection toward one another.
We have cause to fear that this Prophecy is fulfilled upon this Generation;
that for unthankfulness many are given up, not only to unholinesse toward
God, but unnaturalness toward men. O how are the mercies of God swallowed up
in unthankfulness! yea not only swallowed up in unthankfulness, but
murdered in our murmurings and discontents; to what a height then is the
sinfulness of this age like to increase? seeing they who with hold from God the
glory of his mercies are in a readiness to with hold obedience to his
commands, yea, in that, they with hold obedience to his greatest and most
comprehensive commands. How can it be but the unthankful must needs be unholy,
seeing unthankfulness is the sum of all unholiness? A heathen could say, Call a
man unthankful, and you have called him all that is bad or naught; or (as we
speak) you have Called him all to naught.

Let the unthankful remember, That the inanimate creatures will rise up in
judgment against them; for they praise God continually after their manner, or
as well as they can. The Sun Moon and stars, fire, and hail, snow, and vapor,
stormy winds, fulfilling his word, mountains, and all hills, fruitful trees
and Cedars, beasts and all cattle, creeping things, and flying foul, Dragons,
and all deeps, are commanded to praise the Lord, and they do it; And are not
all men, Kings of the earth, and all people, Princes, and all the Judges of the
earth, both young men and maidens, old men and children, more, commanded to
praise the Lord? and are not Saints commanded and bound to praise the Lord more
then all other men? And are not those Saints that have prayed for such a mercy,
and who have personally tasted the sweetness of such a mercy, and whose
interest is much advanced and strengthened by the mercy obtained, have not they
more cause to Praise God for it then all other Saints? And is not this the case
of many here present, and of many more absent in the several parts of these
Dominions?

Therefore (to close this point) Let not us with hold praise from God, either
in whole or in part. Ananias and Saphira were stricken dead for with holding
part of the price; they brought something of their vow, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet, but not all, and dyed for it. If we keep a part of our Praises to
our selves, or give part of our Praises to instruments, we deal with God like
Ananias and Saphira, who brought their gift indeed, but kept part of the price
to themselves, whereas it was all dedicated to God; we may quickly run into a
parallel sin in this day and duty of thanksgiving, and when the whole was
dedicated to God, keep a part to our selves. It is not enough for us to say,
Praised be God, but we must say (as Psalm. 115. 1.) Not unto us O Lord, not unto
us, but unto thy name give glory: we must deny our own Praise perfectly, or
else all our Praises of God are imperfect; we must doubly deny, twice deny all
our own Praises, else we do not so much as give God one single Praise, that
is, not one single-hearted Praise.

And that we may come forth freely in our Praises of the Lord, and sing
Halalujahs to his name alone; give me leave to set the stamp or character of
those works of God which are instanced in this text, upon those works of God,
which are the occasion and matter of our Praise this day, and to show how all
those grounds which that sweet singer of Israel laid as the foundation of his
own and his peoples Praises, meet and center in ours.

First, (says David) The works of the Lord are great. And surely, we are not
called this day to Praise the Lord for some small or little work; indeed, all
the works of the Lord are great, great as done by him, for he leaves the
impression of his own greatness upon all that he does: as every sin, the least
sin is a great sin, because committed against the great God; so every mercy is
a great mercy, as it comes forth from the hand of the great God; but I speak
not of the greatness of the works of God here in this notion, but as they are
great both in themselves and comparatively with others. And as for the work of
this day we may affirm the greatness of it in a threefold consideration.

1. It is great materially, or in the substance of it: A great force of the
enemy was beaten and broken, a great treasure was taken from the enemy, is not
this a great work? The Prophets prediction well may be our report concerning
the work of this day, and he spoke it in the style of a Navall victory (Isa.
33. 23.) For having said of Sion (v. 21.) there The glorious Lord will be to us
a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go no Gally with oars,
neither shall gallant Ship pass thereby (that is, to annoy or hurt us) He
presently subjoyns the reason ( v. 22.) For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our law giver, the Lord is our King he will save us; This salvation of Sion is
the destruction of Babylon (as is showed in the next verse by an elegant*
Apostrophe to the enemy) Thy tacklings are loosed, they could not well
strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail; then is the prey of a
great spoil divided, the lame take the prey: And when he says, The lame take
the prey, he does not mean that it shall be taken by a company of creeples, but
by some smaller power. And may we not say, That now the prey of a great spoil
is divided? yea may we not say, The lame have taken the prey? Was it not taken
by so small a part of the forces sent upon that design, as may not improperly
be called a lame or weak limb, in comparison of the whole body? and did not the
enemy look upon our six Frigates which engaged them, as a company of
Fisher-boats? Therefore great is the work of the Lord in the matter of it.

2. It is yet greater in the circumstances of it. The greatness of actions
whether civil or moral, good or evil, arises much, if not chiefly from
circumstantialls; from the way and manner, from the time and season in which
they are done. And was not this done, first, in a time when our need was great?
Was it not done, secondly, in a time when our faith was little? Was it not
done, thirdly, in a time when the spirits of some were high in wrath, and the
spirits of others higher in scorn at this undertaking? And as this work was
great both in the substance and concomitant circumstances of it: so

3. It may prove yet greater in the consequences of it: Who knows what effects
this work may have, or how far it may reach? this may prove a long handed
mercy. The Apostle James speaks admiringly, Behold how great a matter a little
fire kindles! the fire is not much at present but it may do much, so much that
possibly we and others may have cause to admire the greatness of that matter
which shall be kindled with this little fire; Therefore let us go forth in
praises, for as in David's, so in our experience, The work of the Lord is Great.

The second attribute of the work of the Lord is laid down in the third verse,
His work is honorable and glorious, or (as the Original text has it) His
work is honor and glory. When abstracts are put in Scripture for concreetes,
the sense is increased; To say, the work of the Lord is honor and glory, is
more then to say it is honorable and glorious; much is said in this, but more
in that: It Is good for us when God declares his mercy, but it is better when he
declares his glory; We should be thankful for favor, but our thanks should
exceed for honor. The work of God before us is honorable and glorious, it is
honor and glory.

1. To God himself; He has (in the eye of his people) made himself a
glorious name, as the Prophet says, he did of old by the conduct of his people
Israel through the wilderness ( Isa. 63. 14.)

2. It Is honorable and glorious, honor and glory to his servants, even to all
who had a hand or a heart in it, a good wish or a prayer going with it. As the
with-drawings of God, as to the success of any undertaking, leave those who are
engaged in it under clouds of disrespect, yea sometimes of contempt among men;
So his appearances with them are a redemption of their esteem^, and a
reparation of their honor among men. For though we ought not to esteem actions
by their events, but by their righteousness, yet success renders them
honorable in their eyes (and such are the most of men) who judge actions more
by their events, then by the rules and grounds of them. The Lord has been
tender of us, and remembered u^ in this; Making this action which had (in the
eyes of impartial and discerning men) an intrinsecall honor and glory, as to
the righteousness and justness of it, extrinsecally honorable and glorious,
as to the success and prosperity of it: Therefore let me say with David (Psalm.
66. 2.) O make his praise glorious.

Thirdly, The text says, His works are wonderful. This attribute also is very
applicable, and but due to the present work of God, which is not only a mercy,
but a marveile, not only a favor but a wonder. I do not say it is a miracle
but a marveile it is, and there are wonders in it.

1. This has some what of a marve^le and a wonder in it; that it should be
done at the enemies own door, when they thought themselves beyond all hazard,
and as it were in harbor, when they were ready to say, and probably said in
effect with Agag, surely the bitterness of death is past, yea the fear of
danger, yet then they were ensnared and taken, even in the face of their
creddit, their friends and country men looking on, but not able to relieve them.

2. This work had somewhat of a wonder in it, because done by a small
appearance of humane power, because done (as was touched before) by the lame or
by little strength. That which is done without the concurrence of any visible
means, is a miracle; And that which is done with the concurrence of little
visible means, is a marveile. It was not surely any plot of man, but a plot of
providence it seems to be, That the greatest part of our force was in that nick
of time withdrawn upon necessary occasions far off. If a greater power had
been there, the wonder had been the less. For though the greatest earthly
strength is as weak to any work as the least, and as unable to effect it
unless God be with them (and so they who are spiritual will confess, when
they have most of an arm of flesh with them) yet then the conviction comes
most clearly upon us, that God is much in any work when we see little of man in
it. And that was the reason why the Lord took off all Gideons Army, except
three hundred, in his undertaking against the Midianites: when Gideon had
gathered a gallant army of thirty thousand, the Lord said unto him ( Judge. 7.
2.) The people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites
into their hands, lest Israel vaunt himself against me, saying, mine own hand
has saved me. We may hear such words from God spoken aloud, though not
formally, yet vertually, in this dispensation. And therefore let us say, as it
is often said ( Psalm. 107.) O praise the Lord, for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works, which he does for the children of men, especially for that
which he has lately done for us upon the great waters, there many saw the
works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep (v. 23, 24.)

Fourthly, The text says, The works of the Lord are beneficial and
profitable, that is expressed ( v. 5.) He has given meat to them that fear him.
We may put this character also upon the present work of the Lord; we have
reason to come forth in his praises and say, what the hand of God has wrought,
is not only an honor to us, but a benefit to us: there is not only credit in
it but there is meat in it, yea (as we speak proverbially of such things as are
very comfortable and beneficial) There is meat drink and cloth in it. He has
given meat to them that fear him: We fight sometimes and get nothing but
blows; we fight many times and get nothing but bare victory and honor by it;
but there is meat in some victories, and there is much in this.

The Original word which we translate meat, is extremely suitable to the
present occasion; for it does not signify our usual food, such as is gotten
by ordinary labor, and pains-taking, by dressing grounds, and keeping cattle:
but it signifies such meat as is gotten by force and fighting, by battle with
and beating of an enemy; such meat as is gotten by the sword and spear, not by
the plough and spade; such meat as is gotten by blood, not by sweat. And
therefore we put in the Margin of our larger Bibles, He has given prey to them
that fear him, the prey of war. So the word is used in the Prophecy of dying
Jacob, concerning the Tribe of Judah (Genesis 49. 9.) Judah is a Lions whelp, from
the prey my son thou art gone up; that is, having taken the prey and spoil of
the enemy in war, thou art gone up triumphantly; Judah was the Kingly Tribe,
who as he had the power of making war, so he was under this promise, that he
should be victorious in his wars, and return laden with the spoils of the
enemy. Judah was a Lions whelp, and the Lord does sometimes feed those that
fear him, as Lions feed themselves and their whelps; he feeds them with prey,
and they tear their meat out of the bowels and bellies of those adversaries,
who before did tear and make a prey of them. The Lord in this present work has
given us prey for meat, he has given Thousands, I will not take upon me to
say, how many thousands, of the enemies treasure into our hands by this
victory; But sure I am, he has given meat to feed the business, which was in
some danger of starving, and which many wished might starve. It Is a mercy when
God gives us meat any way, and it is a remarkable mercy when he gives us meat as
he has given us this meat, out of an enemies store, or meat of an enemies own
dressing and preparing. In this work of providence that minatory sentence is
verified and made good, which Job spoke, or Prophesied rather, against any
unrighteous oppressor, whether he be an oppressor of private persons and
families, or of States and Nations, in the 27 Chapter of that Book ( v. 16,
17.) Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he
may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the
Silver. As if God had said by Job, I know oppressors never think their dustheap
big enough, and therefore they care not whom they oppress, so they may but
heap up Silver for themselves as the dust, yea they heap up silver as the dust
that they may be strong to oppress; well let them go on and prosper, let them
prepare it, but I will prepare heirs for them which they never thought of,
unless how to oppress and vex them, The innocent shall divide the Silver. And
that word divide has a sound of war in it; seeing after victories obtained,
spoils are divided.

I know, some are ready to take offense at this day of thanksgiving, because it
is a thanksgiving for prey. But let such remember: First, it is prey taken from
an enemy. Secondly, it is prey taken from an enemy who has swallowed up Nations
greater then his own, without offense given, or recompense made, as a prey. And
thirdly, we have enough in this text to answer such objectors; here is King
David's order for a day of thanksgiving because God had given meat or prey to
his people, as he has given to us this day: We have as much (I might say more)
reason to give thanks to God for meat gotten by a lawful war, as for meat
gotten by our lawful labor. Therefore let us eat it, or enjoy the benifit of
it, and praise the Lord. If while this meat is in our mouths, the praises of
God be in our mouths too, certainly, if they be in our hearts and lives too, we
shall not need to fear (though we cannot be too much cautioned about it) that
(as it befell the Israelites who fell a lusting in the wilderness) the wrath
of God should fall upon us, and slay the fattest of us, and smite down the
chosen men of our Israel (Psalm. 78. 30, 31.) Indeed if we have either asked
this meat for our lusts, or having gotten it bestow it upon our lusts, we may
expect a severer vengeance then theirs.

Thus, I have touched upon, and made a brief application of the first ground
of praising God, laid down in this context, by a parallel of the works of the
Lord, for which David gave order for public praises, with the works of the
Lord for which we are called to praise him this day: They are Great and
Honorable, they are Wounderfull and Beneficial, He has given meat or prey to
them that fear him.

The second general Ground why David ordered a day of praise, was that
assurance and holy confidence which he had of what God was and would further be
unto them and do for them. And indeed, what God himself is to us, is far more
valuable then all that he has done for us: And in all our outward enjoyments
we should be drawn off from the mercies of God to the God of our mercies, from
all the works of God, to God who has wrought them; So did David here, though
he spoke and thought highly of what God had done for them, yet his heart was
especially carried out to and taken up with the thoughts of God.

There are four particulars in which David gives instance for the exalting of
the name of God in praises, as to what he is in himself, and as to what he
will be unto his people.

First, The Lord is righteous and just; his righteousness (or justice)
endures for ever (v. 3.) He is not righteous in this or that act only, at
this or that time only, but he is righteous in all and always. Some men will
do righteously now and then, here and there, to this or that person; yet they
step awry at other times, or in other cases: and so do justice, not with
respect to truth, but with respect to persons. But the Lord does justice at all
times, in all cases, without respect of persons; and therefore the Lords
righteousness indureth for ever. We are saved by, and live upon, the grace and
mercy of God: yet we cannot but, and are much bound to, acknowledge his
righteousness and justice. They in the Revelation (Chap. 15. 2, 3.) Who had
gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his image, and over the number of
his name, were seen by John, standing on the Sea of glass, having the harps of
God, and singing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb, saying, Creat and mavelous are thy works O Lord God almighty, just and
true are thy ways thou King of saints. The ways of Christ are just toward his
enemies, as he has threatened; and they are true toward his own people, as he
has promised. He is the Am^n (giving being and accomplishment to his own word)
The faithful and true witness (Rev. 3. 14.) bearing his testimony to what he
has said, by that which he does, so declaring his own righteousness.

And may not we now turn David's Prophecy ( Psalm. 65. 5.) By terrible things
in righteousness thou will answer us O God, (may we not I say turn that
Prophecy) into a history and say, By terrible things in righteousness thou
have answered us O God of our salvation, who art the confidence of all the ends
of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea. O how much are we
engaged to praise the Lord for his righteousness, who has avouched our right,
and declared himself against those who would not repair our wrongs? Thus did
the same Holy David (Psalm. 9. 2, 3, 4.) I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I
will sing praise to thy name, O thou most high; when mine enemies are turned
back they shall fall and perish at thy presence, for thou have maintained my
right and my cause, thou sit in the Throne judging right.

And as we are to praise the Lord because he has been righteous, or for the
righteousness which he has done: so we are to praise him upon this assurance,
that he will ever do that which is right; For as he is the Father of Lights,
so also the judge of rights, with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning, His righteousness endures for ever, Praise ye the Lord.

The second part of this second ground of praise, is the graciousnesse of God,
The Lord is gracious and full of compassion (v. 4.) That proper name, John,
derived from the Hebrew word here translated gracious, was given in special by
the Angels appointment to the Baptist ( Luke 1. 13.) either because he was
sent to preach the grace of God in Christ, shortly after to be exhibited in the
flesh; or because he was bestowed upon his parents in their old age, as a
testimony of the favor and grace of God to them. And thus, all that God does
for his people, flows from the fountain of his free grace, and from his
compassions which fail not: The Lord deserves highest praises from man,
because what he does for man he does it gratis, or undeserved. As the Lord is
righteous in all he does against wicked men, so he is gracious in all that he
does for the holiest of the sons of men: yea, he saves them graciously, not
only without their deservings, but though they are very ill deserving. Thus he
proclaims and entitles himself ( Exodus 34. 6.) The Lord, The Lord, merciful
and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity transgression and sin. Here are a
multitude of royal titles reckoned up in this proclamation, yet the sum and
substance of all may be collected and resolved into this one, The Lord is
gracious. Surely, then we ought to proclaim his praise in this title also.

The adverb of this word is often used in Scripture, to note injuries received
without cause or desert. Thus David complains to God of his enemies ( Psalm. 35.
7.) Without cause have they hid for me their net in a p^t, which without cause
they have dug for my soul. And again ( Psalm. 7. 4.) I have delivered him
that without cause is mine enemy, or, that is mine enemy gratis; I never gave
any cause in this world why Saul (whom he calls at the head of the Psalm Cush
the Benjamite) should be mine enemy, yet he is so. And when men or nations make
war upon us wrongfully, or having been offered peace and friendship upon just
and righteous terms, shall refuse, and so become our enemies ( gratis) without
any just cause given them; then usually the Lord does arise to destroy enemies
and help his own people ( gratis) though they have given him no cause, but are
exceeding unworthy to receive any such help and mark of honor, at his hands:
yea though they have provoked him (as the Prophet speaks, Amos 5. 12.) by their
mighty sins, to sell them for naught (Psalm. 44. 12.) and to deliver them up
into the hand of their enemies, that they might satisfy their lust upon them.

This I find specially taken notice of in the Order published for this day of
thanksgiving, in thesewords, The eminency of this mercy of God in weakening the
common enemy of Religion, and in encouraging and strengthening the hands of his
servants in a vigorous prosecution of this engagement, is much heightened by the
freeness of it, being extended to us a froward unbelieving and unthankefull
people, who had just cause rather to expect from the Lord a renewing of his
strokes, and to be still kept under his rebukes, then that he should return to
us in loving kindness and tender mercy as he has done in this late
dispensation.

Now seeing the Lord has been thus gracious, and favorable to us, let me
press it once more, O praise him for his graciousnesse; That Is the proper cry
of Saints. When the great mountain becomes a plain before Zerubbabel, then he
shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, and cry, grace grace
to it, (Zech. 4. 7.) that is, The grace or free favor of God has done it,
and, the same grace and free favor will maintain it. And if the Lord shall
make that Great mountain, the greatest mountain of any state in the Christian
world, with which his people in these Nations are now contending by war, to
become a plain before our Zerubbabel and before his helpers and assistants,
all the lines of our duty in praising him must center in this shout or cry,
grace, grace: And let it be the shout and cry of this day, The Lord is
gracious, The Lord is gracious, in what he has done. His favor not our force
or strength has obtained this great victory. Yet that is not all, the Lord has
not only saved us graciously, but which is added in the text, he has saved us
compassionately.

He is gracious and full of compassion. The word signifies such kind of
affections as parents have when their bowels are stirred toward their
children, seeing them in any extremity, or imminent danger, (1 Kings 3. 26.)
when the true mother saw her child ready to be divided (according to the award
given by Solomon) Her bowels (says the text) yerned upon her son. Compassion
is an affection which besides love takes grief into the composition of it:
such grief as is full of simpathy or fellow feeling of the evil or misery
which lies upon the party beloved. Thus when the Lord sees the Powers and
Princes of this world ready to divide and devour his children who are dear to
him as the apple of his eye, his bowels are stirred and his compassions are
kindled together.

And surely the Lord has been touched and grieved with our affliction, seeing
how we were in danger to be divided, yea to be destroyed. The Lord seems in
this providence to speak to us, as he did to Moses in the bush. In seeing I
have seen, or I have surely seen the afflictions of my people, and I know their
sorrows as to this undertaking, and I have helped them in pure compassion? The
Lord seems to say, I have surely seen the anguish of some of their souls lest
this buisnesse should miscarry, I have seen how they have been burdened as
with the difficulty so with the costlines of this work, and I have had
compassion on them. I have surely seen by envy and discontents of many at home
concerning it, as also the pride and scorn of more abroad, even saying as they
of old, what? will they build in a day? conquer nations in a day? swallow up
the world at once? yea the Lord seems to say, I have surely seen, I have heard
what strange constructions and interpretations have been made of former
disappointments and delays of success in this engagement; yea, I have surely
seen how some would have rejoiced and triumphed at further with-drawings and
disappointments: And having seen all this, my compassions are moved toward
them, and I am come forth for their help. O praise the Lord, who is full of
Compassion; He has remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy endures for
ever.

The third particular in the text, for which we are to praise the Lord, is his
faithfulness, of which David speaks in the close of the fifth verse, He will
ever be mindful of his Covenant.

The Covenant of God is the collection or coalition of all his promises into
this one, (which is the center, in which their several lines meet, and upon
which they move) I will be their God and they shall be my people. The Covenant
of God is our title to God, by that we claim him ours; and if God be ours, all
is ours: by that he has given up himself to us, and takes us up to himself.
We should praise the Lord.

First, For making such a Covenant, ( Psalm. 56. 4.) In God I will praise his
word, that is, the word of his Covenant. There Is our Treasure, That Is our
magazin.

Secondly, We should praise him more for minding of it, He is mindful of his
Covenant, says the text. And that mindfulnesse of God has two things in it;
First, his remembering the Covenant which he has made with us: Secondly, his
doing or making of it good to us. It is a common sin among men, that they make
Covenants, but do not mind them; and that is a sin very chargeable upon this
Nation. It is our interest as well as our duty, to make and mind our Covenants
with God; Not to make a Covenant with him (in some cases) is sinful, but not
to mind what we have made is more sinful. Not to mind Covenant with man is
sinful, much more not to mind our Covenant with God. Such is the weakness of
some men, that though they mind their Covenants they cannot do them, or make
them good; And such is the sinfulness of many, that they make Covenants and
never mind them, nor have any mind to make them good; yea such is the
wickedness and perverseness, and perfidiousnesse of others, that though they
mind their Covenant, yet they will not do it, yea they refuse to do it, and
(which is wickedness wound up to the hight) choose to deal falsely with God in
Covenant. Now, as the terror of the Lord should keep all men from such a hight
of wickedness, so the example of the Lord should keep all men from the least
and lowest degree of it. For as the Lord is mindful of the Covenant which he
has made, so he minds it to do it, yea his minding or remembering of it, is
his doing of it. He can as easily keep his Covenant as make it, and as soon
fulfill his word as give it.

Thirdly, God does not only make and mind his Covenant, but, he is ever
mindful of it. It never departs (as wisdom counsels us her counsels
should not Prove. 4. 21.) from his eyes, he keeps it in the midst of his heart,
and it is always as written in the palms of his hands; he is mindful of it,
not only without a total Cessation, but without so much as the least
intermission. O let all that are in Covenant with the Lord praise the Lord, who
will ever be mindful of his Covenant. Who among other mercyes promised in his
Covenant, has promised to bless them that bless his Covenant people, and to
curse those that curse them. And thus he has been pleased to mind his Covenant
to us in the mercy of this day.

I have now set before you those two General grounds of praise: The experience
of what God has wrought for his people, and the assurance of what God is to
his people; hereby to provoke your souls to rejoce in and praise the Lord: The
work of the Lord is great, his work is honorable and glorious, his work is
wonderful and beneficial; therefore praise him. The Lord himself is
righteous, he is gracious and full of compassion in all that he has done for
us, he is mindful and will ever be mindful of his Covenant to do it more and
more for us, as the matter shall require.

Now what remains? but, that as I have paralelld our grounds of keeping this
thanksgiving day, with those of David in the text; so I should both direct and
press you to parallel David by praising God in the same manner and with the
same Spirit as he did.

I shall draw forth this directive Exhortation into four Conclusions, taken up
out of the text and body of this Psalm, and so conclude.

First, Praise God knowingly or understandingly; The Lord cannot bear blind
services and obedience, nor does he delight in blind praises and thanksgivings:
And as the Lord would have us to understand what it is to praise him, (some
pretend praise to God, who know not what it is to praise him) so the Lord would
have us understand what that is, for which we praise him; he would have us
understand our mercies. As when we repent we should search out and labor to
know all our sins, and all the sinfulness of them; so when we praise God, we
should search out and labor to know all the mercies of God and the
mercifulness of God to us in them. This we have expressly in the text, at the
second verse, The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein. We must seek them out, and find the compass of them, we must
labor to understand and comprehend the height, and depth, and length, and
breadth of them, as the Apostle speaks concerning the love of God. They are
great and their Greatness must be sought out.

But some may say, If the works of the Lord are so great, what need they be
sought: great things are obvious and easily seen; we need not seek out the Sun?

I answer, There is a twofold seeking: First to find the work; Secondly to find
out the work, that is, to find the rarities and beauties, the perfections, and
wonders of the work. Thus, though the Sun be a great work of God, creating;
yet, I may say, there are very few that to this day have sought out the Sun;
that is, who have seen the excellency, perfection, and glory of that Candle of
Heaven; we have not found the Sun as we ought, though it shines every day to
us. Much less have we found out the providentiall works of God; some of which
shine as the Sun in the Heavens, and yet we have not found them out. The
present work of God is so great that every one hears of it, and it is every man's
talk and discourse, yet how few have studied to find out the perfections of
it? David describes the persons who do so, They are (says he) sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein. Then, all they that are troubled at them,
who look sour upon them or envy them, who think a loss would serve their
turns and ends better then this great gain, and to whom (as the Prophet speaks
in another case Isa: 28. 19) It is a vexation only to understand the report,
that is, to understand that such a thing is reported. Surely these and such as
these have no pleasure in this work of God, and therefore will never seek it
out. Nor is it every kind of pleasure which we take in the works of God, that
makes us seek them out, and so praise him spiritually and understandingly for
them: They who (as many do) take only a carnal or fleshly pleasure in them,
will seek no further then the flesh or outside of them, and all their praises
must needs symbolize with their spirits, and be merely carnal.

The true pleasure which we should take in this or any like work of God, must
arise upon these three grounds.

1. As it is a return of prayer. David in that other Psalm, where he puts the
question to himself, What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benifits
unto me? (Psalm. 116. 12.) had said ( v. 1, 2.) I Love the Lord because he has
heard my voice and my supplications, because he has inclined his ear unto me.
We never take so much spiritual pleasure in any of the providentiall works of
God, as in those, which (with humble submission to his own good pleasure) we
have wrought him to by prayer.

2. The pleasure which we should take in the works of God, ought to arise from
those more eminent evidences of the power and goodness or any other
manifestations of God in them. And indeed, we should take pleasure in nothing
but as somewhat of God appears in it. As God is himself the chiefest good, so
the more of God is seen in handing our mercies to us, the better they are. And
therefore we should be more affected with, and take more pleasure in the
appearances of God in our mercies, then with our own advantages and
advancements by them. We take pleasure as beasts only, if we take pleasure in
what they are for us, and not in what of God is in them. As a believers hope,
and trust, and confidence, is in God alone for what he would have wrought, so
he has greater joy, and content, and complacency in God himself then in any
of his works.

3. The pleasure which we should* take in the works of God ought to arise from
their aspect upon the Prophecies, or as they look toward the fulfilling of
Prophecies: And indeed, we may take pleasure in the saddest things that are
done in the world (when we see Nations tumbling and rolling in blood, when we
see the Towers falling, and the mountains shaking, though these are dismal
sights, yet we may take pleasure in them under this notion) as they are a
fulfilling of Prophecies, and a bringing about of the Counsels of God. Now,
They that can take pleasure in this special work of providence before us, as
it looks toward the fulfilling a Prophecy, the pouring out of the vial upon
the Babylonish power (which shall certainly be fulfilled in its season, and
certainly the season of it cannot be far off: Euphrates, the strength of
mystical Babylon must be dried up, and the great undertakings of Nations will
at last exhaust that channel. They (I say) who from such a contemplation of
this work, as it is an answer of prayer, as it is a fulfilling of Prophecies,
and a clear demonstration of the power, wisdom, truth and faithfulness of God
in both, have pleasure in it, these) will search it out, and so give praise to
God knowingly and understandingly for it.

The second direction which the text holds out to our practice in this duty of
Praise, is, To Praise him cordially, that we have expressly in the first verse,
I will praise the Lord with my whole heart. I might spend a whole hour about
this whole heart, but I only name it: do not put God off with words or
lip-praise this day; let not yours be heartlesse praise, and let it not be done
with less then a whole heart; half a heart or a divided heart will not serve
in sacrifice: if we have not a heart, and a whole heart, in the business, it
were better our bodies were not at all in it. They who have two hearts or are
double hearted in any duty, and they who have no heart or but half a heart in
it, are an alike abomination to the Lord.

Thirdly, David's example in the text directs us to praise the Lord openly and
avowedly, even In the assembly of the just, and in the congregation (v. 1.)
There are two degrees in the opennesse of David's praise. First he would do it,
In the assembly of the upright, or (as some translate) In the assembly of the
Just. Just or upright men, have two sorts of assemblies, or they assemble for
two great ends; First, to worship and call upon God: Secondly, to advise and
take counsel one with another. The word here rendered an assembly is applicable
to both sorts of assemblies.

1. To a company of men met together to consult what to do in any difficult
case, especially of public concernment, whether for peace or war. And they
who meet thus in Council should be an assembly of just and upright men. None
are fit to direct the course of Justice but they who are Just, nor to set
things right in a Nation but the upright. Every thing is in working, as it is
in being; And what we find in our selves, we are apt to impresse upon all we
do or take in hand. The work bears the image and superscription of the
workman. As the vile person will speak villainy (Isa. 32. 6.) So the just person
will speak justice, and the words of the upright man will be of uprightness.

2. The word is applyable also to any meeting or assembly of the godly, for
they are a secret company too; They are secret ones, and secrets are with them:
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, (Psalm. 25. 14.) and he will
show them his Covenant, or (as the Margin has it) and his Covenant to make
them know it.

Now when David resolves here to praise God in the Assembly of the Just, we may
understand him of either Assembly; He would praise God in the assembly of his
Counselors: where buisinesses are debated and beaten out, There Successes are
especially to be acknowledged. He would do it also in any assembly of gracious
and upright souls. And indeed, Praise is comely for the upright, (Psalm. 33.
1.) And it is so, not only because they have most cause to Praise God, but
because they are most fit to do it, and because it is most acceptable at their
hand to the heart of God. How beautiful and of how sweet a savor are their
Praises for any mercy, who as they have traveled for it, so they would walk
worthy of it. It Is the best and most stately representation of heaven on earth,
to join with such an assembly of just men praising God.

But David would not stay there, neither must we; his Praise was yet more open,
I will praise him in the assembly of the just, and in the congregation. Which
in opposition to the former is as if he had said, I will praise the Lord before
all comers, let all the world come they shall be witnesses of his praise, I
will praise him barefaced and bold-faced, I care not who hears or who knows it,
I ^t it be told in Gath and published in the streets of Askelon. Such Praises
we are called to perform this day, we are Praising God in the congregation;
Public benifits must have public acknowledgements: There ought to be, not
only sincerity, but solemnity, in such a work as this. As they who sin before
all men, should also repent before all men: So, they who have been helped and
saved before all men, should as David professed again ( Psalm. 116. 13, 14.)
Take up the cup of salvation, and pay their praise* vows unto the Lord in the
presence of all his people. Yea, in the presence of all people, enemies and
all, if they are or could be present, and let it be told to them (if any will)
being absent, even in Rome and Spain, that we this day have given thanks to
God for giving us this Sea Victory and those Indian spoils.

Fourthly, Yet with this holy heat and freedom of spirit, let your Praises
this day have a temperament of holy fear, and your rejoycings an allay of
spiritual trembling: We find this directing corrective in the Psalm too; For
a little beyond the text at the 10 verse, thus David concludes, The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all that do his
commandments, his praise endures for ever. We must not be afraid to praise
God, but we must praise him with fear, and they who have most true courage and
holy boldness in praising God, praise him with the greatest mixture of this
gracious fear. Moses put this ingredient into his Song of triumph for the
overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host in the red Sea, Who is like unto thee O Lord
among the Gods? who is like unto thee, glorious in holin^ss, fearful in
praises, (Exodus 15. 11.) Therefore Praise him with fear; what fear? with fear,

First, Lest we should not have praised him as we ought; or with this fear,
that we have not come up to that holiness and spiritualnesse of the duty in
which it ought to be performed. We have no reason to think we have done this
work so well, as that all is well, but rather to fear that we have failed much
in it. When we are at highest in any duty, we are below our duty, how much more
in this duty of praise, which is our highest duty. Who can utter the mighty
acts of the Lord, who can show forth all his praise? (Psalm. 106. 2.) Had we (as
the Apostle speaks in another case, ^ Cor. 13. 1.) the tongues of men and
Angels, yea the best hearts of both, we could not show forth all his Praise;
what then have we done with our stammering tongues and straightened hearts to the
Praise of God?

Secondly, Praise the Lord with this fear, lest you should forget the benifits
which you have praised him for. Holy David (Psalm. 103. 2.) bespeaks his soul
thus, Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benifits; that is,
forget none at all of them: They that are afraid of forgetting the benifits of
God, are most likely to remember them. Such fear will write the Praise of God
upon your hearts, and provoke you to Praise him with your lives.

Thirdly, Praise the Lord with this fear, that you neither are nor shall be
able to answer his loving kindness, nor return to him according to the mercy
now received. The great things which God has heretofore and now done for us,
will undo us in the end, unless we do somewhat (I say not equal but)
suitable to them. Success of affairs whether at home or abroad is a Talent,
yea there may be many talents in one success; And who knows not, that has
read the Gospel, how dangerous it is to wrap up our talent in a napkin? If once
God sees that we are not bettered, and strive not to do better when he does
us good, he will not only not do us good any more but do us hurt, yea
destroy us (as he told his ancient people by the mouth of Joshuah their leader
and chief Magistrate ( Josh. 24. 20.) Therefore let this holy fear be strong
and stirring upon your hearts, lest you come short of the Praise of God, both
in the frame of your hearts, and in your performance to him. Be afraid, that
you shall neither have such strength of faith in God in future streights, nor
such faithfulness to God in any of your enlargements, as the experience of this
day calls for: Be afraid that ye shall never show forth such a zeal for God as
God has showed for you; for as the Prophet tells us, the zeal of the Lord of
hosts shall, so we may say, the zeal of the Lord of hosts has done this great
thing for us, and that zeal of God will yet do greater, if the work of God
cool not upon our hands. Fear lest ye should not know what this mercy calls you
to do, and be more afraid lest you should not do what you know. As the
correcting rod, so the supporting staff of God has a voice in it; They are
wise indeed, who hearing understand that voice, and, understanding it, do
thereafter. Whatever your hand finds to do for the name of God, and for the
prosperity of these Nations, do it with all your might. There Is much to be
done for the promoting of justice and righteousness in the Nation; That our
Judges may every where be as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning: And that there may be no more pricking bryar nor grieving thorn
among our selves, as Israel was promised in reference to those about them (
Ezekiel. 28. 24) There Is much also to be done for the promoting of truth and
holiness, which (in consort with justice and righteousness) are at once the
beauty and stability, the honor and the safety of Nations: Let both evil
deeds and damnable doctrines be witnessed against, let no error find
encouragement, let no faith-devouring and consciencewasting error appear with
open face in our borders, without a rebuke from Magistraticall power. God has
been tender of the honor of the Nation abroad, let not the honor of God
suffer or be ecclipsed at home, through any defect in the exercise of that
great power wherewith you are entrusted.

That fear of the Lord with which I have been pressing you to Praise the Lord,
will surely guide you in all your counsels to the doing and accomplishing of
all these things. For so says this Psalmist ( v. 10) The sear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom; The word which we render beginning signifies also the
head or top, the perfection and highest pinnacle of wisdom. Indeed the holy
fear of the Lord is the beginning and ending, the first and last, the Alpha and
Omega of all true wisdom; and therefore the Psalmist adds in the close of the
same verse, A good understanding have all they that do his commandement^.
Understanding and doing are two things, yet they only understand the
commandments of God who do his commandments; and they only do his
commandments who fear him. Solomon puts both these together, and makes them
the sum of all the duty of man, and therefore, surely, the sum of all the
wisdom of man, ( Eccles. 12. 13.) Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter, Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man,
or this is the whole of man. As if that Preacher-royall had said, You have
heard me long, and I have spoken many words, I will now ease your labor in
hearing and mine in speaking, when you have heard and I have spoken but two
words more, Fear God, and keep his commandments. To fear God, is to honor him
in our hearts; To keep the commandments of God, is to honor him in our lives.
And is not this whole man? A man without this (though in honor) understands
not, but is like the beast that perishes. A man in highest honor, and of
greatest understanding, can not go beyond this: Therefore, This is all man, in
the best of men. To this end, as every man was made, so every man lives, who
knows why he was made, and why he lives. And hence (to return to my text) David
had no sooner said, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good
understanding have all they they that do his commandments, but presently he
concludes, His praise endures for ever. There is a twofold reference of these
words: First to God, whose Praises David had been inditing and singing all the
Psalm over, His praise (eminently) endures for ever. Secondly to that man who
praises God kowingly and with his whole heart, who praises God boldly and
with holy fear, this man has a good understanding, and his praise endures for
ever.

Right Honorable, You have now kept a day of Praise to God; If you shall
approve your selves to God, and to his people, to have kept it according to the
counsel and example of his Kingly Prophet, there will be more then a day of
praise for you, your Praise will endure for ever; the children who are yet
unborn will praise you, and praise God for you. And consider how sad your
account will be, if you who have, now, kept a day of Praise should give the
Nation any just and r^all occasion to dispraise and speak evil of you
hereafter; if your name and honor should receive a blot or blemish by any
thing that you do, or advise to be done, after you have thus beautified the
name of God with these solemn Praises. While your hand is upon the helm of
government, let your eye be to heaven for guidance both as to the way and issue
of your counsels, that you may have praise in the gate, praise in the City,
and praise in the country, that you may have nothing but praise in the hearts
and by the tongues of all those, whose praises are worth the having; or that if
you miss praise at present from men, you may have that praise of God at last
which will indeed endure for ever, Well done good and faithful servants.

FINIS.

