The Case of Sir GERVAS SCROPE KNIGHT, etc.

Before the Honorable COMMISSIONERS FOR ARTICLES

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed in the Year 1650.

Sir Gervas Scropes case before the Right Honorable the Commissioners for
releif upon Articles granted in time of War.
THe Parliament Treators upon the rendition of Newarke, presented Articles to
the Treators of the Garrison Dated 6 May 1646. the eleventh Article whereof are
in these words, viz.

That all persons comprised within these Articles shall be recomm^nded to the
Parliament to compound for their estates as coming in before the first of that
instant May.

The Treators for the Garrison then told the Vide The Certificate of the
Parliament Treators herewith Printed.
Parliament Treators, that they did not know what was the meaning of these
words, of coming in before the first of May, and therefore desired an
explanation thereof. Whereupon the Treators for the Parliament assured the
Treators for the Garrison that all persons (not excepted by former Ordinances)
should not exceed two years value for inheritance, and for Leases for Life, or
one and twenty years, one years v^lue. Upon which explanation, and affirmation
of the Parliament Treators, the Treators for the Garrison, agreed to Surrender
the town, and upon that agreement, it was Surrendered.

The Parliament 1. Iunii 1646. confirmed the aforesaid Articles in these words
viz. That the persons comprised within the Articles of Newark, shall compound
for their estates, as coming in before the first of May 1646.

Sir Gervas Scrope being comprised within these Articles, and not excepted by
any former Ordinance, preferred his Petition at Goldsmiths-Hall, but cold not
compou^d at less then three years value for Inheritance, and proportionably
for other estates and accordingly has paid in two parts of his Fine.

Sir Gervas hereupon petitioned this Court for releife, and prays, that his
composition may be reduced from three years to two years value, according to
the aforesaid explanation made by the Parliaments Treators, because, upon that
agreement, the Garrison was Surrendered, which otherwise had not been Surrendered.

Objections. That the words of the 11th. Article of Newarke, being no more but
that the persons therein comprised should be recommended to the Parliament to
compound for their estates, as coming in before the first of May 1646 and the
Parliaments confirmation of those Articles of the first of June 1646 being in
the same general words, it is objected, that the Parliament has not confirmed
the aforesaid paroll agreement of the Treators, and so this court not empowered
to relieve us.

Answer. This agreement made between the Treators, was not any new matter
distinct from the rest of the articles, but was only an explanation of an
Article, which, without that explanation (as to the Newarke men then beseiged)
had no signification, and until it was so explained, the Treators refused to
agree to Surrender; and upon that explanation the Garrison was surrendered, and
so by the order of 1 Iunii 1646 that 11. Article so explaned, was confirmed,
and consequently, this Court is empowered to relieve them.

Objection. That by several orders, one dated 12 December. 1645. one other dated
23 Martii 1645 the rule to compound was according to the Propositions
afterward sent to the late King at Newcastle, which (for such persons as were
not under particular exceptions) was at a sixth being three years value.

Answer. That 1 Iunii 1646. the Parliament by Vide The Vote it self here. with
Printed.
their vote, explained the former Order, and declared, that for all such as
rendered themselves without Articles, should compound at a sixth; but in
express terms, by the same vote, further declared, that all such, who came in
upon any conditions, upon the Surrender of any Garrison, or otherwise, should
have the benefit thereof, according to the Articles, and agreement made in
their behalf.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Received your Letter of the 25. instant, directed to the Commissioners from
Parliament at the surrender of Newarke, which was brought to me this day by Sir
Gervase Scroop, with a copy of his Petition enclosed, In answer to which (to
the best The Certificate of one of the Treators to the Commissioners for
Ar^icles.
of my knowledge) there being now no other Commissioners in Town, that I know
of. I Certify, that Sir Gervase Scroop Knight, was comprised within the
Articles of Newark, being there, at the surrender thereof. And I believe the
Allegations of his Petition to be true; For, I remember, when that Article was
concluded, as coming in before the first of May, some of our Treators came to
Us the Commissioners of Parliament, and told us, this Article was much stood
upon by the Treators of Newark, who desired our Treators to resolve them what
they meant by coming in before the first of May, That our Treators told them,
by coming in before the first of May, they should be admitted to Composition
at two years value for Inheritance, and for other estates proportionably; such
only excepted, as were within the exceptions of Parliament. Thus having given
you the best of my knowledge,

I remain Your humble servant,
25. November 1649.
It being questioned by the Treators appointed on the behalf of the Garrison of
Newark, at what rate their Composition, coming in as before the first of The
Certificate of the Treators.
May, was to be made. It was answered by the Treators on the beha^fe of the
Parliament, that the Estates of Inhe^itance of all persons (not excepted by
former Ordinances) then in the Garrison of Newark should not exceed two years
Revenew, and Estates for Leases, or lives for 21. years should not exceed one
years value, and so proportionably, this was the sense of the Gentlemen then
appointed to Treat, and so it was agreed;

Witness my hand.
3 December 1649.
The Vote of this House of the 12. of December. 1645 declaring, that the
rendering, and coming in of persons to the Parliament, shall be understood, of
such persons only, as shall testify their affection to the Parliament, by
taking the National Covenant, and the negative Oath, made in April 1645. was
this day Read, An Order for further explanation of the said Vote was read, in
haec verba, vizt.

THat all persons who have tendered themselves before the first of May last
1646. to the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall or any other Committee, or to the
General, or to any Governor of any of the Parliaments Garrisons; or to any
Commander in chief of any of the Parliaments forces, and shall tender
themselves to the Committee at Goldsmiths hall, to take the National League
and Covenant, and the Negative Oath, before the last day of July, shall be
admitted to his Composition at Goldsmiths hall, according to the Propositions.

And all persons which have any Conditions granted unto them, upon the
surrender of any Garrison, or otherwise, shall have the benefit thereof,
according to the Articles and Agreements made in their behalf, and was upon the
Question Committed to the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, who are to consider of
it, and report it to the House.

Hen: Scobel Cler. Parl.

Gervase Scroops Fine, is near as much as all the rest, the rest of the
Garrison of Newark (of any considerable Estate) are of other Qualifications,
not releeveable by the Articles of Newarke.

FINIS.

