I Conceive these three Sermons may be of much use, for the promoting of the
public service in taking the late solemn Covenant, both here, and throughout
the Kingdoms.

December. 5. 1643. JOSEPH CARYL.

THE QUARREL OF THE COVENANT, WITH THE PACIFICATION OF THE QUARREL. Delivered
in three SERMONS on Levit. 26.25. and Jere. 50.5.

By Thomas Case, Preacher of the Word in Milk-street, LONDON; And one of the
Assembly of DIVINES.

2 Chronicles. 23.16. And Iehojada made a Covenant between him, and between all the
People, and between the King, That they should be the Lords people.

Nehem. 10.28. And the rest of the people, the Priests, the Levites, the
Porters, the Singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves
from the people of the Lands, unto the Law of God, their Wives, their Sons,
and their Daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding.

They clave to their Brethren, their Nobles, and entered into a Curse, and into
an Oath, to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and
to observe, and do all the Commandments of the Lord our Lord, and his
Judgments, and his Statutes, etc.

London, Printed for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at the sign of the Parrot
in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

To the Right Honorable John Lord Maitland, and to the Reverend, Master
Alexander Henderson, Master Samuel Rutherford, Master Robert Baly, and Master
George Gellispe, Commissioners of the general Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, to the Assembly of Divines in England.
Noble and worthy Commissioners.
THis Covenant, so unanimously, so religiously entered into, by the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, and Reverend Assembly, (Gods two faithful Witnesses now
in England) as by your selves also, was afterward sent to the City; where,
amongst the rest of the Ministers, I was to take my share in preparing the
people. The Work being so solemn and great, I bethought my self how I might
best serve this blessed Design; The time gave me some advantage, it falling in
the course of my Ministry, to preach thrice between the Warning and the Taking.
I engaged my thoughts (distractions will hardly allow me to say, Studies)
wholly upon this Work; and (blessed be God) not without much encouragement: The
readiness I found in the People to close with the invitation of God and
Parliament, expressing it self, not only in the multitudes, but in the
affections of them that offered themselves to this Service, made visible in
tears of joy.

Yet when I had Preached my Sermons, and adm^^^^^red the Covenant, I found I had
not done my work. Importunity pressed me to make my thoughts public; and
consulting with the ne^^s^itice of the multitudes of poor ignorant People, that
want a Teaching Minister, while the Kingdom waits for the Covenant, rather then
with mine own unfitness, I was not disobedient to the Motion: I had rather
appear in my weakness, then ^nwillingnesse to serve the public good.
Thousands of the poor untaught people, will be glad of this help, the knowing
will not despise it, if (...); if otherwise, they shall trouble themselves,
more then me.

And now Right ^^noralde and Reverend, These poor endeavors, such as they are,
make hold to present themselves unto you: Streams do naturally run back into
the Bosom from whence they issued. God has pleased to honor your Nation in
making them the First Fruits, and Pattern of a Through(...). to Us, and all the
rest of the (...). This Covenant received its first life in Scotland, though it
came to its first breathing in England. You sent it not with more affection,
then it was entertained with gladness and joy, by our Worthy Parliament and
Learned Assembly; and although with some small Additions, yet such, as did
rather render it, more it self, then vary it.

I shall not need to beg your Patronage for my Self or Labors, in promoting
this Service, The Oath of God is upon you; whereby we are contented to
confess, what in your patheticall Letter to our Assembly, you were pleased
upon other respects to acknowledge, That your Assistance, is become your Debt,
To all that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and
persuance thereof: To the payment whereof, Your selves are already come through
a painful and hazardous travel, to join your Learned Assistance, with our
Faithful Assembly; to which, your presence adds both strength and Ornament:
while Thousands of your Nation are preparing their Brotherly addresses, to pay
the same Debt to the whole Kingdom, now almost in as great an exigence, as once
the Gibeonites were, when their five Kings, with all their united forces were
within few days march, to take a bloody and unnatural revenge, for their
entering into Covenant with Joshua.

Only, We beseech you account it not our distrust or jealousy, if sometime
you hear us complaining with the Mother of Sisera, Why are their Charrets so
long in coming; Why stay the Wheels of their Charrets?

We know the Mercy and Righteousness of Joshuah dwells in your Bosoms, which
cannot suffer you to deny or delay that Assistance to your Brethren, whom you
have invited into the League and Covenant of God upon so fair and honorable
terms, which Joshuah durst not deny unto the enemies of God and his people,
Because they had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, Josh. 9.19.
Although by a Serpentine wilienesse they had wound themselves into that
Association. Joshuahs Conscienciousnesse of that Obligation, carried Him and
his Army all night to the rescue of the Gileoniles, Josh. 10.9. And truly, we
doubt not, but your ^endernesse of this Oath of God, between England and
Scotland, had before this time brough in your prepared forces, to the succor
of your end ^ngered Brethren, had not our Creature-considence,
unthankefulnesse, and other hidden Remor^s, hung at the Keel and Bottom of
this Expedition.

The Searcher of Hearts, and Father of Mercies, discover, and remove the
accursed thing, whatsoever it is, That it may no longer obstruct their timely
approach, nor render it, when it comes, unanswerable to our fainting
Expectations. The Lord of Hosts, bring in your Forces, and come in with them;
his Terror go before them, and his Glory be their Rereward; So shall they like
a Mahanaim, the Host of God, be a dread to the Enemies, a Reviving to the
languishing hopes of Gods people, and a powerful means to assist our
Parliament and Armies, in the settling of that blessed Peace and Reformation;
for which, both the Nations have Lifted up their Hands to the most High God.

Sirs, In the midst of all these Calls and Expectations, pardon, and own me, if
I humbly claim my share for my Self, and poor Endeavors, both which, he
cordially devotes to yours, and the Kingdoms service, who is

Yours, In all Gospel Offices, to honor and serve you, THOMAS CASE.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe fears of unworthy Accommodations, which have possessed (...) Spirits, God
has hitherto graciously prevented by the Wisdom and Piety, of our worthy
Senators in Parliament, who yet, have lest no stone unturned for the procuring
of such a Peace, as might render both King and Parliament, Church and State,
truly happy, and glorious; which is, the Cordinall desire, wherewith, every
good Christian, and Loyal Subject, does travel, that wishes, and studies the
recovery and preservation of these three Kingdoms; what further security this
Sacred Covenant may add, believe, and wait.

There is another Accommodation which may do as much mischief; and is the more
dangerous, by how much more it is secret, which it concerns thee with all care
and diligence to prevent; and that is an Accommodation with base sinful Lusts,
which fight against thy soul, and the Kingdoms safety. How low they have
brought the Kingdom, is too apparent to every eye; what they have done to thy
soul, is best known to God and thine own Conscience. God calls not only upon
Parliament and Assembly, but upon Familes and Persons, for a
Through-Reformation; If thou compound, thou destroyest thy self, and three
Kingdoms; One sinner, destroys much good, Eccle. 9.18. This Covenant
conscienciously made and kept, will prevent this evil: For thy encouragement
and direction wherein, these three Sermons are pressed. The first discovering,
the great Quarrel of Covenant-violation, either in refusing, profaning, or
breaking thereof. The second answering (according to my Model) such Objections
against the taking of this Covenant, as I met withal; and laying down some
encouragements and engagements to the taking of it. The third, holding forth
such directions, as may serve for thy help, so to make, and so mind thy
Covenant, as thou may do it both to Acceptance, and Perpetuity. If God
please to add his blessing, neither I in publishing, nor thou in reading,
shall have cause to be ashamed of our pains; If God be dallied withal in this
Covenant, I tremble to think, what will become of us; It is the strongest
Physic that ever the Kingdom took; and I am almost confident, That as in the
public State, it will, either put a period to our distempers, or to our Being;
so in thy personal condition, It will either blast thy Lusts, or slay thy
Soul. My Reason is, Because God is engaged: If we be found conscientious of
this Covenant, he is engaged to us, against our enemies without, and our Lusts
within, and they shall not be able to stand upon us.

If after so solemn an Obligation, we shall be found to mock God, we have
engaged him against us; and add the Almighty to the number of our enemies, a
swift, and a powerful Witness, and Avenger of our perfidiousnesse. Nor will
Refusal of this Covenant help us; when God shall come to interpret, It will be
found, I fear, in most, but a depart from us; And when God shall answer the
daring sinner in his own language; woe to the poer wretch, that ever he was
born.

I have therefore three humble Requests to make.

First, To our truly Honorable, and worthily Honored, Senators; That in the
Wisdom and Zeal, of good King Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 30.1. in a concernment of the
like nature, They would be pleased, with their Commands, for the taking of the
Covenant, To send forth also, such timely Laws and Directions, into the
Kingdom, as may prepare the people, and fence this holy Ordinance, from that
contempt and profanation, which will otherwise be unavoideably cast upon it.

The second is to my Brethren in the Ministry, That to the same end, they, with
the good Priests and Levites, in Hezekiahs time, would be active and diligent,
to put in execution, those Directions and Ordinances, and to do, what else may
be found in their several places, advantageous to the sanctifying of their
people, for so holy a service; lest, if they sin through their neglect, they
translate the peoples guilt upon their own heads.

Yea, I could wish, That all the faithful Ministers of Christ through the
Kingdom, as they are the Lords Remembrancers to the people, and the peoples
Remembrancers to God, would frequently in their Sermons, mind people of the
Vow of God, that lies upon their souls; and in their prayers make frequent
mentions of it to God, with holy David's, holy jealousy, and compassion over
his people, in the day of their willing, and liberal contributions to the
House of God. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our Fathers, keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people,
Or^stab^^th.
and prepare their heart unto thee, 1 Chro. 29.18. That so the memory of so
solemn and sacred an engagement, may not die off from the heart of the Kingdom
for ever.

L^stly, To every soul that shall enter into this holy League and Covenant; my
request is, That they would look about them: Life and death is before them; if
we break with God now, we have just cause to fear. God will stand to Covenant
no more with us, but will ave^ge the Quarrel, with our utter destruction; if
we be sincere and fa^^^full, t^^s Covenant will be a foundation of much Peace,
Joy, Glory, and Security, to us, and our seed, to the coming of Christ, which
that it may be, shall be the earnest Prayer of him, who is

Thy servant for Jesus sake. Tho. Case.

The first Sermon Preached at Laurence Church, on the Fast Day, Septem. 27.
1643.
Leviticus 26.25. And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the
quarrel of my Covenant.


THis Chapter contains a gradation of sins, and a gradation of punishments;
higher degrees of plagues, threatening to overtake higher degrees of Sin. And if
you will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven
times more for your sins; four times repeated over in this Chapter.

The words read, they are the top, or rather the sum of both, (...) violation,
the top or sum of all the evils of sin mentioned in this Chapter, and the sword
with it is concomitants, the top or sum of all the evils of punishment threatened.

And so you have the division of the words before I thought of it: scil. The
peoples sins. Gods judgments.


Their sin, the abuse and violation of Covenant, Gods Judgment, the Sword, etc.

In the one they walk contrary to God, in the other God walks contrary to them:
From whence observe;

Doct. Covenant violation is matter of a high Quarrel between God and a
people, which God threatens to avenge with the sword.

You see there are two Branches in this Doctrine.

I. Covenant abuse is matter of an high Quarrel between God and a people.

II. God threatens to avenge this Quarrel with the Sword.

1. For the first, That Covenant-violation is matter of high Quarrel between
God and a people: Quarrel you find in the Text, and high you find it in the
s^ituation of the Text: This standing as I showed you at a top of the gradation
of the sins here specified, or being the summa totalis of them all; Abuse of
Covenant.

It is this first Branch I shall chiefly pursue; The second I shall but touch
upon, as time and occasion will serve.

In the managing therefore of the first Branch, I shall endeavor these three
things.

1. I shall show you what Covenant abuse or violation is, or wherein it does
consist.

2. I shall lay you down some demonstrations to prove the (...), namely, That
it is sc.

3. I will lay you down the Grounds, which shall give you an account of the
(...), namely, how it comes to pass, that Covenant-violation amounts to such a
High Quarrel between God and a people.

Covenant violation, consists.
For the first; 1. In wilful neglect.
Covenant abuse, or violation; consists in these three things.

1. In a contemptuous Wilful neglect and refusal of it, when God does
graciously invite a people or person to come into Covenant with him; so it is
reported of those wicked Ephramites, Manassites, and Zebulunites, that when
Hez^kiah sent a gracious Message unto them, to invite them to turn again unto
the Lord, from whom they were departed by a grievous backsliding, and to keep
the feast of the Passover, (which was the seal of the Covenant) they added
this aggravation to all their former Rebellions, they refused the Message, 2
Chro. 30.9, 10
and laughed the Messengers to scorn, and mocked them.

2. It does consist in an undue manner of taking of it, 2. In an undue manner
of taking it; as 1. Rashly. 2 Rottenly. Psalm. 78.36, 37.
and that in diverse respects:

First, When people take it rashly in opposition unto Judgment, one of the
qualifications required to an Oath, Jerem. 4.2. Of which more hereafter.

Secondly, When they take it rottenly in opposition to sincerity, as it is
complained of the Israelites. They did flatter him with their mouth, and they
lied unto him with their tongues, For their heart was not upright with him,
etc. When men come with their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling
block of their iniquity before their face; that is, When they come to these, or
the like solemn duties with the love of any one sin upon their hearts, this is
to play the Hypocrite with God, and to profane his Covenant.

3. 3. Unhallowedly.
When men come unhallowedly to this duty with unprepared hearts, and
unsanctified affections, not laboring to get their hearts into an holy
Ordinance frame.

4. When they come Inordinately, with base, low, 4. Inordinately.
carnal and self-ish ends, as those Sechemites did in the Genesis 34. v. 22, 23.
who were persuaded to be circumcised (which was the Rom 4.10.
sign and scale of the Covenant of God with his people) upon carnal hopes and
expectations of increasing their substance, and enriching themselves by this
means. Verse. 22. Only herein will the men consent unto us, for to dwell with
us to be one people. If every Male among us be circumcised as they are
circumcised. Verse. 23. Shall not their Cattle and their substance, and every
Beast of theirs be ours. This God reproves in his own people, Ezekiel. 33.31. With
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness.

A Covenant in the mouth, but covetousness in the heart; their own base
earthly covetous ends they brought with them to the holy things of God. 3. It
consists in graceless breaking of the Covenant.


Thirdly. Covenant violation does consist in a graceless and careless
breaking of it; either by making a wicked Apostasy from it, or rising up in a
cursed rebellion against it. A Wickedness complained of all a long the
Scriptures, 1 Kings 19.14. The children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant,
thrown down th^e Altar, etc. Psalm. 78.10. They kept not the Covenant of God,
and refused to walk in his Law. Verse. 37. Neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant. Jere. 11.10. The house of Israel, and the house of Juda have broken
my Covenant which I made with their Fathers. Isai. 24.5. They have transgressed
the Law, changed the Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant. It were easy
to multiply more Instances, but these may serve; And thus much for the first
Quaere: scil. Wherein Covenant-Violation does consist.

2. Demonstrations to prove the Doctrine. 1. The Saints beway^ing t^^s sin.
The second thing that I undertook, is to give you some Demonstrations, To
show, That Covenant-Violation is matter of a high Quarrel between God and a
People; which will appear if we consider.

First, That the discerning servants of God in Scripture, such as have been
acquainted with God, and have seen into the nature of sin, have bewailed this
sin with their most brinish tears, and deepest groans, and agonies of spirit.
It is enough to break ones heart, to read with what heart-breaking-sighes,
those holy men of God, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel, have bewailed this sin,
lying in the dust at Gods feet. Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed, and ^lush to
list up my sace to thee wy God, etc. So cries Ezra, etc. And again, Verse. 13.
After all this is come upon us, for our evil deads, for our great trespass;
seeing that thou our God has punished (...) less, then our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this; should we again break thy
Commandments, Verse. 15. O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous, for we
remain, yet escaped as it is this day: Behold, we are before thee in our
trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because of this. Nehemiah is very
Patheticall in the confession of this sin, all along the ninth Chapter of that
Book, weeping out this godly sorrow, as it were with tears of blood. Daniel is
covered with confusion of face, when he bewailed this sin of Covenant-Violation
in the ninth Chapter of his Prophecy. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of faces, Ver. 7. And again, O Lord, to me belongs
confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, etc. Verse. 8. It is breach of
Covenant he bewails with so much confusion of face and brokennesse of heart in
that Chapter.

Secondly, Covenant-violation is a sin, Censured in and by the very Heathen.
highly censured in the very poor pur-blind, Heathen: It stands as an Infamy,
and a Brand upon them in that Catalogue of their sins, Romans 1.31.
Covenant-breakers: Yea, it was a sin, that as blind as they were, they were
able by the very light of nature, to discover in the People of God, and could
give it as the account of that ruin and disolation which befell them,
demanding of one another as they passed by the ruins of Jerusalem, Jerem. 22.
Verse. 8. Where^or^^ath the Lord done thus unto this great City, then shall they
answer, Verse. 9. Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their God.

Thirdly, It may appear to be a Quarrel of a high nature, 3. The fearful
judgments, wherewith it is threatened.
if we consider the grievous judgments wherewith the Lord has threatened and
avenged this sin, as here in the text; The Sword with a black Regiment of other
dreadful judgments, following; Verse. 25. I will send the pestilence among
you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. Verse. 26. I will
break the staff of your bread, etc. And ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.
And upon the persisting in this sin; Behold, seven times more evils pursuing
of them. Verse 29. You shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye cat. Verse. 30. I will cast your Carcasses upon the
Carcasses of your Idols, and my soul shall abhor you. Verse. 31. I will make
your Cities wast, and bring your Sanctuaries unto desolation, etc. Verse 32. I
will bring the Land into desolation, Verse. 33. I will scatter you among the
Heathen, and will draw out a sword after you, etc. Isa. 30.18. My Brethren, God
is a God of Judgment, and does all his works in weight and measure. Nehemiah
acknowledged it in his confession, Nehem. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all
that is come upon us; for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly: Yea,
holy Ezra has a strain higher then this, in his confession. Ezra 9 13. Our God
has punished us less then our iniquities do deserve. Behold, these great and
fearful judgments, and curses, pursuing this sin of Covenant-violation, and
yet so far from exceeding, that they fall short of the merit of it; Our God
has punished us, less then our sins deserved. Of what a high nature (think
ye) is this quarrel, when so many tall judgments, like so many Anakims though
standing upon the Shoulder one of another, cannot reach it?

Fourthly, 4 The care of Gods people after their recovery, to make up this
breach
It may appear from hence, in as much, as always upon the recovery and
deliverance of the people of God, from their Captivity, and other Judgments:
you shall find their Governors and Prophets, Sollicitous and active in the
first place, to atone God by taking up this quarrel, and controversy,
between him and his people; as in all the former Instances of E^ra, Nehemiah,
and Daniel, they knew that as long as this breach lay open, there was no
safety; floods of wrath and vengeance, might break in upon them at unaware; and
therefore they labor in the first place to repair this breach, giving us
thereby to understand, That Violation of Covenant is a quarrel of such an high
nature, as there is no safe sleeping under it, no not for a night.

Fifthly, God accounts it his honor to keep his Covenant.
Among all the excellencies and perfections that are in God. God seems to take
high delight and contentment in this, and therefore does often delight and
admire himself for it. Deuteronomy. 7.9. The Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful
God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy. Psalm. 89 28. My Covenant shall
standfast. Verse. 34. My Cevenant will I not break, etc. And as he glori^s in it
himself; for he calls upon his people to glorify him in this his Excellency.
Jerem. 9.24. Let him that glory th^glory in this, That he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise, loving kindness, judgment,
and righteousness in the earth. The righteousness of God is especially seen
in keeping Covenant with his people, and in this, he calls them to glory. And
so they do, It is one of the high and glorious titles that Daniel ascribes to
God in his Prayers: Dan. 9.4 O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping
Covenant, and Mercy, etc. Psalm. 105 8. He has remembered his Covenant for ever.
Psalm. 111 5. He will ever be mindful of his Covenant. It is the Name, for
which he is so dreadful in his praises, Verse. 9. He has commanded h^s
Covenant for ever, holy, and reverend is his Name. Now surely, That Excellency
which God does so admire and magnify in himself; the contrary thereof, his
soul does most of all, hate, or abhor, in a people, or person; we see it in
our own experience, That vice we most of all hate in our children or servants,
the contrary virtue whereof, does most of all please and delight us in our
selves.

Sixthly and Lastly, God acc^unts this an high favor to bring his people into
Covenant with him, for 1. It is a promise. 2 It is established by an Oath.
God speaks of bringing his people into Covenant with him, as one of the
highest Prerogatives and choicest privileges he can honor them withal, to
that purpose you may observe.

1. That it stands in the midst of a Catalogue of promises, E^^k. 20.37. I will
bring you into the Bond of the Covenant: And you know with what titles of
honor the Apostle has enabled the promises? Exceeding great and precious
promises.

2. That it falls under the Sanction not of a promise only, but of an oath
also. Isai. 45.23. I have sworn by my self; the word is gone out of my mouth,
in righteousness, and shall not return: That unto me every knee shall bow, and
every tongue shall swear? An oath it is the Seal of the Covenant; and this
honor God has challenged to himself by an irrevecable Oath. I have sworn,
etc. That to me every tongue shall swear. Now as it was the honor of the
Priesthood of Christ, above the Priests under the Law; That whereas they were
made Priests by the word only of command; Christ was made a Priest by the word
of Oath, by him that said unto him. Heb. 7.21. The Lord swear, and will not
repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. So it is
the high honor and dignity of this duty and prerogative of the people of God;
That whereas others are conferred upon them, only by the word of promise: This
is established by the word of Oath, by him that said, I have swerne by my self,
that to me every tongue shall swear. And by this you may take the measure of
this sin, since by how much the more high and glorious the service and
privilege is; of so much the more vile and hateful an aggravation must the
profanation of it needs be. And this last demonstration may serve in general
as a bottom and foundation of the next account I am to make: scil.

The (...). Crounds and Reasons of the Doctrine.
.

Of the truth in hand; which is,

The third thing I undertook; Namely,

The Grounds and Reasons of the Doctrine, how it comes to pass, That
Covenant-violation is a matter of so High a quarrel between God and his People.

The first whereof is taken from the nature of such a Covenant, 1. The Nature
of a Covenant. A divine Ordinance. Deuteronomy 6.13. Chap. 10.20.
as is here spoken of.

First, That it is an Ordinance of God, a part of Divine worship, having the
stamp and impression of divine authority upon it; Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cl^ave, and swear by his Name;
From which Scriptures it appears not only to be an Ordinance of Gods
appointing but one of the most special and solemn; In as much as ^oth here,
and in other Scriptures it stands for the whole duty of man toward God in the
first Table.

The Ordinance whereby we specially are said to cl^ave to God, Thou shall
cleave to him and swear by his Name; We cleave to him by swearing to him. Isai.
56 6. The sons of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord. How? It
follows, And take hold of my Covenant.

The Covenant is the joining Ordinance, The joynning Ordinance.
It strikes the main stroke between God and a People.

In h^aring the word, we learn our Duty.

In Prayer we call in for help, for divine assistance;

But the Covenant, that comes and binds the bargain. Come let us join our
selves to the Lord, by a perpetual Covenant. Jere. 50.5.

Yea, The ex^^nall (...) ca^^ (...) very (...)
If we consider the very external Ceremonies used about this duty, it will
appear a very solemn Ordinance? Whether between man, and man, or between God
and man.

When Abraham's servant swea^ to his Master, to take a wise unto his son ^anc.
He must put his hand under his Masters th^^^^. A Type that the Messiah must
come out of Abraham's loins: Ge^. 24 7. G^^ 47.^^.
So did Joseph when he swear to Jacob, etc. When God made a Covenant with
Abraham; God commands him to take an Heiser of three years old, a she Goat, and
a Ram, and (...) 9.10. When he has done, God (...) betwixt the p^ices, for a
Ratification of the Covenant, (...) 17 Abraham when he takes an Oath, Lifts up
his (...) the must high God.

These and the like Post^^^s used about this service, carry a great deal of
reverence and solemnity in the very face of them; and this solemnity even of
the outward Ceremony, God uses as an aggravation of Covenant-violation. God
lays it close unto the charge of Zedeziah. That he brake his Covenant with
the King of Babylon.

Ezekiel. 17.18. When lo he had given his hand.

And to the Princes and People of Juda, that they transgressed the Covenant,

Jerem. 34.18. When they had cut the Galfe in twain, and passed between the
parts thereof.

And Verse. 19, 20. for this he threatens to give them into the hands of their
Enemies.

And if the external solemnity add so much aggravation to this sin, then
how much more does that inward beauty and glory of it, heap up guilt upon their
heads that are found to be prophaners and violators of so solemn an Ordinance.

A second Aggravation of this sin, arises from the Mattor of the Covenant.

Covenants betwixt man and man, are in things appertaining to man; The Covenant
betwixt God and man, is in things appertaining unto God; which as it does
exceedingly heighten the duty, so it does highly aggravate the violation. It
was the honor of the Priests under the Law, above other men, That they were
ordained for men in things appertaining unto God, Heb. 5.2. And it was the
honor of Christ above all other Priests, that his Priesthood was employed
about matters of an higher nature, then the Priesthood of the sons of Aaron.

Heb. 8.6. He has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is
the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises.

Now consider then I beseech you, how excellent that Covenant must be above all
others; the matter whereof gave excellency to the very Priesthood of Christ
himself, and lifted it up above all other Priesthoods: For as the Apostle
reasons concerning Abraham and Melchisedeck. That Melchisideck was greater then
Abraham, because he blessed him.

Heb 7.7. For without question, the lesser is blessed of the better.

So may I in some sense argue the excellency of this Covenant above the
Priesthood of Christ, in as much as this Covenant gives excellency to this
Priesthood. -- He has obtained a more excellent Priesthood, by how much he is
Mediator of a better Covenant.

And certainly the excellency of the matter is a transcendent aggravation of
the violation of the Covenant, for men to trissle and prevaricate in things of
such high concernment, in things so immediately appertaining to God, must needs
be a business of an higher provocation, then the sons of men do ordinarily
dream of. The Apostle reasons strongly and dreadfully in this very case: Heb.
10.28, 29. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy; Of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has counted the blood of the
Covenant, an unholy thing, etc.

The Covenant and the blood of it; the privilege and the purchase, are both
trampled under feet in some degree or other, by Covenant-prophanation.

Thirdly, A third reason, why Covenant-prophanation is matter of so high a
quarrel, is taken from the Form of it, which is, an Oath, an Oath on both
sides. The Creature swears by God, and God swears by himself: This is the Form
or Seal of Covenants, between men and men. So Jacob when he made a Covenant
with his Uncle Laban, swear by the fear of his father Isaac. Genesis 31.53. i. e.
That is Objective!

By the God whom his father Isaac f^ared.

So Jonathan and David swear mutually by the name of God.

The Oath of the Lord was betwixt them.

So Z^dekiah took an Oath of fealty and subjection unto Neb^chadnezzar, King of
Babylon, In the name of the God of Israel; for which cause, Ezck. 17.13. and 19.
God calls it, My Oath, and my Covenant.

And hence it is, That God so severely threatens the violation of that
Covenant, with inevitable destruction upon Zedekiah.

Ezekiel. 17.16. As I live, says the Lord God, sure in the place where the King
dwells, that made him King, whose Oath he de^pised, and whose Covenant he
brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon, shall be dye. The King of
Babylons Oath because Zed^kiah swear to him; and Gods Oath, because he swear by
him: And see how divine Justice avengeth the quarrel of this Covenant.

Zed^kiah swear to Nebuchadnezzar, and did not keep his Oath; But for this, God
swears the death of Zedekiah, and will be sure to keep his Oath.

This Accession of an Oath to the Covenant, a people or person swearing, By the
most high God, and calling so holy and dreadful a Majesty to Witness, must
needs wonderfully heighten the sin, and aggravate the quarrel; by this means,
Covenant Breach, becomes a double sin; a sin twisted of two sins (and those,
no small ones, neither) of lying and swearing: Jere. 23.10.
The lie being the profanation of the truth of God, and the Oath the
profanation of the God of truth; sins for which (take them singly) a Land
does often mourn; Hos. 4.2.
Of how much higher provocation are they, when they meet, yea, when they meet,
and are met into one, communicating their malignity one unto another, and
thereby bigning, and aggravating one another: The Lie making the Oath greater,
and the Oath making the Lie greater; and out of both there arises an aliquod
tertium, a third sin of a monstrous nature; namely, perjury, which is a
blasphemy against the Truth of God, and against the God of Truth, while His
Sacred Name is sworn by, and himself called in, to witness to a Lie, and so
that sin, or sins, which in reference to the Law of God, is disobedience; in
reference to love of God, inviting, pardoning, healing, is rebellion; in
reference to our promise, is treachery; is now at last in reference to the
Oath, aggravated into perjury and blasphemy.

This is much, but this is not all.

Parties entering this Oath, and you will find a fourth, and yet a strong
ground and reason, The parties swearing.
why Covenant-violation is so high a quarrel; The parties striking this
Covenant which are God and his People, and this does exceedingly aggravate the
sin: since by how much the parties interested in the Covenant, are more high
and honorable, by so much the more solemn and venerable is a Covenant
esteemed.

So Covenants entered into, between Kings, and Kings, and between Kingdoms and
Kingdoms, are accounted more solemn and sacred then those that are past between
private persons: What is it then think ye, when a Kingdom, yea Kingdoms, on one
side and the great Almighty God on the other side, swear mutually one to
another.

And the more Sacred the Covenant, the more profane the Violation.

Oh, for a People to swear, not only By God, but to God, and yet dally or
prevaricate, this must needs be a mockery of an high provocation. If God so
threaten the breach of Oaths, wherein he was but witness, how impatient will
he be of those forseitures, wherein he is both Witness, and Party? A People
or Person, swearing By God, to God?

End of a Covenant between God and a People, 1. End of a Covenant.
and you will see more matter of provocation in the profanation of it.

Now the end is twofold, Primarie or Essential. Secondarie or Consequentiall.


The Primarie or Essential End is to knita sure indissoluble knot, Jer 50.5.
between God and his people. Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant, etc. Let us join.

A Covenant is the joining Ordinance, the Marriage knot, as it were, wherein
God and a People are made one; for as in Marriage, 1 Cor 6.16, 17.
two, says he, shall be one flesh; so in a Covenant, he that is joined to the
Lord, is one spirit.

Those be high and glorious expressions which our Savior uses in that
heavenly Prayer, John 17.21, 22, 23.

That they may be all one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us, That the world may know that thou have sent me.

And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, That they may be one,
even as we are one; I in thee, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one.

All one, and one in us, and one as we are one, and made perfect in one. These
be expressions and privileges of unspeakable worth and excellency; and these
are the fruits of a Covenant, rightly struck between God and a People, when
both sides do it with all their heart, and with all their soul; as God himself
renders it, more then once or twice in Scripture.

I will be their God, and they shall be my People; Jere. ^4.7. c. 31 33. c.
30.22. c. 32.38.


i. e. I will be to them what they can expect from a God, and they shall be to
me, what I expect from a People: All I am, and have, shall be for their good;
And all they are, or have, shall be for my glory; and so the Spouse triumphs.

Cant. 2.15. chap. 6.3. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. This is the
first and main end of a Covenant. 2. End.


And the second is like unto it; which is, to put an end to all strife.

Heb. 6.16. An Oath for confirmation is an end of all strife.

i. e. If here be any doubts, or haesitations, or diffidence on either side; an
Oath by the swearing party, is, or should be, the removeall of that doubt, or
distrust whatsoever; It should (I say) be so managed and entertained, as that
it should put the matter out of question; to make all sure? Whether it be in
matters of fact, de praeterito, for the time past, or engagements, de futuro,
for the time to come; so it is between God and man.

Man swears to God, to secure God as it were, that there shall ^e no more
tergiversations, or treacherous dealings, as in times past. Let us join in a
perpetual Covenant that shall never be forgotten. q. d. Other Covenants have
been forgotten, this shall never; we will backslide no more, break Covenant no
more; or rather a People or Person swear to God to secure themselves against
themselves to prevent, and shut the door, against all future solicitations,
importunities and Temptations whatsoever; That when any of their old Lovers
should come and bespeck their affections, they may be able to put them all by,
that there might be no possibility of yielding or harkening to the voice of
this Charmer, charm he never so wisely; while the soul may answer them all, as
sometime Jepthah did his daughter (though with more warrant, and less trouble
of mind.)

Judge. 11.35. I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back. And
with David. Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and will perform it (I will be as
good as my word, though I die for it) That I will keep thy righteous judgments.

And again, Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render praise unto thee.

I am not mine own to dispose of; I have given my heart, and my loves, and my
self unto another; and I do not repent of what I have done, if it were to do
again, I would do it, and were I worth a thousand times more, then I am, he to
whom I have sworn, should have it all.

And so on the other side, God swears to his People, That (^s I may so say) he
may leave himself no possibility of recanting or recalling his word, Heb. 6.13.
Verse. 16.
if he had a mind to it. The Ap^stles expression hints such a kind of
supposition; God, when he could swear by no greater, swore by himself: Why?
That by two immutable things; sc. His Word, and his Oath, in which it was
impossible for God to lie. Impossible for him to lie; A very strange
expression; As if God would lock up himself under an Oath from all possibility
of lying or recalling the word out of his mouth, he would not trust himself
(as if the Apostle should say) with making a bare promise, but claps an oath
upon it also, that so if be would, yet he could not go back. This seems to be
employed in this expression, out the truth is, though we need such bolts and
locks to keep us from starting, God does not; he has as much and more mind to
keep his word, then we have that he should: But for our sakes, for our sakes
altogether, is this written, because of the unbelief of our bearts, to secure
our unbeleeving objecting spirits, against all fear and jealousy, of so much,
as a p^ssibility of going b^^k from his word, or failing of his promise, and so
indeed it is after expressed. Verse. 18. That by two immutable things, by which
it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong Consolation, etc. To
strengthen our weak hands, and feeble knees, and drooping spirits in the
expectations and belief of the undoubted accomplishment of all his promises.

Now then (Beloved Christians) this being the end of Covenants and Oaths
mutually between God and his People; sc. To Unite, and Secure the one to the
other; when a People or Person, haffle, or break with God after all this, the
end of the Covenant is frustrated and defrauded; The bands are broken, the
security dissolved; all falls in sunder, as a bundle of Arrows, when the bond
is cut, and then in comes fears, doubts, and jealousies; which often do no small
mischief in the soul, while they even take a poor People, or Person Captive,
and spoil them of their precious treasure, that they can hardly recover their
former comforts, or confidence again, in a long time; These breaches do so
wound their spirits, and shrink up their sinews (I speak of the People of God
themselves) that with their Father Jacob, they go halting (peradventure) to
their very Graves.

And now look upon the Covenant under all these Aspects and Notions Of Nature.
Of Matter. Of Form. Of Parties. Of End.


And then you will easily be able to give an account; Why Covenant-Violation
should be a matter of so high a quarrel, between God and a People, in all the
three kinds of it.

Contemptuous refusing. Graceless profaning. Perfidious deceiving.
Not only of the Covenant of God, but of the God of the Covenant; A People of
Person mocking God, and deluding themselves, breaking with God; and doing what
they can to make God break with them, and to break them all to pieces.

Now for the second Branch of the Doctrine. The 2. Brand of the Doctrine.

This Quarrel God threatens to av^nge with the sword.
There be but two things which I need handle here.
1. De facto, To show, How God has made good this threatening, in the
dispensations of his providence and Justice, by overtaking this sin of
Covenant-Prophanation, with this judgment of the sword, and its concomitants.

2. De jure, To vindicate and assert Gods Justice in these dispensations of
his, by showing the equity and righteousness of such proceedings.

But both these are done, if not so fully as might be, yet sufficiently
already: The Instances given of the sin, in the very same places for the most
part holding forth also examples of the Judgment; besides so many other
Instances in Scripture, so known, That who ever is not a stranger to his Bible,
may turn to them with a wet finger.

And the Demonstrations and Reasons, that set forth unto you the greatness of
the sin, the highness of the quarrel, do upon the very first view, Vindicate,
and Justify the Equity of Gods proceedings in avenging this sin and quarrel
with so grievous a judgment, as the sword; And since the servants of God, who
have well weighed both in the balance of the Sanctuary, have acknowledged not
only the sin to have equalled the Judgment; [Thou art just O Lord in all that
is come upon us.] Nehe. 9. Ez^a 9.
But infinitely to have weighed it down; our God has punished us less, then
our iniquities deserve.

This therefore shall suffice for the second Branch of this Doctrine; and so we
will improve the time that might be spent in the further proof, and enlargement
thereof, in making Use of what has been delivered already in that Doctrine.

Use.
THe first Use that we may make of this sad truth, may be according to the work
of this day, to discover to us what cause we have to afflict our souls, and to
abhor our selves in dust and ashes, before the Lord.

For behold, God is contending with this Kingdom by fire; the fire of the sword
(so called often in the Scripture) is sent upon us, and marches through the
breadth of the Land, in the widest extent of the Kingdom, even from the
furthermost parts of the West, to the uttermost parts of the North: A Sword, I
say, the worst of all Judgments (witness the sad Catalogue of evils here
that do accompany it, ut supra;) yea, a Civil Sword, the worst of all Swords;
a Foreign Sword hits at random; But this knows whom to smite, and where to
make the deepest wounds, Brother embrues his hands in the Brothers blood, and a
man's enemies are these of his own house; and therefore the more enemies,
because of his own house. No Quarrel so fierce, no fewd so mortal, as those
are between the nearest relations, when Coals of division are once kindled
amongst them.

This Sword, I say, is drawn, and much flesh it has devoured already, and
drunk much precious blood. National blood, Christian blood, Fraternall blood;
while we cry to it, as once Jeremiah did.

Jerem. 47.6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet?
Put up thy self into thy Scabbord, rest and be still.

But the Sword either gives us no Answer, or such a one as follows there in the
next verse.

How can I be quiet? Seeing the Lord has given me a charge against England?

Yea, we may fear that God is saying concerning us, as once to his Prophet
Ezekiel, concerning Israel.

Ezekiel. 21.9, 10. A Sword, a Sword is sharpened, it is sharpened, and also
furbish'd. It Is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, should we then make mirth?
No, When God sends a Sword upon a People, the times are times of mourning, and
not of merriment. Read on else.

Verse. 10. It contemns the rod of my son, as every tree.

Verse. 11. And he has given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: This
Sword is sharpened, and it is furbished to give it into the hand of the slayer.

Verse. 12. Cry and howl, son of man, for it shall be upon my People, it shall
be upon all the Princes of Israel: terrors by reason of the Sword, shall be
upon my People. Smite therefore upon thy thigh.

Verse. 13. Because it is a trial, and what if the Sword contemn the Rod?

The rod of God has been upon us; the rod of a more inferior and gentle
correction; but it has done us no good, Folly is so bound up in our hearts,
that it is not a rod of correction that will fetch it out. We will not yet
stoop, nor submit unto the Government of Jesus Christ; therefore we may fear,
that now the sword comes to contemn the rod, to despise the rod; saying as it
were, What does this silly Rod do here? Will they not stoop? Will they not put
their ne^ks under the yoke of Christ? Let me come I Will make them either bow or
break; I Will make them either yield, or I Will have their blood. Those his Enemies
that will not have him reign over them, bring them hither, That I may slay them
before his face. Ah my Brethren, we may fear, That God is speaking against us
in some such bitter language as this is; and what think you may be the cause?
What the Quarrel? Surely, there is cause enough, The Parliament tell us of a
fearful Catalogue of horrible provocations.

Contempt of Gods holy Ordinances, and of holiness it self; Gross and
affected ignorance, under the glorious light of the Gospel clearly shining
among us; unfruitfulnesse under the precious means of Grace; ingratitude for
mercies; incorrigiblenesse under judgments; multitudes of Oaths, and
blasphemi^s; wicked prophanations of the Lords day, by sports, and gamings,
formerly encouraged even by Authority.

All sorts of uncleanness, Luxury, and excess in eating or drinking; Vanity,
Pride, and Prodigality in Apparel; Envy, Contention, and unnatural
Divisions, Oppression, Fraud, and Violence; from diverse of which sins, and many
other, not one Person throughout the whole Nation, can say, That he is wholly
Free; Besides that, all must confess, That they have contributed toward the
great stock of National sins, and so have increased the treasure of Wrath,
against these days of Wrath.

But especially, they tell us of two horrid crying sin, Idolatry, and Blood:
Idolatry, which as it was the sin of our Ancestors; so it is the spreading sin
of these latter times, while by a general connivance, and almost toleration,
it has been several ways fomented and encouraged. And for that other crying
and cruel sin of bloodshed, That calls aloua for veng ance, it went hand in
hand, with the abominable Idol of the Mass, in the days of Queen Mary, and
some of her Predecessors; when many hundreds of the dear Martyrs, and Saints of
God, lost their precious lives in flames and prisons.

These are the sins and provocations which our Parliament Worthies give us
notice of; which surely may amount to a very High quarrel.

But to all these without controversy, England has added this Quarrel in the
Text, to make up the measure of our iniquities; even Covenant-Violation.

Witness all these several ways and branches of this sin, mentioned in the
entrance.

Which of them does not this Land stand guilty of this day before the Lord? All
sorts of Covenant violation found among us. Wilful rejection.
For

1. Are there not found among us multitudes of such profane Ephramitish and
Zebulonitish spirits, that do reproachfully and contemptuously, refuse and
reject the Covenant of God; that deals with the Parliament Injunctions, and the
Ministers of the Gospels invitations to this service; as they did with King
Hezeki^hs Messengers, laugh them to scorn^; lade them with Calumnies and
Reproaches? What more Covenants yet? Will they never have done Covenanting?
Will they send us to Hell quick, with their Protestations, and Oaths, and
Covenants?

These, and the like voices of murmr and rebellion, God has heard in our
Tents, and his anger is kindled?

Oh what shiftings and shufflings, what base unworthy tergiversations has God
found among us, to elude and envade this solemn service! Indeed he said, he
would bring his People into the Bond of the Covenant, but if he would have the
most part of the People among us, enter into Covenant with him, he must drive
them into the Bond of the Covenant. Are not these of the kindred of the Scribes
and Lawyers, of whom it is said, when they were invited unto Baptism, Luke 7.30
which (was the Seal of the Covenant) they rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves, being not Baptized, etc. And may not the Ministers of the Gospel
answer this Generation in some such Language; as the Apostles did the
unbelieving Jews, who spoke against the things which were spoken by Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming, Acts 13.45.
even as these men do.

Verse. 26. It was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken
unto you; but since you put it from you, and judged your selves unworthy of
everlasting life; lo, we turn to the Gentiles; so we to these men.

It was our Commission and Compassion to speak to you, and persuade you to
enter into this solemn League and Covenant with God and his People; but since
you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of so great a privilege;
lo we turn to other People, and other Churches, we will trouble you no more;
God will have a People that shall accept of this Grace of his, and think
themselves highly honored to, by the most high God.

2. Of them that do take it, how few be there that take it in a due manner,
according to the Laws and Rules of so holy and solemn an Ordinance. For

1. Rash and unadvised entering into Covenant. Eccle. 5.1
How many be there that take it Rashly? Hand over Head, as we say, not
considering what they do?

The sin of former times in England has been, That our Fathers knew not this
service; they regarded it not; it was hid from them; they enquired not after
it; and these times of ignorance God winked at; or God lightly regarded them.

But it is the sin of these latter times, that we slight, this Ordinance; That
we know not, or regard not, to know the Laws of this Ordinance; the goings in
thereof, and the comings out thereof, That we come to such an extraordinary
duty with ordinary (hardly so much as ordinary) Consideration and Preparation.

Indeed such care and Caution has not been used for the informing and
preparing of People, for so solemn a service, as was meet; whereby it has been
exposed to unspeakable profanation, and the most of People have but offered
the sacrifice of fools, while they have made their address thereunto. The Lord
convince and humble those, whom it does more especially concern to have
prevented this sin, by their providence and diligence; for concerning this
service we have just cause to acknowledge with holy David.

1 Chronicles. 15.13. For because ye did it not at first, The Lord our God made a
breach upon us (yea many breaches in the West, and in the North, etc.) For that
we sought him, not (herein) after the due order.

We keep our Fasts (for the most part) as if nothing were required, but to hang
down our head for a day; and we take Covenants, as if all that is to be done,
were but to hold up the hand for a day.

2. Again, How many have taken it, Unsoundness of heart.
Rottenly and Hypocritically, their hearts not being Psa 78.37. Verse. 3.
upright with God in this matter, while some have come with their Idols in
their hearts, with their base Lusts in their bosoms. Some have taken it, if
not with a purpose to break it, yet with no purpose to keep it; They did but
flatter him with their mouth, and lie to him with their tongues. And others
have taken it with their own evasions and limitations, and reservations; such a
Jesuiticall spirit is got in among us; by which means it comes to pass, that
by that time men have pared off, and left one, and put what interpretations
they frame to themselves, there is little left worth the name of a Covenant.

3. In the third place, How many profane this Ordinance, by setting up base
and earthly and carnal ends, and aims to themselves? How many come to this
Ordinance with Shechemitish spirits?

Shall not their Cattle and their substance, and every Beast of theirs, be
ours.

If I take it not, says the Malignant Citizen, I shall have my Wares plundered.

If I take it not, faith the Malignant Gentleman, I shall have my Estate seized.

If I take it not, says the Malignant Parson, I shall have my Living
sequestered, and my person it may be cast into Limbo Patrum, etc.

To such base and dunghill respects, do men of vile spirits, prostitute this
pure and heavenly Ordinance.

4. But lastly, Have we not all conspired together as it were, Unsaithfulnesse
in keeping Covenant.
from the highest to the lowest, from the greatest, to the least, to break the
Covenant of our God?

How may God and his Ministers renew all those complaints over England, that
were formerly poured out over Isra^l?

Psalm. 78.10. They have forsaken thy Covenant.

Verse. 37. They kept not the Covenant of their God; they were not steafast in
his Covenant.

Verse. 57. They turned back and dealt unfaithfully; they were turned aside like
a deceitful bow.

Alas, what have we done with all the Covenants, we have made with God? Our
Baptismall Vows, renewed (perhaps) Mon^thly at the Lords Table; our sick Beds
engagements; Parliament Pretistations and Covenants with those often Monthly,
W^ckly, almost daily repititions of Covenants in the days of Humiliations and
Thankesgivings; what is become of them all? Have we not dealt with them in some
such like manner, as Moses dealt with the two Tables; who went up into the
Mountain, to receive them from God; but as soon as he came down to the bottom,
threw them out of his hands, and brake them: So have we done for all the world;
we have gone up into the Mountain of the House of the Lord (so is the place of
public worship called) to make and renew our solemn Vows and Covenants, Isai.
2.3.
which we have Sealed under an Oath and a Curse before, and with the most high
God; but no sooner (all most) have we come down into the Valley of our ordinary
walking and conversation; but we have thrown them out of our hands, and broken
them all to pieces.

Vow Reformation to day, and within a few days, be drunk again; and swear
again, and be unclean again; and worldly, and wanto^, and se^ure again; as
toose, vain, unsavory, and unsensible of pull like sin and misery as ever.

Swear our Estates to day, and perhaps deny at wentieth part of them to morrow;
Worth thousands, and deny to lend an hundred, a s^or^, etc.

Swear to live and dye with the Parliament, and the Cause, to day, and sp^ak
against both to morrow.

Swear to assist them to day, against all Opposers, and Malignants; and it may
be within a few days after, assist Opposers and Malignants against them. Help
them off with their Taxations, though never so indifferent and easy. Cou^^y,
conc.^^l their Goods and Treasur^, though never so justly forfeited to the
State. Get their Mon yes, Arms, Horses, Provisions restored, though never so
lawfully seized by sufficient Warrant, and the industry, and piety of faithful
Officers, who venture their Estates, their lives, their All, in the service.

Swear and unswear, do and undo; protest for Christ to day, and accomodate for
Antichrist to morrow; and when told of it, either they forgot; or which I
tremble to think of, and blush to mention, some (and these no small ones) put
in mind upon such occasions of their Protestations, and their Covenant, have
not feared to reply, Alas, That was broken long since. As if breach of our
Covenant did dissolve our engagements; and because we have broke once with God,
we were never bound afterward to keep our word, our Oaths: Surely, That were an
easy way of getting loose.

But this God has seen and heard among us; and me thinks I heat that angry
question sounding in mine ears.

Ezekiel. 17.15. Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that does such things? Or shall
he break the Covenant, and be delivered?

And if the quarrel were so high, and God so angry for the breach of the
Covenant that was but between man and man; yea between a people in external
Covenant with himself; and a professed enemy; a Tyrant an Usurper; what may
such a People, for whom God has done, and is doing such great things; expect
upon Covenants, so religiously and solemnly made, and sworn, not only before,
but with so holy God; and so ofter, and so treacherously, yea, so desperately
abused and trampled under feet! I may say unto you therefore, as sometime good
Josiah did to his Servants.

2 Chro. 34.21. Go, enquire of the Lord, for us, Humiliation for this sin.
and for the remnant that are left in Israel, and in Judah; for great is the
wrath of the Lord, that is powered out upon us, because we have not kept the
word, and Oath, which we have uttered to the Lord our God.

It is without all question, the Quarrel of the Covenant, which the Sword is
this day a venging upon England, with so much wrath, and fury powered out; Woe
unto us, out God is grievously angry, what shall we do?

When David saw the Angel of the Lord standing between the Heaven and Earth,
Chro. 21.16.
having a sword drawn in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem: Verse. 16.
It is said, Then David and the Elders of Israel, who were clothed with
Sackcloth, fell upon their faces: And David said, even I it is that have
sinned, and done evil indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done; let
thine band I pray thee, Verse. 18. and 26.
Oh Lord my God, be upon me, and upon my Fathers house, etc. And by the
direction of the Angel, he built an Altar, and offered Sacrifices upon it unto
the Lord, and the anger of the Lord was pacified toward his people.

Let us do so this day, and in all our public and private Humiliations.

The Angel has his sword drawn; stretched out over the whole Land; Even the
sword threatened in the Text, to avenge the Quarrel of the Covenant; Let us
fall down upon our faces, and lie in the dust; draw water, and pour it out
before the Lord; take up Jeremiahs wish, and Lamentation. Jere. 9.1. O^ that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of Tears, That I might weep day and
night for the slain of the Daugh^er of my People: Yea, That we might weep
bitterly for the sin which has ^^ain so many precious sons of Sion; even this
sin, Covenant-Violation.

And, oh you that have stood out in refusing the Covenant of God, do not stand
out in refusing to be humbled for your refusalls.

You that have been Rash and Rotten, slight and Carnal, and hypocritical in
taking the Covenant, be not so in your confessions of, and humiliations for
this great sin of yours, whereby God is provoked; labor to be deep and down
right; serious, solid, and substant all in your mournings and lamentations,
over your sin, your selves and the Kingdom.

You that have broken the Covenant of your God, over and over again, Lach. 12.10
labor to get your hearts broken for this sin: and to that end look upon him
whom you have pierced; whose skin, and whose flesh, and whose heart, and whose
soul, you have broken by Covenant breaches, Heb 6.6.
not while he hung upon the Cross only, but as the Apostle, Have crucified
him a fresh to your selves, and put him to an open shame.

Oh look upon him, his tears, his wounds, his blood, etc. Till vour eyes run
down with tears, your hearts be wounded; and your souls even melt into blood
within you. And from thence even turn your eyes also to look upon them, whom ye
have pierced; your slain, wounded Brethren: Behold those many thousands that
lie slain in the high places of the field; Behold, those many hundreds thatly
sick and bleeding almost to the death, of the wounds which your sins,
especially, your treacherous dealing in the Covenant of God, have made upon
their bodies.

Oh cry with David, I have sinned; these poor sheep what have they done; Let
thine hand I pray thee, Oh Lord my God, be upon me, and upon my fathers house.

Oh would it not melt any heart, that were not harder then the Rock in the
Wilderness, to see so many poor Creatures bleeding, languishing, dying, slain,
under the guilt of our Covenant-prophanation?

I may say unto you, as once Pharaohs servants said to him.

Know thou not yet, that Egypt is destroyed.

Know you not yet, that England is almost destroyed?

Oh it would break your hearts to hear the reports of the Western, and many of
the Northern parts of the Land. How sad, how black, how desolate! What a face
of ruin, and destruction, there is to be seen upon them! The Beasts of the
field cut off; The wayfaring man cease; The Inhabitants driven from their
habitations, and the little remnant stripped naked and bare, seeking for Bread to
relieve your souls, with peril of their lives, Lam. 5 9.
under unspeakable miseries and afflictions; doubtless to see what thousands
feel, it would make us weary of our lives; while (in a word) those Countries
and places which before the Destroyer were, as a Garden of Eden; behind him
are as a desolate Wilderness.

Brethren, we have almost broken the Nation in pieces, there is yet a little
life left: Oh lift up your voices for the remnant that remains. Labor to break
your hearts into a thousand pieces. A broken heart is the sacrifices of the
Lord. Psalm 52.17.
So many pieces, so many sacrifices. Oh take these, and upon the Altar which
God has set up, (The Lord Jesus Christ is our Altar;) upon this Altar, let us
offer these Sacrifices: And the Lord pour out upon us the Spirit of Compassion
and Compunction; the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; That this day (as the
rest) may be a day of Atonement and Reconciliation, wherein our God may be
pacified toward us, and reconciled unto us, in the Lord Jesus. A broken and a
contr^^ heart, O God, thou will not despise.

The Second Sermon Preached at Milk-street, upon Saturday Evening, September
30. For the preparation to the COVENANT.
The second Use; Exhortation.
SInce Covenant-violation is a matter of so high a Quarrel; as for the
avenging whereof, God sends a Sword upon a Church or Nation; for which, it is
more then probable, the Sword is upon us at this prefent, A nos 7.4.
it having almost devoured Ireland already, and eaten up a great part of
England also; Let us engage our Counsel, and all the Interest we have in
Heaven and Earth, for the taking up of this Controversy; Let us consider what
we have to do, what way there is yet left us, for the Reconciling of this
Quarrel; else we, and our Families, are all but the children of death, and
destruction: This Sword that is drawn, and devoured so much Christian
Protestant flesh, already, will, it is to be feared, go quite through the Land,
and in the pursuit of this Quarrel, cut off the remnant, till our Land be
desolate, and our Cities waste, and England be made as Sodom and Gomorrah, in
the day of the fierce anger of Jehovah.

Somewhat I have spoken already in the former Use, to this purpose. Jerem. 3.13.
viz. To acknowledge our iniquites that we have transgressed against the Lord
our God.

To get our hearts broken, for breaking the Covenant; to lay it so to heart,
that God may not lay it to our charge, etc. But this looks backward.

Somewhat must be done de futuro; For time to come: That may not only compose
the Quarrel, but lay a sure foundation of an After Peace between God and the
Kingdom. And for that purpose, a Means lies before us; an Opportunity is held
forth unto us by the hand of Divine Wisdom, and goodness, of known use and
success among the People of God in former times; which is yet to me a gracious
intimation, and a farther argument of hope from Heaven, that God has not sworn
against us in his wrath, nor sealed us up a People devoted to destruction, but
has yet a mind to enter into terms of peace and reconciliation with us, to
receive us into Grace and Favor, to become our God, and to own us for his
People; if yet, we will go forth to meet him, and accept of such honorable
terms as shall be propounded to us. And that is by renewing our Covenant with
him; yea, by entering into a more full and firm Covenant then ever heretofore:
For as the Quarrel was raised about the Covenant, so it must be a Covenant
more solid and substantial, that must compose the Quarrel, as I shall show
you hereafter, and that is the service and the privilege that lies before us;
the work of the next day. So that me thinks I hear this Use of Exhortation,
which now I would commend unto you, speaking unto us in that Language.

Jere. Jer. 50.5.
50.5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that
shall not be forgotten.

It is the voice of the Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah,
returning out of Captivity.

Verse. 4. The children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of Judah
together; Seeking the Lord, whom they had lost, and enquiring the way to Sion,
from whence their Idolatry, and Adulteries had cast them out; themselves become
now like the Doves of the Valley, mourning and weeping, because they had
perverted their way, and forgotten the Lord their God.

Verse. 4.5. Going, and weeping; they shall go and seek the Lord their God; they
shall ask the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward.

And if you enquire when this should be? The fourth Verse tells you, In those
days.

And if you ask again, what days those are? Interpreters will tell us of a
threefold day, wherein this Prophecy or Promise is to be fulfilled; A
threefold day of making good the Prophefie. 1. The literal day


That is, The Literal or Inchoative Day. That is, The Evangelicall or
Spiritual Day. That is, The Universal or Perfect Day.
First, There is a literal or inthoative day, here prophefied of, and that is
already past; past long since: Namely, in that day wherein the seventy years of
the Babylonian Captivity expired; then was this Prophecy, or Promise begun, in
part to be accomplished: At what time the Captivity of Judah, and diverse of
Israel with them, upon their return out of Babylon, Ezra 8.21.
kept a folemn Fast at the River Ahava, to afflict their souls before their
God, There may you see them going and weeping;

To seek of him aright way for them, and their little ones; There you have
them, Seeking the Lord, and enquiring the way to Sion, with their faces
thitherward.

And when they came home, you may hear some of their Nobles and Priests,
calling upon them to enter into Covenant; so Shechoniah spoke unto Ezra, the
Princes, and the People; Ezra 10.2, 3.
We have sinned against the Lord, etc. Yet now there is hope in Israel,
toucerning this thing. Now therefore, let us make a Covenant with our God.

And so you may find the Levites calling the people to confess their sins
with weeping and supplications in a day of humiliation, and at the end of it,
to Write, and Swear, and Seal, Nehe. 9.4, 5.
a Covenant with the Lord their God.

This was the first day wherein this Prophecy began to be fulfilled in the
very letter thereof.

The second day is the Evangelicall day, 2 Day, ^^^nge (...).
wherein this Promise is fulfilled in a (...) or Spiritual sense; Namely, when
the elect of God, of what Nation or Language soever, (being all called the
Israel^^ G^^, Isal. 44.5.
as is Prophesied, One shall say I am the Lord is, and (...) shall call him
(...) by the name of Jacob, etc. and (...) by the Name of Israel.)

I say, when these in their several Generations and successions shall turn to
the Lord their God, either from their Gentilisme and Pag^^^, as in their first
conversion to Christianity; (as (...) o^serves after the Resurrection of
Christ, and Mission of the holy ^host. A (...) exinde univer^^s nationes ex
verag^^e (...) humani^^ gent^s ad Dominum Deum, and ad Dominum ^^^^us c^us.
From that day foreward you might behold po^r Creatures of all Nations and
Languages, creeping out of their dark hol^^ and corners of blindness and
Idolatry, and betaking them to God and his S^n Jesus Christ, as to their
Lawgiver and Savior;) or else turning from Antichristian superstition, and
false ways of worship, as in the after, and more full conversion of Churches
or Persons; purging themselves more and more, from the corruptions and mixtures
of Popery and Superstitions, according to the degree of light and conviction,
which should break out upon them, and asking the way to Sion; i. e. The pure
way of Gospel Worship, according to the fuller and cleerer Manifestations and
Revelations of the mind of Christ in the Gospel.

This was fulfilled in Luth^^s time, and in all those after Separations which
any of the Churches have made from Rome, and from those Relics, and remains
of Superstition and willworship, wherewith themselves, and the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ have been defiled.

The third day wherein this Prophecy or Promise is to be made good, 3 Day,
Univerfall.
is that Universal day, wherein both Jow and Gentile shall convert unto the
Lord. That Day of the Restitution of all things, as some good Devin^s conceive,
When ten men out (...) all Lan^^ (...) the Nations, shall take hold of the
skirt of him that is Jew; saying, (...) will go with you, for we have heard
that God is with you, Z^ch. 8.23. And to what purpose is more fully expressed in
the former Verses (answering the Prophecy in the Text.)

Verse. 20. Thus says the Lord of Hoasts, it shall yet come to pass, that
there shall come people, and the Inhabitants of many Cities.

Verse. 21. And the Inhabitants of one City, shall go to another; saying, Let
us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts; I will
go also.

Verse. 22. Yea, many people, and strong Nations, shall come to seek the Lord of
Hosts in Jerusalem, and pray before the Lord.

This I call the Universal day, because, as you see there shall be such an
abundance of confluence of Citi^s, and People, and Nations, combining together
in an holy League and Covenant, to seek the Lord.

And a Perfect day; because, the mind and will of the Lord shall be fully
revealed and manifested to the Saints, concerning the way of Worship and
Government in the Churches. The New Jerusalem; i. e. The perfect, exact, Ezekiel
43.11, 12, 13. Reve. 21.10, 11. Isa 30.26
and punctual Model o^ the Government of Christ in the Churches, shall then
be let ^own from Heaven.

The light of the Moon, being then to be as the light of the Su^, and (...)
light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the
Lord binds up the breach of his people, and (...) of their wound.

By what has been spoken, you may perceive under which of these days we are:
Past indeed the first, but not yet arrived at the third day; and therefore
under the second day, that ^^angelicall ^ay; yet so, as if all the three days
were m^t together in ours, while it seems to me, that we are upon the daw^ing
of the third day: and this Prophecy falling so pat, and full upon our times,
as if we were not got beyond the Literal; a little variance will do it.

The children of Israel, and the children of Judah?

Scotland and England, newly coming out of Babylon, Antichristian Babyl^n,
Papal Tyranny and Usurpations, (in one degree or other) Going and weeping in
the days of their solemn Humiliations, bewailing their Backslidings and
Rebellions, to seek the Lord their God, to seek pardon and reconciliation, to
seek his face and favor, not only in the continuance, but in the more full
and sweet influentiall manifestations of his presence among them; and to that
end asking the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward; that is, Enquiring
after the pure way of Gospel worship, with full purpose of heart; that when God
shall reveal his mind to them, they will conform themselves to his mind, as
according to that blessed Prophecy and Promise, Isal. 2.3. He will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths, etc.

And that they may make all sure, That they may secure God and themselves
against all future Apostacies and black-flidings, calling one upon another, and
ecchoing back one to another.

Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that may not
be forgotten.

You see by this time, I have changed my Text, though not my project; to which
purpose, I shall remember that in the handling of these words, I must not
manage my discourse, as if I were to make a new entire Sermon upon the Text,
but only to improve the happy advantages it holds forth, for the pursuit and
driving on of my present Use of Exhortation.

Come let us join, etc. To this end therefore from these words, I will propound
and endeavor to satisfy these three Quaeres.

1. What? 2. Why? 3. How?
1. What the duty is, to which they mutually stir up one another.

2. Why? or upon what considerations?

3. How, or in what manner this service is to be performed?

And in all these you shall see what proportion the Text holds with the Times.
The duty in our Text, with the duty in our Hands, pressing them on still in an
Exhortatory way.

For the first. sc. What the duty is?

Answ. You see that in the Text, is to join themselves to the Lord, by a solemn
Covenant; and so is that which we have now in our hands, to join our selves to
the Lord by a Covenant; how far they correspond will appear in the sequel.

This is the first and main End of a Covenant between God and his People, as I
have showed you, To join themselves to the Lord. The sons of the stranger, that
join themselves to the Lord, Isa 56.6.
etc. And take held of his Covenant.

This I say is the first and main end of the Covenant in the Text: The second
is subordinate unto it; namely, to Enquire the way to Sion. i. e. To inquire
the way and manner, how God would be worshipped; that they might dish^nour and
prevoke him no more, by their Idolatries, and Superstitions, which had been
brought in upon the Ordinances of God, by the means of Apostate Kings, and
Priests, and Prophets, as in Jeroboams and Ahabs reigns, etc. And for which
they had been carried into Captivity.

And such is the Covenant that lies before us, in the first place, as I say, to
join our selves to the Lord, to be knit unsepaparably unto him, that he may be
our God, and we may be his People.

And in the next place, as subservient hereunto, to ask the way to Sion; to
enquire and search by all holy means, sanctified to that purpose, what is that
pure way of Gospel worship; That we and ou^ children, after us, may worship the
God of spirits, the ^^od of truth, in spirit and in truth; in spirit, Joh 4.^3.
opposed to car^all w^y^s of will worship and inventions of men; and in truth,
opposed to false hypocritical shows and pretenses, since the Father seeks for
such to worship him.

Now, That this is the main scope and aim of this Covenant before us, will
appear if you read and ponder it with due considerations; I will therefore read
it to you distinctly, this Evening, besides the reading of it again to morrow,
when you come to take it; and when I have read it, I will answer the main, and
most material objections, which seem to make it inconsist^nt with these
blessed ends and purposes.

Attend diligently while I read it to you.

The Covenant.
WE Noblemen, ^his Co(...) it (...) hand to c^m (...) the (...) and (...)
several pafa^^s of the C^^^nant to which (...).
Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and
Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the
Providence of God living under one King, and being of one Reformed Religion,
having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness of the Kings
Majesty and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety, and Peace of
the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included, and calling to
mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts, and Practices
of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors thereof in all
places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the Reformation of
Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of late, and at
this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable state of the Church
and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of
England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are
present and public Testimonies; We have now at last, (after other means of
Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for the preservation
of our selves and our Religion, from utter Ruin and Destruction, according to
the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the Example of
Gods People in other Nations; after mature deliberation, resolved and
determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant, wherein we
all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted up to the
most high God, do swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Poperty, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; least
we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses
shall require or deserve, or others having power from them for that effect,
shall judge convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to ou^ Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Article.

VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion; or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor
of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealoufly and constantly
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able
our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of
God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; we profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, That we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy o^ him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And
this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that
great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly
beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance
and safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches
groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny; to join in
the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and Tranquillity of Christian
Kingdoms and Common wealths.

THis Brethren is the Covenant before us; to which God and his Parliament do
invite us this day; wherein the Ends propounded, lie fair to every impartial
eye.

The first Article in this Covenant binding us to the Reform^tion of Religion;
and the ^^st Article to the Reformation of our Lives.

In both, we join our sil^s to the Lord, and swear to ask and receive from his
Lips, the Law of this Reformation; Read them else again, and consider.

And trudy, this is a why, as well as a what (that I may a little prevent my
self.) A ^otive of the first Magnitude. Oh for a People or Person to be joy^^
unto the Lord; to be made one with the most high God of Heaven and Earth,
before whom, and to whom we swear, is a privilege of unspeakable worth and
excellency!

Se^meth it (said David once to Saul's servants) a small thing to your eyes, to
be son in law to a King, seeing I am a poor man? 1 Samuel 18.23.


Seems it, may I say, a small thing to you for poor creatures to be joined,
and married as it were to the great GOD, the living God; who are so much worse
then nothing, by how much sin is worse then vanity; yea, to be one with him, as
Christ says in that heavenly Prayer of his; John 1^.21, 22, 23.
As he and his Father is one, That they may be one, as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee; that they also may be one, with us. And again, That they may be
one, even as we are one. Yea, perfect in one; not indeed, in the perfection of
that unity, but in unity of that perfection, not made perfect in a perfection
of equality, but of conformity.

This is the fruit of a right managed Covenant; and the greatest honor that
poor mortality is capable of. Moses stands admiring of it, Deuteronomy 32.33. You may
read the place at your leisure.

But against this blessed Service and Truth, are there mustered, and led up an
whole Regiment of O^j^ctions, under the conduct of the father of lies; though
some of them may seem to have some shadow of truth; and therefore so much the
more carefully to be examined.

I shall deal only with some of the chief Commanders of them, if they be
conquered, the rest will vanish of their own accord.

Objections propounded and answered.
Object. 1. If this were the end of this service, yet it were needless: since
we have done it over and over again, It is needless.
in our former Protestations and Covenants; and so this repetition may seem to
be a profanation of so holy an Ordinance, by making of it so ordinary, and
nothing else, but a taking of Gods name, in vain.

To this I answer.

Law and Order of so solemn an Ordinance.

2. The people in the Text might have made the same Objection, it lay as strong
against the work, to which they encourage one another: For surely, this was not
the first time they engaged themselves to God by way of Covenant; but having
broken their former Covenants, they thought it their privilege, and not their
burd^n to renew it again, and to make it more full st^^le, and impregnable then
ever; A perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgart^a; which hints a

3. Answ. And that is there was never yet so full and strict a Covenant tendered
to us since we were a people. Former Covenants have had their d^fect and
failings, like the best of Gods people: But I may say of this in reference to
other Covenants, as Solomon of his good House-wife, in reference to other women.

Other D^ught^rs have done well, but thou best exceeded them all.

Other Covenants have done well, but this has exce^d^d them all; h^e Paul
among the Apostles, it goes beyond them all, though it seems to be b^rne out of
duc time.

Now if your L^s^s and Covenants among men, be either (...) or for^^ited; need
men persuade you to have them renewed and p^rfected! Of how much greater
concermnent is this, between God and us, Oh you of little faith?

4 You receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper once a (...), and some will
not be ^^pt off, though they have no p^rt, nor portion in that Mystery, say the
Ministers of Christ what they can; and the Sacrament is but the Seal of the
Covenant; consider it, and be convinc^^d.

But secondly it is objected, O^. 2. We ^^^^at (...).
There be some Clauses in this Covenant, that serve rather to (...) us further
from God, th^n pr^^ us ne^r^r to Vint; as binding us to enquire the way to Sion
of man, rather then of God; to receive the Law of Reform then from S^otland,
and other (...), and not from the lips of the (...) Proph^t of the Churches.

(...). In the (...), we sw^^r first to ^^^ntain the Relig^^ as it is already
(...) in Doctrine, Go^^^^m^^^, and (...); when in fiul, the mest shall sweat
they know not what; and secon^ly, we swear to conserm our selves (...) England
to their (...) and (...) in Scotland, which is presbyteriall, and for ought we
know, as much tyrannical, and more Antichristian then that of Prelacy, which
we swear to extirpate; yea, some have not been afraid to call it The Antichrist
that is now in the world.

Isai 5 20.
and incur the woe of them that call evil good, and good evil.

Secondly, Whereas they object, that many shall swear to they know not what,
the most being totally ignorant of the Discipline of Scotland, and very few
understanding it distinctly. I would have these remember and consider two
examples in Scripture, the one of King Josiah, 2. Instances. 2 Chro. 34 30, 3^,
32. Nehe. 10.28.
the other of the Women and children in Nehemiahs time. Josiah (as the Text
tells us) not being above eight years of age; as Verse. 3. While he was yet
young, began to seek after the Lord God of David, his Father; and in the
twelfth year, he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem, etc. And this purging and
Reformation he did by Covenant, wherein he swear, to walk after the Lord, and
to keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies and his Statutes. Which surely,
at that age we cannot conceive he did distinctly and universally understand; no
more could all the Men their Wives, and their Sons, and their Daughters, that
took the Covenant (in Nehemiahs time) understand all things inparticular to
which that Covenant did bind them; since they did enter into a Gurse, and an
Oath, not only to refuse all inter-marriages with the Heathen, as Verse. 30.
but also to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses, and to observe and do
all the Commandments of the Lord, and his judgments and his Statutes.

Surely there were in this multitude, not an inconsiderable number that were
not acquainted with all the Moral precepts, Judicial Laws, and Ceremonial
Statutes, which God commanded the people by the hand of Moses. 2. Objections
against these Instances.


There be two things I know, that may be replied against these Instances.

Nehemiah, it is said in the same place, They were of understanding. Verse. 28.
Every one having knowledge, and having understanding; Verse. 29. They (...) unto
their Brethren, their Nobles, and entered into a curse, etc.

Laws and Statutes to which they swear, and this Government and Discipl^^ to
which we swear in this Covenant. Those Laws and Statutes were ordained
immediately of God himself; and therefore being insallibly right;
unquestionably, holy, and just, and good; J^siah and the people might lawfully
swear observance to them with an implicit faith; but not so in a Government
and D^^^^^pline set up by man, by a Church (be it never so pure and holy) for
their light being but a borrowed light, and they not privileged with an
infallible spirit (as the Apostles) their Resolations and Ordinances may be
liable to mistake and error; and therefore, to swear observance to them by an
implicit faith, is more then comes to their share, and as unwarrantable as it
is unsafe for a people or person to do, who are yet ignorant or unsatisfied in
the whole, or in any particular.

To these Objections I rejoyn: Answer to these O^^ecti^^.
Nehemiah, That they were of understanding and knowledge, supposes not a
distinct actual cognizance of every particular Ordinance, Judgment, Statute,
and Provision, in all the three Laws, Moral, Judi^iall, Ceremonial, in every
one that took the Covenant; that being not only needl^sse, but impossible; but
it implies only a capacity to receive Instruction and Information in the
things they swear unto, though at present they were ignorant of many of the
severalls contained in that Oath. And so far this Rule obtains among us,
Children that are not yet come to understanding and fools, being not admitted
to this service, as not capable of instruction.



First, We do not swear to observe that Discipline, but to preserve it: I may
preserve that, which in point of conscience I cannot observe, or not, at least,
swear to observe.

Secondly, We swear to preserve it, not in opposition to any other form of
Government that may be found agreeable to the Word, but in opposition against a
common Enemy, which is a clause of so wide a latitude and easy a digestion, as
the tenderest conscience need not kick at it; This preservation relating not so
much to the Government, as to the persons or Nation under this Government, not
so much to preserve it, as to preserve them in it, against a Prelaticall Party
at home, or a Popish Party abroad, that should attempt by violence to destroy
them, or to force another Government upon them, that should be against the Word
of God; under which latitude, I see not but we might enter into the like
Covenant with Lutherans, or other Reformed Churches, whose Government,
Discipline, and Worship, is yet exceedingly corrupted with degenerate mixtures.

Thirdly, Neither in the perservation of their Government; etc. nor in the
Reformation of ours, do we swear to any thing of man's; but to what shall be
found to be the mind of Christ, witness that Clause, According to the Word of
God; Art. 1.
so that upon the matter, it is no more then Josiah and the People in Nehimiah
swore to; namely, what shall appear to be the Statutes and Laws which Christ
has left in his Word, concerning the Regiment of his Church.

Fourthly, Nay, not so much, for we are not yet called to swear the Observation
of any kind of Government, that is, or shall be presented to us, but to
endeavor the Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, According to the Word of God.

In the faithful and impartial and search and pursuit whereof, if Scotland or
any of the Reformed Churches can hold us forth any cleerer light then our own,
we receive it not as our Rule but as such an help to expound our Rule, as
Christ himself has allowed us, Cant. 1.7, 8. 2 Cor. 11.16. Phil. 4.8. 1 Th^s.
1.7, 8. In which case we are bound to kiss not the Lips only, but the very
feet of them that shall be able to show us the way to Sion. Isa. 52.7.


So that still, it is not the voice of the Churches, but of Christ in the
Churches that we Covenant to listen to, in this pursuit, that is to say, That
we will follow them, as they follow Christ; And when all is done, and a
Reformation (through the Assistance and blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ, that
great King and Prophet of his Church) resolved on, according to this Rule thus
interpreted, under what notion or obligation the observation of it shall be
commended to us sub judice lis est, it is yet in the bosom and breast of
Authority; we are as yet called to swear to nothing in this kind. So much in
reference to the Instances.

we are bound no more to conform to Scotland, then Scotland to us: The
Astipulation being mutual, and this Astipulation binding us not so much to
conform one to another, as both of us to the Word; wherein, if we can meet, who
would not look upon it, as upon the precious fruit of Christ's prayer (Joh.
17.20, 21. That they might be one, as we are on) and the beauty and safety of
both Nations, and of as, many of the Churches, as the Lord our God shall
persuade to come into this holy and blessed Association.

We swear ^^ext^p^t^ that w^^ch may be the Gove^^nment of the Gosp^l.
wherein, it is feared by some that we swear, to Extirpate that which for ought
we know, upon due inquiry may be found, the way to Sion, the way of
Evangelicall Government which Christ and his Apostles, have set up in the
Church.

Popery; or if there be any that think that the way, I could wish their persons
in Rome, since their hearts are there already. Is it in Superstition? Nay,
Superstition properly consisting in Will Worship, Teaching for doctrine the
traditions of men; This cannot be the way to Sion which Christ has chalked out
to us in his Word.

No more can Heresy, which is the Opposition to sound Doctrine; nor Schism,
which is the Rent of the Churches Peace; nor Profaneness, the poison of her
conversation. None but Superstitious, Heretics, Schismatikes, Profane
persons, will call these the way to Sion; nor these neither under the Name and
Notion of Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness; For the Heretic will
not call his doctrine heresy; nor the superstitious his inovations
superstition; nor the Schismatic his turbulent practices, schism, nor lastly,
the profane person his lewdness, profaneness, though they love the thing,
they hate the name.

And this, before we go further, occasions another Objection, which you must
give me leave, both to make, and answer in a Parenthesis, and then I will
return.

Object. How then can we swear the extirpation of these, since, who shall be
judge? Who shall judge what is Heresy, etc.
While some will be ready to call that Schism and Superstition, etc. which is
not; and others deny that to be Heresy, Superstition, Schism. etc. which is?

To which I answer.

Ans. 1. By the same Argument, we ought not to Covenant against Popery and
Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, nor any other sin whatsoever, there being
nothing so gross, but it will find some friends to justify, and plead for
it; which if we shall not condemn till all parties be agreed on the verdict, we
shall never proceed to judgment, while the world stands.

2. The word must be the Rule and the Judge, say men what they please, pro or
con.

3. And if the matter be indeed so disputable, that it lies not in my faculty
to pronounce sentence; I have my dispensation to suspend, till the word
determine the controversy.

I now return; If then in none of these, the doubt must of necessity lie in
that word Prelacy.

And is that indeed the th^-way of Gospel-Government? Is that it indeed, which
bears away the bell of Jure divino?

What is it then that has destroyed all Gospel, Order, and Government, and
Worship, in these Kingdoms, as in other places of the Christian World, even
down to the ground? Has it not been Prelacy?

What is it that has taken down a teaching Ministry, and set up in the room, a
teaching Ceremony? Is it not Prelacy?

What is it that has silenced, suspended, imprisoned, deprived, banished, to
many godly, learned, able Ministers of the Gospel; yea, and killed some of them
with their unheard of cruelties, and thrust into their places, Idol, Idle,
Sheepheards; Dumb Dogs that cannot bark (unless it were at the flock of
Christ; so they learned of their Masters, both to bark and bite too) greedy
Dogs that could never have enough, that did tear out the loins and bowels of
their own people for gain, Heap living upon living, preferment upon preferment;
swearing, drunken, unclean Priests, that taught nothing but rebellion in
Israel, and caused people to abhor the Sacrifice of the Lord: Arminian,
Popish, Idolatrous, vile wretches, such as had Job been alive, he would not
have set with the Dogs of his flock; who I say, brought in these? Did not
Prelacy?

What has hindered The Reformation of Religion all this while in Doctrine,
Government, and Worship? Pr^la^y, a generation of men they were, that never had
a vote for Jesus Christ; yea, what has poisoned and adulterated Religion in
all these Branches, and has let in Popery and profaneness upon the Kingdom
like a flood, for the raising of their own pomp and greatness, but Prel^^y?

In a word, Prelacy it is, that has set its impure and imperious feet, one
upon the Church, the (...) upon the State, and has made both serve, ^xod^: 14
as Pharaoh did the Israelites; with rigor. Surely, their Government has been
a yoke, which neither we, nor our Fathers wer^al le t^ bear.

Now, That which has done this and a thousand times more violence and mischief
to Christ and his People, then the tongue or pen of man is able to express?
Can that be the way, of, or to St^a? Can that be the Government of Christ and
his Churches?

Object. I, but there be that will tell us, these have been the faults of the
persons, and not of the calling?

Answ. So cry some indeed, That yet like the men, as well as their calling, and
would justify the persons, as well as the Office, but that their wickedness
is made so manifest, that impudency it self cannot deny it.

But is it indeed only the fault of the men, The abas^^in the Church, not the
fault of the persons the Prelates, only but of the calling.
not of the calling? What meant then that saying of Queen Elizabeth, That when
she had made a Bishop, she had spoiled a Preacher? Was it only a jest.

2. And I wish we had not too just cause to add, The man too. Surely of the
most of them, we may say, as once Aencblus spoke of the Gentiles, Apud vos
optimi censerter ques comparatio pessimorum sic fa^it. Give me leave to vary it
a little: He was a good Bishop that was not the worst man; but if the^e were
some of a better Complexion, who yet, apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto,
were very rarely discovered in their Episcopal Sea; yet

3. Look into their Families, and they were for the most part the vilest in the
Diocese, a very nest of unclean Birds; And

4. If you had looked into their Courts and Consistories, you would have
thought you had been in Caiaphas-Hall, where no other trade was driven, but the
crucifying of Christ in his Members.

5. But fifthly, Produce me one in this last succession of Bishops, (I hope the
last) that had not his hands imbrued more or less in the blood of the
faithful Ministry, (I say not Ministers, but Ministry) produce a man amongst
them all that durst be so Conscientious as to lay down his Bishopric, rather
then he would lay violent hands upon a Non-Conformable Minister, though he had
failed but in one point of their compass of Ceremonies, when their great
Master the Pope of Canterbury commanded it, although both for Life, Learning,
and Orthodox Religion, their consciences did compel them to confess with
Pilate, We find no fault in this just person. Matthew. 27.24.


I say produce me such a Bishop amongst the whole Bunch, in this latter age,
and I will down of my knees and ask them forgiveness.

Oh it was sure a mischievous poisoned soil, in which, whatsoever plant was
fet, did hardly ever thrive after.

5. But yet further, Was not the calling as bad as the men? You may as well say
so of the Papacy in Rome; for surely, the Prela^y of England, which we swear to
extirpate, was the very same Fabric and Model of Ecclesiastical Regiment,
that is in that Antichristian world; yea, such an evil it is, That some
Divines venerable for their great learning, as well as for their eminent
holiness, did conceive sole Episcopal Jurisdiction, to be the very seat of
the Beast, upon which the fifth Angel is now pouring out his Vial, which is
the reason that the men of that Kingdom, gnaw th^^r tongues for pain, Reve
16.10, 11.
and blaspheme the God of Heaven.

Object. I, Some Prelacy lawful.
but it is therefore pleaded further against this Clause, That although it may
be Pr^lacy with all its adjuncts and accidents of Archbishops, Chancellors, and
Commissaries, Deans, etc. may have happily been the cause of these evils that
have broken in upon us, and perhaps Antichristian; yet should we therefore
swear the extirpation of all Prelacy, or Episcopacy whatsoever; since there may
be found perhaps in Scripture, an Episcopacy or Prelacy, which circumcised from
these exuberant Members and Officers, may be that Government Christ has
bequeathed his Church in the time of the Gospel?

Answ. Now we shall quickly close this business. For

1. It is this Prelacy, thus clothed, thus circumstanc't, which we swear to
extirpate; Read else the clause again, Prelacy, that is, Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, etc. Not every, or all kinds of
Prelacy; not Prelacy in the latitude of the notion thereof.

2. And secondly, let us join issue upon this point, and make no more words of
it; If there be an Episcopacy or Prelacy found in the word, as the way of
Gospel government which Christ has bequeathed the Churches, and this be made
appear, we are so far from swearing to extirpate such a Prelacy, as that rather
we are bound by virtue to this Oath to entertain it, as the mind and will of
Jesus Christ.

And this might suffice to warrant our Covenanting to extirpate this Prelacy,
save that only, yet some seem conscientiously to scruple this in the last
place.

Object. Prelacy established by Law.
That they see not what there is to warrant our swearing, to extirpate that
which is established by the Law of the Land, till the same Law have abolisht it.

To which I answer.

Answ. 1. If the Law of the Land had abolisht it, we need not swear the
extirpation of it.

2. In this Oath, the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, go before us, who having
the Legislative power in their hands, have also Potestatem vitae and necis,
over Laws, as well, as over Persons, and may as well put to death the evil
Laws that do offend against the Kingdom, and the welfare of it, as the evil
persons that do offend against the Laws.

3. Who therefore (thirdly) if they may lawfully annull and abolish Laws that
are found to sin against the Law of God, and the good of the Kingdom, may as
lawfully bind themselves by an Oath, to use the uttermost of their endeavors,
to annull and abolish those Laws; their Oath being nothing else but a solemn
engagement to endeavor to perform what they have warrantably resolved upon;
and with the same equity may they bind the Kingdom to assist them in so doing.

4. Which is all that the people are engaged to by this Covenant; sc. Not to
out run the Parliament in this Extirpation, but to follow and serve them in it,
by such concurrence as they may expect from each person in their stations and
callings; for that clause expressed in the first, and third Article, is to be
understood in all.

^arliament bound by Oath to maintain Laws.
that the Members of Parliament have at one time or other, sworn to preserve
the Laws; and therefore to swear to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy, which
is established by Law, is to contradict their own Oath, and run the hazard of
perjury; It is easy for any one to observe and answer.

Answ. 1. That by the same Argument, neither may King and Parliament together,
change or annull a Law, though found destructive to the good of the Kingdoms,
since His Majesty as well as His Subjects, is bound up under the same Oath at
His Coronation.

2. But again, There is a vast difference between the Members of Parliament,
simply considered in their private Capacities, wherein they may be supposed to
take an Oath to maintain the Laws of the Land; and that public capacity of a
Parliament, whereby they are Judges of those Laws, and may as I said before,
endeavor the removeall of such as are found pernicious to the Church or State,
and make such as will advantage the welfare of other; His Majesty being bound
by His Coronation Oath, to confirm these Laws, Quas vulgus elegerit, which the
Commons shall agree upon, and present unto His Majesty.

Object. I, but it seems this objection lies full and strong upon them that
stand in their single paivate stations.

Parliament Protestation, wherein we vow and protest to maintain and defend the
lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject.

Surely, Neither in that nor this, do we swear against a lawful endeavor to
get any such Laws or Clause of the Law repealed and abolisht, which is found a
wrong, rather then a right, and the bondage rather then the Liberty of the
Subject, as Prelacy was; Had we indeed taken the Bishops Oath, or the like,
never to have given our consent to have the Government by Episcopacy with its
endless, etc. Changed or altered, we had brought our selves into a woeful
snare; but blessed be God, T^^t snare is broken, and we are escaped; while in
the mean time, without all dou^t the subject may as lawfully use all lawful
means to get that Law removed, which yet he has promised or sworn to obey
while it remains, when it proves prejudicial to the pu^like safety and
welfare; as a poor captive that has peradventure sworn obedience to the Turk,
(while he remains in his possession) may notwithstanding use all fair
endeavors for an escape or ransom; or a prentice that is bound to obey his
Master; yet when he finds his service turned into a bondage, use lawful means
to obtain his freedom.

3. But once more to answer both all objections; it is worth your enquiry,
Whither the Plea of a Legal establishment of this Prelacy, sworn against in
this Covenant, be not rather a tradition, then any certain, or confessed Truth:
Sure I am, we have it from the hands of persons of worth and honor; the a^
l^st Secretaries of Laws and Antiquities in our Kingdom, that there is no such
Law or Statute to be found upon the file among our Records.

Which assertion, if it cannot find faith; we will once more, join issue with
the Patrons or followers of this Prelacy upon this point, That when they
produce that Law or Statute which does enact and establish Prelacy, as it is
here brancht in the Article, we will then give them a fuller answer, or yield
the question.

To conclude therefore, since this Prelacy in the Article, t^^is many headed
Monster of Archbishops, Bishops, their Chan^^^rs and Commissaries, Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Arch-D^^^ons, and all other Beel s^^^licall Officers depending on
that Hierar^^y, is the Beast, wherewith we fight in this Covenant, which has
been found so distructive to Church and State; Let us not fear to take this
Sword of the Covenant of God into our hands, and say to this Enemy of Christ,
as Samuel said once to Agag, (at what time he said within himself, Surely the
bitterness of death is past) As thy sword has made women childl^sse, 1 Samuel 15
so shall thy mother be childlesse among women. So has Prelacy flattered it
self, finding such a party to stand up on it side among the rotten Lords and
Commons, the debauched Gentry, and abused people of the Kingdom; Surely, the
bitterness of death is past. I sit as a Queen, and shall not know Widdow-hood,
or l^sse of children. In the midst of this security and pride (the infallible
forerunners of her downfall) let us call her forth, and say,

As thy sword, Prelacy, has made many women child^lesse, many a faithful
Minister peoplelesse, houselesse and libertylesse, their wives husbandlesse,
their children and their Congregations fatherless, and Pastorlesse, and
Guidelesse, So thy mother Papacy shall be made childelesse among harlots, your
Diocese Bishoplesse, and your Sees Lordlesse, and your places shall know you
no more. Come, my Brethren, I say, and fear not to take this Agag (Prelacy I
mean, not the Prelates) and hew it in pieces before the Lord.

This Covenant is not purely religious, as that in the Text.
as that which the Text holds forth, To join our selves to the Lord. There be
State-matters, and such too, as are full of doubt, and perhaps of danger to be
sworn unto.



In general I answer, 1. In general. Whatever is contained in the Covenant,
is either religious or tending to Religion.
There is nothing in the Body of this Covenant which is not either purely
religious, or which lies not in a tendency to Religion, conducing to the
securing and promoting thereof.

And as in the expounding the Commandments Divines take this Rule, That that
Command which forbids a sin, forbids also all the conducibles and provocations
to that sin, All the Tendencies to it: And that Command which enjoins a duty,
enjoins all the mediums and advancers to that duty, as the Schools say, Modus
cadit sub precepto. Circumstances fall within the latitude of the Command; so
in religious Covenants, not only those things which are of the substance and
integralls of Religion, but even the collateralls and subserviencies, that tend
either to the establishing or advancing of Religion, may justly be admitted
within the Verge and Pale of the Covenant.

The Cities of Refuge had their Suburbs appointed by God, as well as their
ha^itations, and even they also were counted holy.

The Rights and Pr^^^ledges of the Parliaments, and the Libert^^s of the
Kingdom, mentioned in the third Article: They are the aburbs of the Gospel, and
an Inheritance bequeathed by God to Nations and Kingdoms and under that notion
holy. Concerning which a people may lawfully reply to the unjust demands of him
perours, Kings, or States, as Naboth once to Ahab, when demanded to yield up
his Vineyard to his Majesty:

God forbid that I should give the Inheritance of my father. (...)


These be the Outworks of Religion, the Lines of Communication, as I may so
say, for the defense of this City; which the Prelates well knew, and therefore
you see it was their great design, first by Poli^y to have surprised; and when
that would not do, then by main strength of Battle to storm these Outworks:
Well knowing, That if they once had won these, they should quickly be Masters
also of the holy City, Religion it self, and done what they listed. And
therefore the securing of these must of necessity be taken into the same
Councels and Covenant with Religion it self.

This premised in general, Particular Objections or Seruples. 1. Ignorance in
them that take this Covenant of the ^ights and Priviviledges of Parlilament.
we shall easily and a pace satisfy the particular Scruples and Quaeries as I
go.

1 Scrupl. The most part that swear this Covenant, are in a great degree, if
not totally, ignorant what the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and
the Liberties of the Kingdoms are, and how can they then swear to maintain
they know not what?

Answ. 1. By the same argument no man, or very few, might lawfully swear to
maintain the Kings Prerogatives in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; nor
the King himself swear to maintain the Liberties of the Subject, as he does in
his Oath at his Coronation.

there are Privileges belonging to the Parliaments, and Liberties belonging to
the subject.

3. And that it is the duty of every Subject, according to his place and power,
to maintain these; So that in taking of this Covenant, we swear to do no more
then our Duty binds us to; in which there is no danger, though we do not in
every point know how far that duty extends in every branch and several
thereof.

4. In swearing to do my duty, whether to God or man, if The ignorant of many
particulars, I oblige my self to these two things.

1. To use the best means to inform my self of the particulars.

2. To conform my self to what I am informed, to be my duty.

Which yet in the case in hand, does admit of a further latitude, namely, That
which lies in the very word and letter of this Article (as in most of the rest)
In our several Vocations; which does not bind every one to the same degree of
knowledge, nor the same way of preservation: As for example, I do not conceive
every Magistrate is bound to know so much, no nor to endeavor to know so much
as Parliament Men; nor every member of Parliament so much as Judges; nor
Ministers so much as the Lawyers; nor ordinary people so much as Ministers; nor
servants so much as Masters: nor all to preserve them the same way;
Parliament Men by demanding them, Lawyers by pleading, Judges by giving the
sense and mind of the Law, Misters by Preaching, Magistrates by defending,
people by assisting, praying, yielding obedience, etc. All if the exigencies
arise so high, and the State call for it, by engaging their estates and lives,
in case they be invaded by an unlawful power.

And in case of ignorance, the thing we bind our selves to is this, That if at
any time any particular shall be in question, What the Parliament shall make
appear to be their right, or the liberty of the Subject, we promise to
contribute such assistance for the preservation or reparation thereof, as the
nature of the thing, and wisdom of the State shall call for at our hands in
our several places.

Scruple. But some are offended, while they conceive in the same Article, The
Kings Person and a^t^ority in the p^eservation of Religion, etc.
That the Clause wherein we swear the preservation and defense of the Kings
person and Authority, does he under some restraint, by that limitation;

In the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and the Liberties of the
Kingdom.

To which we reply,

Answ. 1. It maintains him as far as he is a King: He may be a man, but sure no
King, without the lists and verge of Religion and Laws, it being Religion and
Laws that make him a King.

2. See his Majesty's Declarations.
It maintains his person and estate, as far as his Majesty himself does desire
and expect to be defended: for sure his Justice cannot desire to be defended
against, but in the preservation of Religion and Laws; and his wisdom cannot
expect it; since he cannot believe that they will make conscience of defen^i^g
his person, who make no conscience of preserving Religion and the Laws; I mean,
when the ruin of his person and authority may advance their own cursed
designs. They that for their own ends will defend his person and Authority
against Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, will with the same conscience
defend their own ends against his person and authority, when they have power
in their hands.

The Lord deliver his Majesty from such defenders, By what Names or Titl^s
soever they be called.

3. Who doubts but that Religion and Laws (wherein the Rights and Liberties of
Kingdoms are bound up) are the best security of the persons and authority of
Kings and Governors? And the while Kings will defend these, these will defend
Kings? It being impossible that Princes should suffer violence or indignity,
while they are within the Munition of Religion and Laws; or if the Prince
suffer, these must of necessity suffer with him.

4. I make a question, Whether this limitation lie any more upon the defense of
the Kings person and authority, then it does upon the Rights and Privil^dges of
Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdom, since there is no point or stop
in the Article to appropriate it more to the defense of the Kings Person and
Authority, th^n to the preservation of the Rights and Privileges ledges of the
Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms.

5. And lastly, This Clause is not to be understood exclusive, as excluding all
other Cases wherein the Kingdoms stand bound to preserve his Majesty's Person
and Authority, but only pro subjecta materia, as expressing that case wherein
the safety of his Person and Authority, does most highly concern both King and
Kingdoms, especially at such a time as this is, when both are so furiously and
implaceably encountered by a malignant Army of desperate parricides, Papists and
their Prelaticall party.

These Objections answered, and Difficulties removed, we proceed to the
examining of the rest of the particulars, in the following Articles.

The discovery of incondiaries or malignants that have been, or shall be: To
which the fourth Article binds us: Fourth Article. Discovery of Incendiaries
and Malignants.
Does it not lie also in a necessary tendency to the securing and preserving of
this Covenant inviolable with the Most High God, in point of Reformation? For
can we hope a through Reformation, according to the mind of Christ, if opposers
of Reformation may escape scot-free, undiscovered and unpunisht? or can we
indeed love or promote a Reformation, and in the mean time countenance or
conceal the enemies of it?

This is clear, yet it wants not a scruple; and that peradventure which may
trouble a sincere heart.

Object. It is this; Having once taken this Oath, This Oath will bind us to
discover children or parents, or husbands and wives, etc.
if we hear a friend or brother; yea, perhaps a Father, an Husband or a Wife,
let fall a word of dislike of the Parliament, or Assemblies proceedings in
either Kingdom; or that discovers an other judgment or opinion; or a word of
passion unadvisedly uttered, and do not presently discover and complain of it,
we pull upon our selves the guilt or danger of perjury, which will be a mighty
snare to thousands of well affected people.

To which I answer.

Answ. 1. The objection lays the case much more narrow then the words of the
Article, which distinguishes the Incendiary or Malignant which is to be
discovered by a threefold Character, or note of Malignity.

First, Hindering the Reformation of Religion.

Secondly, Dividing the King from his people, or one Kingdom from (...).

Thirdly, Making any faction or parties amongst the People contrary to the
L^^^ue and Covenant.

Now every dislike of some passage in Parliament or Assemblies proceedings;
every distent in judgment and opinion; every rash word or censure, that may
possibly be let fall through passion and inadvertency, will not amount to so
high a degree of Malignity as is here expressed, nor consequently bring one
within the compass of this Oath and Covenant. A suitable and seasonable
Caution or conviction may suffice in such a case.

2. But suppose the Malignity do arise to that height here expressed in any of
the Branches thereof; I do not conceive the first work this Oath of God binds
us to, is to make a judicial discovery thereof; while without all controversy
our Saviors Matthew. 18.
Rul^ of dealing with our Brethren in cases of offense, is not here excluded;
which is,

1. Verse. 15.
To see what personal admonition will do; which toward a Superior as Husband,
Parent, Master, or the like must be managed with all Wisdom and Reverence: if
they hear us, we have made a good days work of it; We have gained our br^ther,
if not then the Rule directs us yet.

2 In the second place to take with us two or three more; if they do the deed,
thou in yest sit down with peace and thankfulness, if not,

3. If after all this, the party shall persist in destructive practices to
hinder Reformation, to divide the King from his People, or one Kingdom from
another, or lastly to make factions or parties among the people; be it the man
of thine own House, the Husband of thy youth, the Wife of thy bosom, the Son
of thy loins, etc. L^vi must know neither Father, nor Mother, private
Relations must give way to public safety; thou must with all faithfulness,
endeavor the discovery; thine eye must not pity nor spare: D^ut 1, 6 7 8.
It is a case long since stated by God himself; and when complaint is made to
any person in Authorite, the Plantiff is discharged, and the matter rests upon
the hands of Authority.

Provided notwithstanding, that there be in the use of all the former means,
that latitude allowed, which the Apostle gives in case of Heresy: sc. A first
and second Admonition. Ti^. 3.13.


This course not only the Rule of our Savior in general, but the very words
of the Covenant it self does allow; (for though the clause be placed in the
sixth Article, yet it has reference to all:) viz. What we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known. So that if the
Malignity fall within our own, or our friends ability to conquer, we have
discharged our duty to God and the Kingdoms, and may sit down with comfort in
our bosoms.

That which remains in the other two Articles, I cannot see how it affords any
occasion of an objection; and the reference and tendency it has to the
Reformation and preservation of Religion, is easy and clear to any eye, that
is not wilfully blind; The preservation of Peace between the two Kingdoms,
Fifth Article. The preserv^tion between the Kingdoms.
in the fifth Article, being the pillar of Religion; for how can Religion and
Reformation stand, if any blind Malignant Sampson be suffered to pull down the
pillars of Peace and Union.

Besides it was a branch of that very Covenant in the Text as well as of that
in our hands. The Children of Israel and Judah which had a long time been
disunited, and in that disunion had many bloody and mortal skirmishes and
battles, now at length by the good hand of God upon them, taking counsel to
join themselves, first, one to another, and then both unto God.

First, Let us join our selves, and then to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant?

Surely, not only this Copy in the Text; but the Wormwood and the Gall of our
civil combustions and wars, which our souls may have in remembrance to our
dying day, and be humbled within us, may powerfully persuade us to a cheerful
engagement of our selves, for the preservation of a firm peace and union
between the Kingdoms, to all posterity.

And lastly, as Peace is the pillar of Religion, Article sixth. Mutual
assistance.
so mutual assistance and defense of all those that enter into this League and
Covenant in the maintaining and pursuance thereof, (mentioned in that sixth and
last Article) is the Pillar of that Peace. Divide and impera; Desert one
another, and we expose our selves to the Lusts of our enemies.

And who can object against the securing of our selves, Indifferency, and
Neutralitie.
and the state, against a detestable indifferency or neutrality, but they must
ipso fact, proclaim to all the world, that they intend before hand to turn
Neutralls or Apostates?

To conclude, therefore having thus examined the several Articles of this
Covenant, and the material Clauses in those Articles; and finding them to be,
if not of the same nature, yet of the same design with the preface and
conclusion; (the one whereof (as I told you, at the entrance) obliges us to
the Reformation of Religion; the other of our Lives) as serving to the
immediate and necessary support and perfecting of these blessed and glorious
ends and purposes, I shall need to Apologize no further in the vindicating and
asserting of this Covenant before us; could we be so happy, as to bring hearts
suitable to this service; could we set up such ayms and ends as the Covenant
holds forth; The glory of God, The good of the Kingdoms, and Honor of the
King, to which, this Covenant, and every several thereof, does humbly
prostrate it self, (Article sixth) would all conspire to make us and our
posterity aftter us, an happy and glorious people to all generations.

To them that object out of conscience, Master Hinderson, and Master Nyes
Speech.
these poor resolutions may afford some relief if not satisfaction; or, if
these slender endeavors fall short of my design, and the Readers desires
herein, I shall send them Master Caryll. Master Soloman.
to their labors, who have taken more a^le and fruitful pains in this
subject. To them that object out of a spirit of bitterness and Malignity,
nothing will suffice;

Quod vult, non quod est, audit semper qui decrevit errare, Chrysostom. He that
is resolved to err, is satisfied with nothing but that which strengthens his
error. And these I leave to such arguments and convictions, which the Wisdom
and Justice of Authority shall judge more proper; while I proceed to the second
Quaere propounded. The Why?

I come now to the second Quaere propounded for the managing of this Use of
Exhortation;

sc. Why?
Why? Or upon what Considerations we may be persuaded to undertake this
Service? To enter into this holy Covenant. First Motive Gods dishonors by our
former Violations of Covenant.


And the first Motive that may engage us hereunto, is the Consideration, how
exceedingly God has been dishonored among us; by all sorts of
Covenant-violation, as has been formerly discovered at large; in the avenging
whereof, the Angel of the Covenant stands, as once at the door of Paradise,
with a flaming sword in his hand, ready to cut us off, and cast us out of this
Garden of God; this good Land wherein he has planted us thus long. Numb. 12.14.


I may say unto you therefore, concerning our selves, as once Moses in another
case, concerning Miriam;

If her Father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed, etc? If our
Father had but spit in our face by some inferior correction; should we not be
ashamed? Ought we not to be greatly humbled before him? How much more, Isa.
42.25.
when

He has poured out upon us the fury of his wrath, and it has burned us; and
the strength of battle, and it has set on fire round about. Should we not lay
it to heart, and use all means to pacify the fierceness of his anger, lest it
burn down to the very foundations of the Land, and none be able to quench it?

Yea, Secondly, Second Motive, That such a means of recovery is yet left us.
A wonderful mercy and an high favor may we count it from our God, That yet
such a Sovereign means is left us for our recovery and reconciliation; Infinite
condescension and goodness it is in our God, That after so many fearful
provocations by our unhallowed and treacherous dealing in the Covenant he will
vouchsafe, yet to have any thing to do with us, That he will yet trust or try
us any more by admitting us to renew our Covenant with His Majesty, when he
might in justice rather say unto us, as to the wicked.

What have you to do, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
that you should take my Covenant into your Mouths, seeing you hate instruction
and cast my worsd behind you?

Certainly, had man broke with us, as often as we have broke with God, we should
never trust them any more, but account them as the offscouring of mankind,
the vilest, the basest that ever trod upon Gods ground; and yet that after so
many unworthy and treacherous departures from our God, after so much
unfaithfulness and perfidiousnesse in the Covenant, (such as it is not in the
capacity of one man to be guilty of toward another) that God should say to us,
as once to his own people.

Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, Jere. 3 1
yet return to me, says the (...); Oh wonder of free grace!

Oh might this privilege be offered to the Apostate Angels which kept not the
Covenant of their Creation, nor consequently their fust estate, and to the rest
of the damned souls in hell; would God send an Angel from Heaven to preach unto
them a second Co^^^ant upon the laying hold whereon, and closing wherewith,
they might be received into grace and favor; how would these poor damned
spirits Sestirre themselves: what rattling of their red-hot chains; what shaking
of their fiery locks: In a word, what an uproar of joy would there be in hell,
upon such glad ti^^gs!

How many glorious hurche^, as Capernaum, Bethsaida, the seven Churches o^
Asia, with others in latter times have for their Covenant-violation, been cast
down from the top of Heaven, where once you sat in the beauty and glory of the
Ordinances; to the very bottom of hell, a dark and doleful condition, and God
has never spoken such a word of comfort, nor made any such offer of recovery,
and reconciliation unto them, as he has done to us unto this day?

Surely, He has not d^lt so with every People, etc.

Let it be our wisdom, and our thankfulness, to accept of it, with both
hands; yea, both with hands and hearts.

If God give us ^^arts suitable to this price, that is in our hands,
Covenanting hearts, as he gives us yet leave and opportunity to renew our
Covenant it will be to me a blessed security, that we are not yet a lost
people; and a new Argument of Hope, that he intends to do England good.

If neglected and despised, Whether this may not be the last time that ever
England shall hear from God, I much doubt, unless it be in such a voice, as
that is,

I would have healed England, Ez^^. 24.23.
and she will not be healed; because I would have purged thee, and thou art not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee.

The Lord forbid such a thing: For,

How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?

Thirdly, We may be mightily encouraged to this service, Third Motive, It is
the Privilege of Gospeltimes. Ezekiel. 37.16.22.
in as much has it is prophesied of, as the great Duty and Privilege of
Gosp^l-times. You see the Evangelicall-day is one of those days, wherein this
prophecy and promise must be fulfilled. And it is the same Pri^iledge and
Happiness which was prophesied of, under the type of the sticks made one, in
the hand of the Prophet Ez^kul: For though in the literal sense, it be to be
understood, (as it is expressed) of the happy reunion of that unhappily divided
seed of Jacob, Joseph and Ephraim, Israel and Judah; yet in a Gospel-sence, it
is to be applied to the Churches of Jesus Christ, in the latter days, which
though formerly divided, and miserably torn by unnatural quarrels, and wars;
yet Christ the King of the Church, has a day wherein he will make them one in
his own hand: The great and gracious design which we humbly conceive Christ
has now upon these two Nations, England and Scotland; even after all their sad
divisions and civi^ discords to make them one in his right hand, to all
Generations.

And this gives me assurance, that the work shall go on and prosper; yea,
prosper gloriously, it having a stronger foundation to support it, then Heaven
and Earth, for they are upheld but by a word of power; but this work, which is
called, Hob. 3 1.
the New-Heavens, and the New-Earth, is uphold by a word of promise; For,

We according to his promise, look for New-Heavens, 2 Pet. 3.15.
and a New-Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

I say, by a word of prophecy and promise, which it seems is stronger then God
himself; for his word binds him, so that he can as soon deny himself, as deny
his promise.

There shall be therefore an undoubted accomplishment of these things, which
are told us from the Lord: Luke 1.45.
God will find, or make a people, who shall worship him in this holy
Ordinance; and upon whom, he will make good all the mercy and truth; all the
peace and salvation which is bound up in it: Only, therefore let me Caution,
and beseech you, not to be wanting to your selves, and your own happiness:
Acts 13.
Judge not your selves unworthy of such a privilege, nor Luke 7.3^.
reject the Counsel of God against your own souls; sin not against your own
mercies, by withdrawing your selves from this service, or rebelling against it.

God will exclude none that do not exclude themselves.

Yea further, This seems to speak an Argument of Hope, That the calling of the
Jews, and the fullness of the Gentiles, is not far behind; in as much as God
begins now to pour out this promise in the Text, upon the Churches, in a more
eminent manner, then ever we, or our fathers saw it, in a Gospel sense; And
surely, Gospel performance must make way for that full and universal
accomplishment thereof, which shall unite Israel and Judah, Jew and Gentile, in
one perpetual Covenant unto the Lord that shall never be forgotten. The Gospel
Day is nothing else, but the dawning of that great universal Day in the Text,
wherein God will make one glorious Church of Jew and Gentile; The Day Star
whereof is now risen in our Horizon; So that I am humbly confident, That the
same shores shall not bound this Covenant, which bound the two now-Covenanting
Nations; but as it is said of the Gospel, so it will be verified of this Gospel
Covenant.

The sound thereof will go into all the Earth, Romans 10.18.
and the words of it to the ends of the world.

There is a spirit of Prophecy that does animate this Covenant, Psalm. 14.15.
which will make it swift and active; swift to run: His word runs very swiftly:
and active, to work deliverance and safety, not only to these two Kingdoms,
but to all other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of
Antichristian Tyranny, whom God shall persuade to join in the same, or like
Association and Covenant.

So that me thinks all that travel with the Psalmists desire of seeing the
good of Gods chosen, Psalm 106.5.
and rejoicing in the gladness of his nation, and glorying with his
Inheritance, Will certainly rejoice in this day, and in the goodness of GOD,
which has crowned it with the accomplishment of such a precious promise as
hear lies before us. While none can withdraw from, muchlesse, oppose this
service, but such as bear evil will to Sion, and would be unwilling to see the
ruin and downfall of Antichrist, which this blessed Covenant does so evidently
threaten.

Fourthly, Fourth Motiv^. The example of the Churches of God, and
This has been the practice of all the Churches of God, before, and since
Christ; after their Apostacies, and Captivities for those Apostacies and
recoveries out of these Captivities: The first thing they did, was to cement
themselves to God by a more close entire and solemn Covenant, then ever.

Nehemiah, Ezra, Hezckiah, Jeremiah, Josiah, will all bring in cl^er evidences
to witness this practice. This latter Churches have learned of them, Germany,
France, Scotland, etc.

But what shall I need to mention the Churches, when as the God of the Churches
took this course himself; who, when he pleases to become the God of any people
or person, it is by Covenant; as with Abraham, Gen 17.2.
Behold I make a Covenant with thee, and what ever mercies he bestows upon
them, it is by Covenant; all the blessings of Gods people, are
Covenantblessings; to wicked men, God gives with his left hand, out of the
Basket of common providence; but to his Saints, he dispenceth with his right
hand, out of the Ark of the Covenant. Isa. 55.3
I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.

Yea, which is yet more to our purpose, When the first Covenant proved not, but
miscarried, not by any fault that was in the Covenant-Maker, no nor simply in
the Covenant it self, Of the God of the Churches.
(for if man could have kept it, it would have given him life.) I say when it
was broken, God makes a new Covenant with his People.

Not according to the Covenant which I made with their Fathers, which my
Covenant they brake, etc. Jer. 31.31. Heb. 8 8.
But this shall be the Covenant, etc. I will put my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my
People, etc.

Because they could not keep the first Covenant; God made a second that should
keep them.

Oh, that while we are making a Covenant with our God, he would please to make
such a Covenant with us; so would it be indeed a perpetual Covenant, that
should not be forgotten.

Well, you see we have a Covenanting God, a Covenant Making God, and a Covenant
renewing God; be we followers of God, as dear children: Let us be a Covenanting
people, a Covenant making, a Covenant renewing people; and (as our God) finding
sault with the first; Heb. 8.8.
Let us make a new Covenant, ^^^n a perpetual Covenant that shall never be
forgotten.

A fifth Motive to quicken us to this duty, F^th Mo^^. The practi^^ ^f the Pope
and Preletes.
may be even the practice of the Antichristian, State, and Kingdom; Popery has
been dexterous to propagate and spread it self by this means.

What else have been all their Fraternities and Brother-hoods and Societies;
but so many Associations and combinations politic, compacted and obliged by
Oaths and Covenants, for the advancing of the Catholic Cause, whereby Nations
and Kingdoms have been subdued to the obedience of the Roman Miter.

And Prelacy (that Wh^lp) has learned this polisieof its mother Papacy (that
Lioness) to corroborate and raise it self to that height, we have seen and
suffered by these Artifices; while by close Combinations among themselves, and
swearing to their o^edience, all the Inferior Priesthood, and Church Officers,
by Ordination-Engagements, and Oaths of Canonical Obedience, etc. A few have
been able to impose their own Laws and Canons, upon an whole Kingdom; yea, upon
three Kingdoms, it being an inconsiderable company, either of Ministers or
People (the Lord be merciful to us in this thing) that have had eyes to
discover the Mystery of iniquity, which these men have driven; and much more
inconsiderable, that have had hearts to oppose and withstand their Tyranny and
Usurpations.

And why may not God make use of the same stratagem to ruin their Kingdom,
which they used to build it; yea, God has seemed to do it already, w^^le in
that place where they cast that r^^ring, Canon, and formed their cursed Oath,
for the establishing their (...), with its endless etc. to perpetuits. In the
^^ing Henry 7 Chapel.
very (...) place has this Covenant been debated and voted, once, and a second
time by command of public Authority for the Extirpation of it Root and
Branch, and the casting of it out for ever, as a plant which our heavenly
Father has not planted.

And who knows, but this may be the Arrow of the Lords deliverance, which as it
has peire't to the very heart of Prelacy; so it may also give a mortal wound
to Papacy it self, of which it will never be healed by the whole College of
Physicians (the Jesuits) whose study the Complexion and health of that
Babylonian Harlot.

In the sixth and last place. Sixth Motive. The blessed success of this
Ordinance in other Churches.


The good success this course has found in the Churches, may encourage us
with much cheerfulness and confidence to undertake this service.

It has upon it a probatum est, from all that ever conscientiously and
religiously used this remedy.

It recovered the State and Church of the Jews, again and again, many a time,
when it was ready to give up the ghost, it recovered and kept a good
correspondency between God and them, all the time it was of any esteem and
credit amongst them.

It brings Letters of Testimonial with it, from all the Reformed Churches;
Especially from our neighbor Nation and Church of Scotland, where it has done
wonders in recovering that people, when all the Physicians in Christendom had
given them over.

It is very remarkable, in the 20. Ezekiel. 37. God promises to bring them into
the Bond of the Covenant; and in the next Verse it follows, and I will purge
out the Rebels from among you, there is an [And] that couples this Duty, and
this Mercy together; I will bring you into the bond, etc. And I will purge out,
etc. Truly God has made good this promise to our Neighbors; The Waters of this
Covenant have been a notable Purgation to the Rebels there; It has been a
Shibboleth to discover them, and a Sword in the hand of the Angel of the
Covenant, to chase or slay them.

The mighty Armies of Malignants, whether inbread or foreign, though more in
number, and greater in power; have not been able to stand before it, from the
first day till now.

The Walls of Jericho have fallen flat before it.

The Dagon of the Bishops Service Book brake its neck before this Arc of the
Covenant.

Pr^lacy and Prerogative have bowed down, and given up the ghost at its feet:
And what changes has it wrought in the Church and State! What a Reformation
has followed at the heels of this glorious Ordinance!

And truly, even among us as poorly and lamely, and brokenly, as it has been
managed among us, I may say thus of it: It has kept life and soul together; I
am confident we had given up the ghost before this time, had it not been for
this Water of Life.

Oh what glorious success might we expect, if we did make such cheerful, such
holy, such conscientious addresses, as becomes the Law of so solemn an
Ordinance! Truly, could I see such a willing people in this day of Gods Power,
as are here in the Text, encouraging, and engaging one another, in an holy
Conspiracy. Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant,
etc. I have faith enough to promise and prophecy to you in the Name of the
Lord, and in the words of his servant Haggai; Hagg^i 2.18, 19.
From this very day I will bless you.

And that you may know of what Sovereignty this Ordinance is; Take notice of
this for the close of this last Motive and this second Quaere; That this is the
last Physic that ever the Church shall take or need; it lies clear in the
Text; For it is an everlasting Covenant; And therefore the last that ever shall
be made; after the full and final accomplishment of this promise and duty, the
Church shall be of so excellent a complexion, Isai. 33. last.
That the Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, The people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their inquitie.

The Lord make it such Physic to us for Christ his sake.

And this shall suffice, etc.

The Third Sermon on the Sabbath Day in the Morning, being the first of
October. Immediately before takingof the COVENANT in Milk-street Church.
I Come now to the third Quaere. How? Third Quaere, How?


And this inquiry divides it self into two Branches.

sc. How to Acceptance? Perpetuity?


For the satisfying of both which, I will fetched as much as may be out of the
Text, That so you may yet further behold what proportion there is between the
duty there, and that which lies before us this day.

First in general. With an Ordinance frame of heart.
we must enquire how this duty may be so managed, that God may accept of us in
the doing of it? How to Acceptance?

Now in the General, we must know, that this service being an Ordinance of
God, it must be undertaken and managed with an Ordinance of frame heart. i. e.
According to the Laws and Rule of ^ivine worship; and by how much the more
sacred and solemn this Ordinance is, by so much the more ought we to call up,
and provoke the choicest and heavenliest of those affections and dispositions
of spirit, wherewith we make our addressements to the Holy things of God. In
special.


In particular these.

First, ^^^st in Judgment. Jere 4.2
we are to come upon this service, with the most ponderous advisednesse, and
most serious deliberation of Judgment, That may be.

It is one of those grand Qualifications which God himself calls for to an
Oath^ Thou shall swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness.

In Truth for the matter, and that we have already examined in the former
Sermon; In Righteousness, in reference to the keeping of the Oath (of which
hereafter) and in Judgment in respect of the taking or making of the Oath, the
thing which we are now about, that we should well consider what we do.

And indeed, if at any time, and in any undertaking, that advise be useful,
Prove 4.26. Eccl 5.1
Ponder the path of thy feet: and keep thy foot when thou entrest into the
house of God; then certainly it is most seasonable, when a people or a person,
draw near to make or renew their Covenant with the most High God.

And it seems, in the latter of those two Scriptures, now quoted, Eccl s. 5.1.
The Holy Ghost does principally refer to this duty of making Vows and
Covenants with God; The second Verse does intimate such a business, Verse. 2.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God,

To utter what? The fourth Verse is express, When thou make a Vow unto God,
etc.

So that it is clear, the purpose of the Holy Ghost in that place^s, as in all
our holy services; so especially in this of Vows, to ca^tion all the people of
God, when they draw near to utter their vows unto the Lord, to manage it with
the greatest deliberation, and solidnesse of judgment that is possible; to sit
down and consider with our selves before hand, With whom we have to deal? What
we have to do? Upon what warrant? By what Rule? To what end?

The lame and the blind, Mal 1 8.
Gods soul hates for a Sacrifice, the lame affections, and the blind ignorant
Judgment. And well he may; for certainly, they that do not swear in Judgment,
will not, cannot swear in Righteousness; They that do not make their vows in
Judgment will not, cannot pay or perform them in Righteousness. He that
swears he knows not what, will observe he cares not how. Incogitant making,
will end in unconsci^nable breaking of Covenant; and if need be in a cursed
abjuration of it; for rash swearing, is a precipice to forswearing.

And therefore, if any of you have not well weighed this service, or be any
ways insatisfied, in whole or in parts, I advise you to forbear, till your
judgments be better informed. What soever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14.23.


Provided, That this be not done merely in a pretense to evade and elude this
service, to which God and the two Nations call you, as here in the Text. Come
let us join, etc.

Take heed of casting a mist of willing prejudice, 2 Per 3 5
and affected ignorance, before your own eyes, (such the Apostle speaks of) to
no other purpose, but that your Malignity may steal away in that mist
undiscovered; for be sure, your sin will find you out.

An ingenuous ignorance, and truly conscientious tenderness is accompanied
with an ingennous and conscientious use of all means, for information and
satisfaction; and to such, I make no question, The Ministers of Christ will be
ready to communicate what light they have, for resolving doubts, removing
scrupills, and satisfying conscience, when soever you shall make your addresses
for that purpose.

In the mean time, if there be any, that under pretense of unsatisfiednesse, do
shun the duty and information too; they will be found, but to mock God, and
Authority; to whose Justice and Wisdom therefore, I must leave them.

Gods tells his people when he joins himself to them, Hos 2 20.
I will marry thee to my self in Righteousness and Judgment,

How in Judgment? Because God considers what he does, when he takes a people
or person to himself; not that God chooses for any wealth or worth in the
Creature: Faith foreseen or Works foreseen; but that finding it (on the
contrary) poor and beggarly, and undone, and foreseeing what it is like to
prove, crooked and froward, unteachable and untractable; he sits down (to speak
after the manner of men) and considers, what course to take, and what it is
like to cost him, to make them such a people, as he may delight in; and then
consulting with his treasures, and finding he has wherewith all to bear their
charges, and to bring about his own ends; he resolves to take them, and marry
them to himself, whatsoever it cost him.

The result of such a confultation you may read, dropped from Gods own Pen,

And I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee (...) asant
Land, a goodly Heritage, the Hosts of Nations, Jer^. 3.19. Here is Gods wise
deliberation upon the matter: How (...) I put thee, etc? That is, how shall I
do this, but I must do it to mine own dishonor? for I see before hand what
thou will prove; thou will be the same that ever thou wast; as Idolatrous, as
adulterous, as unstable, as backsliding as ever, etc. It is not a ^leasant
Land, a goodly Heritage, that will make thee better. Well, after some pause,
God was resolved what to do: And I said, (hear his resolution) Thou shall call
me my Father, and shall not turn away from me: That is, as if he had said, I
will take this course with thee. I will first give thee, the heart of a child,
thou shall call me, my Father; and then I will give thee the inheritance of a
child, (a goodly heritage, etc.) and when I have done, I will not leave thee
to thy self, but I will knit thee to my self by an indissoluble union. Isai
59.21.
I will put my spirit into thee, etc. And thou shall not turn away from me,

There is Gods wife Resolution; He resolves to do all himself, and then he is
sure it will not fail his expectation; he undertakes it. Thou shall call me my
father, and shall not turn away from me.

Thus God when he marries his people to himself, does it in Judgment.

Now therefore, Ephesians 5.1.
Be ye followers of God as dear children; And since you come now about the
Counter-part of the same work; namely, to joy or marry your selves to God, do
it in Judgment. Consider well what you do; And among other things, since you
are so poor, and nothing in your selves as you have seen in the openining of
this precious Scripture, ( Jerem. 3.19.) Bethink your selves where you will
have strength and sufficiency, to make good this great and solemn engagement
with your God. But of this, more hereafter.

I proceed to the second qualification or direction.

Secondly, The second Qualification. Holy fear.
See that you come to this service with a Reverentiall frame of Spirit, with
that Holy fear and awe, upon your hearts, as becomes the greatness and
holiness of that God, and that Ordinance, with whom you have to do; remembering
that you are this day to swear before God, by God, to God: either of which,
singly considered, might justly make us fear and tremble; How much more may
this threefold cord, bow, and bind our hearts down in an humble, and holy
prosternation?

It is said of Jacob, he swear by the fear of his father Isaac. Genesis 31.53.
Jacob in his Oath chooses this title of Fear, to give unto God, to show with
what fear he came, but to swear by this God; what should we do, when (as I say)
we come to swear by him, and to him? Surely, when he is so especially the
object of our Oath, he should then especially be the object of our fear.

The consideration of that infinite distance between God and us, may
wonderfully advantage us toward the getting of our hearts into this holy
posture.

Great is that distance, that is between a King and a Beggar; and yet, there is
but creature and creature; greater is that distance between Heaven and Earth;
and yet these, but creature and creature; and yet greater is the distance
between an Angel and a Worm; and yet still, there is but creature and creature.
But now the distance that is between God and us, is infinitely wider; For
behold, There is the Mighty, Almighty Creator, Isai. 40.15. Psa. 62.9.
Before whom all the Nations are but as a drop of a bucket, and the small dust
of the balance; and the poor nothing-creature vanity, and altogether lighter
then vanity. And yet, this is not all; yea, this is the shortest measure of
that distance, whereof we speak; The distance of Creator and Creature; lo it
is found between God and the Angels in Heaven, and the Spirits of just men made
terfect; in respect whereof, the Psalmist says of God, Psa. 113.6.
He humbles himself to behold the things that are in Heaven: It is a
condescension for that infinitely glorious Being, who dwells in Himself, and is
a undantly satisfied in the beholding of his own uncomprehensi^le Excellencies,
to vouchsafe to look out of himself, and behold the things that are in Heav^n;
the best of those glorious Inhabitants that stand round about his Throne; Who
therefore, Revel. 4.8.9, 10, 11.
conscious of that infinite distance wherein they stand, make their addresses
with the greatest self abasements, Covering their faces, and casting themselves
down upon those heavenly pavements. But behold upon us, poor wretches, that
dwell here below, in these houses of Clay, There is found that which widens
this distance beyond all expression or apprehension; Sin, set us farther
beneath a Worm, then a Worm is ^eneath an Angel: I had almost said (bear with
the expression, I use it, because no other expression can reach it.) Sin sets
us as much beneath our Creatureship, as our Creatureship sets us beneath the
Creator. Surely, there is more of God to be seen in the worst of a Creature,
then there is of a Creature to be seen in the best of sin; There is nothing
vile and base enough under Heaven, to make a simile of sin.

And now therefore, if it be such a condescension for the great God to behold
the things that are in Heaven; how infinite condescension is it, to behold the
sinful things that are on Earth! And if sinlesse Saints, and spotless Angels,
do tender their services, which yet are as spotless, as their persons, with
such Reverentiall dep^rtment; what abhorrency, and self annihilation, can be
sufficient to accompany our approaches to this God of Holiness, in such high
and holy engagements, in whom, when God looks out of himself, he can behold
nothing, besides our Creatureship, (of our own) but that which his soul hates.

Heb. 12.29. Let us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably
(in this so excellent an Ordinance) with reverence and godly fear, for our God
is a consuming fire.

The acceptable serving of God, is with reverence and godly fear. The Lord
teach us to bring fear, that so we may find acceptance.

Again in the third place, The third Qualification, Sincerity.
To that end, labor to approve your selves to God in this service, in the
uprightness, and sincerity of your hearts.

The want of this, God lays often to the charge of the (...), as in other
duties, so especially in this which is now before us. They lied to him with
their tongues, For, Psalm. 78.36, 37.
their heart was not (...) with him; neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant. And this stood between them and their acceptance; God tells the
Prophet Ezekiel as much: Son of man, Ezekiel 14.3.
these men have set up their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling block
of their (...) before their face; should I be inquired of at all by them?

They come with their hearts full of their Lusts; so many Lusts, so many Idols;
and for this God refuses to be inquired of by them; Should I be enquired of,
is as much as, I will not be inquired of, etc. It is a denial with disdain;
should I? Or if they be so impudent to enquire, he will not answer; or if he
give them an answer, it shall be a cold one; he will give them their answer at
the door, better none, Verse 4. and 7.
I will answer them according to the multitude of their Idols: i. e. According
to the merit of their Idolatry: Calvin. super hunc lo^um. Afferant materiam
suae damnatio^is, etc. Psalm 66.18.
they bring the matter of their own damnation with them, and they shall carry
away nothing else from me, but the answer or obsignation of that damnation.

Oh it is a dangerous thing to bring the love of any sin with us to the
Ordinances of God; If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my
prayer; and so may we say to our own souls, if I regard iniquity, the Lord will
not accept my person, he will not regard my Covenant. If God see any thing lie
nearer our hearts then himself, he will scorn us, and our services.

If therefore you would be accepted, out with your Idols; Genesis 35.2.
cast ^ut the love of sin out of your hearts; and be upright with your God in
this holy undertaking. It is the main Qualification in the Text; They shall
enquire the way to Sion with their faces (...) i. e. In sincerity, with
uprightness of Spirit, with the full set and bent of their souls: As it is
said of Christ, when he went t^ his Passion, Luk, 9.51
He steadfastly set his face to go up to Jerusalem. He went with all his heart
to be crucified; with a strong (...) spirit. Beloved, we are not going to
crucifying work, ((...), it be to crucify the flesh with the affections and
lusts) but to ^^arriage-work; to join our selves to the Lord in an everlasting
Covenant, etc. Let us do it with our faces Sion-ward; yea, let us steadfastly
set our faces, Reformation-ward, and Heavenward, and Godward, and
Christ-ward, with whom we enter Covenant this day.

A man may enquire the way to Sion with his face toward Babylon; a people or
person may enter Covenant with God, with their hearts, Rome-ward, and
Earth-ward, and Sin-ward, and Hell-ward. Genesis 27 12.
Friends look to your hearts. Peradventure (said Jacob) my father will feel me,
and I shall seem to him as one that m^^ks, and I shall bring a curse upon me,
and not a blessing.

Without all peradventure, may we say, Our father will feel us; for he
s^archeth all hearts, and understands the imaginations of the thoughts. If we
be found as they that mock, showing much love with our mouths, while our
hearts are far from him, we shall bring a curse upon our selves; yea, and upon
the Kingdoms also, and not a blessing.

It is reported to the honor of Judah in the day of their Covenanting with
their God; 2 Chro. 15.55.
They had sworn with all their heart, and with their whole desire. And their
success was answerable to their sincerity; For so it follows, And the Lord was
found of them, and gave them rest round about.

Oh that this might be our honor and happiness in this day of our lifting up
our hands to the most high God, that God might not see in us a double heart, an
heart, and an heart, as the Hebrew expresses it: i. e. One heart for God, and
another for our Idols; one heart for Christ, and another for Antichrist, etc.
But he might see us a single-upright-hearted people, without base mixtures and
composition (for he loves truth ( i. e. sincerity) in the inward parts) that he
finding such sincerity as he looks for; we also might find such success, as
we look for; Safety and deliverance to both the Nations; yea, That both in
respect of our sincerity and success, that might be made good upon us, that is
spoken to the eternal honor of that good King Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. 31. last.
And in every work he began in the service of the house of God, and in the Law,
and in the Commandments to seek his God; He did it with all his heart and
prospered. Universal sincerity is accompanied with universal prosperity; in
all he did, he was upright, and in all he did he prospered.

Brethren, what ever you want, be sure you want not sincerity; let God see you
fully set in your hearts, to take all from sin, and to give all to Jesus
Christ; Me thinks I hear God saying unto us, According to your uprightness, so
be it unto you.

In the fourth place, The fourth Qualification, of direction, make God, our
End. Hos. 7.14. Zech 7.5.
If you would be accepted by God in this holy service, labor to make God your
End. It is your pattern in the Text, They shall go and seek the Lord; It was
not now Howling upon their beds for Corn and Wine, as formerly; of which, God
says, They cried not unto me. i. e. They did not make God the End of their
Prayers; as elsewhere God tells them.

When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month; even those
seventy years, did ye fast to me, even unto me? In seventy years they kept
seven score fasts in Babylon; and yet amongst them all, they kept not one day
unto God; for though the duty looked upon God, they that did the duty, did not
look upon God; that is, they did not set up God as their chief End, in Fasting
and Praying: They mourned not so much for their sin, as for their Captivity;
or, if for their sin, they mourned for it not so much as Gods dishonor, as the
cause of their Captivity; they were not troubled so much, that they had by
their sins walked contrary to God, Levit. 26.40.
as that God by his judgments had walked contrary to them: They fasted and
prayed rather to get off their chains, then to get off their sins; to get rid
of the bondage of the Babylonians, then to get rid of the servitude of their
own base Lusts.

But now (blessed be God) it was otherwise: The children of Israel shall come,
they, and the children of Judah, together; To what end? They shall seek the
Lord, i. e. They shall seek God, for himself, and not only for themselves;
going and weeping; why? Not so much, that he has offended them, as that they
have offended him; for their sins more then for their punishments; so it is
more distinctly reported. Jere. 3.21
A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping, and supplications of the
children of Israel; because they have perverted their way, and have forsaken
the Lord their God. They had forgotten God before, not only in their sins, but
in their duties; They cried not to me; they fasted not to me; not at all unto
me, etc. But now they remember the Lord their God; they seek his face; they
labor to atone him; yea, they seek him to be their Lord, as well as their
Savior; to govern them, as well as to deliver them; they ask the way to Sion;
they require, as well (and more) how they should serve him, as that he should
fa^e them.

The Lord is our Judge; (...) 33.22.
the Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our (...) will save us.

Beloved Christians, let us write after this Copy, and in this great business
we have in hand let us seek God, and seek (...) as a (...) in of holiness, as
well as a fountain of happy(...). Ta^e we heed of those base, low, dunghilly
ends, which prevail d^p^^th. (...), to enter into Covenant with the God of the
Hebrews, Shall not their Cattle and substance be (...).

Let the two Nations, and every soul in both the Nations, that (...) hand to
the most high God, in this holy League and Covenant, take heed of, and abhor
such unworthy thoughts if they should be crowding in upon this service, and ^ay
unto them, as on^e Christ to Peter; Get thee behind me Satan, that (...) not
of the things that be of God, but of the things that be of m^n. You may
remember how it fared with Hamor, and his son Sech^m, and their people, to whom
they propounded these ^ase ends. God did not only disappoint them of their
^^ds, but d^stroy them, for them; Their ayms were to get the Hebrews substance
and cattle, but they lost their own, with their lives to boot; Genesis 34.2^, 27,
28, 29.
For it came to pass on the third day, when they were ^or^, two of the sons of
Jacob, Simeon, and Levi, came upon the City, ^oldly, and slew all the males,
etc. And the sons of Jacob (...) upon the slain, and spoil^d the City; they
took their Sheep, and their Oxen, and all their Wealth.

A most horrid and bloody, Genesis 4^.5, 6, 7
treachery, and cruelty, in them, which stands as a Brand of infamy upon their
foreheads to this day; but a most just and righteous censure from God, and a
caution to all succeeding generations of prostituting heavenly and holy
Ordinances to earthly and sensual ends. Oh let it be our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come, to the end that we may not tempt God, 1 Cor 10.
as they also tempted; for if God so much abhorred, and so severely punished
these worldly respects in the men of the world; if God was so angry with poor
purblind H^^then, who had no other light for their guide, but the glimmering
light of Nature; how, will his anger not only kindl^, but flame in the
avenging of such baseness upon Christians, a people of his own, who have the
glorious light of the Gospel of (...) Christ, to discover to them higher and
heavenlier Ends and References? so that such a Kingdom, People, or Person, that
should date to bring such base carnal Ends, to so spiritual and divine a
contract, should be made a Monument of the wrath and vengeance of divine
Justice; and while they propound to themselves, safety, or riches, or
greatness, from such an excellent Ordinance, God makes it by a strange, but a
righteous hand, an occasion of misery and ruin to them, and their posterity to
many generations.

Christians, labor to set up God in this day and duty, wherein you engage your
selves so nigh unto him; and if you would have heavenly blessings, see that you
propound and pursu^ heavenly Ends and Ayms; Lest, while you come to make a
Covenant with God, you commit Idolatry against him; whatsoever we make our
ultimate and highest end, we make our God: If therefore you cannot make God
your sole, your only End; yet be sure you make him your choicest, your
chiefest End; keep God in his own place; and let all self-respects whatsoever
vail to his Glory, according to that great Rule, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether you eat or drink, or what ever you do, do all to the glory of God.

Fifthly, To do this business to Acceptance, Fifthly, with cheerfulness. 2
Cor. 9.7.
we must do it cheerfully, as God loves a cheerful giver; so he loves a
cheerful hearer, a cheerful Petitioner, and a cheerful Covenanter; and you
have it in the Text to, Come let us; There is their readiness and
cheerfulness to the work; as it was that for which the Apostle does commend
his Ma^^donians in another service.

This they did not as we hoped, 2 Cor 8.5.
but first gave themselves to the Lord; So these, they give themselves to God,
of their own accord, Come let us.

Oh that the Ministers of the Gospel might have occasion to make the same boast
of you, concerning this solemn Ordinance before you, that they might say and
rejoice, that you were a people, that gave your selves to the Lord, and unto
the work of Reformation, not by a Parliamentary fear, or by our Ministerial
compulsions; but above our hopes, and beyond our expectations; of your own
accord.

See what a wonder not only of cheerfulness, but of joy and triumph is
recorded of the Jews in King Asas time, in their taking of the Covenant.

They swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, 2 Chro. 25.14.
and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets. And all Judah rejoiced
at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their hearts, etc.

There was indeed a severe mul^t, a capital censure inacted, against those
that should refuse, and reject this Ordinance.

They should be put to death, Verse. 13.
whether great or small, whether man or woman.

A very grievous censure; but it seems there was neither need, nor use of it;
For all Judah rejoiced at the Oath; The people looked upon this service, not as
their pressure, but as their privilege; and therefore came to it, not with
contentedness only, but an holy triumph, and so saved the Mastigrate and
themselves, the labor, and charges, of executing that sentence on Delinquents.

Oh, that this may be your wisdom and honor; That what ever penalty the
Honorable Parliaments of either Nation, shall in their wisdom think fit to
proportion to the grievous sin of rebelling against this Covenant of the Lord.
(And it seems by the instance before, That whatsoever penalty they shall ordain
less then death, will not be justice only, but Moderation) I say, whatever it
shall be, it may be rendered useless and invalid by the forwardness and
rejoycings of an obedient people.

That all England (as well as Scotland) would rejoice at the Oath, and swear
with all their hearts, etc.

For certainly it will not be so much our duty as our Prerogative, as I have
showed you before, to enter into Covenant with God and his people.

It is the day of Gods power, Psalm. 120.3.
the Lord make you a willing people.

And as a testimony of this willingness and joy, imitate the people here in
the Text, and stir up one another, and provoke one another to this holy
service. Let us join our selves to the Lord, etc. They express their charity,
as well as their joy; They would not go to Sion alone; They call as many as
they meet, with them; Come let us join our selves to the Lord.

Oh that this might be your temper! It is the very Character of the
Evangelicall Church; both as Isaiah and Micah have described it, Their words be
the same.

Many people shall go and say, Come ye, Isai. 2.3. Micah 4.2.
and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord.

Oh that while Nentralls and Malignants do discourage one another, and set off
one another, and embitter one another spirits; God and his Ministers might
find you encouraging each other, and provoking one another, and laboring to
oil one another spirits, to this (as other) Gospel duty and prerogative; God
could not choose, but be much pleased with such a sight.

I might have made this a distinct Qualification, but for brevity sake, I couch
it under this head. I come to the last.

If you would be Accepted, Sixth and last Qualification Faith in reference.
Bring faith with you to this service: And that in a fourfold Reference, To
God. To The Ordinance. To Our selves. To Jesus Christ.


First, In reference unto God; For, 1. To God. Heb. 11.6.
He that will come to God (in any Ordinance) must believe that God is, and that
he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

There is nothing God takes better at his peoples hand, then when they come
with their hearts as full of good thoughts of God, as ever they can hold, such
as

Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, Isai. 25.9.
and he will save us; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in
his salvation.

He will save, we will be glad; i. e. God will undoubtedly give us occasion of
gladness, and triumph in his praises. Oh sweet and blessed confidence of
divine goodness! How well does this become the children of such a Father, who
has styled himself the Father of mercies.

Good thoughts of God, do mightily please, and even engage God to show mercy to
his people. Heb. 4.15.
Let us therefore come with boldness to the throne of grace; even in this
Ordinance also, That we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help us in this
time of our need.

Secondly, 2. To the Ordinance.
Let us bring faith in reference to the Duty; As we are to believe well of God,
so we are to believe well of the Duty, that it is an Ordinance wherein God will
be sanctified, and, (...) of them that seek him. It is not enough, that we seek
him in his Ordinance, but that we believe it to be his Ordinance, (...) faith,
Romans 14.12.
is sin; he speaks not of a faith, that does justify the person; but of a
faith, that does justify the performance; that is, a (...), that the work
whatsoever it is, is such as the word will bear me out in it, such as God
himself does approv^; To do doubtfully, is to do sinfully; an (...) God. 3. In
reference (...) Ives.


Thirdly, Bring (...) in reference to your own persons, beleev^ that God will
accept of them in this Ordinance; whatever your success^ shall be in regard of
the Kingdom, yet you shall find (...) in regard of your persons; Isa. 64.5.
so the Church.

Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness, those that
remember thee in thy ways.

When a people or person can say, as the Church in another place. Isa 26.8.


In the way of thy Judgments have we waited for thee, O Lord, the desire of
our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. God will not stay till
they come unto him, but he will (...) them half way; thou me^test him, etc.
like the father of the Prodigal, while they are yet half way, he will see, and
run, and m^et, and fall upon their neck; and while they weep at his feet, tears
of contrition; he will weep over their necks, the tears of compassion: Oh
stir up your selves, and engage your faith to believe, and expect a gracious
entertainment; if God ^e^ you coming in the integrity and uprightness of your
hearts, to enter into Covenant with God, to take him as your God, and to give
up your selves, to be his people, to take away all from sin, and to give all to
Jesus Christ; be will certainly take it well at your hands, and say unto you,
Come my people, and welcome, I (...) you shall in my people, 4 In reference to
Jesus Christ.
which that you may not miss of:

In the fourth place, Come believingly in reference to Jesus Christ; Be sure
you bring a Christ with you; Ephesians. 1.6
for he has made (...) in the beloved. Come without a Christ, and go without
acceptance.

The day of Atonement among the Jews, (...).
was called dies Cippu^^m the day of Expiation; and the word Cippurim, is
derived from an Hebrew Root, that signifies to Cover; and so the day of
Atonement, was as much as to say, The day of covering; the covering of
nakedness, as Revel. 3.18. Revel. 3.18. Psa. 32.1.
and the covering of sin, as Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose transgr^ssion
is forgiven, and whose sin is covered; In which very name of the day, the
ground or reason is held forth, why it was called a day of Atton^ment^; sc.
Because it was a day of conering; wherein Christ was typified, who is the
covering of the Saints; the l^ng white Robes of his Righteousness, covering
both their (...) and performances; so that the na^ednesse of neither, does
appear in the eyes of his Father; Number 23.21.
He has beheld no iniquity in (...); neither has seen perverseness in
Israel: Why? Not because there was no iniquity in Jacob, or perverseness in
Israel (for there was hardly any thing else;) but because their iniquity and
perversen^ss^ was hid from his eyes, being covered with the Mantle of his
Sons Righteousness, the Messiah which he had promise^, and they so much
looked for.

Let us therefore in this service, as in all, Romans 13.14.
Put on the Lord Jesus; That as Jacob in the Garments of his ^lder brother
Esau, so we in the G^rments of our elder brother Jesus, may find acceptance,
and obtain the blessing.

And thus much be spoken concerning the first Branch of this third Quaere, How
to acceptance. How to perpetuity?


I come now to the second branch of it, and that is,

How to perpetuity?

Or, How may we perform this service, Directions.
so that it may be an (...) Covenant that may never be forgotten?

To that end, take these few brief Directions, and I have done.

G^^ soul affliction for former Covenantv^olations.
First, Labor to come to this service with much soul-affliction, for former
violations of the Covenant, either in refusing, or p^^ph^^ing, or breaking
thereof: The foundations must be laid low, where we would build for many
Generations. In what deep sorrows had you need to lay the foundations of this
Covenant, which you would have stand to eternity, that it may be an everlasting
Covenant, etc.

This you have in the Text; They shall seek the Lord going and weeping; weeping
in the sense of their former rebellions and ^pestacies, whereby they forfeited
their faith, and brake their Covenant with the Lord their God; and it was no
ordinary fl^^ght business they made of it:

A voice was heard upon the high places, (...). 3.22.
weeping and supplication, etc.

They were not a few sil^nt tears: no, they lift up their ^oices and wept, as
it was said of Esau, etc. They cried so loud, that they were heard a great way
off. A voice was heard upon the Mountains; Zech 12.11, 22.
and it was as bitter as it was loud; A great mourning, as the mourning of
Hadedrimmon in the valley of Megidde, when all Judah, 2 Chronicles. 35.2^, ^^.
Jerusalem, Jeremiah the Prophet, and all the (...), bewailed the death of
their good King Josiah, with a grievous Lamentation, and made it an Ordinance
for ever, etc.

Oh that as we have their service in hand, so we had their hands and their
hearts, to manage it with Rivers of tears, for our former vileness; that we
could weep this day together, and afterward apart, (...). 12.^^.
as it is prophesied, Every family apart, and our (...); yea, and every foul
apart, that we have dealt so (...) with so good a God; so unfaithfully with so
faithful a God; That we could put our Mouth^s in the dust, and smite upon our
^^^gh, and be ashamed and confounded, for all the Wickedness we have committed
against God and his Covenant, in any, or all th^se ways.

Such a Posture God will see us in, before he will show us the way to Sion;
before he will reveal to us the Mod^ll and Plattor^^^ of Reformation; for so
was his charge to Ezekiel.

If they be asham^d of all that they have done, (...).
show them the forms of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof, and
write it in their sight, etc.

Surely, This blessed Prophecy has an eye upon our times, for this is one of
those days, as I told you before, wherein God will make good these gracious
words unto his people; and God has called together his Ezekiels, his
Ministers, to show the House. i. e. Verse. 1.
The form and pattern of the Evangelicall House or Church, unto the House of
England and Scotland; Show the House to the House of Israel, that they may be
ashamed; That is, show them the outside thereof, show them that there is such a
House, which they never yet beheld with their eyes, that they may be humbled
and ashamed of their former Idolatries, etc. And thus do our Exekiels tell us
there is a way of Gospel Government, of such beauty and excellency, as our eyes
never yet beheld, nor the eyes of our forefathers; To the end that we may be
ashamed of all our former Idolatries and Superstitions, our monstrous mixtures
of Popery and will worship in the Ordinances of Christ; and that we have not
sooner enquired after the mind of Christ, how he will be worshipped in his
House: But now, unless we be ashamed; i. e. Deeply and thoroughly humbled, for
all that we have done unworthy of Christ and his Worship, and the Covenant of
our God; we shall never see the inside, that is, the Laws and the Ordinances,
and the Forms of this House, (which are both various and curious (for so the
variety and repetition of the words imply.) The Prophets are not to reveal
these unto us, unless we be ashamed, God will either withdraw them from us, or
which is worse, withdraw himself from them; so that our eyes shall never behold
the Lord in the beauty of Holiness; we shall not be admitted to see the beauty
and glory of such a Reformation as our souls long for.

And as God will see us in this posture before he reveal to us the Model and
Platform of Reformation; so also till we be in such a posture of deep
Humiliation, for our former abominations. Shall we never be steadfast and
faithful in the Covenant of God: Till our hearts be thoroughly broken for
Covenantbreach, we will not pass much for breaking Covenant, upon every fresh
temptation.

Yea, till that time we be humbled, not for a day only, and so forth: But
unless we labor to maintain an habitual frame of goodly sorrow upon our
hearts; for our Covenant-violations, shall we ever be to purpose conscientious
of our Covenant. A sad remembrance of old sins, is a special means to prevent
new, when every solemn remembrance of former vileness, can fetch te^^s from
our eyes, and blood from our hearts, and fill our faces with an holy sh^^^, the
soul will be holily shie of the like a^ominations, and of all occasions and
tendences thereunto.

R^m moring mine affliction and my misery, ^am. 3.^9, 20.
the Wormwood, and the Gall.

My soul has the^ still in remembrance, and is humbled within me.

When old sins cost dear, new sins will not find an casie entertainment; when
old sins are new ^fflictions, when the remembrance of them is as Wormwood and
Gall, the soul will not easily be bewitched to drink a new draught of that
poisoned Cup any more.

Christian believe me, or thou may find it by experience too true, when
thou have forgot old sins, or can remember them without new affliction of
soul, thou art near a fall; Look to thy self, and cry to God, for preventing
grace. There will be great hopes we shall be faithful in our n^w Covenant,
when we come with a godly sense and sorrow for our abuse of old, and la^our to
maintain it upon our spirits.

But so much for the first direction; I come to the second.

Secondly, ^. Direction. See old scores crossed.
If you would have this Covenant to be a perpetual Covenant, Labor to see old
scores crossed; do not only mourn for thy Co^enant-unfaithfulnesse; but labor
to get thy pardon written and sealed to thee in the blood of Covenant. There i^
virtue enough in the blood of the Covenant to expiate the guilt of thy sins
against the Covenant.

I will ^rinkle cl^an water upon you, Ezekiel 36.^^.
and you shall be clean from all your filthynesse, and from all your Idols,
will (...) leanse you.

Their sins of Idolatry, were sins especially, against their Covenant; Idolatry
being the violation of the marriage knot, between God and a people; yet even
from them does God promise to cleanse them, upon their repentance and
conversion, The blood of the Covenant, compared to water for the cleaning
virtue thereof, should cleanse them for their Covenant de^^ments.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. 2 John ^.7.


Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, Jer. 3.1.
yet return again to me, says the Lord.

It is a mighty encouragement to renew our Covenants with God. That he is so
ready to pardon the Breach of ol^; and ^^e sense of this pardon is a mighty
engagement and strengthening, to keep our N^w-Covenants. Oh for God to say to a
poor soul, B^ of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee; Matthew. 9.2 Isai 44.22.
(...) 31.33.
And I have blotted out thy sins as a cloud, and thy transgressions as a thick
cloud; All thy unkindnesses, and unfaithfulnesses, thy treacherous dealings
against the Covenant, etc. shall be forgotten; they shall do thee no harm,
etc. This will mightily strengthen the hands, and fortify the heart, and even
make it impenetrable and impregna^le against all the solicitations, and
importuni^i^s of old temptations; See a notable instance of this, Hos. 14.4.

I will (...) their backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away from him.

I will be as the dew to Israel, etc. (...).


His branches shall spread, etc. (...).


They that dwell under his shadow shall return, etc. (...).


What follows these gracious promises? Why,

Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols?

He that before was so unseparably joined to Idols, Ch^p. 4.17 (...) 31.18
that he could not be divorced from them, Ephraim is joined to Idol. All the
blows that God gave him, (though God should have beaten him to pieces (as he
himself afterward confessed) could not beat him off from his Idols; in so much,
that God at length gave him over, as an hopeless child.

Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone.

Yet no sooner does this Ephraim hear of a pardon, and of the love of God to
him; but the bonds between him, and his Idols are dissolved, and away he
thrusts them with indignation; Ephraim shall say, what have I do do with Idols?
Or as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it.

Y^e shall d^file the covering of the graven Images of silver, Isai 30.22
and (...) of thy m^lten Images of Gold; Thou sh^lt cast them away as a
m^^strous cloth; thou shall say unto it get thee hence.

And thus it is with a people or a person, R^m. ^5. Isa, 51.8.
when once God (...) abroad his Law in their hearts, and makes them hear joy
(...) gladness, in speaking, or sealing, a pardon upon their souls; they that
before were joined to their Idols, drunkenness, uncleanness, covetuousnesse,
pride, ways of false worship, old Superstitious Customs, and Ceremonies, and
the like; So that there was no parting of them; or those who had long been
grapling and conflicting with their strong corruptions, and old temptations,
and in those conflicts had received many a foil, and got many a fall to the
wounding of their consciences, and cutting deep gash^s upon their souls; now
they stand up with a kind of omnipotence upon them, no temptation is able to
stand before them; They say to their Idols, whether sinful company, or sinful
customs, Get ye hence, and what have I to do any more with Id^ls? What have I
to do, with such, and such, base company? What have I to do with such base
filfthy Lusts? I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Christ is mine, and I
am his.

The reason of it is, Luke 4.4^ Can. 8.6. Revel. 12.11. Act. 20.24 1 Timothy
1.^.13.
Because, pardon begets love; she loved much, because much was forgiven her;
and love begets strength: For l^ve is as strong as death; yea, stronger then
sin or death; they loved not their lives to the death; And I count not my life
dear, says Paul. When once the man had tasted of the free grace of God in the
pardon of his sins, who before was a blasphemer and a persecutor, and
injurious; he could find in his heart, not only to lay down a lust, but to
lay down his life to for Jesus Christ. For whose sake (says he) I have
suffered the loss of all things; Phil. 5.8.
And I count not my life dear, so that I might finish my course with joy, and
the Ministry which I have received from the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of the grace of God.

My beloved Christians, If you would be faithful in the Covenant of God, into
which you are now entering, sue out your pardon for what is past; yea, entreat
the Lord, not only to give a pardon, but to speak a pardon, and seal a pardon
upon your hearts; and never give the Lord rest, till the Lord have given rest
to your fouls.

The joy of the Lord is your strength. (...). 8.3 ^^^ection. Self distruct.


Thirdly, If you would make an unchangeable Covenant, with an unchangeable God,
come furnished with, and maintain upon your hearts, an ^bundant measure of
self-distrust; Labor to be thoroughly convinct of your own nothingnesse and
disability. 1 Samuel 2.19. Je^. 2.19. Jere. 10.23.
By his own strength shall no man prevail. Surely, Thine own treachery may
inform thee, and thine own backslidings may convince thee, to confess with
Jeremiah. Oh Lord I know (I know it by sad experience) the way of man is not in
himself: It is not in man that walks to direct his steps.

Staupitius confessed to Luther, Ego pl^^^ quam millies devovi.
That he thought in his very conscience he had above a thousand times renewed
his Covenant with God, and as many times broken it: A sad confession, and yet,
how many among us may take up the like ^amentation!

Be convinct of it, I beseech you, and maintain the sense of this conviction
upon your spirits. Say often within your self, I am nothing, worse then nothing,
This treacherous heart of mine will betray me into the breach of my Covenant,
if the Lord have me to my self, I shall one day fall by the hand of my
corruptions.

He that walks tremblingly, walks safely.

In the next place, Be often renewing your Resolutions. 4. Direction. Often ren^w
resolutions. Acts 13.23.


It was the Exhortation of that good man to the New-Converts at Antioch (where
they were first called Christians,) That they should cleave unto the Lord with
full purpose of heart. This Covenant I have showed you, is the Ordinance
whereby you cleave unto the Lord, the joining Ordinance. Oh do it with full
purpose of heart, and be often putting on fresh and frequent resolutions, not
to suffer every base temptation of Satan, every deceitful, or malignant
solicitation of the world; every foolish, and carnal suggestion of the flesh,
to bribe and seduce you from that fidelity which you swear this day to Jesus
Christ and the Kingdoms.

A well grounded resolution is half the work, and the better half to; for he
that has well resolved, has conquered his will; and he that has conquered
his will, has overcome the greatest difficulty; No such difficulty in
spiritual things, as to prevail with ones own heart. With these cords
therefore, of well bottomed resolutions, be often binding your selves to your
Covenant, as once Ulysses did himself to his Mast, that you may not be bewitched
by any Syrenian song of the flesh, world, or the (...), to violate your holy
Covenant, and drown your selves in a set of perdition.

And to that end it would not be altogether useless to fix you. Covenant in
some place of your Houses, or Bedchamber, where it be may oftenest in your
eye, to admonish you of your Religious and Solemn engagement, under which you
have brought your own souls.

The Jews had their Phylacteries, N^m. 15.18.
or borders upon their Gar^^^s which they did wear also upon their heads, and
upon their (...); which though they abused afterward, not only to pride,
making them broader then their first size or pattern, in ostentation and
boasting of their holiness, which our Savior condemns in the Scribes and
Pharisees; Matthew. 23.5.
and to Superstition, for they used them as Superstitious helps in prayer,
which they colored under (...) derivation of the word in the Hebrew Denv^ng
(...) which signifies to pray; whereas it is derived truly from (...) which
signifies to aff^^ ^r ^w^. Isa 49:16
; yet God indulged them this Ceremony, as ^n h^lp for their memories, to put
them in remembrance to keep the Law of the Lord.

And God himself seems to use this Art of Memory, as it were, when comforting
his people, he tells them, Behold, I have eng^aven thee upon the Palms of my
hands, and thy Walls are continually before me.

I must confess the nature of man is very prone to abuse and pervert such
natural helps to Idolatry and Superstition. This instance of the Jews,
wretchedly improving their Phylacteries to Superstitious purposes, their
Id^lizing of the Brazen S^rpent; and thereby of a Cure, turning of it into a
Plague, a snare; with the like, are sufficient testimonies.

And we see how the Papists have abused and adulterated the lawful use of
natural Mediums, to the unlawful use of artificial Mediums of their own
inventions; Images and (...), first to help their Memories and stir up their
devotions in their Prayers, and then to pray unto them, as Mediums of divine
Worship.

The more Cautions had Christians need be in the use of those Mediums which
either God has ordained by special command for the help of our memories, and
stirring up of our (...) as the (...) El^ments in the Sacraments; or such
natural advantages, which Moral equity allows us for the help of our
understandings, and memories in spiritual concernments; such is this, we are
now speaking of; it being the same, with the use of Books and Tables, etc.

Tertullian tells us of a Superstitious custom among the ancient Christians,
That they were wont to set up Images over their doors and Chimneys, to keep
Witches when they came into their Houses from bewitching their children; and so
by a little ^inde of Witchcraft, prevented Witchcraft. But surely to set up
this Covenant where we might often see and read, what engagements we have laid
upon our souls, (and I could heartily wish Christians Would do it at lest once
a week) it will be an innocent and warrantable Spell, to render the Witchery of
the Flesh, World, and Devil, fruitless and in effectual upon our spirits,
while the soul may say with David, Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render
praise unto thee. Ps. 56.12.


But fifthly, Consider often and seriously, Fifth means, Prayer. 1 Pet 1.5
who it is that must uphold your Resolutions; even he that upholds Heaven and
Earth: no less power will do it, For you are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto Salvation.

It is God that first gives the resolution, and then must uphold and bring it
into act; It is God that works in you, Phi. 2.13.
both to will, and to do of his good pleasure; and therefore labor I beseech
you to do these two things.

First, Put all your resolutions into the hands of prayer: 1. Pra^.
David was a man of an excellent spirit, full of holy Resolves.

I will walk in mine integrity. Psalm 26.11. Psalm 119.8. ^sal ^4. Psalm. 139.21,
22.
And

I will keep thy Testimonies. And again,

I have sworn, and will perform it, That I will keep thy righteous judgments.
And yet again,

Do I not hate them Lord that hate thee, etc. I hate them with a perfect
h^tre^, etc.

A thousand such sweet resolutions does that precious serv^nt of God breath out
all along the Psalms; and yet so jealous (...) man is of himself, That he never
trusts himself with (...) resolutions; and therefore shall you find him
always cl^pp^ng a Petition upon a resolution, as in the quoted places.

I will walk in mine integrity, Redeem me, and be merciful unto me.

I will keep thy Testimoni^s, Oh forsake me not utterly. q. d. Thou (...) me
fall fearfully, suffer me not to fall finally.

And so when he had said, I have sworn and will not repent, etc. Ver. 107.
He presently adds (within a word or two) Quicken me, O Lord, (...) to thy word;
And again, Accept I beseech thee, of the (...) rings of my mouth, Ver. 108.
O Lord, and teach me thy judgments. God must teach him (as to mak^; so) to
make good the (...) will offerings of his mouth; i. e. His promises and ^ow^.
And so when he had made that appeal to God, Do I not hate them that hate th^e,
Lord, etc. Vt sup: He presently betakes himself to his Prayers, Search me, O
God, and know my heart, try m^, Psalm 129 23, 24
and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in (...), and lead me
in the way everlasting. Mark I pray, Search me, try me, know my heart, know my
thoughts, see whether th^re be any wicked way, lead m^, etc. He will neither
trust himself, for what he^ts, nor for what he shall be; Try me, he dares not
trust his own trial; Lead me, he dares not trust his own Resolutions: Such a
sweet holy jealousy of himself (...) he creath forth with all his heavenly
purposes and res^lations.

Oh, (...) you that would make an Everlasting Covenant with (...) holy David,
upon every holy Resolution, clap an (...) say, I will reform my life; Oh redeem
me, and (...) I will set up Christ in my heart, I will labor (...) him in my
life; Oh forsake m^ not utterly, Lord (...), and am utterly purposed in all
(...), to amend my life, and to go before (...), etc. O Lord teach me (...), O
Lord, according to thy Word.

(...) are upon me, That I will according to my place and (...) to preserve
Reformation in Scotland, to procure (...) England; That I will in like manner
endeavor (...) Popery and Prelacy, etc. To preserve the Rights (...)
Parliaments, etc. Discover Incendiaries; En(...) between the two Kingdoms;
(...) that enter into this League and Covenant, That I will never make
defection to the contrary part, or to give my self to a detestable indifferency
or neutrality, etc. And this Covenant I have made in the presence of Almighty
God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as
I shall answer at that great day, etc. But now add with David, Search me, O
God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any
way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

In a word, put your Covenant into frequently renewed Resolutions: Resolutions
into Prayer, and Prayer, and all into the hands of God: It is God that must
gird thee with strength, to perform all thy vows. This the close of this
blessed Covenant, into which we enter this day, does teach us.

Humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his spirit; for this end, and
to bless our desires and proceedings, etc. And the Covenant in the Text, was
surely inlaid with Prayer, while they engage themselves to seek the Lord; sc.
Not only to show them the way to Sion, but to give them strength to walk in
that way.

Let it be your wisdom and piety (my Brethren) to imitate both; Oh pray, and
be much in Prayer, and be often in prayer, pray daily over the Covenant; as you
this day lift up your hands to swear to the most high God in this Covenant, so
lift up your hands, every day to pray to that God for grace to keep this
Covenant. Let sense of self-insufficiency, keep open the sluice of Prayer, That
that may let fresh streams of strength, every day into your souls, to make good
your vows; when you be careless to pray over the Covenant, you will be
careless to keep the Covenant; when you cease to pray, you will cease to pay;
If you will be watchful in praying over your vows, Prayer will make you
watchful in paying your vows; If you will be faithful in crying to God, God
will be faithful in hearing and h^lping, Psalm. 50.15. Pray therefore, pray
over every good purpose and resolution of heart toward the Covenant of God,
which conscience shall suggest, or the Spirit of God shall breath into your
bosoms, at this present, or any time hereafter; as David once prayed over that
good fram of Spirit, which he observed in his people; what time they off red so
willingly and liberally to the preparing for the House of God; 2 Chr 29 ^^.
Oh, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (...) Fathers, keep this for ever, in the
imagination of the thoughts of my heart, and prepare my heart unto thee.

To every command God is pleased to add a promise; so that what is a command
in one place, is a promise in another, Ex. gr. Circum^^^ (...) sores hin^ your
heart, Deuteronomy. 10.1^. (...)
it is a command in Deuteronomy. 1^.16. But in the 30. Chapter, verse. 6. There it is a
promise, (...) God will (...) thine heart, and the heart of thy (...). Lord.
Again, mak^ you a new heart, so says the word of command; A (...) will I give
you; so speaks the Word of Promise, Chapter 36.26. Once more, Little children abide
in him, th^^ is the command, 1 John 2.28. Which in the immediate Verse (...),
is a (...) pr^mi^^. You shall abide in him. Diverse more such Instances I could
give you; and why thus? Surely, the (...) teaches us our Duty, the Promise,
our weakness, and (...) to perform that luty. The Command finds us work; the
(...) finds us stre^^th: The command is to keep us from (...); the promi^^ to
keep us from being discouraged, etc. W^ll, (...) God, and as he couples a
command and a (...), so let us couple a Resolution and a Petition. As (...)
seconds and backs his command with his promise, so let us second, and back our
promises with our Prayers; the on^ in sense of our duty, the other in sense of
our weakness; by the one, to bring our hearts up to God; by the other, to
bring God down to our hearts: Resolve and Petition, Promise and Pr^^y; (...)
And the Lord prepare your heart to pray, and cause his ^^r to (...).

Secondly, Since God only must uphold your desires, W^^^ continually, as in
his presence; S^^ilitie is only to be found in the prefence of God; So fair
we live an unchangeable life, as we walk and live in the presence of an
unchangeable God. The ^aints (...) Heaven know no vicissitudes, or changes in
their holy fran^e and temper of spirit, because they are perfected in the (...)
holding of his face, With whom is no variableness, nor (...). And so far, as
the Saints on Earth can (...) in their presence; so far the presence of God
will keep them; Isa. (...)
(...) the Lord always before me; and because he is ^t my right hand;
therefore I shall not be moved, sung David of ^^mself, liberally, and in the
person of Christ, typically: The pri^^ledge was made good to both, so far as
either made good the Duty. David according to his degree, and proportion of
grace, (...) God before him, placed him on his right hand; and so long as he
could keep Gods presence; the presence of God kept him; it kept him from sin, I
have kept my self from my iniquity, Ps. 18 13
how so? Why, I was upright before him, in the former part of the same Verse.
So long as he walked before God, in Gods presence; so long he walked upright, and
kept himself from his iniquity; or rather Gods presence kept him: And as it
kept him from sin, so it kept him from fear also; Psa 23.4.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear; Mark
what he says, Though he walk not step; and walk through, not step cross; and
through, not a dark Entry, or a Churchyard in the night time, but a Valley, a
large, long, vast, place; How many miles long I know not; And this not a Valley
of darkness only, but of death, where he should see nothing but visions of
death, and not bare death, but the shadow of death; the shadow is the dark part
of the thing; so that the shadow of death, is the dark^st side of death: Death
in its most hideous and horrid representations; and yet behold, when he comes
out at the farther end, and a man would have thought to have found him all in a
cold sweat, his hair standing upright, his eyes set in his head, and the man
beside himself, etc. Behold I say, he does not so much as change color, his
hand shakes not, his heart fails not, as he went in, he comes out; and though
he should go back again the same way, he tells you, I will not fear. How comes
this to pass, how comes the man to be so undaunted? Why, he will tell you in
the very same Verse, speaking to God, For thou art with me. Gods presence kept
him from fear, in the midst of death and horror. Thus it was I say with David,
while he could keep God in his presence, he was unmovable, impregnable; You
might as soon have stirred a Rock, as stirred him, I shall not be moved; Indeed
so long as he was upon the Rock, he was as unmovable, as the Rock it self; But
alas, sometime he lost the sight of his God, and then he was like other men;
Thou did hide thy face from me, Psa. 30 7.
and I was troubled. When God hid his face from him, or he hid his eyes from
God; 1 Samuel 29 1.
then how easi^ly is he moved? Fear breaks in, I shall one day fall by the hand
of Saul. Sin breaks in, yea, one sin upon the heels of another; the adulterous
act upon the adulterous look, and murder upon adultery, as you know in that sad
business of Vriah the Hittit; once off from his Rock, and he is as weak as
dust, not able to stand before the least temptation of sin or fear; Psa. 61 2.
and therefore, as soon as he comes to himself again, he cries, Oh lead me to
the Rock, that is higher then I; To my Rock Lord, to my Rock.

But now, The Lord Jesus, the Antitype of David here in this Psalm, because he
made good this ( Duty shall I call it?) For in him dwelt the fullness of the
Godhead, G^l 2.9.
bodily; to him therefore was this privilege made good perfectly in the
highest degree; for though he had temptations that never man had, and was to do
that which never man did; and to suffer that which never man suffered; the
contradiction of sinners; the rage of Hell; and the wrath of God: Yet, Because
he set the Lord always at his right hand; yea, indeed was always at the right
hand of God; therefore he was not moved, but overcame even by suffering.

Beloved you see where stabilitie in Covenant is to be had; even in the
presence of God, labor I beseech you, to walk in his presence, and to set him
always at your right hand; Behold, it shall keep you, so that you shall not be
moved, or if you be moved, you shall not be removed; if you stumble, you shall
not fall; or if you fall, you shall not fall away; you shall rise again.

There is a double advantage in it.

First, It will keep your hearts in awe; He that sets God in his presence,
dares not sin in his presence: God sees, will make the heart say. How shall I
do this great evil, and sin against God?

Secondly, Ps 16.12.
There is Joy in it; In thy presence is fullness of joy; it is true in its
proportion of grace, as well as of glory; and joy will strengthen and stablish,
as I showed you before, The joy of the Lord is your strength. Psalm 91. ^.10.
As long as the child is in its fathers eye, and the father in its eye, it is
secure. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the m^st
high, thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, etc. It will hold as
well in the evils of sin, as in the evils of punishment: Well, the Lord make
you know these precious truths in an experimental manner.

I have h^ld you too long; but the business requires it. Remember I beseech
you, It is God that must uphold your desires and resolutions; And therefore,

1. Be much in Prayer, and

2. Set your selves in the presence of God, He lives unchangea^^le, that lives
in the unchangeable God.

In the sixth and last place, Sixth and last direction; Look up to Christ.
If thou would make an everlasting Covenant with God that shall never be
forgotten, Look up to Jesus Christ, go to Jesus Christ, he must holy, and he
must strengthen, and he must keep thee, or else thou will never be able to keep
thy Covenant; hear him else

Without me ye can do nothing. Joh. 15 5


And as Christ speaks thus on the negative; so you may hear the Apostle
speaking by blessed experience on the affirmative; I can do all things through
Jesus Christ, which strengthens me: Phil. 4 12
Observe I pray,

Without me ye can do nothing.

Through Christ I can do all things.

Nothing, All things; There is a good deal of difference between two men; take
one without Christ, and be his parts never so excellent, his resolutions never
so strong, his engagements never so sacred, He can do nothing, unless it be to
break his Covenants and Vows, as Sampson brake his Cords like threads scorcht
with the fire; and take the other with a Christ standing by him, and be he in
himself never so weak and mean, unlearned and unguifted, lo, as if he were
clothed with omnip^^eatie, He can do all things; he can subdue such
corruptions, conquer such temptations, perform such Duties, and in such a
manner, do such things, suffer such things (and in all these keep his Covenant
with God) as to other men, and to himself before, were so many impossibilities:
He could not before; now he can. Nothing before, All things now. All things fit
for an unglorified Saint to do; All things God expects from him; All things in
a Gospel sense; All things comparatively to other men, and to himself, when he
was another man: See I beseech you, how without a Christ, and through a Christ,
makes one man differ from an^^^er; yea, and from himself, as much as can and
cannot; All things and nothing; Impetencie and omnipotency, Without me you can
do nothing. Through Christ I can do all things.

If therefore you would make a Covenant with Eternity to (...), Study Christ
more then ever, Labor to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And
therein these two things.

1. Interest in Christ. 2. Influence from Christ.
First, 1 Go to (...) ^^st. Joh. 15.4.
Labor to get interest in Christ. Interest is the ground of Influence; Union
the Fountain or Spring of Communion; so Christ. As the branch cannot bear fruit
of it self, except it abide in the Vice, no more can y^^, except ye abide in
me. There you have the truth, and the (...) of it; No fruit from Christ,
without being and abiding in Christ; There is truth: Illustrated and (...) by
the Vine and the B^anel; There the simile, which is prosecuted and enlarged by
our Savior in the 5, 6, 7 Verses.

And as all Communi^ (...) from Union, so look what the Union is, such is the
Communion; Christ was filled with the fullness of God, (...) 16. (...) 17.23.
^ol 2 9.
because united to God; The Saints receive of the fullness of Christ, because
united to Christ. I in them, and thou (...), only here is the difference.
Christ's Union with his Father was P^^^^nall, Infinite, and Substantial; And
therefore the (...) were answerable, Joh. 3 34.
For God gave not the spirit by (...) unto him, etc. But the Saints Union with
Christ being of an in^^i^ur nature; their Communications also are
proportionable; yet such as serve poor Creatures to all blessed (...) purposes.

And therefore with Paul; (...) 9.
Labor to be found In Christ, That so, on may (...) the power of his
Resurrection, and (...) his Sufferings; All the Power and Virtue that is in
Jesus Christ, it is only for them that are in him, as the Branch in the R^^^,
as the Members in the B^dy.

Christ is c^l^d the (...) God, (...) God.
Isal. 49.8. I will (...) Covenant of the People. i. e. As Calvin well expounds
it, (...), the surety or undertaker of the Covenant, of that second new
Covenant, between God and his People, not the Jews only, but the Gentiles
also: A surety on both sides, The surety of Gods Covenant to them, 2 Cor.
1.20.
for all the promises of God are in him, yea, and in him Amen, i. e. He sees
them all made good to the heirs of promise; and Christ again is the surety of
their Covenant unto God; for he undertakes to make good all their Covenant, and
Vows, and Promises unto God. Joh. 17.12. Gal. 2.30.


Those that thou gave me, I have kept, says Christ.

And I live (says Paul) yet not I but Christ lives in me.

So that it is Christ who makes the Covenant good on both sides, as Gods to his
people, so his peoples to God; And so it follows in that place of Isaiah, I
have given thee for a Covenant to the people, to establish the earth;
Establishment must come from Christ, the undertaker; the surety of the
Covenant; as he paid the Debt for the time past, so he must see the Articles of
the Covenant kept for the time to come. For want of such an undertaker or
surety, the first Covenant miscarried; It was between God and the Creature
without a Mediator; and so the Creature changing, the Covenant was dissolved;
but the second, Psalm. 19.19.
God meant should not miscarry, and therefore puts it into sure hands; I have
laid help upon one that is mighty, speaking of Christ; And I will give thee for
a Covenant to the People: God has furnished Christ wherewith all, to be a
surety; to make good his Covenant to his People, and their Covenant to him.

But now he has this stock of All-sufficiencie for none but these that are his
Members, he actually undertakes for none but those that are actually in him;
These that thou have given me, I have kept. He keeps none but them whom the
father has given him; given him so, as to be in them, and they in him.

I in them, so John 17.23. and they in me, so Chap. 15.5.

Well, if thou would be unchangeable in thy Covenant, get interest in Christ
who is the Covenant; The unchangeable Covenant; The Amen, the faithful and
true witness; Revel. 3.14. H^b. 13 8 Phil. 3 9.
Yesterday and to day, and the same for ever; Get interest, Count all things
loss and dung, that thou may win Christ, and be found in Christ.

Yea, do not only labor to get interest, but prove thy interest; take not up
a matter of so infinite concernment upon trust; all that thou do Covenant to
God, and that God does Covenant to thee, depends upon it; and therefore, Work
it out with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.13 2 Pet. 1.^0.
and give all diligence to make it sure unto thy soul: Study evidences, and be
content with none but such as will bear weight in the balance of the
Sanctuary; such as the Word will secure; such, as to which the Word will bear
witness, that they are inconsistent with any Christlesse man, or woman
whatsoever; And pray with unweariable suppliceations that God will not only
give thee interest, but clear thy interest, and seal up interest upon thy soul
and thee, to the day of Redemption.

And then secondly, 2 Go to Christ for influence.
Study influence, when once in Christ, then have thou right and liberty to
draw virtue from Christ: For behold, All the fullness that dwells in Christ is
thin; all that life and strength and grace, and redemption, that is held forth
in the promise, it is all laid up in Christ, as in a Magazine; and by virtue of
thy interest in, and union with the Lord Jesus, it is all become thin^. Hence
you hear the believing soul making her boast of Christ as (before) for
righteousness, Isa. 45.24
so also for strength. In the Lord I have righteousness and strength, as
righteousness for acceptance, so strength also for performance of such duties,
as God in his Covenant does require and expect at the believers hands: I have
no strength of mine own, but in Christ I have enough; In the Lord I have
righteousness and strength. Christ is the Lord Keeper, or Lord high Steward,
or Lord-Treasurer; to receive in and lay out, Psalm. 68.18. ^e received, ^phe 48
beg^e gifts, etc.
for and to all that are in Covenant with the Father.

And this is one main Branch of Gods Covenant with the Redeemer, that he give
out to the Heirs of promise, wherewithal to enable them to keep their Covenant
with God; so that they never depart from him.

As for me, Isa. 59.25.
this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds seed, says
the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

They be the words of God the Father to the Redeemer, concerning all his
Spiritual Seed; The Redeemer shall come to Sion, Verse 24. And that spirit, and
these words of life and grace, which were upon the Redeemer must be propagated
to all his believing Seed; by virtue whereof, their Covenant with God, shall in
its proportion be like Gods Covenant with them (for indeed the one is but the
counterpart of the other) unchangeable, everlasting.

I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, Jer. 32 40
that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in
their hearts, and they shall not depart away from me.

Now therefore my Brethren, since there is enough in Christ, study how to draw
it out: Indeed it will require a great deal of holy skill to do it; It requires
wisdom to draw out the excellencies of a man: Counsel in the heart of a man
is deep, Prove. 20.3.
but a man of understanding will draw it out: It is a fine art to be able to
pierce a man, that is like a Vessel full of Wine, and set him a running; but
to draw out influence and virtue from the Lord Jesus is one of the most secret
hidden Mysteries in the life of a Christian; indeed we may complain, John 4.
The Well is deep and we have nothing to draw withal; But labor to get your
Bucket of faith, that you may be able to draw water out of this Well of
Salvation; Isa. 12.
Labor by vital acts of a powerful faith; set on work in Mediation and
Prayer, to draw virtue and influence from Jesus Christ; the Mouth of Prayer,
and the breathings of Faith from an heart soakt and steept in holy Meditations,
applied to Jesus Christ, will certainly (though perhaps insensibly) draw virtue
from him. Behold, Faith drew virtue from Christ by a touch of his Garments;
shall it not much more draw out that rich and precious influence, by applying
of him in the promises, and in his Offices unto our souls?

Consider oh Christian who ever thou art, even thou that art in Christ,
consider, God has not trusted thee with grace enough before hand, for one
month, no, not for a week, a day; Nay, thou have not grace enough before hand
for the performance of the next duty, or the conquering of the next temptation;
nor for the expediting thy self out of the next difficulty; And why so? But
that thou may learn to live by continual dependence upon Jesus Christ, as
Paul did, Gal. 2.20
The life that I now live in the flesh, I live it by the faith of the Son of
God. Paul lived by fresh influence drawn from Christ by faith, every day and
hour: study that life, it is very Mysterious, but exceeding precious. Had we
our stock before hand, we should quickly spend all, and prove bankrupts: 1 Cor.
1.36.
God has laid up all our treasure of Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption in Jesus Christ, and will have us live from hand to mouth, that
so we might be safe, and Gods free grace be exalted: Romans 12.16.
It is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end your promise might be
sure to all the seed.

Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of this heavenly calling, look up to Jesus
Christ, who is the Covenant of his Father, and your Covenant; lo he calls you.

Look unto me, Isai. 48.22
and be ye saved all the ends of the earth. Surely, they are worthy to perish,
who will not bestow a look upon Salvation: Oh look humbly, and look
beleevingly, and look continually; look for Interest, look for Influence, look
for Righteousness, look for Strength; and let Jesus Christ be All in All to
thy soul: thou will never be any thing, nor do any thing in Christianity, till
thou come to live in and upon Jesus Christ, and him only: Humbly entreat the
Lord, and give him no rest; That he will make a Covenant with thee in Christ,
which shall keep thee, and then thou will be able to keep thy Covenant; Look up
to Christ for Covenant-grace, to keep Covenant-engagement, and so shall thou do
this service (in a Gospel-sence) to Acceptance, to Perpetuity.

I have now done with these three Quaeres; What? Why? How?

How to Acceptance. Perpetuity.


I know much more might be added, but the work to which we are to address our
selves, will take up much time; the Lord set home what has been spoken.

Only give me leave to tell you thus much in a word, for the close of all; As
this Covenant prospers with us, so we are like to prosper under it; The welfare
of the Kingdom and of thy soul, is bound up now in this Covenant; For I
remember what God speaks of the Kingdom of Israel, brought into Covenant now
with the King of Babylon, to serve him, and to be his Vassals; (...). 17.13,
14. Verse. 16.17.
That by keeping Covenant it should stand; and the breaking of that Covenant
was the breaking of Zedekiah and his whole Family, and Kingdom. Now was
Covenant-breach or fid^litie the foundation of stabiliti^ or ruin to that
Kingdom, which was struck, but with a dying man; how much more is the rise or
fall of this Kingdom; yea, of these two Kingdom, bound up in the observation or
forfeiture of this Covenant, which we make this day with the living God? You
that wish well to the Kingdoms, that would not see the downfall and ruin
thereof; be from henceforth more conscientious of your Covenant, then ever
heretofore; for surely, upon the success of this Covenant, we stand or fall;
as we deal with the Covenant, God will deal with us; if we steight the
Covenant, God will slight us; if we have mean thoughts of the Covenant, God
will have mean thoughts of us; if we forget the Covenant, God will forget us;
if we break the Covenant, we may look that God shall break these two Nations,
and break us all to pieces; if we reject it, God will reject us; if we regard
our Covenant, God will regard his Covenant, and regard us too; if we remember
the Covenant, God will remember his, and remember us; if we keep the Covenant,
the Covenant will keep us, and our posterity for ever.

Oh that this Consideration might be a Motive to whet on that Exhortation of
the Apostle; Let him that stole, Ephesians. 4.28.
steal no more; And so let him that was drunk be drunk no more; he that was
uncl^an, let him be unclean no more; they that were worldly, proud, secure,
careless of receiving Christ in their hearts, and of walking worthy of him in
their lives, be so no more; he that has been Malignant or Neutrall, let him be
so no more: For I protest against every man, that after the striking of this so
solemn and sacred a Covenant with the most high God, shall dare knowingly and
willingly to persist in any one of these mentioned abominations, or any other;
he is an enemy to Jesus Christ; a Traitor to the Kingdoms; a State-murderer,
and a destroyer of himself, and his posterity; and at his hands (if they
miscarry) God will require the blood of all these: But there are a people of
whom, and to whom, I hear God speaking gracious words. Surely they are my
people, children that will not lie, Isa. 63.8.
My people, mine by Covenant; I have brought them into the bo^d of the
Covenant; I have made my Covenant with them, and they have made their Covenant
with me: and they be children that will not lie; I know they will deal no more
as a lying and treacherous generation with me, but will be a faithful people
in their Covenant; and I will be a faithful God unto them; I will be their
Savior, th y will serve me, and I will save them.

Now the Lord make us such a people unto him, children that will not li^; and
he be such a God to us; He be our Savior, a Savior to both Kingdoms, and
every soul that makes this Covenan^; to save us from sin, and to save us from
d^struction; to save us from our exemies without, and to save us from our
enemies within; to save us from the devil, and to save us from the world, and
to save us from our selves; to save us from the lusts of men, and to save us
from our own lusts; to save us, and to save our posterity; to save us from
Rome, and save us from Hell; to save us from wrath present, and from wrath to
come; to save us here, and to save us hereafter; to save us to himself in
grace, and to save us with himself, in glory, to all Eternity, for Christ's
sake, Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

