THE PROLOGUE TO HIS MAJESTY At the first PLAY presented at the Cockpit in
WHITEHALL, Being part of that Noble Entertainment which Their MAJESTY'S
received November. 19. from his Grace the Duke of ALBEMARLE.
GReatest of Monarchs, welcome to this place
Which Majesty so often was wont to grace
Before our Exile, to divert the Court,
And balance weighty Cares with harmless sport
This truth we can to our advantage say,
They that would have no KING, would have no Play:
The Laurel and the Crown together went,
Had the same Foes, and the same Banishment:
The Ghosts of their great Ancestors they feared,
Who by the art of conjuring Poets reared,
Our HARRIES and our EDWARDS long since dead
Still on the Stage a march of Glory tread:
Those Monuments of Fame (they thought) would stain
And teach the People to despise their Reign:
Nor durst they look into the Muses Well,
Least the clear Spring their ugliness should tell;
Affrighted with the shadow of their Rage,
They broke the Mirror of the times, the Stage;
The Stage against them still maintained the War,
When they debauched the Pulpit and the Bar.
Though to be Hypocrites, be our Praise alone,
It Is our peculiar boast that we were none.'
What er'e they taught, we practiced what was true,
And something we had learned of honor too,
When by Your Danger, and our Duty pressed,
We acted in the Field, and not in Test;
Then for the Cause our Tyring-house they sacked,
And silenc't us that they alone might act;
And (to our shame) most dext'rously they do it,
Out-act the Players, and out-ly the Poet;
But all the other Arts appeared so scarce,
Ours were the Moral Lectures, theirs the Farse:
This spacious Land their Theater became,
And they Grave Counselors, and Lords in Name;
Which these Mechanics Personate so ill
That even the Oppressed with contempt they fill,
But when the Lions dreadful skin they took,
They roared so loud that the whole Forest shook;
The noise kept all the Neighborhood in awe,
Who thought 't was the true Lion by his Pawe.
If feigned Virtue could such Wonders do,
What may we not expect from this that is true!
But this Great Theme must serve another Age,
To fill our Story, and adorn our Stage.
LONDON, Printed for G. Bedell and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple Gate in
Fleet Street. 1660.


