A LETTER WRITTEN BY A IESVITE TO THE QVEENS MAJESTY, MARCH, XXII.

WHEREIN He uses diverse subtle insinuations to Her Majesty, for the Kings
Majesty's repealing and recalling of the Laws and Proclamations against the
Jesuits, Priests, and Recusants.

With a brief consideration of the Reasons, intimated in the Letter, and a just
Confutation of them.

LONDON. Printed for John Watkins.

THE JESUITS LETTER TO the Queens Majesty.
Most mighty Princess;
IT has alwais bin accounted honorable, for great personages to have pity
and compassion of afflicted and distressed souls; but especially if they were
guiltless and innocent, and suffered for good, yea for Gods cause.

A most fit occasion of exercising this heroical act is now offered to your
Majesty, by the manifold molestations inflisted upon English Catholics, the
truth of whose religion and innocence is briefly convinced in our many
Treatises; for which cause I have thought it no presumption, to commend them to
your Royal Protection.

The History of Hester is not unknown to your Majesty, and we doubt her
example deserves no less imitation then admiration, by her mediation with
King Ahasuerus, the Nation of the Jews was delivered from an universal
overthrow; and why should not Queen Marie prevail as far with King Charles, for
ancient and Christian Catholics.

Can any doubt, but that he would extend the Golden Rod of Clemency toward the
dearest Spouse; yea rather divide his Kingdom then deny her request: his
Majesty is already informed of former services performed by Catholics both to
his Grandmother of happy memory, and himself, for which they crave no other
recompense: or reward, but the recalling and repelling of such Proclamations
and Laws, as their Adversaries have procured against them.

This did Queen, Ester obtain of King Ahasuerus for the Jews. Thus we
Catholics beseech your Majesty to motion for us; but yet notwithstanding that
earnestness, which good Mordicheus used, who spared not to tell the Queen,
making some difficulty? That though she held her peace, the Jews should be
delivered by some other means, but that she and her Fathers house should
perish; only we will urge that which immediately follows, who knows
whether this was the cause of your Majesty's coming to the Crown, that you
might be prepared against such a time.

This also we add, which makes the matter more easy: we desire no man's harm
but our own good, we wish for no man's fall that we may rise: we would rejoice,
but would have none to sorrow: when our Country was separated from the
Catholic Faith, and Church of Rome, all was done by great force and violence,
we hope when we shall return, all will be compassed with a contrary course:
and we would willingly admit that Exposition, which one has made of St.
Edwards Vision; if it had no other difficulty in it then this. Two Monks which
this holy King had bin familiarly acquainted with in NORMANDY, and were now
Saints in Heaven, appeared to him, and told him of his Countries, coming to a
better estate, by proposing unto him this Problem; A green Tree being cut from
the body, let it be separated the space of four Acres from the Root, which
when man's hand compelling it, no necessity urging it, returning to the body,
shall come again to the ancient Root, and taking sap, shall flourish, and bear
fruit again then, etc.

By this green Tree, says my Author, we may very well understand the Kingdom
of England: of which St. Edward, and those holy Monks censured the cutting it
from the body, was dividing it from the Sea Apodilique, for the space of four
Acres, that is, for the time of four Princes Reigns, King Henry, King Edward,
Queen Elizabeth, and King James.

Wherefore now what are we to expect, but that without all compulsion, or
constraint, it should return to the body and root again, and begin to flourish
with Catholic Doctrine, and bear fruit of good works, by receiving the S^p of
Grace, which cannot be out of the virtue of the Catholic Church, which
consists of the foresaid head and Members.

Thus he, and howsoever (as I said) the rest may be exproved, we should like
passing well this facility and sweetness without force and violence; and
therefore do earnestly wish, that as the separation between King Henry and
Queen Katherine, was a great beginning of that other breach: so the inseparable
love of King Charles and Queen Marie might restore us to the ancient union, The
very attempting of this Noble and Godly Enterprise, deserves immortal praises.

Henricus Rosas Carolus Regna. O that we might add, and Maria Ecclesias. Your
Majesty's most faithful servant, and humble Orator, M. C.

A brief consideration of the Reasons intimated in the former Letter, for His
Majesty's repealing and recalling the Laws and Proclamations against Recusants.
etc.
THe first Reason, for the services performed by the Catholics to his
Grandmother.

It is a considerable service, for by the instigation and malice of the
Jesuits, and Romish Catholics, were that Queen drawn and invited to those
traiterous designs and practices against Queen Elizabeth, and the State; for
which that great, but unfortunate Princess lost her head.

The 2. Reason, for the services done to his Maj. this Jesuit would not be
seen to know, or at least would not have it remembered, that detestable plot of
the Powder Treason; whereby his Majesty's Father, and His whole Progeny, and
this State, had suffered in that execrable way, that no times could ever
parallel.

And for his Majesty's service to himself in particular, though this Letter
might seem to be written before this horrid Rebellion in Ireland began; yet I
cannot believe, but the groundwork and plot thereof was laid before this
Letter: and also the discention between us and Scotland plotted: All which, who
is so ignorant, as not to know that it proceeds from the Jesuits and Romish
Catholics: Therefore let all out desires to her Majesty be to move the King,
that instead of Mordeca's reward, they may have the just reward of traiterous
Haman, which they never yet failed to deserve.

Thirdly, this also we add, which may make the matter more easy, we desire no
man's harm, but our good: we wish for no man's fall that we may rise.

This addition makes a fair gloss, but mark the consequence, what follows
that State and Kingdom wherein Idolatry is suffered to be committed? Whatsoever
is offensive unto God, is not to be tolerated; Idolatry it self is offensive
unto God, and consequently the exercise and permission of the same. A Christian
Prince being the keeper of both tables of the Decalogue, should not suffer
Idolatry to defile the worship of God, within His Dominions.

Whatsoever the good Kings of Judah, and other godly Princes are commended for
in the Scripture, that Christian Princes ought to imitate; therefore Christian
Princes ought to expel contrary worshippers, and to repress Idolatry in like
manner.

The Proposition is manifest, for whatsoever is written, is written for our
instruction, the assumption is proved by induction. Asa brake down the Altars
and Images of strange Gods, 2 Chronicles. 14.3. Iehosaphat removed the high places
and Groves, 2 Chronicles, 17.6: Josiah put down the Chemarines that were Idolatrous
Priests, 2 Kings 23.5. Iacoh would not suffer Idolatry to be committed in his
house, but buried all the Images under an Oak, Genesis 35.5. All which were
commended for so doing.

We would rejoice, but would have none to sorrow? What greater sorrow can
befall a State or Kingdom then the wrath of God to hang over their heads,
which Idolatry and superstitious worship draws upon them where it is tolerated:
and although the Almighty for a time permits, yet when his violl of wrath is
full woe be to that state. Which let all of us humbly pray, may not fall upon
this Nation, Amen.

FINIS.

