A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House OF COMMONS At WESTMINSTER,
August 22. 1645. Being the day appointed for their Solemn Thanksgiving unto God
for his several Mercies to the Forces of the Parliament in diverse parts of the
Kingdom, In the Gaining of the Towns of Bath and Bridgewater, and of
Scarborough-Castle, and Sherborn-Castle, and for the dispersing of the Clubmen,
and the good Success in Pembroke-shire.

By Thomas Case, Preacher at Milkstreet, and one of the Assembly of Divines.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth, for Luke Fawn, at the sign of the Parrot in
Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

To the Honorable the House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
IT was Asa's sin, and it stands as a blot upon him to this day, that he
imprisoned the Seer, for dealing faithfully with him in a message from the
Lord: 2 Chro. 16.7,8,9,10.
It has been your exceeding honor, worthy Patriots, and there be monuments
enough of it published in Print to all the World, that you have not only
pardoned, but encouraged those Hanani's which God has sent, and you invited,
to this Service, to deliver unto you the whole Counsel of God. It was never
heard yet (and I am consident it never shall) that any man has become your
enemy, or you his, for telling you the truth; And therefore let me tell you one
truth more: It is as great a sin to imprison the Truth, as to imprison the
Prophets that deliver it. Gal. 4.16. (...), Vsurpatur de iis qui in carcere and
custodia detinenur, as Genesis 39.20.
As it has been your honor before men, that you have not imprisoned the
Prophets, let it be your honor before God, that you do not imprison the Truth.
2 These. 2.10,11,12.
O receive the Truth in the love of it, and it shall preserve you from
believing lies. You have by you a Treasury, or Library of Parliament Sermons;
in which, you have many choice directions and encouragements in the Service, to
which, God and the Kingdom have called you. As you have heard them, hearken to
them; as you have Printed them, so consult with them: I presume you Printed
them for that end; If you do indeed obey the voice of God in them, they will
witness for you, if when you have heard Gods will, you will do your own, you
have set up so many monuments (like Joshua's stone) Josh. 24.26,27
to witness against you in the day of your account. As for these poor hudled
Labors, they are pressed to serve you, though not with so much skill as others,
yet with as much sincerity as any; as the Author himself, who, whatever he is,
is

Your Honors, both in Life and Death, THOMAS CASE.

A Sermon of Thanksgiving, for the taking of Bridgewater and Sherborn Castle in
the West.
ISAI. 43.14. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy One of Israel; For
your sakes have I sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their Nobles, and
the Caldeans, whose cry is in the ships.


IT is the glory of God, Hab. 3.2.
That in the midst of Judgment he remembers Mercy. This glory of God beams it
self forth most beautifully in the later part of this Evangelical Prophecy,
from the 40 Chap. to the end. This people of Israel were as yet hardly in
Captivity: nay, the Prophets of God were but foretelling of it in their Sermons
to the people; when God sends this Gospel-Prophet Isaiah with an Olive Branch
of good tidings in his mouth, promises of redemption and deliverance out of
Captivity, as so many Cordials and Preservatives to prevent desponding and
despairing thoughts, as if God meant utterly to cast off his people, and to
leave them to miscarry and perish in Babylon.

My Text is one of those promises, wherein, though the Captivity (as I say)
were not yet begun, God speaks of it as if it were already expired, and Israel
already rescued and redeemed out of it.

Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, For your sakes I
have sent to Babylon, etc.

The opening of the Text.

I will briefly open the words to you, and then drive up such Observations as
they will naturally afford; some on whereof I will single out, for the Subject
of my present Discourse.

Thus says the Lord] Jehovah, he that has power enough to make good his
promises; for he is Jehovah, The Fountain of Beings, his own, and every things
else that has a being; and therefore is able to give a being to his promises.

Your Redeemer] The God and Creator of all things, and of all men; but Your
Redeemer, that redeems you from Hell and Wrath to come: That redeemed you from
Egypt, and from all the Nations whither you have been carried away captive; and
will redeem you from Babylon also. He is willing, as well as able; for he is
your Redeemer.

The holy One of Israel] Holy in himself, essentially holy: Holy in his
Covenant and Promises. Therefore called, The holy One of Israel; i. e.
faithful in Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac and Israel. There is his
sidelity.

For your sakes] I shall open to you the meaning of that expression anon, more
seasonably and fully then I can do here.

I have sent to Babylon] etc. By the hand of Cyrus King of the Medes and
Persians.

A (...) descendit; diciturde inferiore condition, servi ture and subjectione.
And have brought down] (i.e. by Cyrus) (...), descendere feci; I have caused
to come down: or, I have brought into subjection, etc.

All their Nobles] (...), which I find diversely translated, as indeed the word
is capable of various significations.

Ar. Montanus, Calo etc.
Some translate it, Fugitivos; descendere feci fugitivos universos ipsos: I
have brought down, or caused to come down, all their fugitives; because the
Hebrew root (...) signifies fugere, to fly.

In Conjugatione Kal.
Others translate it vectes, Bars, metaphorically, because a bar does as it
were flee from one side of the gate or door to another.

Thus God promises Cyrus, Isai. 45.2. I will break in pieces the gates of
Brass, and cut in sunder the Bars of Iron. (...) significat vectis, quia
transcurrit and quase fugit, ab uno extremo ad aliud.


Thereupon I conceive it is, that Sanches.
some do render it impedimenta, remoras, etc. all those impediments and
obstructions which, as so many bars or bolts, did hinder so long the Expedition
of Cyrus into Babylon: One whereof was the River Euphrates; which impediment or
bar was removed or taken away by diverting of that River into diverse other
Channels (made and prepared on purpose beforehand by the Army of Cyrus) that
very night in which the Babylonians were carowsing and drinking themselves
drunk in their security, whereby the Medes and Persians came in upon them, and
slew them, while they little dreamed of any possibility of the enemies access
that way into the City: Xenophon, lib. 7. Cyripaediae. Herod. li. 1. Theodor.
Vatab. etc.
Prophesied of by the Prophet Jer. 50 38. A drought is upon her waters: And so,
Chap. 51.32.

Muri, Turres omniaque muni menta Babylonis. Cornelius a Lap.
Some, by bars, understand their Walls, and Towers, and Strongholds, and all
the mighty Fortifications of Babylon, which seemed impregnable: And so the
words must run thus: I have sent to Babylon, and have caused all their Towers
and Castles, and fenced Cities, and their invincible Fortifications (in their
own opinion) to come down, and fall flat upon the ground before Cyrus his Army.
As God threatened to do to Tyrus by the King of Babylon, so God threatens to do
with the King of Babylon by Cyrus: Ezekiel. 26.9.
He shall see engines of War against thy walls, and with his Axes he shall
break down thy Towers. Zeph. 3.6.
So, I have cut off the Nations, their Towers are desolate.

Hierom, etc. quia fortes sunt and potentes.
Others, by (...), understand Reges, Principes, The King and Princes of
Babylon; because they are, or should be, the bars and strength, defense and
safety of a Kingdom; and so our Translators have rendered it, I have brought
down their Nobles: And thus they are threatened, Jer. 50.35. Jer. 50.35.
A sword is upon the Caldeans, says the Lord, and upon the inhabitants of
Babylon, and upon her Princes, and upon her wise men.

And thus it follows in my Text:

And the Caldeans] i.e. As in that place of Jer. The inhabitants, or the
common people of Babylon; not only the Nobles and great Commanders, but upon
all the people, all the military forces of Babylon; called, Jer. 50.37. The
mingled people that were in the midst of her. The King of Babylon having hired
Soldiers of all Nations to serve in his Army: Why now, says God, All these
have I brought down; that is, made to fall or flee before the Medes and
Persians.

Whose cry is in the ships] In navibus gloriantes, or ovantes; who boast and
glory in their Shipping: So some. But I conceive it rather, it is meant of the
cry and howling they made while either they were fleeing from the Medes and
Persians in Ships, the passages by land being stopped up, as Jer. 31.31. or while
they were carried away prisoners by the Medes and Persians in ships: Their cry
went up to heaven.

In a word, God here promises to break in pieces all the power and strength of
Babylon, to dash the whole Empire in pieces, like a Potters vessel, before
Cyrus; that so the prison-doors might be opened to his poor Israel, that had
lien prisoner and captive in Babylon now seventy years, their Iron bolts might
be stricken off, and they set at liberty to return home to Sion, with joy and
gladness upon their heads. So speaks God of Cyrus: Isai. 45.13.
I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways; he
shall build my City, and he shall let go my Captives, not for price nor
reward, says the Lord of Hosts.

The words now thus opened, I come to the Observations.

1 Observe.

And first, from the circumstance of time when this promise was made; namely,
some hundreds of years before the Captivity was brought upon them: Observe,

While God is yet bringing his people into trouble, yea, but yet threatening of
them with trouble; he is meditating and contriving the ways and means (as I may
so say) of bringing them out of their troubles.

Hence it is, that the means of deliverance are not to seek when the time of
deliverance is come. God has his Balsoms prepared, before he wounds his
people; his Cordials, before he makes them sick with his Corasives. 2 Pet. 2.9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the goldly out of temptations.

The means are prepared beforehand. This may minister abundance of comfort to
the people of God; even while they are entering into, or lying under their
afflictions; while they are entering into the hour of Temptation: Why the means
of their deliverance and enlargement are all prepared and fitted already, by
the hand of a wise and faithful Redeemer.

But again, This ruin of Babylon, and enlargement of Israel, is spoken of
(here) as a thing done already: I have sent (says God) to Babylon, and brought
down their Nobles, etc. some indeed read it in the future tense, I will send to
Babylon, and will bring down their Nobles: The Hebrew indeed bears both; But
truly, the future tense is not so emphaticall as the preterperfect tense,
which God uses to express the certainty of his promises: From whence,

2. Observe. The promises of God are as certain, as if they were already
accomplished: Here is more comfort for the people of God: The promises of God,
are as good money as any they have in their purses.

To this end, see further how this promise is guarded and backed, with what ever
may strengthen Faith: For

1. Here God lays his credit and reputation to stake upon this promise. Thus
says the Lord.

2. He engages his Power and All Sufficiency. Jehovah a fountain of Beings;
and therefore able to give a Being to his promises.

3. His Love, his tender care of his people, though scorned and persecuted by
the world; yet he is their Redeemer: there is his willingness.

4. His fidelity; The Holy One of Israel: If he deny his Covenant, his promise,
he must deny himself, his Holiness.

And from all this,

3. Observe. God in making his promises, is very sollicitous and careful to
secure the faith of his people, about the making of them good.

It implies two things:

1. Much infidelity and unbelief even in Israel.

2. The great goodness and compassion of God, who when he might punish the
unbelief of his people, studies to succor it: According to the prayer of the
Father of the possessed child, Mark 9.24.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief.

But further, The Lord your Redeemer.

4. Observe in the fourth place,

God gives himself out to his Church and people, in no ways so much, as in
ways of Redemption.

Indeed, One creation would serve their turn, but they stand in need of many
Redemptions:

Or thus,

God is properly and peculiarly the God of his Church and people, by way of
Redemption.

He is the Creator of the Just and unjust, good men and wicked, Angels and
Devils: But he is a Redeemer, only and properly, to his Church.

And this implies also two things:

1. The Churches forlorn condition in her self; Isaiah 49.21.
a poor lost captaive: She loses her self, she sells her self at every turn:
The world takes her captive, sin takes her captive, Hell takes her captive: Had
she not a God to redeem her, she were lost for ever.

2. The care, and love, and goodness of God, in rescuing and redeeming her:
She sells her self by her sins, God purchases her; She loses her self, God
seeks her up; She is taken captive, by men and devils, God redeems her: Here be
the tender mercies of a God.

The Holy One of Israel: See

5. Observe. Such is the love God bears to his Church and people, That he does
not only put his Name upon his people, but takes his peoples name upon himself.

It is much, that Israel should be called The Israel of God: but that God
should be called The God of Israel, The Holy One of Israel; This is above all
admiration.

Yet further; I have sent to Babylon, sc. by the Ministry of Cyrus, to deliver
Israel out of prison. The Babylonians thought Israel as sure from starting, as
ever Herod thought Peter; Acts 12.6.
at what time, He committed him to four quaternions of soldiers, and bound him
with two chains between two soldiers, intending to have brought him forth the
next day to be tried for his life.

And poor Israel gave themselves for lost too; they thought it was as possible
for a dead man to break out of his grave, as for them to get out of captivity:
(the more was their unbelief, and God took it very unkindly, having made them
such gracious promises of deliverance) Ezekiel. 37.11.
Behold, they say (said God to his Prophet) our bones are dried, and our hope
is lost; we are cut off for our parts: And yet notwithstanding, you see God had
a way and a means, beyond all expectation, for their enlargement: He had an
Army ready for this service, that neither the Babylonians nor Israel little
dreamt of. It is an observation of it self.

6. Observe. When no way of deliverance appears to humane reason, God has ways
in store by him, for the Redemption of his Church and people, out of those
evils which seem to threaten inevitable ruin and destruction.

Again, I have sent. Cyrus went, and yet God sent: He went voluntarily, carried
on by his own lusts: His pride, his covetousness, and unsatisfiable ambition,
Hab. 2.5,6. and yet God sends him upon a design which he little thought of: To
let his Israel out of prison. From whence,

7. Observe. Gods holy ends, and man's sinful ends, may sweetly concur in the
same action.

And it may teach us this point of prudence, Wisely to distinguish between,
what is Gods, and what is man's, in the same action: Man does foolishly (many
times) God does wisely; man weakly, God powerfully; man trecherously, God
faithfully; man sinfully, God most righteously. This will keep us from
justifying the miscarriages of men; and yet from murmuring against the wise and
righteous dispensations of God.

I have brought down their Bars, i.e. as you have seen, all the power and
strength of Babylon.

8. Observe. From thence you may take an eighth Observation, viz. The strongest,
and scuningly most inconquerable impediments and obstructions that stand in the
way of the Churches deliverance, shall he all broken in pieces, and become as
dirt, when Gods time of deliverance is come.

Take the word as it is translated, Their Nobles, that is, The King and Princes
of Babylon: So translated from their Office, and that will make a ninth
Observation: sc.

9. Kings and Princes, and the Nobles of a Land, they ought to be as Towers and
Bars, strength and safety, to a Kingdom and Nation.

The more sad and deplorable is the condition of that people, whose Governors
are such as are described; Isai. 1.23.
Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves, etc. Zeph. 3.3.
Zeph. 3.3.
And Her Princes within her are roaring Lions, and her Judges are Evening
Wolves, etc. The Lord have mercy on such a people.

But from the whole, take this

10 and last Observation. In the mighty concussions and subversions of the
Empires and Monarchies of the World, God carries on the designs of his
Churches deliverance and enlargement.

Or thus,

God for his Church and peoples sake, will not spare to dash Nations and
Kingdoms all to pieces, in the day of his power and jealousy.

For your sake have I sent to Babylon, and brought down, etc.

I shall not be able in such straits of time, to travel through the
Historical part of this Doctrine; and to show you by an induction of
particulars, how in the breaking, and destruction of Kingdoms and Nations, God
has carried on the design of his Churches enlargement.

Who raised up the righteous man from the East, called him to his foot, gave
the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings; he gave them as dust to
his Sword, and as driven stubble to his Bow.

So is it said of Abraham, and the story you have, Genesis 14. where you shall
find five Kings with their Armies, and spoil, given as dust to Abraham's sword,
for Abraham's sake, and the rescue of Lot, his Brothers son, who was then
carried captive by the numerous and potent enemy.

From that time forward, travel through the Scripture, and you shall find the
ruins of Egypt, Bashan, the Amorites, and all the Kingdoms of Canaan;
Palestina, Syria and Assyria; Babylon, both Old and New: Babylon Ethnic, and
Babylon Antichristian, with other Monarchies and Empires of the World, standing
as so many Monuments and Witnesses of this truth.

All that I intend in the Doctrinall part of this discourse, is to open unto
you the meaning of this expression, For your sakes.



And I will be the shorter in it, that I may have the more time to bestow in
the Use.

Excludit his verbis omnem popult dignitatem, ne quid suo merito se adeptum
fuisse glorietur, Calv.
For your sakes, I have sent, etc. (...) Propter vos; for you, or for your
sake: We must be sure to exclude all thought of merit in this and the like
expressions: As when God promised Abraham to spare Sodom, for fifty sake, and
for forty sake, Genesis 18.26,29. And to defend Jerusalem for his own sake, and
his servant David's sake, 2 King. 20.6. The worth and merit of the creature must
be laid in the dust.

But for you, or for your sake, in this place may mean three things.

For your sake, a threefold sense.
1. First, For your sake, i.e. In propitiationem vestram, In your stead, or for
your propitiation and atonement as it were. Pro hostia vel victima piaculari.
So you have it more clearly in the third Verse of this 43 of Isaiah, I gave
Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee; i. e. For a propitiatory
Sacrifice (as it were) to appease my wrath toward thee; which the Ancients
were wont to call (...), (...) homines facinorosi pro Patriae lustratione morti
devoti, qui diris execrationibus obruti magno cum totius populi tripudio
interficiebantur, Steph. (...) Sacri Homines, Budaeus.
such men who in the time of public and common plagues, were either devoted to
death by the people, or did willingly devote themselves, to appease (as they
imagined) the anger of their gods, who were called Sacri homines, or devota
capita, among the Latins; men cursed and devoted to death, to be as it were a
propitiatory Sacrifice for their Country and Nation. Such was M. Curtius among
the Romans, who in the time of a great casm, or opening of the Earth in Rome,
cast himself into the Gulf, to appease the angry deity. However, this was a
blind and unwarrantable superstition among the Heathen; yet the Text may
allude to it.

I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Saba for thee; That is, when
Sennacherib made his Expedition against Judah and Jerusalem, to destroy and lay
it waste, Cyril.
ego effeci ut pro Judaea Sennacheribo objiceretur Ethiopia, Egyptus and Saba
quasi victima piacularis loco Judeae ab eo mactanda. I caused him to return
from Judah and Jerusalem, and I diverted his Expedition upon Ethiopia and
Egypt, and gave them as piacular Sacrifices, to be offered up to divine
Justice, instead of Jerusalem: I gave Egypt for thy ransom. And thus God did
once and again, as I might show you had I time, out of Isai. 37.9,37.
prophesied of, Isa. 20.4. According to that of the Proverbs 11.8. The righteous
is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead.

Gods people are the Isaac spared and rescued, when even the knife is at their
throat; and the wicked, the enemies of the Church, as the Ram caught by the
horns, and sacrificed in their stead.

So here, Israel delivered out of Captivity, and the Babylonians sacrificed in
their room to Divine Justice, and God reconciled to Israel. Feci commutationem
tuam Egyptum. Isa. 43.4.
And to this purpose the Septuagint read it, I have given Egypt, etc. by way of
exchange for thee: And so the Text reads on, I will give men for thee, and
people for thy life.

This may be the first sense: For thee, or for thy sake.

2. For thee; In commodum tuum, In liberationem tuam. I have sent Cyrus to
Babylon for thee; that is, for thy good, for thy enlargement and deliverance
out of Captivity, to serve thee, as Isai. 45.13. He shall let go my captives,
etc.

3. But yet further, for thee may imply respect had by God, in sending Cyrus to
Babylon, to his people, though not by way of merit, yet by way of motive, and
that in a fourfold respect.

1. The love he bears to their persons: God has an high esteem of his people.
So he tells them in the fourth verse of this Chapter: Isa. 43.4.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. So God
loves his people, that, rather then they shall miscarry, Nations and people
shall go to confusion. Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his Saints: Yea, so precious,
that God accounts the world no better then the first Chaos, unless he have a
people of his own to dwell in it: Isa. 45.18.
For thus says the Lord that created the heavens, God himself that formed the
earth and made it; he established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it
to be inhabited. It is an argument whereby God comforts his people, That he
will save his Israel, verse. 17. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord, etc.
What security? Heaven and Earth; both were lost, if Israel be not saved: He
created it not in vain. It is in vain (such is Gods love) if he have not an
Israel to inhabit it.

2. The love the Lord bears to their prayers. Look in what language the Church
prays, Isa. 63.17 Isa. 63.17.
Return for thy servants sake, the tribes of thine inheritance; in the same God
answers them here: For your sake have I sent to Babylon. So runs the promise;
Isa. 65.24.
Before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
Hezekiahs prayers are an hook in the nostrils, and a bridle in the lips of the
Babylonish Plunderer, Isa. 37.25, etc. compared with verse. 29.

I tell, The Saints of the Most High God can pray down Empires, and Kingdoms,
and the Towers, and Castles, and Walls of the proudest enemies: It is safer
standing before the mouth of a Canon, then before the prayers of the Saints.

The Queen of the Scots.
You know who feared the prayers of Knox more then all the Forces of England.
Indeed the prayers of the Saints are the plagues of the world. It is
observable, Revel. 8.3,4,5. that Censer which received the prayers of the
Saints, emptied forth fire, and voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and
earthquakes, etc. that which went up, Prayer, comes down plagues.

No wonder since Christ is so taken with the prayers of his Church, that by his
good will he would never have the sound of that Music out of his ears. Oh my
Dove, that art art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs; let me see thy countenance, and hear thy voice: For sweet is thy voice,
etc.

3. The Relation wherein the Saints stand toward God, takes much upon his
heart: Servants, Sons, Daughters, Friends, the Spouse of Christ. Why what will
not a man do for these Relations sake? And will not the great God much more
engage himself for his people which stand in this Relation to him, since he is
the Fountain of all that love and fidelity which fills these Relations among
men?

4. The Image of God is stamped upon them, and therefore he does such great
things for their sake. Heb. 1.3. cum Ephesians. 4.24. and Coloss. 3.10.
As Christ is the Image of God, so the Saints are the Image of Christ; insomuch
that you may hear God saying unto them, Zech. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.

In these respects God may be said to do all these things for his peoples sake;
sc.

For the love he bears to their Persons, Prayers, Relation, Image.


And yet all these may be resolved into an higher fountain, out of which all
these do flow; and it is fourfold also. I will but name them.

1. For free graces sake; as in that Proclamation, Exodus 33.19. I will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show
mercy.

2. For his Covenants sake. Psalm. 105.8.
He has remembered his Covenant for ever; the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations. Psalm. 106.45. Psalm. 111.5.
And he remembered for them his Covenant. He has given meat to them that fear
him, he will ever be mindful of his Covenant.

God looks upon his Covenant, and then accounts it but his engagement to do
great things for his people.

3. For his Christ's sake: So Daniel prayed, when he wrestled with God for this
very mercy which here God promises, Dan. 9.17.
Deliverance out of Captivity. O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and
his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is
desolate, for the Lords sake.

Isa. 49.8,9. and 42.1. Matthew. 3.17.
Christ is his Fathers Darling, his Beloved, in whom his soul delights; and God
looks upon his redeemed through Christ, and his soul is delighted in them also.
Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us accepted in the Beloved. After he has bestowed a Christ upon
them, he thinks nothing too good or too much for their sake. He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? After he has redeemed them from eternal death,
with the Blood of his Son, he will not stick to redeem them from temporal
Destruction, with the blood of his and their enemies. I will give men for thee,
and people for thy life.

For his Name. His Name is called upon his people.

Isa. 43.6.
Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth.

Isa. 43.7.
7. Every one that is called by my Name; for I have created him for my glory,
etc. Their name is called upon God, and Gods Name is called upon them. If they
perish, his Name suffers, his Glory suffers; they bear his Name, which is his
Glory; and therefore Joshua took the advantage of this argument, when he
pleaded for Israel; Josh. 7.9.
What will thou do to thy great Name? q. d. Though Israel deserves to suffer,
thy Name does not deserve to suffer; in saving Israel, thou shall preserve
thine own Name: and upon these terms God is resolved to save them.

Isa. 48.
9. For my Names sake I will defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain
for thee, that I cut thee not off.

10. Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver, etc.

11. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, I will do it; for how should my
Name be polluted? and I will not give my glory to another.

God destroys the enemy for his peoples sake, because he has loved and chosen
them for his own sake, his Names sake.

And thus I have showed you the sense and meaning of this expression, For your
sake, and the spring and fountain of that sense.

And this shall suffice for the Doctrinall part of my Text: I come now to the
Use and Application.

Uses.

And there are but two Uses I will speak to: 1. Information, 2. Exhortation.


Use.

It may serve, first, to inform us, and that in diverse particulars:

1. Branch of Information.

First, To discover to us the difference of mercies. Some mercies you see there
be, which God bestows on his people for their sake; Deliverances from, and
victories over their enemies: God subdues and destroys Armies, and Countries,
and Nations; before them; and all this he does for his peoples sake; he has
respect to them in such works as these be: But some works there be, which God
does only for his own sake; such as are

Predestination] Ephesians. 1.5.
Having predestined us to the Adoption of Children to himself, according to
the good pleasure of his will. To himself; and the good pleasure of his will:
The good pleasure of his will, the ground; and to himself, the end.

Justification] Tit. 3.7.
Justified by his grace, no other ingredient goes into Justification by way of
Motive, but only Free Grace.

Isai. 43.25.
So Pardon of sin, which is a part of Justification: I even, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions, for my own sake; and so their everlasting
salvation. Ephesians. 2.5.
By grace ye are saved.

In these mercies, the people of God come not in so much as by way of motive,
much less by way of merit: But God does these merely and immediately for his
own sake.

The reason of this difference is, because these temporal mercies and
deliverances, find them the people of God; but election, justification, etc.
make them the people of God; those find them qualified persons; these bestow
these qualifications upon them: And therefore learn to distinguish of mercies,
and to prize, and put in for your share in those mercies, which purely and
unmixtly are in, and from, and for, and to himself.

Isai. 55.3.
The sure mercies of David.

Second branch of Information. See and admire the love of God to his Church and
people: They were taken out of the same pit, and hewn out of the same rock,
with the rest of the world; they had all one Father and Mother, and yet see
what a difference God makes between them: Surely, as much as he makes between
men, and the beasts of the earth; he gives them as bread to his people to feed
upon, he makes them as sacrifices for the expiation of his wrath toward his
people; when his wrath goes forth armed as it were against his people, he
commands it to turn aside, and satisfy it self with the blood of mighty
Nations, and great ones of the world, that rise up against the Church. He makes
them but as the Rams to be sacrificed to divine Justice in the room of his
Isaacs.

And if this be such an honor; What is it then, that he gave his own only
Son, not the Creature, but the Creator, Heb. 1.3. Isai. 53.6. Romans 8.32. John
6.55.
The brightness of his glory, and the express form of his person, to be a
Sacrifice of Expiation, a Propitiation; to be as it were, a devotum Caput, upon
which, he lays the iniquities of all his Elect; to deliver him up to death for
them; and then to give his Body and Blood to be their spiritual meat and
drink, to life eternal?

Here is love indeed; Love above all expression, above all admiration. John
3.26.
So God loved the world, etc. Oh, labor to get interest in this Love, and you
are made for ever.

Thirdly, Take notice how vainly and ignorantly the Philosophers and other
wisemen of the world, have discoursed of the Rise and Ruin of the Nations and
Kingdoms of the world: They have dreamt of the periods of Monarchies and
States; Vid. Victor. Strigel. Aphoris. Polit. and Johan. a Cokier Aphorism.
Polit.
The (...) whereof some make 50, some 100; some 300, the (...) 500 years; the
great Astrologers have consulted the Stars, and the Influences, and Houses of
the Heavens: But they have not consulted the God of the Stars, the Maker and
Upholder of Heaven and Earth: They have not consulted Gods Oracles, where this
great Mystery is revealed; and the Reasons and Causes of all these alterations
and confusions that befall the great and mighty Empires and Dominions of the
World, discovered to the sons of men; namely, the deliverance and enlargement
of the Church, and therein the propagation and exaltation of the Kingdom of his
dear Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, the great end of ends, they have been ignorant
of: The ways of God they have known.

And as blind and ignorant are the Kings and Nations of the world, who while
they make war one with another, pull down and destroy each other, as here the
Medes and Persians come to conquer and subdue the Babylonian Empire, little
know or consider who sets them on work, as God speaks to Cyrus; Isai. 45.4.
Nihil minus vulgo creduum fuit quam illius Monarchae ruina cencussum suisse
orbent ut in patriam redirent Judaei qui tunc abjectissimi erant in hominum
oculis, Calv.
I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me; and I girded thee, though
thou have not known me. He did not know who set him on work; he took notice of
nothing but his own ends; the enlargement of his own Empire; He thought he was
his own man. As when God sent Israel into Captivity, the Babylonian Tyrant
minded nothing but his own lusts, his pride, and his cruelty, his ambition, and
covetousness; and yet he was but Gods Rod and Staff, to beat and correct his
hypocritical, and rebellious children. Isai. 10.5,6,
O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc. Verse 7.
Howbeit, he means not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his
heart to destroy and cut off Nations not a few; So when he brought them out of
Babylon, Cyrus thinks he goes upon his own errand, howbeit, God tells him, For
Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by Name.

The Nations, and their Kings and Emperors, are doing Gods work, and the
Churches work, when they think not of it: God sends them, and they think they
go about their own business.

Fourth branch. Hence also, We may see upon (...) ^isadvantage the enemies of
the Church, be they never so (...) and potent, come to make war with the
Saints. They come to fight with a generation great in Gods eyes, his
favorites, before whom God contemns the Nations, and despises the persons of
Kings and Emperors.

Psalm. 105.
Verse 15. When they went from one Nation to another, and from one Kingdom to
another people, ( sc. From Egypt to Canaan.)

Verse. 14. He suffered no man to do them wrong, but rebuked Kings for their
sakes:

Verse. 15. Saying, Touch not mine anointed; and do my Prophets no harm.

A Text which Kings and Potentates shall know, that they and their Parasites
have mistaken and abused; when God shall write the true and sad interpretation
thereof in their blood, for his despised peoples sake.

Truly, When Princes and their people combine and conspire to come from afar,
with their united forces to battle with the Church, it is but many times to
bring their own Throats to be cut, to save the people of God the labor of
longer marches, and harder sieges. Consult at your leisure these two famous
places, Josh. 11.1,2,3,4,5. with verses 19, 20. and Mich. 4.11,12,13.

Fifthly, This Doctrine takes away all ground of boasting, and contention,
about the Instruments which God uses in bringing down the strength and pride
of the enemy. There is this observation lapt up in the bowels of it; sc. That
God gives not victories always for their sakes that fight the battles of the
Church, but for the Churches sake, whose battles (under the Lord of Hosts) they
are.

Cyrus here, goes up to Babylon, has notable and wonderful successes; it was
not for his sake (he knew not upon what service he went) but for Isreal's sake;
For your sake I have sent to Babylon.

I speak not this to obscure and eclipse the praise of any, whose fidelity and
valor, in the dangerous and daring undertakings of this later age, have
deserved as highly from this Nation, as ever any did since the foundations of
this Kingdom were laid: Judges 5.9.
No, My heart is toward the worthies of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people: Praise ye the Lord.

I speak it only to this end, that people may not lay more upon acts of
providence, then they will bear. I speak it to the same end, that the Apostle
lays in his Caution about faithful Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.6.
That you be not puffed up for one against another: That that which is
undoubtedly matter of joy and thankfulness to all, might not through the
corruption of our natures, and the wiliness of the tempter, be turned into an
occasion of pride and contention to any. That that may not divide us, which
rightly improved, might be an happy means to reconcile and unite us. Jere. 9.24.
He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

Second Use. Exhortation.

Has God in the great turnings of States and Kingdoms upside down, in breaking
Monarchies and Kingdoms, and all the Malignant powers of the earth, an eye to
his Church, respect to his people? Does God do these great things for his
Churches sake? For his peoples sake? See then how much we stand engaged to God
this day. Has not God (my Brethren) done as much for England, as ever he did
for Israel? Has not God for Englands sake, sent to Babylon, and brought down
all their Bars?

You may please to observe, That ever after Israel was in Babylon, all the
enemies of the Church, to the end of the world, are called Assyrians, as Mich.
5.5. This man (speaking of Christ) shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall
come into our Land, etc. Revel. 14.8. and 16.19. and 17.5. and 18.2,10.
And Babylonians, especially Rome, with all the Antichristian enemies of the
Church, they are called Babylon. Rome is Babylon, and all the Popish and
Antichristian multitude, are Babylonians; which now in these three Kingdoms
have taken up Arms against Christ, his Government and people; and what a sad
thing is it my Brethren, to see our King in the head of an Army of Babylonians,
refusing as it were to be called, the King of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and choosing rather to be called, the King of Babylon, etc. This is a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation. The Lord us help to mourn for it
in our secret Chambers.

But now I say, has not God in a great measure fulfilled my Text upon our
Babylonish enemies, in bringing down their Bars? take them in which of the
senses you will, abovementioned; take them with Sanches for Impedimenta, etc.
The Impediments and Remora's, which lay in the way of Reformation, and
Deliverance of Gods people out of that Romish bondage, wherein they and the
Ordinances were taken Captive; (for though we were not in Babylon, yet Babylon
was in the midst of us: Rome was among us, though we were not in Rome) Prelacy,
and the Prelaticall Clergy, Priests and Jesuits, Ceremonies and Service Book,
Star-Chambers and High Commission Court, with all the appurtenances: These were
mighty impediments and obstructions in the way of Reformation and Deliverance;
and God has mightily brought them down.

Take Bariach with Jerome, for principes populi: God has pretty well brought
them down too. The Malignant Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom have known to
their cost, what it is to oppose God, and rise up against Christ, would they
see the hand of God, now it is lifted up.

Next to the Bishops and Popish Clergy of the Land, they have been the greatest
scorners and opposers of Reformaon, and active Incendiaries in this combustion,
the flames whereof have devoured Amos 7.4.
the great deep, and eaten up a part: Ireland almost consumed, and a great part
of England and Scotland laid waste. I say, God has so broken, and brought them
down, that we may in a great part translate the words in my Text, as some do,
Calvin and others.
Omnes illi fugitivi; They are all fugitives: Fly b^yond Sea.
God has made many of them fly, and others of them fall, before you and your
Armies; so that that Prophecy seems to reckon upon our times: Isaiah 5.9.
In mine ears, says the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many Houses shall be
desolate, even great and fair, without Inhabitant.

Or if we take Bariach for Muri, Turres, porta, omniaque munimenta; Has not
God brought them down, and laid them low, as flat, as ever the Walls of
Jericho, before your Armies?

I want time and memory to list, and file up the names of those strong Holds,
and seemingly impregnable Fortifications which God has brought down, even of
late, and delivered up into the hands of your Armies, (to pass by in silence
these great things done formerly since the beginning of these Civil Wars.)

Shrewsbury, Leicester, Scarborough, Pomtefract, Stoakeley-Castle in
Shropshire, Cannon Froom, taken by our Brethren of Scotland; The Garrison at
Highworth Church in Wiltshire, Bridgewater, Bathe, and Sherborn-Castle, some of
the mercies which we this day celebrate.

And thus God has brought down their Bars in every sense.

There is another word in the Text, that we must take in, and that is, The
Chaldeans, i. e. All the Military strength and forces of Babylon; the Armies
that the King of Babylon had raised in all his Empire, to make resistance
against the Medes and Persians, ut supra. And has not God brought down these
also before your Victorious Forces? Not to mention Edgehill, Newbury, York,
etc. Surely, the marchings of your new Model, under that renowned General, Sir
Thomas Fairfax, that despised, and despaired Army; despised of enemies, and
despaired of by friends, have been like the marchings of Joshua, and the Army
of Israel, under his conduct; of whom it is said (when once Achan the Troubler
of Israel, was discovered and removed) in the tenth of Joshua: He went and took
it, and smote it; he went and took it, and smote, etc. Seven or eight times
over. And may we not reckon up seven or eight as glorious marches and successes
within seven or eight weeks? He went to Naseby-field, and took and smote; and
from Naseby-field to Leicester, and took it and smote it; and from thence, our
Joshua passed to the siege of Taunton, and took, and delivered it from being
smitten; and from thence, to the enemy in the field of Langport, and took them,
and smote them; and from thence, to Bridgewater, and took it, and smote; and
from thence, to Bathe, and took it, and smote it; and from thence to
Sherborn-Castle, and took it, and smote it; save only, that did not lie so
expressly in the Commission of this Joshua, to smite, as it was in the
Commission of that Joshua, which you may read, Deuteronomy. 7.2. And when the Lord thy
God shall deliver them before thee, thou shall smite them, and utterly destroy
them; thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them The sword
of our Joshua has shown more mercy; And I wish it may so convince and gain the
poor deceived people in the West, and other places; that they will not stand
out to their own destruction.

Never History since Joshua's days, can file up so many glorious Victories,
upon such long and tedious marches, accomplished by one Army in so short a time.

The fruits whereof are,

1. The breaking in pieces the strongest Armies that the King had in this
Kingdom, which scorned and cursed your new Model, as much as ever the great
Philistine did little David; but God made it a formidable instrument in his
hand; such a one, one would think that very instrument, prophesied of by the
Prophet Isaiah: Isa. 41.15.
Behold (says God) I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
teeth: thou shall thresh the mountain, and beat them small, and shall make the
hills as chaff. A new instrument indeed this was, after your old was broken;
and it had teeth: The proud enemy thought it was a toothlesse instrument that
could not bitte; but they have felt, to their cost, that it has teeth, sharp
teeth: Surely these teeth have torn their flesh, and broke their bones in
pieces: and it has thresht the mountains. I think those mountains and hills,
those proud presumptuous and blasphemous Armies, have been pretty well thresht
by this New instrument in the hand of our Redeemer; it has beaten them even to
dust and chaff in the high places of the field.

Is there any of them here that jeered and scorned that New Instrument? that
have despised that New Model, as if it consisted of a company of feeble
unskilful boys, rather then men of War: Sir, go home, and learn to confess,
The Lord of Hosts can make better Soldiers in a few days, then the Prince of
Orange can do in many years.

2. A second fruit is the relieving of our distressed friends in diverse parts
of the Kingdom, who cried unto our General, as sometime the Gibconites did
unto Joshua, Come down quickly, and save us; for all the Kings of the Amorites
are upon us.

And truly it may be said of our worthy General, as then of Joshua, Josh.
10.9.
He came up suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all night: Yea, many days and
nights did our Armies and their worthy Commanders march to the relief of their
Brethren, whose destruction else would have filled the Land with the saddest
lamentations that ever have been heard in England since the beginning of this
unnatural War.

3. The dispersing of the Club-men; a Plot of as dangerous and desperate an
aspect as any since these Troubles began; and that the Contrivers of it
(whoever they were) knew well enough; and had providence cast that success
upon the enemy, which he has mercifully and miraculously blessed and honored
your Armies withal, we had known, to our sorrow, before this time.

4. The great and gracious hopes of a full and speedy regaining of the West,
the poor almost-desolate West, which was as a garden of Eden before the enemy,
but behind him a desolate Wilderness.

My Brethren, behold a wonder; our Sun, contrary to the course of Nature, is
risen in the West, where we were afraid it was going, if not gone down: But God
has wrought in as much wonder and more mercy for us, as once for Joshua: He
has commanded the Sun stand still in the West; yea, as once for Hezekiah, he
has brought it back by many degrees which it was gone down in the Western
Horizon.

5. A fifth fruit is, The opening of the passages of Trade and Traffic, which
a long time have been obstructed, to the great impoveaishing of this City, and
diverse other Cities and Towns in the Kingdom.

6. The encouragement of your friends, and discouragement of your enemies at
home and abroad: Your friends shall hear of the success God has given to your
Forces, and their hands shall be strong, their hearts shall be comforted, and
their spirits raised, concerning England. Enemies shall hear of it, and their
hearts shall fail them, and their knees shall smite one against another, and
none of the men of might shall find their hands: yea, thousands of them that
were seduced and deceived by the lies and flatteries of the enemies, shall come
in, and fall down at your feet, and confess that God is with you of a truth.

7. The Enlargement of thousands of our dear and precious Brethren out of bonds
and imprisonment, whose feet have been hurt in the Stocks, and the Irons have
entered into their souls.

8. The hopes and beginnings of the reducing of Wales, four Counties already
come in.

9. A door of Hope opened for gasping Ireland.

10. And lastly, which is all, A fair and hopeful possibility yea probability
(if our murmr and unbelief do not wheel us back again into the wilderness)
of putting an end, this Summer, to the bleeding distractions of this poor
languishing Kingdom, and of making a Peace upon your own terms.

Surely methinks God seems to tell you, You may be delilivered if you will; I
am willing, if you be willing.

God has given you gracious demonstrations, that when men go faithfully and
cordially about their business, what a world of work may be done in a little
time.

And now if you would know for whose sake God has done all this, my Text will
tell you, For your sakes have I sent to Babylon. It is for his Church and
peoples sake. God has a people in England, for whose sake he has sent to
Babylon, and brought down the cry of the Nobles, etc.

Who they be, or how you may know whether you be of the number of them for
whose sakes God has done these things, I shall give an hint in the close of
the Work.

In the mean time, suffer, I beseech you, the words of Exhortation: And it is
this:

If God do such great things for your sake, thou be you exhorted to do great
things for the Lords sake.

The Church and people of God have been of such a disposition, that they have
thought they could never do or suffer enough for the Lords sake.

Psalm. 44.22.
For thy sake we are killed all the day long.

2 Cor. 12.10.
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses, for Christ's sake.

And again: Acts 21.13.
I am not only ready to be bound, but to die, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

O let the same mind be in you, that was in David, in Paul, and in the rest of
the Saints: Be ready to do, be ready to suffer: Be willing to live, be willing
to die; and think nothing too much, for his sake, who has done such great
things for your sakes.

I must crave leave to branch out this Exhortation to two sorts.

1. To you Honorable and highly-honoured Senators of the Land.

2. To you the people of God that stand here this day, and the rest of your
brethren thorowout the Kingdom.

First, to you the Worthies of Englands Parliament.

For your sakes God has sent to Edgehill, and to the North, and to the West,
and has brought down the cry of their Nobles, etc.

God has honored you more then ever he honored any Parliament since the
foundations of this Kingdom were laid, and has done as great things for you as
ever he did for any Assembly of men, I think, since the foundations of the
world were laid.

And now, Honored Senators, study your Renders, What shall I render to the
Lord? etc. Study what you should do for the Lords sake, who has done so much
for yours.

Will you give me leave to by your Remembrancer? I will do it with all
Humility, Fidelity and Plainness, being encouraged thereto by former
experience of your candid and Christian entertainment of the faithfulness and
facenesse of those whom you have called to this Service.

Omme bonum quod superbus sibi arrogat supp^diaculum diabolo facit. Guil. Paris.
First therefore, for the Lords sake, study Humility: You cannot exalt God, if
you lift up your selves. And truly there be two things that do easily swell
the heart with pride, if it be not well watched; sc. Greatness, and Good
success: Both these have been your portion; God has lifted you up, and set
you upon the highest Throne in the Kingdom, The Throne of Legislative power:
Every one of you resemble the person of a Prince; you are so many little kings.

And God has given you admirable Successes (ever since he called you together)
to the astonishment of all that see or hear of the Lords goings forth with you
and for you: O now take heed, I beseech you, that these do not become
temptations and snares to you, Deuteronomy. 17.20.
whereby your hearts should be lifted up above your brethren, that they should
become cheap and vile in your eyes. O let not that which should lift up your
heart in Thankfulness, lift up your heart in pride and haughtiness.

You know how it fared with Hezekiah, though a very gracious King, and what the
sad consequences of it was: But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the
benefit done unto him; 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
for his heart was lifted up; namely, upon his miraculous recovery, and the
honor that was done him thereupon, by the King of Babylon.

Observe, I beseech you, Hezekiah rendered not, etc. why? For his heart was
lifted up. A proud man does nothing for Gods sake, though he thinks God does
all for his sake. And what follows? Therefore there was wrath upon him, and
upon Judah and Jerusalem.

O Sirs, if ye have found your hearts thus lifted up, with Hezekiah, upon the
honor and good successes God has cast upon you; humble your selves in the
presence of God for the pride of your heart, as it is said of Hezekiah in the
next verse, Why should there be wrath upon you, and upon the whole Kingdom for
your sakes? The lower you lie, the higher you lift up God, and the higher God
will lift up you. Humilitas semper volat licet repere videatur instar avis
volitantis, alas ad solemn habentis, rostreque pendentis Guil. Paris. Perit omne
judicium, ubi res transit in affectum.


2. For the Lords sake take heed of self-interests, and by-ends: Where these
prevail, there can be nothing done for the Lords sake: Either the Lords work is
not done, or not done to his mind, or not for his sake, which is all one with
not doing of it at all, and will bring a curse with it. Jer. 48.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently.

Hence it was that Jehu's zeal in doing execution upon the house of Ahab, when
God comes to reckon, is set upon the score of Murder, Hos. 1. Jehu writes
service, God writes murder: Jehu sets down zeal, God sets down blood; and all
because he did the Lords work in the pursuit of his own base and sinful ends
and interests. O that you would shake off these Vipers from your hands and
hearts. If you will not shake them off, God will shake you off: If you will not
shake these out of your bosoms, God will shake you out of his.

3. If you will do any thing for the Lords sake, do this, Set up his Son upon
his Throne; you cannot do any thing which the Lord will take more kindly at
your hands: For the Father has committed all Judgment (i. e. all Gov rnment)
unto the Son, that men may honor the Son, as they honor the Father.

I am persuaded, had this been done sooner, England had not now been to have
been delivered.

Jer. 10.7. Revel. 15.3.
He is King of Nations, and King of Saints. As King of Nations, he has a
Temporal Kingdom and Government over the world now he is in heaven, though he
exercised not such a Kingdom while he was on earth; Matthew. 28.18. 1 Cor.
15.25,27.
the Father having now given to him all power both in heaven and earth; and the
Rule and Regiment of this Kingdom he has committed to Monarchies,
Aristocracies, or Democracies, as the several combinations and associations of
the people shall between themselves think good to elect and erect. God leaves
people to their own liberty in this case. Submit your selves to every Ordinance
of man, for the Lords sake. for the Lords sake. (...), i.e. (...). Gr. Schol.
Civilis gubernationis dispositio. Beza.
The Greek reads it, (...), To every humane Creation. Civil Government, in the
kinds or species of it, is as it were but the creature of man, because men may
choose what kind of Government they shall find most advantageous to public
peace and welfare.

But Christ is also the King of Saints: As he has an inward and Spiritual
Government in the Conscience, which is only his Throne; so he has an outward
Kingdom, which he does visibly exercise in his Church,

Which does consist of these Particulars:

1. In that he conquers and subdues a people to himself, who are visible
subjects of this Kingdom.

2. In that he gives Laws and Statutes to this people, distinct from all the
Laws and Statutes of all the Kingdoms and Republiques in the world; as the
Church acknowledges Isa. 33.22.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, etc.

3. In that he appoints and constitutes special Officers in this Church, not
only to promulge these Laws, but to govern his people according to them ^
Matthew. 28.19. Acts 20.28. Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. (...). Presbyterorum ordinem
declarat qui disciplinae and Politiae Ecclesiastica custodes erant.
Go teach all Nations: Feed the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you
overseers. He that rules, with diligence. And God has set in his Church
Governments.

The spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.

4. In that he has commanded all the people and subjects of this Kingdom to be
obedient (in the Lord) unto these Officers. Heb. 13.7.
Remember them that have the rule over you, etc. and, Verse. 17.
Obey them that have the rule over you. Who does he mean here? the Civil
Magistrate? No: for it is added, Which have spoken to you the Word of God; and,
They watch for your souls, etc.

5. In that Christ has appointed penalties to be inflicted upon the stubborn
and disobedient, proper to this Government: Matthew. 18.17.
Let him be to thee as an Heathen, etc. and put away from among your selves
that wicked person, etc.

Now therefore since the Lord Jesus is King of Nations, and King of Saints, set
him up as both, in both his Kingdoms and Governments; and do it thoroughly, and
do it specdily.

1. Do it thoroughly. Would you have a through Deliverance, study a through
Reformation of Church and State.

Think not, renowned Nobles and Patriots, of doing the work of Reformation by
degrees, and piecemeal: It will be Christ's Honor, and your Advantage, to let
your Reformation come forth as full and honorable at first as may be: O it
will strike the more fear and awe into the hearts of people; it will be your
honor in the eyes of your own people, and strangers abroad, who will certainly
say, O what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the
Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? (surely Reformation is
the great thing which the Saints this day in England and in the three Kingdoms
have prayed for) And what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and
Judgments so righteous as all that Law of Reformation is, which Englands
Parliament have set up?

But now, let your Reformation be poor, and mean, and low at first, such as
wicked men may sit securely under; you discourage and kill the hearts of the
godly that have been praying for you, and expecting a Reformation from you;
encourage the common people to trample upon your Reformation, and the
Ministry; and render your selves cheap and contemptible to all the reformed
Churches, who do certainly stand at a gaze upon Englands Parliament and
Assembly, expecting not only that you should follow them, but that you should
hold forth to all the Christian world the most full, purest and glorious
Reformation that has been since the Churches have begun to shake off the yoke
of Antichristian Bondage.

You have done admirably in the destructive and purging part of Reformation:
with Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 24.15,26.
You have brought out the uncleanness that was found in the Temple of the
Lord. You have pulled up every plant which by our heavenly Father has not
planted, and taken out of his Kingdom whatsoever did offend; and the Lord
bless you for it.

Now therefore, that your work and your blessing may be complete, study to be
answerable in the positive and erective part of Reformation; that as you have
left nothing that Jesus Christ would have removed, so there may want nothing
that Jesus Christ would have set up in this New Model of Church Government.
Heb. 8.5.
See that ye do all things according to the pattern: so shall it be your honor,
as it was Moses, Heb. 3.2.
To be faithful to him that appointed him in all his House. Do thoroughly, that
Christ may not be an underling in his own House.

2. Do it speedily.

Tell me, I beseech you, what have you got by Delays? Who has been a gainer by
them? Not Jesus Christ, not you, not the work of Reformation. I know none that
have gained by these unhappie Obstructions, but Heresy, profaneness,
division, and in all these the devil.

You cannot but know how it is in the City, and it would make your souls bleed
to look into the Country, even those that are under the Parliaments command
(not to speak of those that lie under the Villainies and Violences of the enemy)
I say it would make your bowels ache, and your hearts grieve, to see what a face
of things there is in the Country; not so much truly as the face of a Church,
a Garden of God; but the face of a Wilderness; not a faithful Minister
perhaps in twenty Congregations; and where there is, they know not what to do
with their Congregations, for want of a Government: So that in the mean time
the greatest part turn profane; and if one or two here and there peep out of
the dungeons of Ignorance and Atheism, to enquire after the ways of God,
presently they are snapt up, and seduced into some way or other, of Heresy or
Schism, because there is neither hand nor instrument to take these Foxes, Cant.
2.15.
the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, that now begin to have tender Grapes.
If you mean that England shall be turned into a wilderness, and be overrun
with Atheism, and Heresy, and Profaneness, and Blasphemy, you may hold your
hands; and you need not do it long: But better it were, that England should be
overrun with fire and sword; better it should be devoured by plague and
pestilence; (the Arrows whereof fly so thick abroad, that they darken the very
Heavens over our heads) till man and beast were destroyed off the face of this
good Land, rather then this should come to pass: Better judgment should turn
us into a Wilderness, then sin should do it; better welter in our blood, then
wallow in our lusts.

Therefore, for the Lords sake, for the Lords sake, and again I say, for the
Lords sake, make haste; be through, be speedy in your Reformation. Would you
not stay long for a Deliverance, let not Christ stay long for a Reformation. In
both respects, hear what an Heathen Emperor could advise and command: Ezra 7.2^
Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done for
the House of the God of Heaven; for why should there be wrath against the Realm
of the King and his sons?

I should come to the fourth particular; but that there is one thing as a
branch of this third, which I desire leav cumbly to commend unto you; and that
is,

Concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

O, if you would express your love and zeal, and thankfulness to God in any
thing: If there be any thing wherein you would express your kindness and
fidelity to the Lord Jesus; do it in this: There is not a nearer concernment,
wherein you can gratify God (if I may so say) then this; What has God dearer
to him, then his Son? And what has his Son dearer to him, then his Body and
Blood? Oh, look to it I beseech you, that that be not profaned and trodden
under feet by any unworthy person, so far as it is in your power to prevent it.

Herein you may do well to imitate the Bishops, in building a Rail, or if that
word like you not, change it a letter or two, and make a Rule about the Lords
Table: But be sure, make it so thick and so high, that not a Dog may creep
through, or leap over, to eat the Childrens Bread; De occultis non judicat
ecclesia.
not one (I mean) that appears to be so; for secret things we must leave to the
Lord to judge.

Let me humbly ask you one Question.

Are there any kind of sinners think you, that Jesus Christ would have
excluded from that holy Mystery? If any, then all of the same Nature and
Influence; for what if you should keep out seventy, yea, seven thousand, sins
and sinners from the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.27.
and let but one scandalous sinner come, would not he be found a Crucifier of
the Son of God? yea, and (let me speak freely) you too, if he come under your
protection. But if Jesus Christ would have all come promiscuously to his Board;
it is not in the power of Elderships, nor Classes, nor Assemblies, or
Parliaments, nor any body in the World, to suspend any one kind of sin or
sinner from that Holy Feast.

Honorable and Beloved: Your blood, and the blood of your sons and daughters
has been precious in Gods eyes: O let the blood of the Son of God, be precious
in your eyes. God has not prostituted your flesh and your blood to any of your
wicked enemies; O suffer not the flesh and blood of the Lord Jesus to be
prostituted to any of his wicked enemies. For suppose God should say, The Irish
shall not spill your blood; Prince Ruperts Army shall not drink your blood;
Hoptons Army shall not; Gorings Army shall not; Greenvils shall not; the
Clubmen shall not; and so name seven, yea, seven times seven Armies, and
Nations, and yet give Commission or leave but for one Army, one Nation, in all
the world, to eat your flesh, and drink your blood; what would it avail you,
that the rest were suspended and restrained? O give not the Lord Jesus occasion
to say of you, 1 Samuel 25.21.
as sometime David said of Nabal: Surely, In vain have I kept all that these
men have; I have been sparing of their blood, and they have been prodigal of
mine: Now therefore go blasphemers, go drunkards, go Sabbath Breakers, go ye
worst of men, and eat their flesh and drink their blood, and the blood of their
sons and daughters. O deal not so unkindly with the Lord Jesus; to provoke him
to jealousy: Purge the Sacrament, and purge it thoroughly; And then hasten the
setting up of that Ordinance in all Congregations (where there be a competent
number fit for it.) Behold, the children cry for this bread, and there is none
to give it unto them: Behold, The Spouse of Christ is sick of love and hunger;
and therefore, hasten to stay her with this bread, and comfort her with these
flagons, that she may eat and drink, and her soul may bless you before she die.

Fourthly, For the Lords sake do execution upon all the professed and
implacable enemies of the Lord Jesus; who have said and sworn, Luke 19.14.
This man shall not reign over us. Behold, Christ commands you, saying, Verse
27.
Bring them hither, and slay them before me. For your sake God has sent to
Babylon, and brought down your enemies, great and small, and laid them dead at
your feet; What can you do more answerably by way of return, for the Lords
sake, then to bring down his enemies, and slay them before his face? Behold,
shall God for your sake, not suffer Parliament-Traitors, and
Parliament-Revilers, to live, and shall Christ's Traitors, and
Trinity-blasphemers, escape your just and severest vengeance? God forbid. You
had need to do somewhat as in vindictam so interrorem: For I tell you,
Blasphemy begins to be very bold and impudent; Eccles. 8.^.
Because sentence against evil doers, is not speedily executed; therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do and utter evil. O draw out
your sword to execute judgment against such enemies of Jesus Christ, That
others may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

Fifthly, For the Lords sake, Look to his poor Members that suffer: O hear the
complaints of your poor Brethren that are oppressed by inferior Committees in
any part of the Kingdom, that none that sit under your shadow, may have just
cause to say, You have pulled down one Star Chamber, and set up hundreds: Look
to your wounded Soldiers; to the poor women that have been made widows, and
children that have been made fatherless in the Parliaments Service; Their cry
is gone up to Heaven: O let their cry enter into your ears. Look to these
Families, many whereof have been of good estates, that by this unnatural War,
and for owning you, and your work, have been driven from their habitations,
destitute and naked, and have fled to this City of Refuge, (so God has made
London) to seek for shelter and relief: Or, O that you would give us leave to
look to them, and provide for them; by making some other provisions for your
wounded Soldiers, that the Collections in the City, might be employed for the
relief of such as are ready to give up the ghost at our doors, or lie
languishing at home, choosing rather almost to die, then to discover their wants
and necessities. Know ye not that thousands are ready to perish for want of
bread among us, and we have not wherewith to relieve their souls? This is a
work that much concerns Jesus Christ; for he has said it, Matthew. 25.45.
In as much as ye have done it to one of the least of these, ye have done it
unto me.

Sixthly, For the Lords sake, Stand by your friends, and the friends of Christ
and his Cause: Herein you stand by Jesus Christ himself. The enemy have gained
much (but the God would not suffer them to keep it) by their fidelity, or
policy rather, to their friends. O come not short of them in point of fidelity,
nor let the children of this world be always wiser in their generations, then
the children of light; Let none have just cause to say, We suffer for our good
will to the Parliament, if you can help it: You have the better Cause; stand by
it, and it will stand by you.

I come now to speak a word in the last place, to all that stand before God
this day; and the whole people of this Kingdom: God has done great things for
your sakes also, as you have heard. And now what will you do for the Lords sake?

There be but two or three things, that in this strait of time, I shall commend
to you as proper returns for these great deliverances and victories.

First, Since God has brought down your enemies abroad, do you labor to bring
down his enemies at home. God has avenged you in the blood of base and wicked
men, do you avenge God in the blood of your base and sinful lusts. God has
pulled down the strong holds of your enemies, and made them fall before you; do
you down with these strong holds within every one of you, 2 Cor. 10.5,6.
whereby Jesus Christ has been kept out of your hearts. Brethren, better it is
to perish by the lusts of our enemies, then by our own lusts; and better the
enemy had prevailed and blasphemed God with their tongues, then we delivered to
reproach and blaspheme God by our lives. Hear what an angry question God asks,
Jer. 7.9,10.
Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
Incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom we know not; and come and
stand before me in this house, which called by my Name, and say, We are
delivered to do all these abominations? O let us not be the reproach of
victories; let us not sin against, much less sin upon, sin because of our
deliverances: It is pity fair weather should do any harm. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? O let us put these
lusts to flight, to death; whose cry has been in Gods ears, calling for
vengeance so long, on us, and on the Nation: God has given us the heads of our
enemies; let us give God the heads of our corruptions.

Secondly, God has made our enemies a Sacrifice for us, and we are as the
Scapegoat, as Isaac. Romans 12.1.
I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, wichh is your reasonable
service. This is indeed a reasonable service, that he that has redemeed us,
should have us: 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God with your bodies and souls,
which are Gods.

Thirdly, Let us still own the Cause, which we see God still owns; and serve it
with our Estates, our Counsels, our Prayers, our persons, and if need be, our
lives and blood: Christ has not deserted us, let not us desert Christ. And to
this purpose; Let us all, both Parliament and people, Remember our Covenant;
Let us often read over our Covenant, and live up with our Covenant, and act up
with our Covenant, and reform up with our Covenant. It is a fearful thing to
let a Covenant lie by the walls, as worm-eaten Paper; it is a fearful thing to
take a Covenant, as it were, for no other end then to aggravate our sins; that
as the Light turns sin into rebellion, so the Covenant might aggravate
rebellion into perjury. How may we expect for this, That God should strengthen
the hand, and sharpen the sword of the enemy, which for a while he has in
mercy weakened and blunted, and let it in upon us, with Commission, Levit. 26.25.
To avenge the quarrel of the Covenant? O let us be wise to Salvation, and say
with David, Psalm. 116.12,14.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his mercies? I will pay my vows unto
the Lord: And again, Psalm. 56.12.
Thy vows are upon me, O God, I will render praise unto thee.

Now therefore, holy Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly Calling, let us every
one in our stations and callings, stir up our selves to be active for God, who
has been mighty for us. And for your encouragement, take this precious, and I
hope prevailing motive, (it is the hint and evidence I promised you even now;
and with which I will conclude.)

Hereby we shall know that we are of the number of those for whose sake God
has done these great things, (and will do yet greater) when we find our
hearts raised and enlarged to do great things for him: By this we may know, God
does all for us, when we do all for him: He hears us when we have an heart to
hear him. If we find such a frame of heart, here is comfort indeed;
Deliverances, and deliverances for our sake; Victories, and victories not only
by divine leave, but with divine love, love to our persons, and love to our
prayers, etc. These be deliverances indeed; Victories worth the having;
victories of Gods Israel, Genesis 32.28.
such as of Jacobs, wrestlers, have become Isreal's, Princes, to prevail with
God and men.

O let us study this; It is the spiritual, and the best part of our mercies, a
divine impression, and argument of the love of God upon our spirits: Surely,
There is not a more glorious sight on this side Heaven, then to see a God doing
great things for a people, and a people doing great things for their God.

The Lord be such a God to us, and make us such a people to him, and we are
happy for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

