THE PRESENT Duty and Endeavor OF THE SAINTS.

Opened in a Sermon at Paul's upon the Lords day December, 14.th 1645.

By JOSEPH CARYL, Minister of the Gospel at Magnus near London Bridge.

LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET for GEORGE HURLOCK, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Magnus-corner. 1646.

To the right Honorable, THOMAS ADAMS Lord MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
SIR:
J Have (though somewhat late) obeyed your desires for the publishing of this
Sermon. The Acceptance it found with your Self gives me a ground of hope, that
it was not unacceptable to others; The judgment of those who are (as your
Self is) in place of Eminent dignity and Authority, is (usually) the measure
of inferior judgments. And while our Magistrates give Testimony of their
relishing such a Doctrine as this, I am much persuaded, that God is bringing it
to the relish of all his people. When the Kingdoms (that is the people) of
this world, shall become the kingdoms of the Lord and of his CHRIST, Then
(doubtless) Kings and Magistrates in all the World shall become the Lords and
his Christ's. All their Policies shall be turned into Piety, and their
Consultations into a zealous Proving what is Acceptable to the Lord. That your
Lordship with those venerable Colleagues the Magistrates of this City may do
so, and that All the people of this City eying as chiefly the warrant of the
Word, so likewise your work, as a shining President, may do so, is the prayer
(as much as that in so doing your Hon: ble Self, and this renowned City under
your government shall be happy, is the assurance) of

SIR, Your humble Servant in this work of the Lord, JOSEPH CARYL.
Januar. 22. d, 1645.
THE PRESENT DUTY AND ENDEAVOR OF THE SAINTS.
EPHESIANS. 5. 10. Proving what is acceptable to the Lord.
NAturals in working, are suitable to their being; Grapes grow not on thorns,
nor Figgs upon thistles. While our Natures continue dark we cannot but do the
works of darkness. They who are Spiritual should act spiritually: And when
they are in the light, it is their duty to be always doing works of light:
Thus the Apostle argues at the 8th verse of this Chap. Ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of the light.

And lest any should be in the dark about this duty, what it is to walk as
children of the light, the Apostle steps aside into a Patenthesis, at the 9th
verse to explain it, The fruit of the Spirit (who or which is light) is in all
goodness and righteousness and truth. To walk in goodness and
righteousness and truth, is, to walk as children of the light.

And because light is a help to discovery (light makes manifest) therefore the
children of Light are not only called to do their duty, but are warned to see,
that it is a duty which they do, Proving what is acceptable to the Lord.

That Is the business of the text, upon which I shall insist, when I have
briefly opened; First, what it is to prove; Secondly, what is meant by a thing
Acceptable to the Lord.

The Greek word, translated Proving, signifies also Approving, and includes
Practicing. In the first sense it is taken two ways; First, for proving by way
of Trial or Experiment; Secondly, by way of Reason or Argument.

The former way, he that had bought five yoke of Oxen, went to prove them, Luke
14. 19. The Apostle speaks of the proof or trial of Faith, which is much
more precious then of Gold that perishes (1 Pet. 1. 7.) The word bearing a
native Allusion to the trial of metals, especially of Gold by the Test, or by
the Touchstone. Thus his Canon tells us, that Deacons must be proved: then let
them use the office of a Deacon, being found (upon proof) blameless, 1 Timothy
3. 10. And thus all who profess CHRIST, are exhorted to Prove themselves,
whether they be in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Besides this experimental proof of things and persons, there is a logical
or a rational proof of Doctrines, of which we must understand that rule given
the Thessalonians (1 Epist. 5. 21) Prove all things, hold fast that which is
good. To this kind of proof the duty of the Text is chiefly to be referred.

From Proving, the word caries us to Approving; the former convinces the
judgment, this latter touch-es the will and affections. We have this
translation, Romans 14. 22. Blessed is he that condemns not himself, in that
thing which he allows, or approves. And in the Passive mood (1 Cor. 11.
19.) There must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest among you. Approved ones are current Professors, in the sense,
we call that Current money, which is allowed in all payments.

To both these acts of Probation and approbation, we may add a third upon the
usage of this word; namely Practice, Romans 12. 2. Be not conformed to this
World, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove
what is that good, and that acceptable and perfect will of God. When the higher
and nobler faculties of the Soul are renewed the whole man is transformed. New
apprehensions of things by the mind cast a man into a new mould, and then as
his Reason proves by discerning, and his Will by approving; so his actions
prove by Practicing what the acceptable will of God is.

To be Acceptable, imports more then to be Pleasing. The composition of the
word increases the sense Non simplicite^ (...) sed (...) valde b^ne placitu^ et
per gratum. Zanch.
of it, into Well-pleasing or very well-pleasing, yea Best-pleasing; In this
language the Apostle exhorts Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and
to please them well, (Tit. 2. 9) or to give them all content. The duty of a
Servant is not reached in doing only so much as may serve his turn, to keep
his Master from being angry with him, but he should labor to win his Love,
and to the utmost gain his favor. The word is translated Well-pleasing, Phil.
4. 18. and (in another form) Well-pleased, (Heb. 13. 21.) both in reference to
Free-almes, and deeds of Noblest-charity.

So then the Apostles meaning is, that we must not only try, approve and
practice those things, which possibly may be pleasing to God in some low
degree, such things as set as a step beyond his displeasure; but we must search
and do those things, which give him highest content, and carry us furthest into
his favor. Things which come up to the exactest rule and bear truest
proportion to the Standards of truth and holiness.

Take all gathered into this brief Proposition.

It is the duty of the Children of light diligently to Doct.
try (and having by trial found out, to) approve and Practice, what is
best-pleasing and most contentfull to the Lord.

It did not satisfy holy David to be kept from Presumptuous sins, and to be
innocent from the Great transgression, unless the words of his mouth and the
Meditation of his heart might be acceptable in the sight of the Lord, his
strength and his Redeemer, Psalm. 19. 14. How desirous was he, to have his
actions accepted, who could not bear it, that a word or a thought of his,
should miss of acceptance? The Apostle inferres this duty upon the whole
matter of our Gospel-priviledges, Heb. 12. 28. Wherefore we receiving a
Kingdom, which cannot be shaken, let us have Grace whereby we may serve him
acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear.

Greater love calls for greater care. And while God (which should please us
fully) gives us mercies, which cannot be shaken, we should be steady in our
purposes, fully, to please God. Enoch the second Saint by name, and the seventh
Man from Adam, was translated from Earth to Heaven, that he should not see
death. But what had this man done while he lived upon the earth, which moved
the Lord to dispense with that Great Statute of Heaven (which in our reading
was dispensed with but once more) It is appointed for all men once to die,
(Heb. 9. 27.) The text answers, Before his translation, he had this testimony,
that he pleased God. By whose hands these letters Testimonial were subscribed,
is not written; whether this was the testimony of Man or of God, or of both is
not written, but a Testimony he had, That he pleased God. Were there none
before that age who had this Testimony? Yes, Abel pleased God so much, that man
could not endure he should live; But Enoch pleased God so much, that God could
not endure he should dye. Though the Apostle Paul could not be confident of
Enochs privilege; Not to be uncloathed, but clothed upon; That his Mortality
might be swallowed up of Life, yet he was as diligent in Enoch's duty, (2 Cor.
5. 10.) We labor (as covetous men for Money, or ambitious spirits for Honor,
such are the reaches of the Original, we labor) that whether present or
absent, we may be accepted with him.

His Title in the text tells us, we cannot go less, then such an accurate care
to please him: He is our Lord. If Servants must be so obedient to their own
earthly Masters, as to please them well in all things, Tit. 2. 9. How should we
please our Master, who is in heaven, and who is Lord of earth and heaven. Man
is apt enough to please, where he has dependancies, and strives to be
accepted, where much is to be received. All preferments and offices are in the
gift and at the dispose of this Lord. Promotion comes neither from the East
nor from the West, nor from the South; But God is the Judge, he puts down
one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. When King Herod was highly
displeased, with them of Tire and Sidon, they came with one accord unto him and
desired Peace, because their Country was nourished by the Kings Country, ( Act.
12. 20.) Our Country is nourished by CHRIST'S country, Heaven feeds the Earth,
and can we live with a displeased Christ?

And as our rewards and comforts come from him now, so hereafter, must our
judgment. That Is the Apostles reason 2 Cor. 5. 9. 10. Wherefore we labor,
that whether present or absent we may be accepted with him; for we must all
appear before the judgment Seat of CHRIST, etc. Many (says Solomon) seek
the Rulers favor, but every man's judgment is of the Lord, Prove. 29. 26. Why
has the Rulers so many suitors for his favor? Is it not because the judgment
of inferiors proceeds from him? Solomon denies not this, while he affirms
that every man's judgment is of the Lord, but teaches us to seek Gods favor
chiefly, both, because he can overruled the Rulers heart to give a right
judgment, and will himself give the last judgment (from which there lies no
appeal) to every man.

Again, that which is acceptable to the Lord is most excellent in it self. Low
things may please men in high place. And that which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is an abomination to the Lord, (Luke 16. 15). But whatsoever is highly
esteemed of the Lord, has a real worth in it. That must be rich and pure wine
which pleases the quickest palate, and that an exact Picture which pleases the
skilfullest eye. It is argument enough, that a thing is good, when it pleases
the Chief Good. Some men are so bad, that the worst things please them best.
God is so good that nothing but good can please him; and, because he is the
Chiefest good, therefore the better any thing is, the more it pleases him. We
cannot desire a stronger or a nobler ground of reason industriously to please
another, then this assurance, that we cannot please him with any thing, which
is not Honorable in it self.

This point caries a reproof in it against four sorts of men.

First, such as Practice what they have not proved or First to Prove all things
then hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. And the reason why many do
not hold fast that which is good is, because they did not first Prove it. David
could not march in Saul's Armor, for he had not assayed it. 1 Samuel 13. 9. In
this sense a man may practice a truth too soon. And they who practice it thus
soon, will not practice it long. How many thousands practicing truths which
they never tried, have let them go, when themselves were tried. The not
rooting of Truth in the understanding (as well as not in the affections) is a
root of Apostasy. What we do upon the reason or command of men, will not bear
up against the reason and command of men. The Treble Turn which this Kingdom
felt in a few years (not many years since) from Popery to Protestantisme,
from This to That, from That to This again, is a proof, to this day
bewaylable, of their unsteddinesse, who Practice what they have not Proved.

Secondly, such are reproved by this Truth, who practice Romans 7. 15) They allow
not of the good they do. Vainglory and the applause of men, made the
Pharisees frequent in Prayer, Fasting, and Almsdeeds, the spiritualnesse and
holiness of which Duties they tasted not ( Math. 6.) Covetousness caused the
Sichemites to submit to Circumcision, their consciences were not taken with it.
The argument which moved them, lay in the Cattle and earthly goods of Jacobs
family, not in the heavenly Good, which that Covenant sealed and assured from
God, Genesis 34. 17. Shall not their Cattle, and their substance and every beast
of theirs, be ours, Verse 25. How many are daily led by fear of censures from
men, by desire of concurrence and compliance with men, by the sway and stream
of Times, at the mere appointment and command of Man, to do or forbear those
things at which their Consciences never scrupled, with which their consciences
never closed? I will leave but two words with this Generation. First, they who
do good things, which they approve not, shall never be approved by God for
doing them. Secondly, God will rank and reckon them among evildoers, who have
done good, which they approved not.

3.ly, they fall under the reproof of this point, who will The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against their unrighteousness, who (thus) hold the truth
in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. Truth is not only free, but it makes those who
receive it, free. Woe to those who make bonds for truth, who imprison and
enslave it, who violently hold down truth, lest it should exercise due
dominion and command over their actions. Such is their case who smother the
light of clear Principles received, and know better, then they dare or have a
will to appear and do. Thou know his will (so the same Apostle chides them
too) and approvest the things that that are more excellent, being instructed
out of the law, Romans 2. 18. Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou
not thy self? etc. As that man is happy, who condemns not himself in that
thing which he allows, (by a scandalous practice of it) Romans 14. 22. So
happy is that man who condemns not himself, in that thing which he allows,
by a scandalous neglect of it. As some Heretics, so this sort of hypocrites
are Self-condemners. While a Heretic would logically justify his false
opinion, and while these hypocrites will not practically follow their true
opinion, they both really (though neither of them intentionally) condemn their
own persons.

The fourth sort which this Point deals with, fail greatest number would
feign please those who are great in Dignity, and sometime they who are great in
dignity will industriously please the greatest Number.

When Herod had killed James the Brother of the Lord with the Sword, because he
saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also ( Act. 12.
3.) He cares not to spill the blood of an innocent, so he may please the humor
of the multitude. The sin is near of the same stature, whether Great men
sin to please many, or many sin to please those who are Great.

The Apostle Paul (I grant) pleased all men in all things, 1 Cor. 10. 33. and
concludes ( Romans 15. 2.) Let every one of us please his neighbor. It is our
duty to do so, but take the limitation which follows; for his good to
Edification. We may please men to edify them, but not to flatter them, to do
them good, not to make our selves Great or rich: So the holy Apostle explaines
his Noble Parasitisme, I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. All man-pleasing, but
that whereby we profit those we please, is displeasing unto God. And the profit
he means is not either in filling or saving their purses, but in saving their
Souls. Any other man-pleasing he disclaimes, as having no allowance at all
from God, (1 These. 2. 3, 4.) Our exhoration was not of deceit, etc: but as we
were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, not as pleasing men
but God, who tries the hearts: Nor at any time used we flattering words, as ye
know (you must have heard them had we used them) nor a cloak of Covetousness
(that I confess is beyond your sight, Covetousness is a close sin, and the
intendment of it closer, but) God is witness, nor of men sought we glory, etc.
Glory or gain, profit or praise, are the usual provocations to such flattery.
He that is above the bayt, shall not fall into the snare.

I have four things to say to these.

First, they who sinfully endeavor acceptance with Wolsey saw himself
deserted by that King, he said; If I had labored to please and serve God, as
I have done to serve and please my Prince, I had not bin thus cast off and
forsaken. Many such wrackt and weather-beaten wretches, will complain at last,
that they too much sought and pleased themselves with the Faire-weather and
warm Sunshine of the world.

Secondly, such usually prove unacceptable to themselves. Achitophel had
sinfully ingratiated himself with Absalom, to betray David, and Judas with the
Scribes and Pharisees to betray CHRIST, they both fell out with themselves and
ended their lives under the disfavour of their own Consciences. How many,
having (to regaine their lost reputation with men) renounced the truth, have
presently bin renounced by their own hearts, and could never get a good word,
or a good look from them again: And they who have not found that quarrel
endless, have taken soar revenges upon Themselves, and could not recover
their peace, till they had acknowledged and bewailed their own cowardice.
Cranmer, puts his right hand into the fire, which had subscribed his
Recantation. And Jewel mournes in Germany for a subscription he made in England
to the Popish Inquisitors. The hypocrites hope shall be cut off (says Bildad,
Job 8. 14.) the word signifies also extreme Loathing, and Abominating; which
implies his hope shall be so cut off, that he shall be a Loathing to himself.
It is an affliction (and in some cases a very great one) to be Loathed by other
men, but it is a far greater for a man to be loathed by his own Soul.

There is a twofold Self-loathing; First, of Repentance; secondly, of
Desperation; this latter is there portion: And that is as black as the suburbs
of hell, and lies but one step from the regions of everlasting darkness.

Thirdly, such displease Christ so much, that he Gal. 1. 10. Do I now
persuade men, or God; Paul preached of God, not to God: God is above man's
Rhetoric, or persuasions, why then does he say, Do I persuade men, or God?
His meaning is, do I persuade the things of men or of God, do I persuade you
to hear and obey Men or God: Or (as our late Annotators) do we make faith to
men, or seek to endeare our selves to men. The next words of the Text give us
this gloss, do I seek to please men? Why Paul, what danger or damage if
thou had? yes, very great: For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the
servant of Christ. No man can serve two Masters, unless their will and
commands be one. It is best for man when his will (in reference to the object)
is melted into Gods; yet God and some men are never, God and no man are always
(in this sense) Monothelites: And therefore they who resolve to please men
always, shall be sure to please God but seldom, if at all. The two Witnesses
tormented them that dwelt upon the earth, Rev. 11. 10. How could two torment
millions? What were the racks or engines upon which they held the world in
pain? It was their plaine-speaking and plaine-doing what was acceptable to the
Lord. They who will follow them, or, are now Acting them, shall sure enough,
anger all wicked men who dwell upon the earth, and possibly (in some things)
some of them, who are godly too. Truth puts the world into a rage, Psalm. 2. 1.
Every rule of duty is a Band of slavery, and every holy counsel a Cord, which
they will break a sunder, if they can, and cast away from them. How then shall
they please God, who are studious to please such men? And as All holy truths
put all the world (whether their sound comes) into a rage: So some truths are
so holy, that they may put some Churches, or some of the Churches into a rage.
Every good man is not always in a frame to receive all that is Good. How then
shall they please God, who are resolved to do or say no more then pleases all
good men?

Fourthly, while we seek to be accepted with men, Ioh. 5. 44. How can ye
believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the Honor, which
comes of God only. It is possible to receive honor both from God and man for
the same thing. Only of God, does not exclude the honor of Men, but teaches us
to resolve to do our duty, when honor comes from God only. The meaning of
Christ is, unless (though we slight not honor from men) we can rest
satisfied with honor from God only, We cannot (which is our honoring of God)
believe him. They never give God credit who are in Love with credit from the
world. Or if Christ gain faith in the hearts of such, yet he looses their
Profession of him, with the mouth. Among the chief Rulers many believed on
Christ, but they did not confess him ( Ioh. 12. 42.) And this reason is added;
For they loved the Praise of men, more then the praise of God. That man who
loves the praise of God, but as much, as he loves the praise of men, loves it
less. Seeing there is nothing more unequal then this equality. Where the
obligation is unequal we cannot discharge our duty by making our payments
equal. If then, it could be supposed, that a man did gradually love the praise
of men, no more then he loves the praise of men, yet really he loves it more.
And when once a man's affections are thus warm after the world, how cold and
unactive is he after JESUS CHRIST. He must have the smiles and embraces, the
good word and acceptance of men, though he run the hazard of his acceptance
with the Lord.

I have done with matter of reproof. This point will also inform and give us
an account of the reason why the servants of Christ stand so strictly upon
their Terms with the world, even till some call it vain preciseness and
others wilful stubbornness. When Pharaoh came to the lowest terms of a
composition with Moses about the departure of the children of Israel out of
Egypt; Go ye serve the Lord, only let your flocks and your herds be
stayed, let your little ones also go with you: will Moses yield to this? No,
Our Cattle also shall go with us, there shall not an hoof be left behind us.
Was not this obstinacy in Moses? Why was he thus rigid and peremptory with so
great a King? Surely if Moses had bin to please himself only in the
agreement, he had accepted his own peace and the deliverance of Israel on
those or easier terms to Pharaoh, but he had a God to please whose right he
could not give away in the least thing. Which he clearly intimates in the next
words. There shall not an hoof be left behind: for thereof must we take to
serve the Lord our God; And we know not with what we must serve the Lord until
we come thither. Exodus 10. 26. As if Moses had said, if we had nothing to do
with our cattle but only to work or eat them, we might (possibly) hearken to
thy motion. And rather leave our beasts to thee, then to live an hour longer
within the reach of so cruel a beast as thou; But the Lord has use of our
cattle as well as we; Thereof must we take to serve the Lord our God. And we
will not take upon us to part out his portion here, we expect direction from
him, there; We may bring what he likes not, therefore he shall take his choice
of all, a hoof shall not stay behind. I will not bate an ace, or loose a
title. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, Prove. 10. 32. To know
is the work of the understanding, to speak is the work of the lips: how then
says Solomon, That the lips of the righteous know? There is a great affinity
between Reason and Speech; and therefore the lips which are an organ of
Speech, are honored with the work of the understanding. Or because a righteous
man has much true knowledge; therefore his lips are said to know (as David's
hands are said to understand and he to govern by the understanding of his
hands, Psalm. 78. 72. His hands understood more then the heads of ordinary
Princes) in this sense (I say) the lips of a righteous man are said to know.
And among all Objects of knowledge, this, he either does or desires to know
most, namely What is acceptable. And because he is so much skilled in this
Point, he will run all hazards to practice it, and do what is acceptable to
the Lord. The Holy Apostles put this question to the Vote of their professed
Enemies, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then
unto God, judge ye. Act. 4. 19. The servants of Christ know very well what the
concernements are of man-pleasing. They know favor, and honor, and riches,
and respects come in at that door, and they are not ignorant of the meaning of
these things, nor yet so stoicall as not to desire to enjoy them; They know
also what the frowns* of men are, what storms clouded brows portend: they
are very sensible of it, what is to be slighted, what to be poor, what to be
scourged, what to be imprisoned: and they are not so stoicall as not to desire
to avoid these things. Christ himself (according to his humane nature) was not
a thirst for a bitter cup, but prayed thrice, Father if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me. Only that which satisfied CHRIST, satisfies them. Not
our will but thy will be done. And upon that title, they think all men should
be of their mind, and are resolved to be of that mind, though all men are
against them; Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more
then unto God, judge ye; we believe you are of our mind: However we resolve to
be of that mind, though you vote against it, for that is our duty. We ought to
obey God rather then men, Chap. 5. 29.

Then, let the strength of your endeavors run out in seeking and doing what is
acceptable to the Lord. Pray continually, Lord, let us have Grace, whereby we
may serve thee acceptably. Let nothing be acceptable to us, which is not to the
Lord. Let us reckon all our walkings, wanderings, which are not in paths
pleasing to him. Resolve to live unacceptably to all, rather then unacceptably
to One. As we should say, let God be true and All men Liars; So let God be
pleased, and all men displeased. Who art thou (dares any man appear and show
his head upon this challenge) that thou should be afraid of a man that
shall dye, and of the Son of man that shall be made as the grass, and
forgettest (to please) the Lord thy Maker, that stretched forth the heavens,
and laid the foundations of the earth, etc. Isa. 51. 12, 13. Consider

First, it is a great honor to Christ, when all study to please him. It is the
glory of Princes that so many strive to be accepted with them, and to find
favor in their eyes. We cannot but esteem (or at least pretend to esteem)
him much, whom we labor to please much: And such as we esteem highly of, we
are ready not only to please but to humor. Christ should have this honor from
all the Saints: an affectarion to please him is their duty: Yea (with reverence
be it received) it is their duty to humor him. Not that there is any
imaginable humor in Christ, all whose commands are bottomed upon infinite
reason. But my meaning is only this: our care to please Christ should be exact
and curious, and that then we honor him most, when we not only do those
things which carry the light of a clear necessity, or the great things of the
Gospel, but those also, which most look upon, but as ( Minucia's) small
matters, the tything of Mint and Cummin, forms, circumstances and (as it were)
curiosities in Religion. To prove and practice what is acceptable to the Lord
in the least things, gives greatest honor to the Lord. Our obedience is the
more, where the duty is less.

Secondly, it is a great privilege to be accepted Aaron to wear a Golden
plate upon his Mitre, with this inscription, HOLINESS TO THE LORD. And this must
be upon Aarons forehead, that he might bear the iniquity of the Holy things
which the Children of Israel should hallow in all their holy gifts; And the
reason given was this, That they might be accepted before the Lord. As if the
Lord had said, This shall be Isreal's honor, above all the Nations of the
earth. They shall be accepted before the Lord, Exodus 28. 36. This was Moses
Prayer for the Tribe of Levi. Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work
of his hands, Deuteronomy. 33. 11. When wrath was grown highest and hottest against
Jerusalem this Charter was recalled. When they Past I will not hear their cry,
and when they offer burnt offerings and an oblation I will not accept them,
Ier. 14. 12. They sacrifice Flesh for the sacrifice of mine offerings, and eat
it, but the Lord accepts it not, Hos. 8. 13. They may fill themselves, and
make merry with their Sacrifices, but the Lord will not taste a bit, or give
them a Thank, for all the cost they bestow upon his holy Feasts. To what
purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me says the Lord, I am full
of the burnt* offerings of Rams and of the fat of fed beasts, Isa. 1. 11. The
Lord was full, not as a man is full, with feeding plentifully upon meat he
likes, but full, as a man is cloyed with the very sight of meat he loathes; so
the next words expound it. I delight not in the blood of Bullocks or of Rams.
When God says to a People, to what purpose are your Prayers, your humblings,
your fastings? I am full of them, It is an argument he accepts none of them.

Thirdly, the comfort which arises from the sense Jacob was much comforted in a
probability, that his Brother Esau would accept him. I will (says he) appease
him with the present, that goes before me, and afterward I will see his face,
peradventure he will accept of me, Genesis 32. 20. It was some comfort to him to
have but a ground of hope, that the clouds which had bin so long gathered in
the brow of Esau would shortly dissolve* and that he might enjoy the shine of a
pleased look, from his angry, revengefull Brother.

How earnestly does the Apostle Paul bespeake, yea beg Prayers, that the
service which he had for Jerusalem, might be accepted with the Saints, Romans
15. 31. It is no small comfort to have a place in the hearts of the Saints. The
good word and approbation of one Good man, weighed more with Paul then the
commendation of all the world which was not such. There is a Testimony from a
third hand, which is a richer treasure then this. Paul found it so, and he
could not conceal it, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of
our Conscience, etc. Acceptance with the men of the world (while we keep a
good Conscience) is a great mercy; But as to be accepted with the Saints is
more desirable then with all other men; So to be accepted in our own
Consciences is more desirable then with all the Saints. To please and hear
well with the Saint within us, is better then to please, and hear well, with
the Saints without us.

Yet the Point in hand shows us a higher consolation then these. For as the
testimony of God against us is more terrible then that of our own hearts (1
Ioh. 3. 20.) If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our hearts and
knows all things: and therefore knows more evil by us, and every evil
more, then our own hearts do. So the testimony of God for us, is more
comfortable then that of our own hearts. If our hearts acquit and accept of us,
God is greater then our hearts, and knowing all things, He knows more good by
us, and every good more, then our own hearts do. Who can express how sweet
it is to hear well with God, and to receive this Testimony, that we please
him? When Conscience speaks us fair, we have Peace; but when Gods speaks us
fair and gives us an Euge from heaven, Well done good and faithful Servants,
we have peace that passes all understanding, and joys which are unspeakable
and glorious. A good Conscience is a continual feast, but this is hidden
Manna, upon which the Saints especially feed fat, when the Fig Tree does not
blossom, and when there is no fruit in the Vines, when the labor of the Olive
fails, and the Fields yield no meat, when the Flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no Herd in the stalls: Yea when we are at fullest
Tables, this is the sauce in our dish and the sugar in our Cup, Go thy way
(says the Preacher) eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart (why, what is the matter?) For God now accepts thy works. Let thy
garments be always white, and let thy head lack no ointment, live joyfully
with the Wife whom thou love all the days of thy life, etc: Joy is shed into
all the motions and relations of his life, who is, and knows that he is
accepted of the Lord.

This may be cleared further in three Particulars.

First, because if we are once accepted with Christ, Jews sing Hosannah to
Christ, and will force him to a throne, shortly after they cry out Crucify
him, and nail him to a Cross. In the same City Paul with Barnabas (being
called Gods in the likeness of men) had almost bin Sacrificed to, and Paul
being supposed unworthy to live amongst men, was really stoned, almost to
death. The affections of men alter as much as their condition. Only God never
alters his opinion of any man; No Ziba shall ever be able to accuse us out of
the favor of the King of heaven. God never rejects where or whom he has
accepted. He never changes his correspondence. Once a friend and always a
friend. Yea he is pleased with his, while he manifests a fatherly displeasure
against them.

Secondly, Christ can command our acceptance in the hearts of men, when to
please him, we venture the displeasure of men. Daniel (chap. 1. 8, 9.) purposed
in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings
meat, nor with the Wine which he drank. Now God had brought Daniel into
favor and tender love with the Prince of the Eunuchs. Carnal policy might
have prompted Daniel thus, Meats in their own nature are indifferent, and the
reason upon which the command of their distinction is grounded may (possibly)
be of an inferior Nature to the preservation of mine and my brethrens lives,
which, as things stand, depends on the favor of the great Officers in the
Court of Babylon. These or the like thoughts made no impression upon his
spirit: but seeing that the honor of God, and the credit of the Jewish
Religion must have bin shaken by his yielding to Gentilisme in the least
degree; therefore he resolves to run all hazards rather then this. But the
Story tells us, how the Lord calmed and meek'ned the Spirit of the Prince of the
Eunuchs toward Daniel, insomuch that he endangers his own head to the King,
rather then he will force the conscience of a Captive. And therefore winkes at
his under Officer dispencing with the rigor of that hard Law. Who would not
purpose in his heart to keep close to the will of Christ, when Christ can thus
command the wills of men, and cause them to yield in courtesy, when we will not
yield for conscience. It is at once the comfort and the privilege of the
Saints, that they serve a King who rules the Spirits of men, as well as their
Bodies. When his people were few in number yea very few and strangers in the
Land, when they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another
people. He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for their
sakes. Psalm. 105. 12, 13, 14. Many had (as we say) an a king tooth at the
people of God, their fingers itcht to be a dealing with them. And what hindered?
The text gives us four advantages that the world had of them. First, they were
few; secondly, very few; thirdly, strangers; fourthly, unsettled? what hindered
them? It was the Lord: He restrained the spirits of Princes, and the madness
of the people. Many offered and attempted, but the Lord suffered no man to do
them wrong. Hence the Lord that he might encourage the Jews after they were
safe in Canaan, to come up freely to the place of his worship, gives them this
assurance. No man shall desire thy Land when thou shall go up to appear
before the Lord thy God thrice in the year (Exodus 24. 34.) God can keep not
only hands from spoiling, but hearts from desiring. And as the concupiscible
appetite in man is under his command, so also is the iracible. He can stay
anger and wrath as well as covetousness and desire. When a man's ways please
God he makes even his enemies to be at Peace with him. (Prove. 16. 7.) why then
should we displease God to avoid the wars and emnities of men? Austin brings
in some excusing their compliances with the sinful customs of those times, in
drinking Healths, thus. Great Personages Deus qui te videt, per ejus amorem
inebria^^ non velle, ipse tibi gratiam etiam illorum dabit qui te, ut plus
hiberis videbantur cogere. Sermon. 2. do de Temp.
urged us to it, and it was at the Kings banquet, where they judged of Loyalty
by Luxury, and put us upon this election, drink or dye, The not drinking of a
health had bin our death. He gives many answers to these cowards, but this
especially to the present purpose. That God, who sees that for love to him,
thou would not conform to their drunken customs, will give thee favor in
their eyes, who thus threatened thee to drink. This argument holds in the point
of Faith and worship, as well as of manners. When God sees we will not pollute
our consciences to please men, he always can and often does make men, if not
pleased with us, yet at peace with us. He (says the Apostle Romans 14. 18.) that
in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men. God
and good men approve the same things and persons. And God can cause evil men
who approve not the same things, yet to approve the same persons. Even as he
often makes those who fear not God contrary to all men (1 These. 2. 15.) They
shall not long please either good or bad, who care not to please God. And they
often please the bad (not that their hearts are suited but overruled to them)
who will do goed, lest they should displease the Lord.

Thirdly, Christ's acceptance sets us above the rejection of the world. How low
a thing is credit with men, when once the soul has found credit with God. No
man (says CHRIST) having drunk old Wine, straightway desires new, for he
says, the old is better. (Luke 5. 39.) The Favor of God is old Wine, even as
old as Eternity. They who have tasted how gracious the Lord is, can never
hunger or thirst after grace in the eyes of men. And therefore as the three
children in Daniel told Nebuchadnezar, (chap. 3. 17. 18.) Our God whom we serve
is able to deliver us from the burning furnace, and he will deliver us out of
thy hand O King; But if not, be it known unto thee O King, that we will not
serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up. They knew
they should be above fire, when they were in the midst of it. Thus the children
of light say unto this day; Our God whom we serve is able to keep us out of
the fire of men's displeasure and indignation, and to cause the light of their
countenance to shine upon us. But if not, we will not comply to worship any
Image of man's erecting; for we are above the rage and contempt of men, while
we are filled with it. When David danced with all his might before the Arc,
Michal Saul's daughter looking out at a window despised him in her heart (2 Samuel
6. 16.) and at the 20.th verse jeeres him with her tongue: How glorious was the
King of Israel to day, etc. But was David's zeal cooled or his spirit troubled
because he missed acceptance with his Queen in that Holy service? Nothing
less; he despises that shame: and David said unto Michal (verse. 21.) It was
before the Lord, which chose me before thy Father and all his house, etc;
therefore will I play before the Lord, and I will yet be more vile then thus,
and will be base in mine own eyes, etc. As if David had said; Madam, those
higher raptures and actings of my Devotion, were never intended to please thee,
but God: It was before the Lord, not before Thee or the Court Ladies that I
danced; and therefore if this makes me cheap and vile in your eyes, I will yet
be more vile. He that really and intendedly honors God, can easily digest
dishonor from the creature. It is a very small thing that I should be judged
of you (says Paul) or of man's judgment, But he that judges me is the Lord
(1 Cor. 4. 3, 4.) that is, Though men do nothing but judge and censure me, yet
(with me) their judgment stands for nothing: The Lords judgment is the
judgment I appeal to, and the judgment I must stand to; He that judges me
is the Lord. He breathes out the same Spirit, in his 2d. Epistle. I trust that
you shall know, that we are not reprobates (that is, I doubt not but we shall
give proof that we are not rejected of CHRIST, not deserve to be disregarded
of you.) Now I pray to God that yet do no evil, not that we should appear
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as
reprobates, Chap. 13. v. 6. 7. As if he had said, I am not in this, projecting
for my own reputation among you, but for the glory of God in your salvation,
which being once well settled and assured, I care not much what acceptance my
name has among you, whether I be approved or disapproved, esteemed, or
slighted. Do ye approve your selves as the Elect of God, and then let me be
your Reprobate.

What a spring of comfort arises to the Soul and makes glad the whole city of
God, upon the evidences of acceptance with him? When we consider, that if we
are once accepted with him, we shall be so forever; That he commands favor
from the world for all his Favorites, or lifts them up above the disfavours of
the world; what heart will not be heated upon these considerations, ambitiously
to labor after the acceptance both of his person and actions with the Lord.

And least any should labor in vain, let me give a few counsels and
directions:

First, get a rule for your work, a warrant for what In vain do they worship
me, teaching for Doctrine the traditions of men. Obedience is better then
Sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of Rams. He that Sacrificed, under the
law, offered up a beast, but he that obeyed offered up himself. To obey God is
more then to serve him: And he respects nothing in all our services, but to see
himself obeyed. Livia the Empress being asked, how she had the happiness to
please Augustus so exactly; Answered, I always acted what Augustus commanded.
I have received of the Lord (says Paul) that which also I delivered unto you,
1 Cor. 11. 23. And at the 5.th verse of the next Chapter; There are differences
of administrations, but the same Lord. In relation to This Lord, we are all
fellow servants, and no man another Master. No man knows what will please the
Lord, but himself. As no man has bin Gods counselor to direct him what to
do with us; so no man can be his Councellor to direct him, what to require of
us.

And if at any time we are in the dark about the special rule of what he
requires. Then we must resort to the general Rules. Chiefly, these Two:

Consider first, what is most for the glory of God. That Doctrine or Practice
which lifts up the name of God, must needs be related to the will of God; For
as God has made, so he has written all things for himself. His own honor
is his design in his word, as well as in his works, in what he would have us
do, as well as in what himself has done. All truths honor God. God is the
spring of truth; nothing flows from him which is unlike him, or against him.
To serve God is to honor him, and therefore we cannot truly serve him in any
thing which does not honor him.

Consider secondly, what tends most to make man holy. Truth in doctrine, and a
true way in worship purify both heart and life. Ye are clean (says Christ)
through the Word which I have spoken to you, Ioh. 15. 3. And he prays,
Sanctify them thorough thy truth, thy Word is truth (Ioh. 17. 17.) That which
is pure will make pure. We may read the Nature of many things in their effects:
All the ordinances of Worship bear this Inscription, Holiness to the Lord,
and are appointed to work Holiness in Man. That which is not serviceable to
this end, or has but a show of it, cannot be of Gods appointment.

The second Direction is this, In every thing thou do do thy best. A little
may be acceptable to the Lord, if it be all, and a great deal is not, if we
have more. It is not the quantity but the entirenesse of what we do, which
pleases the Lord. It is a truth in all cases as well as in that of Alms (2
Cor. 8. 12.) If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that
a man has, and not according to that a man has not. But then, whatsoever a
man does or gives it must be according to what he has (that is, as much as he
has in his stock for such an end) or else it cannot be accepted. The poor
Widow cast in more then all the rich men into the Treasury ( Luke 21. 1, 2, 3.)
because though they gave more, yet she gave all; Her all was very little, and
their part, was a great deal; yet her little being all, was more then their
great deal, being but a part. It is thus in every duty, be it little or much,
it must be all we have, and the best we can. Cursed be the deceiver which has
in his Flock a male, and voweth and Sacrifices (that is, having a Vow upon
him, or having vowed to Sacrifice, sacrifices) a corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14.

This direction has two branches, requiring us to act,

First, according to the best of our strength; The whole man must be given up
to Christ. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy
soul, and all thy mind.

Secondly, according to the best of our light. The Apostle prays for his
Philippians, that they might approve (...).
things which were excellent (chap. 1. 10.) or things which differ: That is,
those things which differ from others in way of excellence; For things differ
two ways. First, in their kind; secondly, in their qualities. Light and
darkness, Truth and falsehood, good and evil differ in their kind. But in the
second sense, light differs from light, truth from truth, one Good from another
good. Not only does Wheat differ from Darnel, and Gold from Lead; But wheat
from wheat, and gold from gold. Thus, to the point in hand, it is not enough
for us, to do good and not evil, but we must wind up our affections to the
highest good, and among good things do the best. This the Apostles counsel
aims at ( Phil. 4. 8.) Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise; that is, (as I conceive) whatsoever things
(among those things, which are True, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good
report) are most virtuous and praiseworthy, think on those things, those
things do. Covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31. chap. 14. 1. Covet
grace above all gifts, and among the Graces covet the best, 1 Cor. 13. 13. God
fed the Israelites with the finest of the wheat (Psalm. 81. 16.) Course bread
might have kept them alive, but he dyeted them to delight as well as to
necessity. We cannot content Christ while we set up our rest in the lower
regions of Gospell-profession. It argues a low spirit to say, we will go no
further then will serve for Salvation. We must study what will honor Christ
most, not what is the least wherein we may be saved. We cannot thrive by
resolving upon the cheapest way to heaven. While we live on earth we shall be in
a state of imperfection; but our imperfection in the ways of Grace, should be
like that of Children in nature, who are daily growing up to a fuller stature.
He that labors not to be better, and do better, draws a just suspicion upon
himself, that he was never good; and that he never did good, because it was
good. He that loves wine, does certainly love the best wine; and he who likes
what is good, must needs like what is better. If the nature of a thing pleases
us, the perfection of it cannot displease: it is most acceptable to the Lord,
that we should do what we know he most accepts.

Thirdly: Do all in Faith; For without Faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. 6. And whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14. 23. By the former
text, the works of Infidels and unbeleevers who have no faith at all, are cast
out as unacceptable: But by the latter, that also is adjudged unacceptable,
which is done by a Believer without the evidence of a warrant from the word,
and a fair assurance in his own heart and conscience: For though a thing have
a real evidence in the word, yet if he that does it, has no evidence for it
in his heart, to him it is sin. Even as that also is sin, which has no real
evidence in the word, though our hearts have the highest assurances about it,
and we ready to lay down our lives for it. So then, as that which a man does
according to his conscience may be a sin in its self; so that which he does
against his conscience, is always a sin to him. He that is not accepted of
his own conscience in what he does, cannot be accepted of the Lord in doing it.

Therefore in things doubtful to us, we should rather forbear then act; the
sin of Omission lies in neglecting that which we know to be the will of God,
not in a forbearing to act that of which we are really doubtful whether it be
his will or no: And yet even such a not acting comes to be the sin of
omitting, if we rest in not acting, because we are doubting, and are not
diligent to have our doubt removed, that so we may act. If our forbearing to
do a doubtful duty, or our forbearing a duty, because of some doubts about
it, be not our burden, it is our sin. It is possible to displease Christ in the
not doing of that, which will displease him also if we do it. Our doubts must
quicken us to industry for resolution what is to be done; doubting must not
make us resolve to sit down and do nothing. Woe be to those whose doubts draw
them to such resolutions. Ignorance is not so displeasing to the Lord as our
neglect to be taught and come to the knowledge of the truth. Such then must
pray much, read much, confer much, that they may know more. Many (says
Daniel prophesying of the latter times) shall run too and fro, and knowledge
shall be increased. Sedentary men usually get much knowledge; How them is it
said, that these shall run too and fro and increase knowledge. He means a
running too and fro to inquire and search for knowledge, when we study men
as well as Books. And run too and fro among men, as the Be flies too and fro
among the flowers to suck some honey from every one we light on: He that thus
searches for wisdom, is promised to find it. And he that cannot learn of his
neighbor, may expect to be taught of God. Only take this caution: Be very
humble and meek: God will not take pr^^d ones into his Tutorage. The meek
will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way, (Psalm. 25. 9.) He
calls none but Children into his School. At most he has but a rod for the
proud, his lessons are for the the humble. Many think themselves too wise to be
taught by men, and most men are too wise to be taught by God. I thank thee
(says Christ, Matthew. 11. 25.) O Father Lord of Heaven and earth, that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto
babes; To them who were ignorant as babes, as also, humble and teachable as
babes. Upon this account it is that the wise and prudent, The learned clerks
of the world know so little of the mind and way of God, for the unclean shall
not pass over it, but it shall be for those, (namely the Saints) or he shall
be with them, as a guide to conduct and lead them, and then, the-way-faring men
though fools shall not err, Isa. 35. 8. That is, the simplest so conducted
shall not miss their way; They that seem to be wise in this world, must
become (such) fools that they may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18.

Fourthly, Accept those whom Christ accepts; To accept a person whom the Lord
accepts, is a thing very acceptable to the Lord. Our affections and Gods should
concenter in the same object. Should thou love them which hate the Lord?
said the Prophet to Iehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 19. 2. It is alike unpleasing to God
whether we love and embrace those who hate him, or hate and reject those, whom
he loves. But who are they whom God accepts, and how may we distinguish them?
Take their character from the Apostle Peter's mouth, Act. 10. 34. 35. Of a truth
I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that
fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him. If in every Nation
God accepts such, no Nation ought to, or can safely, reject such. The Apostle
Paul uses the same Argument, to move the dissenting Brethren of that age to a
forbearance of bitterness one toward another, Romans 14. 2, 3. One believes
that he may eat all things, another who is weak eats herbs. What shall
they do in this case? may they devour one another, because they cannot eat
the same meat? Hear his decision of this quarrel and the ground of it. Let
not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him which eats
not, judge him that eats; (Why may he not?) for God has received him. That
is, he ownes him, and has admitted him into his Church; therefore do not
thou censure and cast him out, or judge him unworthy to be received in. The
same Apostle exhorts all heartily to be of one mind; and yet injoynes mutual
acceptance (with a Non obstante) notwithstanding a great difference, Phil. 3.
15. 16. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect be thus minded: and if in any
thing (any such thing he means, as with which Saint-ship may consist) If in
any (such) thing, ye be other use minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. He does not say, Fire and Sword, Racks and Prisons, raylings and revilings
shall reveal this to you, but God shall reveal even this unto you; Not that
such are to wayt for extraordinary immediate speakings and revelations from
God: but God will reveal, by blessing and prospering those means which he
has appointed for the resolving of those who are in doubt, and the reducing of
those who are in Error. But what if the Lord neither by himself, nor by going
forth with those means, will reveal this to them and set them right in their
judgments; what must we do in that case? The next verse informs us;
Nevertheless whereto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same thing. Paul would have us walk by the same rule with them, who
come not up to our rule: and to mind the same thing with them, who are
otherwise minded. Here Is a practical mystery. How can we walk by the same
rule with those, who have not the same rule, and mind the same thing with them,
who are not of the same mind? Yes, we may walk by the same rule of love with
those, who (in some things) have not found the same rule of knowledge; and we
may mind the same thing in Peace, with those who (in some things) are not of
the same mind in opinion. It is sad to see Christians so angry about the things
they have not attained, that they quite forget to Love in the things they have
attained: And in stead of bearing one another burdens (difference of
judgment among those who fear God and work righteousness is a burden I am
sure, and a burden within the law of that text, Gal. 6. 2) It is sad (I say)
that in stead of bearing these burdens for one another, so fulfilling the law
of CHRIST, we should resolve to make the bearing of them a violation of the law
of Man. Many (perhaps) are willing to bear such light differences as are no
burdens; But Christ puts us upon this Trial, even to bear that which is a
burden; It is no great matter to suffer what we do not feel, or to bear
what comes near none of our Interests. But (as to this point) Here is the
patience of the Saints, when all they who fear God and work Righteousness
(this counsel aims at none without that capacity) are accepted by us, though
to our own disadvantage. And by bearing such burdens to the disadvantage of
private Interests, the public Interest may gain no small advantage. Truth may
gain in time, by such a bearing with those who (possibly) may be in Error: and
Peace among our selves will be a present gain toward our common preservation.
And when CHRIST sees we have learnt humbly to bear with those who ( fearing
him and working righteousness) are yet otherwise minded: he (I doubt not)
after we have patiently suffered one another a while, will ease us all of these
burdens, and by a bright convincing light of Truth make us all of one Mind.
However, while (on these terms) we endeavor a mutual acceptance among our
selves, we are all acting what is acceptable to the Lord.

And that we may according to these four Directions go on so doing, I shall
provoke your industry by three Considerations, and so an end.

First, these are times wherein a Spirit of Error is gone out into the world.
That Prophecy of Christ seems (in a great measure) to be fulfilled in our
Days. There shall arise false Prophets, insomuch that (if it were possible)
they shall deceive the very Elect, Math. 24. 24. Is it not time to be Proving,
when there is such deceiving? Such accurate deceits, as may not only delude
Children and fools, the Ignorant and unlearned, the carnal and profane, but,
only not, the very Elect. If it should be told that many Cheaters were in a
market, and those so cunning at it, that they could almost cozen the wisest
Merchant, would not every one look well to his bargain, what he bought or how
he sold. Or if it should be said, that much counterfeit and base Money is
coined, and that so skilfully, that it may pass for current, not only with
simple Countrymen, but almost with the Goldsmith or the Master of the Mint:
would not all, be weighing and trying their money before they receive it in
payments? Such a sense is in this warning given by Christ, They shall deceive
(if it were possible) the very Elect. I believe deceiving is grown to this
height amongst us; have we not need then every one to be Proving. Wicked
Doctrines are damnable, as well as wicked Practices; Woe be to those who love
Error, though love may be maintained toward those who Err. The Apostle Jude
speaks of some who turned the Grace of God into lasciviousness: If any (which
is to be feared, though it cannot be denied them) shall turn that grace of
favor which God in the Scripture allows an erring Brother into
lasciviousness; let them tremble at what the same Apostle speaks of the
former, They were of old ordained to this condemnation. It is bewaileable with
tears of blood, that many are in danger to loose all Religion by seeking it;
and that they even let go what they had, while they are inquiring after what,
they have not, and (perhaps) what is not to be had. The Lord discover to us all
the great and necessary duty of seeking, together with the extreme danger of
wandering: and teach us to know the method of Satan in bringing poor souls to
such confusion. That Satan is abroad acting these devices should make us very
dilligent in proving what we do, and in doing what we have proved acceptable to
the Lord.

Secondly, unless we prove what we do, we shall Let every man (says the
Apostle) prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself
alone and not in others. Gal. 6. 4. But may a man rejoice in himself? The
Prophet cautions us, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong
man in his strength, nor the rich rich man in his riches, Ier. 9. 23. It Is
true, we must not glory in our selves in opposition to Christ, such glorying is
no glory, He that gloryeth must glory in the Lord: But we may glory or rejoice
in our selves in opposition to men; The other in the text alleged, is another
man, some man of greater learning and wisdom then our selves, some man whom we
greatly reverence and esteem, and therefore rejoice in what we hold or
practice, not because we our selves see the ground of it, but because such a
man holds, and practices it. Thus the misled Papists cry out, Augustine,
Hierome, Gregory, Chrysostom, etc. The most learned names in the several
ages of the Church, held thus, practiced this, (though that is denied them) yet
thus they cry, and rejoice in one another.

This is to rejoice in another and not in our selves alone. Now then, let every
man Prove his own work, that is, study, to be able to give a reason as of the
hope that is in him, so of the work or practice that is held forth by him; and
then we shall not rejoice in others, that is, boast that we do, what such holy
and learned men do, They are on our side; But we shall rejoice in our selves,
that is, in beholding with our own eyes the beauty, and finding with our own
understanding the grounds of those things in the word of God, which we hold
forth in opinion or in practice.

Thirdly, till we do what is acceptable to the Lord, we our selves. When Israel
walked contrary to God, then God walked contrary to them, Lev. 26. 40. 41. If
they shall confess that they have walked contrary unto me, and that I also
have walked contrary unto them. With the froward God shows himself froward,
Psalm. 18. 26. He can displease us, as easily as we displease him. The speediest
way then to obtain what is good in our eyes, is to be doing what is good in
his. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways,
Psalm. 81. 3. What then? I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned
my hand against their adversaries. He should have sed them also with the finest
of the wheat, and with honey out of the stony rock should I have satisfied
thee, verse. 14. 16. When we hearken to God, he quickly hears us, and when we
walk in his ways, mercy encompasses ours. Our enemies who have begun to fall,
shall fall more by the command of CHRIST, if we show our selves friends to
Christ, by doing whatsoever he has commanded us, (Joh. 15. 14.) Many places
which fed on Gall and wormwood, have now (blessed be God) Bread to eat; but he
will feed us all with the finest of the Wheat, and the sweetest of the Honey,
he will give us not only what is acceptable but delightful, if we walk before
him with refined lives, and draw near to him in purified ordinances, daily
proving, approving, and practicing, what is acceptable to the Lord.

FINIS.

