A LETTER TO A FRIEND. Showing, The Illegal proceedings of the Two Houses of
PARLIAMENT: And observing GOD' s averseness to their Actions.

Which caused the Authors return to the KING and His Alleagiance.

OXFORD, Printed in the year M. DC. XLV.

A Letter to a Friend, showing the illegal proceedings of the Two Houses of
PARLIAMENT.
Cosen,
YOu know how earnestly, and with what charge I opposed the illegal demands of
Ship Money and Loanes, how I hated Court Monopolies, and arbitrary Justice in
the Star chamber, Council Table, and Marshalls Court, how I abhorred the
exorbitance of the High Commission; all which the King readily rectified in the
beginning of this Parliament.

You know with what cheerfulness I tendered my purse (my person being
unserviceable) for the Reformation of Religion, the suppressing Popery, the
establishment of our liberties and properties, the removing of evil
Counselors, the reducing the King to his great Counsel the Parliament, and the
uniting of the Sister Countries in a Brotherly Union.

You remember how willingly we declared and protested, that for the safety of
the Kings person, the defense of the Houses of Parliament, the Protestant
Religion established, the Laws, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdom, we would
live and dye with the Earl of Essex. And this being first commanded by the
Houses of Parliament, then seconded by the Pulpit, carried the face of Law and
the voice of Religion, so that with us was all Israel from Dan to Beersheba.

We possessed all the walled Cities, while the King like David in the mountains
had not a Town to retreat to. We had thousands of the choice men strongly
armed, while the King had only a handful of out-lawed Cavaliers (as we call
them) and them naked, not a musket, scarce a sword among them. We had all the
Crown revenue, all the City plate to bodkins and thimbles, even talents of
gold and silver, and the King scarce enough to buy his dinner. Our Magazines
swelled with Arms, Ordnance, and Ammunition of all sorts; while the King (the
Houses having seized his) wanted all. And lest he should have supplies from
beyond* Sea, we possessed all his Navy, all his Port-Townes, and left him not a
Cock-boat, not a Haven. And better then all these, we had the advantage of a
just Cause, fighting for God, and reformation of religion, (as our Preachers
taught us) for the defense of the Kings Person, our Laws, the properties and
liberties (as the Two Houses told us) of Subjects, and these backed with the
pious Fasts and Humiliations of Sanctified Congregations, with humble and
earnest prayers for success.

And could so just a Cause, so piously managed, by such religious Patriots,
can such miscarry or want success? Especially, while on the other side the
Kings small Army was unarmed, Idolatrous and Popish Cavaliers; their Cause
justifying of Idolatry, Popery, Superstition, maintenance of Bishops, rebellion
against the Parliament, and subversion of the fundamental laws; their prayers
(if any) for success but supplications out of a Popish Liturgy. And what can
such Armies, such Persons, such a Cause, such prayers expect but destruction?

Thus both Pulpit and Parliament misse-led me, until of late I considered the
success of both sides, and do you weigh them indifferently, and then tell me
where we can boast a Victory? For if we consider the Battles we most brag
of, those at Keinton, Alresford, Lansdowne, York, Newbury, we shall find the
success such, as if heaven rather intended both sides vanquished, then us
Victors.

On the other side examine the Actions at Runawaydowne, Newbury, Newarke,
Cropready, Lestithiell, Pontfract, and elsewhere, weigh the disproportions and
disadvantages the Kings Armies fought with, and then view their success, and
you will find it so far beyond the expectation of reason, as it is scarce
within the reach of our belief. Inquire what plenty of Men, Arms, Ordnance,
great Towns and strong holds the King now has, and so many have we lost.
Consider how many thousands of men, how many Armies my Lord of Essex, my Lord
of Manchester, and Sir William Waller have lost, how much treasure they have
exhausted, how our Navy is decayed, how many of our ships and men drowned,
while we had no enemy at Sea but heaven? Nay how many of our Ships with their
lading have the winds (siding against us) carried into the Kings aid, and our
destruction? And can these argue less then Gods displeasure against our
proceedings?

These ill successes made me look back upon our State Actors, that sit at the
helm and direct all things, and among them even those that were best reputed
of, for Reformation and integrity to the Commonwealth: as Master Hampden, that
first raised Arms against the King, when (as we thought) out of danger, you
shall find him shot in Chalgrove field where the year before he had first taken
up his Arms. You may see Patriot Pym, whom the people for his Speech applaud
like Herod, like Herod eaten up of Lice, The Lord Brook (armed as Death could
not enter him, and at a distance danger could not reach) breathing out threats
against the Church, is before the Church with a single bullet shot in the eye.
My Lord Say (whom Heaven cannot hurt, if the plot hold,) has one Son scorned
for being a Coward in so good a bad Cause, his other Son condemned to be
hanged for being honester then his Father in delivering Bristol. Sir John
Hotham and his Son, whom the Houses justified for Treason against the King,
the Houses (to maintain their privilege) execute first the Son, then the
Father by a Court of War for thinking to be honest. And as if the same method
were to be observed for the whole House, they are hanging young Waineman to
come to my Lord his Father. The Earl of Essex whom the first year they salute
with Hosanna's, pass votes for his thanks and trophies; but now decry, and as
much as they dare scorn and neglect him. Warwick and Manchester, (like Tinker
Fox, and Rag-man Phips) must now be squeezed (as orenges) to make sauce for the
Juncto palats, they are rich. Others there be deserve observation. While I
contemplated these great active men and their misfortunes, I could not think
them less then farthing sparrowes, which fall not without the Divine
providence, and therefore strictly examined our Cause by the Rules of Law and
Gospel, and in a matter of this consequence I have taken the best opinions both
of Divines and Lawyers, and of both the most moderate, yet such as were rather
engaged on ours, then on the Kings side.

All the Divines agree, our Kings to have their power from God, and therefore
Saint Peter commands obedience to Kings, as to the Supreme; Saint Paul to the
Higher powers, for there is no power but from God, and therefore (says he) pay
ye tribute. And they observe that these commands were to Christians; the
obedience commanded to be given to Pagans, to heathenish Kings, as the Romans,
those of Pontus, Asia, Bithynia, etc. The Divines observe that Saint Peter's
Epistle was to Strangers in Pontus, Galatia, etc. not natives; they tied only
by a local allegiance, we by a local, by a native, by a sworn allegiance;
they to a heathenish, we to our anointed Christian King.

All Divines agree Christ would not have his Church his Gospel planted by any
blood, but his own, and therefore would not suffer Saint Peter to strike, to
rescue him his King, his God. Christ then will not that his vine should be
dressed, his Church reformed with the blood of Christians. Yet now our reformed
Religion permits subjects (Jesuitelike) to fight against their King, for the
propagation of the Gospel. And that all things be done (as the Apostle directs)
decently and in order, they have suppressed all Church Government, and left
almost every man to be his own Bishop, and if he will his own Priest. The
Book of Common Prayer composed by all the Clergy of England, and they legally
called, confirmed and sealed by their blood, and commanded by several
Parliaments for these 100. years, yet now on a sudden voted down as Popish.
But not one particular exception to any one thing in the Liturgy.

But a set form of Prayer is a binding of the Spirit, and therefore our new
Directory ties not the spirit to words (for the cloven tongues speak all
languages) but the Assembly of Godly Divines, prescribes only the matter or
effect of their prayer, lest the spirit being at too much liberty should pray
against the Close Committee and their proceedings.

The ten Commandments and Commination (as restraining our Christian Liberty
and Judaicall;) the Creed (not yet rectified according to the sense of the
house) as erroneous; the Epistle and Gospels (fitted to the Celebration of
their several days) as Popish, according to the Discipline of the Kirk of
Scotland, are all excommunicated. So that now in our new Reformed Church we
have neither good Commanded, nor evil prohibited, no faith confessed, nor good
example to imitate.

The Reading Psalms had been totally banished the Church, because written by
a King; but in respect David was a Prophet too, they are left to the wisdom of
the Minister, to read if he will. But the better Meetre of Hopkins and
Sternhold, because composed by Commoners, are commanded to be sung, to awaken
the sleepie devotion of the otherwise mute Congregation. I pray thee pardon
me, that I a little sport with our misery; but it is in private, and only to
thee.

All the Lawyers I have spoken with (except Corbet and Master Prideaux)
unanimously agree that all Ordinances made by one or both Houses of Parliament
without the King's assent are (like man without the breath of life) handsome
models, but useless: and that all things done or acted by color or direction
of those Ordinances are illegal and invalid, and that there is neither
president to warrant, nor reason to maintain them.

And that both our ancient and modern Laws were made by the King, but advised
and consented to by both Houses; all which appears clearly in the penning of
our Ordinances and Acts of Parliament, even from H. 3. until within these two
years; for they run thus: The King at the instance of his great men provided
and ordained that, etc. And that manner of penning held until R. 2. and then
The King by assent of the Lords, and at the request of the Commons ordaines and
establishes, etc. And all the following Parliaments even this present in the
Act for the Trienniall Parliament uses the same words, Be it enacted by the
King, with the consent of the Lords and Commons. So that in all ages the King
made the law, the Lords and Commons do but advise and consent thereunto, and
custom (that is, a great part of our law) will not that any old law be
abrogated, or a new law made, but by the King with the consent of the two
Houses, and they are all confident that Master Pryn cannot show any one
Ordinance made without the Kings assent, nor any one book or any ancient
opinion that they might; nay the very practice of the Houses is against it;
insomuch as nothing is of record with them but what has life by the Kings
assent. So as if a bill has passed in both Houses, yet that if the Sessions of
Parliament end before the Kings assent had to that Bill, the next Sessions the
same Bill must be as at first thrice read in both Houses; and again, have all
the formalities and circumstances as it had the first Sessions; for they cannot
this Sessions take notice of their own Actions in that before.

The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are but Atturnies or Deputies for their
several Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, and therefore they cannot (as Barons
which sit in their own right) make a Deputy or party to consent or act for
them: because by law an Attorney cannot make an Atturny, and assign the power
and trust to another which is reposed in himself, and therefore cannot make
Committees in several Counties to raise arms, to commit their fellow
Subjects, etc. Nor can Atturnies exceed or alter the power given them by their
deputation or letter of Attorney, but must follow that. And what the power and
authority given them is appears in their Indenture between the Sheriff and
those that elect them: which is but according as the Kings writ requires* and
not power to do what they list, as appears by Crompt. Ju^is* fol. 2.

The constant practice and course of Courts best shows the power and
jurisdiction of the Court, (say the Lawyers) and they aver that there is not
any one Ordinance of Parliament to be found made by the Lords and Commons
without the Kings assent. and surely had the two Houses such power, the
Parliament of Ewd. 2. Rich 2. and Hen. 6. so bitter against the King, would
have found both the precedent, and made use of the power.

Let these therefore that are so ready to raise arms without the Kings assent,
nay contrary to his Command, nay even against His Person, let them consider,
that in Rich. 2. where his Barons of Parliament and others by color and in
persuance of an Ordinance of Parliament, whereby Hugh De le Spencers were
banished and to be proceeded against as enemies to the King and Kingdom in
case they did return; The Son returning to the King, the Barons and others
pretending that the De le Spencers could not be legally attainted by process
of law, because they (the De le Spencers) had usurped the Royal power, and
therefore in case of necessity (for so is the Book of old M^g. Char. fol 54.)
mutually bound themselves by oath, (as we by our Protestations) and with Arms
and banners displayed pursue the De le Spencers, and kill and imprison diverse
of the King Subjects, and take their Towns, Castles, Houses, etc. and all
without the Kings assent, (as ours do) for which the were glad to take a
pardon, (as ours would be of an act of oblivion the Scotch word for a general
pardon) for that oath, their arms, etc.

Touching the opinion raised this Parliament, that the two Houses are above the
King, and therefore the King ought and must pass such Bills, such Acts as they
resolve and offer to him.

That (say the Lawyers) is totally false and against all reason, law, and
practice in all ages. And in considering thereof they have not bin led by the
pamphlets published this Parliament on either side, because such (like
Schoole-Disputants) rather endeavor to maintain their position and side, then
to discover truth: therefore the Lawyers grounded their judgment upon books
formerly written, upon precedent* of moderate times, when the Kings Prerogative
and Subjects liberty both knew and kept their proper bounds.

The Parliament (say they) of the 24. Hen. 8 cap. 12. Declares, That the Realm
of England is an Empire governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the
Dignity and estate of the Imperial Crown, unto whom a body politic compact
of all sorts and degrees of people by the name of the Spirituality and
Temporaliy been bound, and one next so God a natural and humble obedience,
being by Gods goodness endued with plenary whole and entire Power Authority
and Jurisdiction within His Realm.

This body politic no doubt is the two Houses of Parliament, and doubtless
then the two Houses owe this natural and humble obedience; and then sure if
the Servant be not greater then his Master to whom he owes his obedience, the
Creature then his Creator* then the two Houses that (as appears by their own
act for the continvance of this Parliament) are called by the King, and by Him
dissolveable, are not above the King, that is their breath and gives life to
all their actions.

And it the King be by God endued with plenary power, entire Authority and
Jurisdiction. Consider from whom can the two Houses have their power, their
authority, and Jurisdiction to be above that given by God.

In Caudries case in the 5. Report. fol 10. the King is said to be the Vicar of
the Highest King, Ordained to govern and rule the Kingdom and People.

The Parliament in the 25. Hen. 8. acknowledged the Jurisdiction of Kings to be
immediately from God.

The Statute of the 26 of Hen. 8. cap. 1. declares the King to be the only
Supreme Head in Earth under God of the Church of England, and that he has
Power to redress and reform all Errors and abuses in the Church.

In the 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3. the Parliament declares, that the King is the only
Supreme Head under God of the Church of England, having the whole Governance,
tuition and defense thereof, and of His Subjects.

And consonant to that is our Statute, 1 Eliz. and in our Oath of Alleagiance,
(ordained by Act of Parliament) we and especially the Members of the House of
Commons acknowledge and swear, That the Kings Highness is the only Supreme
Governor of the Realm, both in Ecclesiastical and Temporal causes. And our
Lawyers say, that the King being the Supreme governor cannot have any
Governor natural or politic, (as the two houses) above him; and as he is
the only Supreme Governor must needs be above all other Governors either
natural or politic.

By the same Oath we swear allegiance to Him and His Heirs and Successors,
which must needs be to his Natural capacity, for his politic cannot have
Heirs. And in the case of the Duchy of Lancaster, Plowd. 213. It is resolved
that the body politic of the King cannot be severed from his natural body.
And then it is ridiculous to think, much more to say, that the politic
capacity of the King is included in the two Houses of Parliament, when his
natural is absent and dissenting to what they do.

If the two Houses could make a Law or Ordioance to bind the Subject without
the Kings assent, why should not all the bills that passed both houses but had
not the Kings, assent, why should not they be good and valid, and bind the
Subject? they had the Votes of both Houses when full and entire, they had more
consideration, more circumstance, all necessaries (but the Kings assent) to the
making of a Law; yet these Bills in all ages have been held naught and
invalid. And shall the votes of the two houses upon motion of a worthy Member
(though not a 5th part of either House be present) and without the Kings
assent, shall they make a good Ordinance to repeal five Statutes in the
Reigns of Edw 6. and Queen Eliz. as in the Ordinance for the Directory, and
the book of Common Prayer? all which have stood unquestioned these 100 years,
in which time we have had 20 Parliaments, in which our now Parliament-mens
Fathers and Grandfathers were Members, and (I believe) as wife, as honest, and
as Religious, as their Sons and Grandchildren, and they approved, they
practiced and followed that Liturgy.

The Parliament 1 Jacob. cap. 1. prays the Kings Royal assent to a Bill,
without which nothing (say they) can be complete and perfect, nor remain to
posterity. And Cowell (who writ about 40 years since) speaking of the regally
of the King, comprised under the title of Prerogative, There is not one (says
he) that belonged to the most absolute Prine in the world, which does not also
belong to our King, only by the custom of this Kingdom he makes no laws
without the consent of the three Estates, [Lords spiritual, Lords temporal,
and the Commons] though HE MAY Q^ASH ANY KAVV CONCLUDED BY THEM. Then how shall
the Votes and Ordinances of a small part of the House be good, when against
Magn. Char. against the Petition of Right, against our Allegiance and
Protestation? Yet must we venture our lives to murder our brothers, and fellow
Subject, or they us, or both, to maintain what they vote, though against Law,
contrary to the Gospel, and without precedent, But the two Houses do but
endeavor to take the King from His Evil Counselors to bring him to his
Parliament, where he ought to be present and resident, or else they may force
him, yea eradicate three ears of Wheat to destroy one of Tares.

For that (say the lawyers) there is no precedent, no book unless writ within
these two years. But Mr. Hooker, alias Vowell, (who writ about the beginning
of Queen Elizab. and is much quoted by Mr. Pryn) writing the manner of holding
of Parliaments (as we may see in Hollinshead, 2 part. fol. 121) says, that the
King is Gods Anointed, his Deputy and Vicar on earth, the Head of his Realm,
the Chiefest Ruler, on whom wholly and only depends the government of the
Estates of the Realm. That the King ought to be personally* present in
Parliament three days in every Parliament, first, on the day of appearance;
secondly, on the day when the Speaker of the House of Commons is presented; the
third, when the Parliament is prorogued. And for other days (says the Book)
he is at his choice, to come or not to come.

And it appears by the Statute of 3^ Hen. 8 c p. 21. That if the King be
absent from the Parliament, he might always give his Royal assent by
Commission under the great S^ale, and by that it seems he had liberty to be
absent if he would.

When Rich. 2. refused to come to his Parliament, the Lords (that threatened to
depose his) only averted* that by an old Ordinance of Parliament if the Kng
absented himself forty days, then they might every man return quietly to his
own house, and that they would do so if he came not; but they pretend no law to
raise arms, to compel the King to come. And surely had there been any color
to justify it they would not have omitted it, and if there had been any law or
precedent (though by popish Parliaments) since Rich. 2. time to raise arms or
make laws without the Kings assent. Mr. Pryn's Zeal to the Cause and hatred
to the King would have found it before now.

Since therefore that the two houses cannot without the Kings assent make a new
nor abrogate an old law, cannot without the Kings assent raise arms to execute
a person condemned by Parliament with the Kings assent (as in Hu-De le Spencers
case) but they must have a pardon for it. In what case are we, that have
without the Kings assent, nay contrary to his express Command, contrary to
Mag. Char. contrary to our Petition of Right, 3^ Car. by arms taken the 20th
part of every man's estate, imprisoned their persons, imposed new leanes, and
new impositions, hanged Citizens and Gownmen, contrary to the Privileges of
Parliament, executed even Members of the Parliament by Martial Law, and at the
Parliament door, while the Houses of Parliament were sitting, the Kings bench
(as we pretend) open at West* minster, the Goal delivery for London and
Middlesex in the Old B^l^? Nay contrary to our Petition of Right, and our
Statute made this Parliament, have we not in the Kings name because we could
not in our own, pressed our fellow Subjects, and by arms compelled them to
fight? Contrary to their sworn alleagiance and vowed Protestation, which is to
maintain the reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England; Yet we fight to turn out the Liturgy, and prayers ordained
by the whole Church of England, and which we have long known to make room
for the extemporary and unknown prayer of a single man, and him often
unlearned, sometimes debauched, and this according to the Kirk of Scotland,
not of England: to defend the Kings Royal Person, His Honor, His Estate, yet
we justify them that fight against him, that permit nay license libellous
pamphlets against him and his honor, that rob his Exchequer by receiving and
keeping from him his R^venew: to maintain the Previledges of Parliament, yet
h^^e the Members to prison, nay to execution by Martial Law: to Maintain the
Lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, yet fight to have our Estates,
Liberties, and Lives taken away by Votes, Ordinances, and Martial Law, and
against the Kings command. We have protested to preserve the peace of England,
Scotland, and Ireland,, yet fight here among our selves to annihilate and
break the Cessation of Arms and the peace there, and send for Scots the
hither to rob, murder, and (if God be not better to us then we to our selves)
utterly subdue and inslave us, to set up and enrich themselves.

By what law can the Scots prescribe us a Church government? by what law have
they (our Homagers) a voice in the settling of our Militia, and the laws of our
Nation?

To conclude, we fight to save a few close-Committee men, our Sate-actors that
have persuaded and voted us, and enforced the poor common soldiers to commit
rapine, bloodshed, Sacrilege, and Rebellion, to protect them, who with
Shimei, reviled and flung stones and dust at David by their Declarations and
Pamphlets, who by their Remonstrances and Votes endeavored to discover with
Ch^m the nakedness of their father, who following the Counsel of Achitophel,
have in the sight of all Israel lain with David's Concubines, by usurping his
Authority and Royal power. We fight to secure them, whom an act of oblivion
cannot, and therefore must have the Militia at their sole dispose, that the
swords, and lives of the poor soldiers may protect, whom the law cannot
justify. We fight to make London an Independent City, to make the Mayor
Aldermen and Common Council a third House of Parliament, and give them the
Tower of London* with the Militia of the City and Suburbs, least the King being
but Gods Vicar on earth, their only supreme Governor and Sovereign Lord, as
several Acts of Parliaments have declared, least he should rebel against them
his native, his local and his sworn Subjects. We fight to abolish the ten
Commandments, the Creed, the Epistles and Gospels, because not consistent with
the Scots Presbyteriall Discipline. What one act of Charity or Mercy have these
reformers of Religion done? Where have they offered to the King to part with
any thing of any pretended right, liberty, or privilege, to settle a peace in
this Church and Commonwealth? Nay which of these is not greater in estate and
wealth, in power and authority, then he was before the Civil War began, or
shall be after the War ended?

Have not the Earls of Warwick, Manchesler, and others that you know much
enriched themselves and friends by the harvest of this War? Have not their
Chaplains, Burges, Sedgewicke, Case, Peter's, and others treble revenues and
in-comes, to preach Doctrines answerable to the occasion of raising money, men,
or Arms, or crying no Treaty, no Peace? Doctrines suitable to their Church and
practice, that have in cold blood murdered many poor Protestant English-Irish,
for being on the Kings side.

While on the other part the King not delighting in blood, has pardoned diverse
whom the Law condemned, nay he has proclaimed pardon to all that would take
it, and to purchase peace, he has offered to part with his right, to divide
his Militia, putting it into the power of twenty men, whereof he to name ten,
and the two Houses ten Commissioners. He desires and offers that Popery may be
suppressed according to Law, and not Papists murdered because Irish. He is
willing that both Church and Commonwealth should be rectified according to
law, and according to law he offers to have all persons to be tried by law. He
commiserating his oppressed Subjects the distracted Church and ruined
Commonwealth, has offered and desired a Cessation from Arms, but cannot
obtain it; and then shall we not believe him the true father that would save
the child? God would not have his Temple built by a man of blood, though even
David; nor would Christ have his Church reformed with the blood of Christians.
The King of peace cannot delight in war.

Upon these Considerations, Cosen, I am resolved to leave their party that have
misse-led me and my poor Countrymen to our ruin; and I will now lay hold of
the Kings mercy and pardon offered by his Proclamation, and by a hearty
repentance I hope to expiate the blood, the treason, and sacrilege, I have
countenanced by my former opinions, and supported by my purse and persuasions.
And I do heartily wish, that my poor Countrymen and Neighbors that by an
illegal press are forced from their Wives and Children, from their parents
and Friends, to fight against the English Protestant Religion and Liturgy, to
set up a Scotch Directory against their King, to pay a tribute to their fellow
Subjects; against their Protestation to protect such as have seduced and
deceived them and their nations, that have raised this unnatural war upon
pretenses; fears and jealousies, and by the murder of many thousand English
Christians, keep themselves from a legal trial, that they may still sit
quietly voting at Westminster, and eat the fat of the Land.

Cosen, I do heartily wish that both you and the rest of my poor Country men
would consider and weigh these things, and that God would give you relenting
hearts truly penitent for these horrid sins, and then I would not doubt but
you and they would end this war (for it is in your powers) by returning to the
English Protestant Religion and Liturgy, to your sworn allegiance to your
Anointed King, and then to your own vines and figge-trees. And no doubt but
both you and they shall receive from God and the King the blessings due to the
blessed peacemakers: which is heartily prayed for by him that will lead you
the way,

May 15. 1645. A. C.

FINIS.

