THE OPPRESSOR Destroyed. As it was delivered in a Sermon at Paul's Septem. 21.
1651. Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, The Right
worshipful the Aldermen and the Sheriffs his Brethren. It being a Sermon in
comemoration of the 3d of Sept. on which day it pleased the Lord to vouchsafe a
wonderful Victory to the Parliaments Forces before Worcester, in the total
defeat of the Enemy, By Joseph Carryl, Minister of the Gospel at Magnus near
London Bridge.

Psalm. 68. 1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you. LONDON, Printed by J. B. at the request of diverse Friends.

The Epistle.
Courteous Reader,
PVblique good is that which should be the chief aim and endeavor of all men,
a very heathen man could say, non nobis solum nati sumus we are not born only
for our selves, a thousand pities it were such a Sermon as this is, should lie
asleep and be buried in oblivion, which may be (through the blessing of God) of
so much use to a whole Nation; in it thou have comprehended the duty of Gods
people, after the receipt of Deliverances, and that is to walk humbly and
thankefully, and to keep the precepts of God.

To walk thankfully for mercies received is the ready way to have deliverances
renewed; to be brief, remember, Laesa patientia fit furor mercies abused are
turned into fury, take heed of making God your Enemy by continuing in your
former sins, but earnestly desire of God that thou may reap some spiritual
advantage by this Sermon, which if thou do, bless God for it, I take my
leave and rest,

Thy Cordial Friend in the Lord Jesus E. P.

The Oppressor destroyed.
119. Psalm. 134. Deliver me from the oppression of man, so will I keep thy
precepts, etc.
THere are two great troublers of our peace, and hinderers of our keeping the
precepts of God, The first is, violence of corruption within; the second is,
oppression without, In the verse before the Text, David prays for help
against the former hinderance, namely, the violence of corruption within, Let
not any iniquity have dominion over me, he prays for help against the
latter in the words now read, Deliver me from the oppression of man, so will I
keep thy precepts.

First, We have here David's prayer for deliverance, Deliver me from the
oppression of man, oppression is the matter of it.

Secondly, We have David's engagement, or his vow upon supposal of an answer to
his prayers, So will I keep thy precepts.

Deliver me, that is, redeem, rescue me, oppression is bondage, deliverance
from oppression is freedom, great deliverance has Christ obtained for us,
deliverance from sin, and deliverance from Hell, and this goes under the
name of redemption from the oppression of man; that is, from the oppression
that man has brought upon me, or from oppressing man; oppression in general
is any wrong done to man by man: But more distinct, oppression may be
considered, either in reference to the manner, or the matter of oppressing, in
reference to the manner, when it is violently and openly done, when men come
boldly and oppress us. It is said of Nymrod, that he was a mighty Hunter
before the Lord, he was a Hunter of Beasts, but more especially a Hunter of
men, Oppression in Scripture is often compared to hunting, in regard of the
fierceness of it.

Secondly, There are secret and cunning oppressions which the Prophet Hosen
speaks of in the 12th of that Prophecy, 7. verse, says he, he is a
Merchant, the balance of deceit is in his hand, he loves to oppress, who
was this? says he, he is a Merchant. As some oppress with a sword in their
hands, that is, violently and openly, come deliver up your estates or liberty,
or deliver up your life? so is it with a pair of balances in the hand.
Balances are put in a Synechdoche, for all the commerce betwixt man and man,
now says he, here is one that oppresses with Balances in his hand; he tells
you you shall have penny for penny, bargain for bargain: yet, says he, he is
an oppressor, he loves to oppress.

Thirdly, You may distinguish of Oppression, in regard of the matter of it,
thus: in the first place, Positive oppression, as in taking away from a man
that which is his: secondly, Negative oppression, in withholding that from a
man which of right belongs unto him: Thou shall not oppress the hired servant,
thou shall pay him his wages at the day, etc. Deuteronomy. 24. 14. Again, you may
consider Oppression, in regard of the matter of it, and so it is twofold:
first, there is Civil oppression; secondly, there is Spiritual oppression.

First, Civil oppression is, when the matter is in civil things; and you may
divide it either to oppression of our estate, or oppression of our persons,
Nehemiah 9. 37. The Kings that thou have set over us for our sins, have
dominion over us: What dominion is this? It was a dominion over their persons,
and over their estates, at their will.

Secondly, There is Spiritual oppression, and that is of the Conscience, when
there are things imposed upon the Conscience, which God has not made; those
things which are of man's making, to impose upon Conscience. Thus the Scribes
and Pharisees were great oppressors, they oppressed men's spirits, they did bind
heavy burdens, and laid them upon men's shoulders, but they themselves would
not touch them with their little finger. Thus Antichrist is the great
Oppressor, and hence the Seat of Antichrist has three Names given it in
Scripture, Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon: and here David prays, to be delivered
from the oppression of man.

So will I keep thy Precepts: I will do it. He speaks resolutely, and yet he
did not depend upon his own strength. What is our strength and our will? Alas,
it is nothing: but we may say so, as we are under a Covenant of Grace, and
assistance from God, So will I keep. The word which we render here, to keep,
it signifies to keep a thing so, as to yield to it, obey it, and submit to
it: secondly, it signifies to keep a thing so, as to maintain it, or protect
it. I will keep thy Precepts, says David; that is, I will submit to them, and
obey them: or thus, I will keep them, I will maintain them, I will preserve
them. So it is used, Psalm. 116. 2. The Lord preserves the simple, or, he keeps
the simple: He does not mean by the simple, the man that is a fool, that
has no wisdom or understanding; but the simple man, is a man of a simple
heart, that has no windings or doublings in his spirit: this is the man that
is under the protection of the Lord. So it may be taken both ways. By Precepts
we must understand the whole revealed will of God, not only Precepts of
working, but Precepts of believing, it comprehends all: There are Precepts
concerning things to be done, and Precepts concerning things to be believed:
those Precepts which are to be done, are such as we must use in our ordinary
conversation, these are Precepts of Holiness; and then there are Precepts of
Truth, in reference to Doctrine, what we are to believe.

Object. But, may some say, did not David keep the Precepts of God before?

I answer, Yes: David had kept the Precepts of God before; for the Lord speaks
of him as a man after his own heart, who would fulfill all his will. What then
is the meaning of this expression, Deliver me from the oppression of man? The
meaning is this; Deliver me from the oppression of man, so shall I have a
better opportunity to keep thy Precepts. There are two great hindrances of
the service of God, as you have heard before, sin within, and oppression of
man without. Again, he means, I will keep them more then I have done before;
I will not live as formerly I have done: I have walked in the ways of thy
Commandments before, but now I will run: This is the meaning of that
expression, Deliver me from the oppression of man, so will I keep thy Precepts.

Object. 2. But, may some say, if God would not deliver David, would not he
keep his Precepts?

For answer to this: David did not indent with God, and say, if God would not
deliver him, then he would not keep his Precepts; this was far from David's
thoughts. Thus much for the explication of the Text, Deliver me from the
oppression of man, so will I keep thy Precepts.

There are several Observations that arise from the words.

Doct. 1. Observe, that in all Ages there has bin among men, oppressors of
men: David found oppression in his time; yea, oppression was much elder then
David, it is as old as the World: as soon as there could be oppression,
oppression appeared, Cain oppressed Abel: in the Age after the Flood, there you
read of great oppression; Nimrod was a mighty Hunter before the Lord, he was
the Patron of oppressors, Genesis 10. 89. There is a notable oppression upon
Record, Ier. which stands to this day against Jerusalem, a City of God, a
place where the people of God did dwell, and yet you shall find oppression
there, yea, nothing but oppression; she is wholly oppressed, some render it;
Tota ipsa, she is all oppressed; and says the Text, Oppression is in the
midst of her, in interiori: it is not here to be meant locally, as if
oppression were only in the midst of the City; but in the midst of her as
there is a middle in her heart, in her soul; oppression in her very spirits.
As there is a spirit in man which lusts to envy, James 4. 5. so there is a
spirit in man which lusts to oppress. An envious spirit is angry, troubled,
and vexed, when any man enjoys any thing that is good. An oppressing spirit
will not give over oppressing, till it has taken away that good which a man
does enjoy. And in this, see how man is departed from the example of God: God,
he is a preserver of man, a lover of man; and so should man be to man: but they
are as the Devil is to man, a Destroyer, and an Oppressor: Thus are many men
to men.

Doct. 2. Observe, (from the Text) Deliver me (says David) from the oppression
of man. Man has a very heavy hand upon man: David desired rather to be under
the hand of God, then under the hand of man. The oppression of man is a very
heavy oppression, David prays against it with all his might: the oppression
of man is very heavy; it was that which made the Psalmist cry out: Arise, O
God, to judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the men of the world may
no more oppress; the word in the original signifies, to terrify. Oppression
in Scripture is expressed by Devastation, it is that which lays all waste;
Oppression makes a wise man mad: Oppression does not only spoil a man of his
outward estate, but it even bereaveth him of his wits; he is as it were
distracted, dis-composed, unfit for to do God service. There are three phrases
given to Oppression, in Scripture:

First, The Scripture calls Oppression the burthening of the people; which is
very tedious.

Secondly, The Scripture calls Oppression the grinding of the face; and
that is far worse.

Thirdly, The Scripture calls Oppression the eating of the flesh, the gnawing
of the very bones; and that is worst of all.

Doct. 3. Deliver me from the oppression of man: David was under a fear of
oppression, and therefore he addresseth himself to God: observe, it is God
alone that delivers from oppression, he can do it, he alone has power to
do it, he will do it, he has promised to do it, the glory of God consists
in it; he will do it, for he is honored by it; he will break the teeth of the
oppressors: The Lord does this many ways, but I will only name three.

First, By the total destruction and overthrow of Oppressors, They shall be
consumed as stubble that is fully dry.

Secondly, The Lord delivers his people from oppression, by restraining the
rage and malice of the Enemy, that they are not able to hurt them; He
suffered no man to do them any wrong, says the Text: This implies, that many
would have done them wrong, but God put a bar upon their power, he suffered
no man to do them any wrong. God kept the fire from burning the three
Children: How? Not by putting out the fire, but by restraining the natural
power of the fire, that it could not burn them, Dan. 3. 23. God also preserved
Daniel in the Lions Den: How? Not by destroying the Lions, but by taking away
the Lions appetite, he stayed their hunger, that they did not hurt Daniel,
Dan. 6. 20.

Thirdly, He delivers his from Oppression, by changing the hearts of their
Oppressors, he can make them of Enemies to become friends, Esaias 11. 6. The
Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid,
and the Calfe and the young Lion and the fatling together. God can so change
the Lion, that it shall not hurt the Lamb; he can so alter the Leopard, that
it shall not hurt the Kid, but both shall lie down together, and the Earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord. We have had great experience of
the Lords delivering us from the oppression of man: the first way, by
destroying all our oppressors; yea, and by the second way, when our Enemies
were strong, he has restrained their power, that they were not able to hurt
us. Now our last prayer for our Enemies should be this, That God would change
their hearts, that of Wolves they might become Lambs.

Doct. 4. The last Doctrine is this, That the Deliverance from the oppression
of man, should be a strong Engagement upon us, to a new and vigorous service of
God: So will I keep thy Precepts.

Judgments call from sin, Amos 4. 10. I have brought this and evil upon
you, says the Lord, yet ye have not returned unto me: But the Voice of
Deliverance is especially to call to Holiness, and that for these following
Reasons.

First, Because Deliverances are Mercies, and therefore they have this
Obligation lying upon them.

Secondly, Deliverance from Oppression are great Mercies, and therefore it
calls for more Holiness.

Thirdly, We are under the Engagements of the Lord; we have prayed for
Deliverance, and behold the Lord has now delivered us.

Fourthly, By Deliverance from our Enemies, we are freed from Encumbrances, and
all Hindrances are taken away. Now we have room to serve God, now we have
an opportunity to keep Gods Precepts, now the Oppressors are taken away; the
enlarging of the heart is an inward help for the running of the ways of thy
Commandments.

I might give you many more Reasons for the proof of the Point, but I will
wind up all in some few words of Application.

Deliver me from the oppression of man, so will I keep thy Precepts.

Right Honorable, and well-beloved, I need not tell you, that we are a people
who have formerly groaned under Oppression, under such as would have Dominion
over our Bodies, over our Cattle, over our Estates, at their pleasure, and
especially from them which would lay heavy Yokes upon our Spirits and
Consciences. I need not tell you, that we have had such Oppressors, that
surely the noise of those that groaned under them, are not gone out of our
ears. Again, I need not tell you, that we were lately under a fear, of
having Oppression renewed upon us, and to have had those to Rule over us, whose
little finger would have been heavier then our former Oppressors Loins. I
need not tell you of an Enemy that came like an overflowing Flood, that would
even have swallowed us up quick. I need not tell you, that we are delivered
from these men's oppressions. I need not tell you, that we have been
fearfully and wonderfully delivered; that there is not only Mercy, but
Miracle in our Deliverance. How has the Oppressor ceased? They are ceased
(blessed be God) but we can scarcely say how. I hope I need not tell you, that
it is God that has delivered us from the oppression of man; though God has
made use of many worthy Instruments, for the accomplishing this great Work,
which deserve your chiefest commendations. I need not tell you of these things,
supposing also that you will hear further concerning this particular at
another time. The Deliverance that we have now had from the oppression of man,
has laid a mighty Engagement upon us to keep Gods Precepts; it has put an
Engagement upon us, to keep a Day of Praise and Thanksgiving unto God; it
has put an Engagement upon us, to keep his Precepts every day.

First, some may say, True it is, we are delivered from the oppression of man,
our Enemies are destroyed: but, do they say now, Come, let us keep the
Precepts of God? No, they are far from that: Come, say they, now we shall
keep our Estates, and add unto them; now our Trade is open, let us buy and
sell, and get Gains; Though this in it self be lawful, yet this is not the
chief end that the people of God make of their Victories. David's Resolution
was, Come, let us keep the Precepts of God.

Secondly, There are others that say, We are delivered from the oppression of
man, Come, let us eat and drink, and rejoice, we shall not dye to morrow;
we shall now live, our Enemies are down, we now seem to have a longer term
added to our lives: surely, may some say, the bitterness of Death is gone.

Thirdly, There are such who are so far from keeping the Precepts of God, by
being delivered, that they take more liberty to break the Precepts of God,
they take liberty to break all the bounds which God has kept about them.
Their Lusts perhaps were at a stand, when the Oppressors held their Rods over
them; but now they being delivered from the oppression of man, do willingly
give themselves over unto sin, that sin might have dominion over them.
Better a thousand times be under the power of a raging Enemy, then lie under
the power and tyranny of Sin, to lie under Pride, Covetousness, Envy,
Malice, Drunkenness. What shall we say to such a Generation? There was an
everlasting Brand put upon Ahaz: This is that Ahaz, that sinned yet more and
more, whilst the hand of God was upon him. How shall they escape a worser Brand
then Ahaz had, who notwithstanding all those glorious Deliverances which it
has pleased God to vouchsafe unto them, yet sin more and more against him?
That as God heaps Deliverances upon them, so they heap their sins against
God. But before I part with these, I would willingly commend these three things
to their consideration.

First, Do you think, that you answer the end and design of God, in
bestowing these mercies upon you? Jerem. 7. 10. there is a strange passage:
Says the Lord, They come and stand before me in this House, which is called by
my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations. Now, what
were these abominations? To Steal, Murder, commit Adultery, Swear falsely,
burn Incense unto other Gods: I conceive, there were no people in the world so
wicked as to say we have received these mercies, we are delivered from our
enemies, that we may steal, murder, swear falsely, etc. I think Sodom it
self would not have said so? neither do I believe this people here did say so,
sillabically or verbally, but by interpretation there actions did speak so
much, every one that sins wilfully against God, throws a stone at God.

2. Do you think, that it is not possible that you may yet need a further
deliverance, is it impossible that new troubles should arise? surely no, and
God may say unto you, why should you be delivered any more, you are resolved
to sin yet more and more and more, why therefore should you be delivered any
more, since you have revolted more and more.

3. From that dreadful Scripture, 9. Ezra 13. 14. and after all this is come
upon us for evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, seeing that thou our God
have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and has given us such
deliverance as this, should we again break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations: would thou not be angry
with us, till thou have consumed us? so that there should be no remnant nor
escaping.

The second use may serve for exhortation, seeing that we are delivered from
the oppression of man, be persuaded to keep the Precepts of God, keep them
according as you heard in opening of the Text, keep them by way of obedience
and submission, and keep them by way of protection, and preservation.

First, Be exhorted to keep all the precepts of God, by way of obedience and
submission, keep them more strictly then you have done heretofore, how happy
would it be if there were found a people imitating that pattern, 9. Acts 31.
Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and
were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
holy Ghost were multiplied. Then had the Churches rest, temporal rest, rest
from the oppressors; the Churches had rest because they kept the precepts of
God, they did walk in the fear of the Lord and were multiplied: Magistrates
they should keep the precepts of judgment and justice, Lord (says David) I
have done judgment and justice, therefore deliver me from my Oppressors. The
Lord has not left you to the Oppressor, therefore do you do judgment and
justice. To all this City, I would say one word, seeing the Lord has
delivered you from the Oppression of man, love one another, take heed that God
having delivered you from open oppression lets not there be secret oppression
among you. I would also press you to be keeping of the commandments of God,
do not only keep them your selves, but cause others to keep them.

Secondly, You must defend and protect the precepts of God, contend earnestly
for the faith once delived to the Saints, especially Magistrates and Ministers,
they should keep the precepts of God; Ministers they should defend the precepts
of God by arguments, they should redeem them out of the hands of the
Oppressors, especially, because there are so many that do pervert them, not
only profane persons, but other Heretical persons, which bring in damnable
doctrines: God expects it also from Magistrates, that they should defend them
by the sword of their power, fulfill the end of God in giving you victories,
keep his truth and his precepts from violence, Magistratus sunt Custodes
utriusque Tabulae Magistrates are the keepers of both the Tables, Has not God
kept this City from violence and plundering, your wives from ravishing, your
Children from being destroyed, your estates, your eyes from shedding tears,
your feet from going down to the Pit, therefore be you now keepers of the
Lord, the Lord has kept us as the Apple of his eye, those which have gone
about to touch us have been destroyed, he has kept our peace, our persons,
therefore let us keep his precepts from violence, let none touch them that
would wrong them, let it not be said of you, as David had occasion to say of
Nabal, In vain have I kept all that this fellow has, that my Army has not
touched him, but be a shelter unto him. Give not God occasion to say so by
you, in vain have I kept your City, in vain have I kept your Estates, in
vain have I kept your persons, for you will do nothing for me, you will not
so much as keep my precepts, which are for your eternal good, Oh that God
might have occasion to say thus of us, This people have traded well with the
Mercies and Deliverances formerly bestowed upon them! therefore will I give
them more Deliverances, I will multiply my Blessings upon them. Their
Oppressors shall not rise and increase faster then I will destroy them; when
they rise up against them, I will scatter them before my people: their
Oppressors shall no more rise up against them, but you shall be a people saved
by the Lord. Thus much for this time.

FINIS.
September 27. 1651.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.


