A DESCRIPTION OF THE ROUNDHEAD AND RATTLE-HEAD.

London Printed for J. Sweeting. 1642.

THE ROVND-HEAD.
1. HIs flaxen hair, his damask rosy cheeks,
His comely looks, unlike the surly Greeks,
His Star-like eyes, grave forehead, lovely chin,
Purtrayes the wisdom which abides within.
2. His hair cut round, he wears no Indian Lock,
His heart is sound, he fears not Straffords Block:
His milk-white actions do not seek the dark
Like Malignants, who hide themselves at York.
3. God made heads round, what ever fellows prattle:
More knave then fool, whose head is made a rattle:
Round has no corners, that is their hard hap,
That wisest roundheads miss the Prelates Cap.
4. Truth is round dealing, it has no crochets,
The fowlest hearts lies under fairest Rochets:
Celestial motion is of most perfection,
Heaven and the Roundheads move by one direction.
5. Cambridge round Church skares the crosier Doctors,
As much as fresh-men fear the Bug-beare Proctors.
They prophecy that Church portends a loss,
If that the fabric stand not like a Cross.
6. Let sons of harlots still grave Roundheads scorn,
And such whose wives have furnished with a horn.
Such daring language makes not Roundheads worse,
His credits safe, the danger is his purse.
7. Where Is Law, Jestice, Mercy to be sound?
Not in the Rattle, but in the head that is round;
He reads Luther, Calvin, Beza, Marter,
He preaches duly, Rattle once a quarter.
8. He brings plate, coin, horse, and will stand his tackle,
Though Hare-braines bustle, all will prove a Rattle.
Courage brave Roundhead, and do thou not fear
The swearing, roaring, whoring Cavalier.
9. Monopolies, Ship Money, Innovations rent,
Did make us barren as the wild of Kent;
That they are down, we do with one consent
Thank the round dealing of the Parliament.
10. We may remember the brave round Cap Scots,
Who helped much our noble Patriots,
Their courage we'll record, whilst we remember,
Eighty eight, or the fifth of November.
11. Captains are Roundheads, whose brave examples,
Have merited the garland to bewreath their temples:
Kings Dukes, Emperors, this is their renown,
To have their Round heads vested with a Crown.
12. Peace Momus dare no more the venture,
To blame the circle where God sits in the Center,
For Roundhead suits with Princes, wise men Peers,
But Rattle suits with Priests, and nasty Cavaliers.
THE RATTLE-HEAD.
1. THe Rattle first was composed at Rome,
Where Cardinals, Jesuits, and Magicians come,
When they determined that which now they hope
To blast Religion and set up the Pope.
2. This Goblin foul was framed by Magic spell,
Of brains of Loyala, Merlin, Machivell,
Coapes, Crosses, Cringings, and such Romish Rites,
He taught our Priests this garb of Jesuits.
3. Pryar Bacons Art took in this head, chief place,
That this is truth, behold his Brazen-face:
Pandora and her Nymphs did so dispose,
At learned Oxford he should leave his Nose.
4. And sure it was some Policy of State,
To fix this relicke on a College gate;
A Pattern for the Cavaliers at York.
That spoil their Coppernoses in the dark.
5. Part of their noses to the femall kind,
As pledges of their love, are left behind,
It also shows that Scholars void of grace,
Are like an ugly nose without a face.
5. This Negroes errant was by common fame,
To raise war and dissension where he came,
Distinctions, equivocations, and such things,
They charge him rattle in the ears of Kings.
7. That they may neither hear, nor give consents
To Votes or prayers of their Parliaments:
It Is for their Honor, and portends their merits.
To crush their people, and to break their spirits.
8. Rattle is never greatly at a loss,
On plainest Laws to cast a Romish gloss:
The wholesome Laws of God, and of the Land,
Must mean no more then he does understand.
9. For those fair reading Priests his Votes do pass,
Who make our prayers but an English Mass:
Round dealing Preachers, and their godly Lessons
He does attend, as Thieves do Size and Sessions.
10. His plots were spoiled, his heart began to fail
When new Oath and Canons could not prevail,
His rotten Regiment among their pots,
Still drink confusion to the honest Scots.
11. He gives them leave to rail and boast and swell,
And swear God damn them nine miles deep in Hell:
Such wretched Roysters God will sure discard;
Unhappy Princes that have such a Guard.
12. The Westeren Indians fear the Rattle Snake,
Whose venomous sting few do with life escape,
Unless some Snake-weed there be near at hand,
Which does this poison mightily withstand.
13. In England lives the venomous Rattle-head,
Whose charming tongue does strike the Natives dead,
If Antidote of health we will not ressent,
Applied us by the wiser Parliament.
14. The Lord of N. P. that brave Cavaliere,
Hulls sounding Canons made to fly for fear:
In his great have befell a dismal matter,
Head fled the fire, and fell into the water.
15. Both he and others found to their great grief,
That fire and water gave them small relief,
Had not his chiefest friend then been his hair,
His Caveleiers had surely left him there.
16. Don John of York against Roundheads make complaint,
And blesses Rattle as the only Saint;
Good men the Prelates curses many years
Have had, but now they bless the Cavileeres.
17. Their Process, Censures, and the causeless curses,
The common Picklocke was of best men's purses;
Their pennilesse blessings, if that they were true,
Would set Heaven open to a Hellish crew.
Upon the Roaring Cavalier.
Bless us! why here is a thing as like a man,
As Nature to our fancy fashion can.
Beshrew me, but he has a pretty face,
And wears his Rapier with indifferent grace.
Makes a neat congie, dances well, and swears:
And wears his Mistress pendant in his ears:
Has a neat foot as ever kissed the ground,
His shoes and roses cost at least five pound.
Those hose have not a peer, for by relation,
They Are cut a month at least since the last fashion.
He knows two Ladies that will vow there is none
At Court, a man of parts, but he alone.
And yet this sop, scarce ever learned to know
The mixture of the disjoined Christ-crosse row.
Strip off his rags, and the poor thing is then
The just contempt of understanding men.
FINIS.

