THE DESIRES OF THE COUNTY OF SURREY About the late Tumult at Westminster.

The further proceedings in the County of Kent, and a discovery of the
intentions for securing of London Bridge.

With a Letter from Excester, and the landing of some eminent persons in
Cornwall, a Rising there, and the Forces which are gone to suppress it.

London, Printed by B. A. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1648.

NEVVES FROM KENT
SIR,
SInce the Kentish men's seizing of Rochester, and the Magazine, they have
increased, diverse, both Gentlemen, Servants, Soldiers, and men of all sorts
come in, and stand upon their defense, and cause all that pass over the Bridge
to sign their Petition: they say that they will have the King come to London,
and a treaty and the Army of sectaries disbanded: they put all soldiers out of
the Country, and permit none except such as comply with them, and they have
prevailed so far with the horsemen of the Country, that they are almost all the
troop gone in to join with them, and the trained Bands are too cold to oppose
them, and they will grow too numerous, if speedy course be not taken. An
Officer of the ship that carried the Prince away was to see him that calls
himself Prince Charles, and saying he was not the Prince, he that personates
him, told the Major that he came to kill him, and desired he might be secured,
which was done accordingly, and others are committed also, for saying that he
is not the Prince. There are in Rochester, and the parts adjacent, at the least
a thousand that are risen in arms, besides their interest in some Sea men, and
others at Maidstone, and other parts. Here are abundance of Ordnance, and many
ships, a great number of arms, much powder in the ships, if some speedy course
be not taken herein, it may be prevented when too late.

We hear there are some Members of Parl. ordered to come down into these parts
to pacify those which are now in Arms, and it is believed, that most of them
will be persuaded to go home to their own houses, or observe such order in
presenting their Petition, as was lately ordered by the Parl. in relation to
the prevention of tumults. We hear that some of the most active in this
business have endeavored to associate themselves with those they can engage to
their party in London, and something was presented to the last Common Council
concerning an intention which some had to secure London Bridge on Tuesday next,
which we doubt not, but by the fore knowledge thereof will be prevented by the
wisdom of that grave Council, who (as we understand) are resolved to be in a
posture of defense, as they have great cause to do, for not only the
disaffected of this County, who distinguish themselves by wearing of colored
Ribbons in their hats, but some of the discontented persons of the County of
Surry hold correspondency together, and we have news here, that on Monday last
there was a meeting of many Gentlemen of Surry with some members of the Parl.
at which meeting the Gentlemen for the County drew up certain heads or
particulars of their desires, touching the late combustion when they came to
Westminster with their Petition. One of their desires is, That he which spilt
the first blood there should be made exemplary; but on which side that will
appear to be, we leave to the evidence. Another is, that reparation may be
made for what was lost by particular persons; touching which, we hear good
satisfaction was presently given, which we hope will prevent any further
discontents in that County. This morning intelligence was brought, that the
Parl. have voted a personal treaty with the King, upon condition, that his Maj.
first grant the Militia, settle Religion and recall all Proclamations and
Declarations against the Parl. which gives much satisfaction to the moderate
party, and it is now verily believed, that all except the old professed
Royalists, as they are called, will rest satisfied with what the Parliament
shall further con^lude on about this business, and other things in relation to
settling of the Kingdom.

Darking 25 May 1648.
A Letter From Excester.
SIR,
ACcording to your desire at my parting with you, I shall as near as I can give
you the true intelligence out of these parts Sir Hardresse Waller having settled
this City in posture of defense, news was brought of some insurrections
further in the West whereupon he sent part of his horse and foot to prevent the
further increase thereof: this Rising is said to be at St. Ives, and at
Pensance, they have gotten some arms, and some persons of quality are said to
be landed there, the Forces which are marched that way will be with them this
week, the Country between this and them are generally indifferently well
affected; and by Letters from Bath it is certified, that diverse disaffected
persons which were gotten thither, and showed themselves active, are secured by
the well-affected party.

By an Express hither is brought how it fares with our enemies, and the state
of our Forces in South Wales; of them taken in the last Defeat, these following
are put aboard Vice Admiral Crowther, and are to be tried at the Head
quarters, Major General Stradling, Major Philips, Captain Thomas Matthewes,
Captain William Button, Master Miles Matthewes, Lieutenant Colonel Hopkin
Potkins. Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Morgan, Colonel Arthur Harris, Captain
Edward Walker, Capt. Richard Cradock, Lieutenant-colonell Thomas: at a council
of War four were condemned, and after shot to death, one hanged, seven
condemned, not yet executed.

About 160 are in Chepstow castle, Wednesday last, they had neither bread nor
salt, quarter was offered them, but they refused; they now cry for it but it
will not be granted them: they had let down a Boat to have escaped, but a
soldier of ours swoom over the River, with a knife in his mouth, cut the Rope,
and brought away the Boat, Lieutenant General Cromwell is by this day before
Pembroke, and has made Poyer either take reason, or set on work a Mine to blow
him toward heaven; this is the state of South Wales, notwithstanding the Gent.
Letter to his Cousin in London. It is said Col. Powel is slain by Langhorn,
which is all at present, from

Your affectionate friend, J. T.
Exceter 22. May 1648.
Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott.

FINIS.

