THE DESIGNS OF THE Rebels in Kent.

At their Rendezvous, the day before the storming of Maidstone.

As they were found in a person of qualities pocket, who was taken prisoner,
and this day sent up to the House of Commons. Upon which, and other things of
note, the Lords and Commons had a Conference this day.

With the substance of His Excellencies Letter to both Houses of Parliament, of
a more fuller Relation then formerly, having taken so many Arms as to make up
4000. 1500 prisoners, and 1500 horse; besides all the Countrymen, whom the
General has discharged, and sent to their own homes.

TOGETHER, With an Act of Indemnity passed by the House of Commons for the
County of Essex, with their laying down of their Arms, and returning to their
own Habitations.

Imprimatur

June 7th GILBERT MABBOT.



LONDON, Printed by J. C. MDCXLVIII.

The Designs of the Rebels in Kent, at their Randezvouz the day before the
storming of Maidstone, as they were found in a person of qualities pocket, who
was taken Prisoner, and this day sent up to the House of Commons.
IT was voted and agreed upon by the Kentish Council of War, and the
Gentlemen belonging to that Army, that the Earl of Norwich should be General
and Commander in Chief, Esquire Hailes voted Lieutenant General, and Sir
William Compton Major General, the plotted Design touching the proceedings of
their Army, is continued as these particulars does specify.

Commanders in Chief to be divided into Brigades, Regiments, and Companies,
and to have necessary Commanders and Officers over them.

All other Officers, Quartermasters, Scoutmasters, Mustermasters, Ingeniers,
etc. Pioneers, and their Commanders, and necessary provisions of Shovels,
Spades, Mattocks, Wheelebarrow, Edgerooles, etc. to make defenses against
Horse, and Breast works for Musketeers, etc.

Quaere. D^^kes and Fieldpeeces to fortify the Blockhouse at Gravesend.

And what course shall be taken that we may be supplied out of Essex when need
is.

And to endeavor supplies out of Sussex.

Quaere. Whether not necessary to fortify Rochester with a Line and Forts.

To take away all Arms from the adverse party, and to secure the persons of
such as are most powerful, and dangerous.

If the enemy be stronger then we, then to have a course for recruit beyond
Medway.

To fortify Bridges, and to break down those Bridges which are not fit to be
fortified, and to stop up the Fords.

Quaere. Also to fortify Tunbridge Castle, and the Bridge there: And to choose
a select Council of War, not of very many, to avoid confusion in debates,
and to prevent discovery of secrets.

Another Council or Committee to hear and disparch ordinary things that the
Council of War be not troubled with over much besinesse.

Quaere. How to order all Affairs when we go up with our Petition, and to
secure Maidsto^e, etc. When we are gone, to take special Order for
Intelligence.

To appoint an Officer or Commissary to deliver out Arms, who must not deliver
till he is well informed to whom, and to take notice of their names.

The Tr^ined Bands of Maidstone have lent to Auxiliaries 80. Arms, who desire
to have them again, and that the Auxiliaries be otherwise furnished.

To appoint Colonells, Captains, and Officers over all the Trained Bands, and
to consider touching Volunteers, and Auxiliaries.

By this you may perceive they had a farther intent then to petition; this
machivilian plot has bin a contriving this many months, and there has been a
Collection of old Soldiers out of Holland, and all those that have been
engaged in the Kings Service here in England, has been privately invited to
come into Kent, and then to put all things in a flame, they have had as real
an intent to maintain the known Laws of the Land, and the Protestant Religion,
as thousands who formerly declared for His Majesty, as for instance, on Sunday
last, there was shot at Mile end one Major Hughton, a Gretian, a known Jesuie,
that has been sent over hither by the Pope, to foment mischief in this
Kingdom, ever since these unhappy d^fferences has been, a very fi^ instrument
to fight in the behalf of the Kentish and Essex men's Petition, to have the
Covenant performed. There came on Monday last, a Letter from the Gentlemen of
Essex, brought up by Mr. Rich, one of my Lord of Warwicks Sons, a Member of
the honorable House of Commons, humbly desiring an Ordinance for Indemnity,
so fully and largely as was proffered to the Rebels of Kent, more, there wa^
(...) Postscript to that letter. from Essex, that there may be an Ordinance of
indemonity for the remainder of those forces of Kent, which came from Greenwich
on Sunday morning last, to Bowe-bridge, to have joined with the Essex men:
which Ordinance is granted to the Gentlemen of Essex, and carried down per Mr.
Grimston, Mr. Rich, and other Members of the House of Commons, belonging to
that County: Upon which grant, they have enlarged the Committee men they
imprisoned at Chelmsford, and submitted to the Ordinance of Parliament,
disbanded their forces, and laid down their Arms.

An exact Relation concerning the Passages in Kent, since His Excellency my
Lord Fairfax, marched over Medway River,
AFter my Lord General had stormed Maidstone, and slain near 300 men, for
prisoners, horse and arms, you shall have a more full account presently, he
marched from Maidstone to Rochester on Saturday in the afternoon, where he
found the Rebels fled, and the people very full of discontent, by which means
they discovered 1000 arms which was hid privately in that town: the women
reviled, with curses in their mouths, against Goring, Hayles, and Compton, who
had engaged their husbands, and now betrayed them, cursing them for bringing in
a company of strange Officers and soldiers, that were not known to the
Country, swearing they were not a quarter of them Gentlemen and countrymen of
that County, but were strangers, privately invited out of other countries, to
make their county a seat of war, this was the loud out cry of all the common
people in Rochester. They did report of a most vilde prosane wretch, a Knight
who has been a great man for the King ever since these troubles began, his
name is, Sir Gamaliel Dudley, who swore, because the Citizens came no faster in
to their army, he would come up to London to commit all the sins he could, to
draw Gods judgments and plagues upon the City and citizens, both men, women
and children.

There were a great many lofty, desperate, and discontented minded spirits,
amongst them at Maidstone, that were taken prisoners in the Town, as for
instance, a young fellow, who was sometimes a servant and Clark to one Best of
Kent, his stomach was so great because he was taken prisoner, that he hanged
himself with a Bell rope, in the Church where the prisoners were in Maidstone.

My Lord Gentrall is in very good health, and went yesterday to Chattham being
invited to dine with the Commanders of the N^vy a shipboard.

There is taken three times as many Prisoners and Horse, as was by the first
true ^i^ence computed, they carry themselves so si^^ently that as yet we do not
so fully understand their qualities as we shall hereafter, we have 1500.
Prisoners in hold, besides great numbers my Lord Genesis has discharged and sent
to their own homs, which were seduced Countrymen; for all those we pass by.

We have taken in all 1400. horse, 4000. Arms, and 1500. Prisoners as I named
before, a great many of he Horse are exceeding good ones, Sir John Many was
slain, but not discovered so to be until Sunday last, he charged in that Troop
which his Excellency killed and took most of them prisoners, when he made the
onset on Maidstone. The Troop was said to be Squire Hales, own Troop,
advanced by his one particular.

From Richmond May the 27. 1648.
The Genesis own Regiment of Horse, with Col. Harrisons Regiment of horse, with a
proportional number of foot, are come in to the assistance of Major Genesis
Lambert, so that they are in all 600. and they are able to take the field, and
we doubt not but that we shall have very suddenly a good account of their
proceedings against Langdale and Musgrave.


Jmprimatur

GILBERT MABBOT.



FINIS.

