To the Supreme Authority of this NATION, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth
of England.
The Humble Petition of CHARLES Earl of Derby.
SHOWS,
THat by Conveyances heretofore made in the life of your Petitioners
Grandfather, William Earl of Derby, all his Manors and lands in the Counties
of Lancaster, Chester, Flint, Yorkshire, Westmerland and Cumberland, and in
diverse other places in England and Wales, and the Isle of Man, were limited to
James late Earl of Derby, your Petitioners Father, for his life only, with
remainder to the first Son of the said James, (which is your Petitioner,) and
the Heirs males of his body, with other remainder over.

That the Estate of the said James Earl of Derby, being according to the late
Act of the 16. of July last, appointed to be sold, your Petitioner has
preferred his Petition to the Committee by that Act appointed, and therein set
forth his title to the premises. But most of the Deeds concerning the said
Estate were imbezeled or burnt upon the taking of Latham-house, in one part
whereof the Evidences belonging to his Family were usually kept, and if any do
remain, they are now in the Isle of Man, so that your Petitioner cannot produce
them timely enough, to have allowance of his Estate according to the saving of
that Act, and the Order for further time.

He further shows, that there was a Composition formerly set in
Goldsmiths-Hall, for the said Estate for his Fathers former Delinquency, and
humbly hopes his death will be accepted as an expiation for his later
Delinquency.

Your Petitioner therefore, (who never acted or consented to any thing
prejudicial to the Parliament or Commonwealth of England, nor ever will act,
or consent to act any thing prejudicial to the same,) most humbly casts himself
upon your clemency, and humbly prays that you would be pleased to admit your
Petitioner to have the said Estate upon such Composition as you shall in
clemency and compassion to him thinkfit. And to appoint and direct a stay of
the sale of the said Estate, or any further proceedings therein, until you
shall be pleased further to determine therein.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall pray.

