A DESIGN BY Captain Barley, and others, to surprise Carisbrook Castle, in the
Isle of Wight, where His MAJESTY now is.

WITH The proceedings of Colonel Hammond against them, Captain Barley, and some
others of the chief Actors taken prisoners, who are to be tried for their lives
by Martial Law.

ALSO Some proceedings in Parliament, concerning the KING. ( who is in
Carisbrook Castle) for the security of His PERSON.

January 1. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbott.



LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648. 1649

A Design by Captain BARLEY and others, to have surprised Carisbrook Castle,
in the Isle of Wight, where His Majesty now is.
ON Wednesday December 29. 1647. Some Malignants formerly of the Kings Army
intended to have surprised the Castle in this Island, to have either kept it
for the King, or carried His Majesty to Jarsey Island.

The chief of these Plotters was Captain Barley formerly Governor at Pendenis
for the King against the Parliament, an active Malignant, and one who has been
very active and was now Captain of a Ship, with others who came into this
Island to stir up all such as they could here, to rise and join in Arms
with them to perfect their Rebellious design.

By command from Collonell Barley and the rest, Drums were beaten for the
raising of men and they declared for the King, and had some came in to them, so
that they intended to have surprised the Castle where His Majesty then was.

But the Mayor of Newport and some others, endeavored what they could to
hinder this most dangerous design, and Collonell Hammond having notice of it,
as also Captain Basket the Governor of the Castle, there were all possible
means that could be used to suppress them.

Colonel Hammond sent Letters to the Commanders of the Horse who came to
secure that Island, appointed by His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to have
aid presently sent over.

Captain Basket the Governor of Cowes Castle sent also Letters to the
Commanders of the Parliament ships, who were riding near those parts for the
guard of that Island for releif from them also, not knowing what this design
might come to, for Captain Barley and the rest of the Rebels that rise, went
still on in their design to surprise the Castle and the Island.

About 11 a clock that night a Letter came to the Commanders of the Parliaments
ships from Captain Basket, of Cowes Castle in the said Isle of Wight, by which
Letter they were advertized, that the Governor of the Isle of Wight was (that
night) beseiged by some formerly of the Kings party, that had been in Arms
against the Parliament: and that it was feared that the Hollanders then riding
there at Anchor might be engaged with them (but for that it afterward appeared
that they were not, and they have showed great willingness afterward to
clear themselves therein,) and that also diverse of the Islanders were joined
with them.

Hereupon the Commanders of five ships of the Parliaments, viz. Captain
Jordaine, Captain Penrosse, Captain Jervis, Captain Mildmay, Captain
Legent, called a Council of War to consult presently on this business for
relife of the Island, and the souldery for the Parliament against the power of
the Plotters.

1 And it was resolved (in council that all possible assistance should be
speedily given to Collonell Hammond Governor of the Isle of Wight for the
Parliament against those who had risen there in opposition to the power of
Parliament.

2 That those several ships for the Parliament should be disposed in such
stations as might best prevent the putting off of boats to or from the Island
without search.

3 That the Island may be secured from all inconveniences by the ships then
riding near the Island, and all others as much as may be.

And accordingly the Commanders of the ships addressed themselves for the
perfecting of speedy relief,

On Thursday December. 30. The Captains of the five ships for the Parliament, had
informations by expresses, that the aforesaid Captain Barley and other three
of the chief Mutiners, were apprehended and prisoners in Carisbrook Castle. And
the Mayor of Newport and other of the Magistrates had done very good service in
assisting Colonel Hammond, and that there was some appeasing of the business.

Also an hundred men were landing upon the Island and an hundred more going
from Portsmouth after them for further releife if occasion were.

January 1. 1647.
A Letter this day from the Governor of the Isle of Wight, concerning a
design for a surprise of the Castle of Carisbrook, where the King now is, by
Captain Barley and others, was this day read.

A Letter from some Commanders of the Parliaments ships riding in the Mawes,
Dated December. 30. concerning a design of surprising of Carisbrook Castle, by
Captain Barley and others, was read.

The House upon consideration of this business, Ordered, That a Conmission for
Martial Law be given to the Governor of the Isle of Wight, for the Trial of
the said Captain Barley, and the rest of the chief Mutiners in this business.

A Message this day came from the Lords whereby the Lords returned some
Amendments to the Orders yesterday, sent up by the House of Commons, to
authorize his Excellency, and the Governor of the Isle of Wight (in order to
his Excellencies directions therein) for the security of the Kings person,
which Orders were to this effect, viz

That the Lords and Commons do approve of what the General has done
concerning the safety and security thereof, in the place where he now is: And
the Lords and Commons do further Order, that the Governor of the Isle of
Wight, be hereby authorized to take especial care for the security and safety
of the Kings person, where now he is, and that he does observe such orders and
directions herein as he shall receive from his Excellency, or both Houses of
Parliament. And that these Votes be dispatched away to his Excellency, and the
Governor of the Isle of Wight, accordingly.

Also that the thanks of this House be given to the Mayor of New-port, and to
the well-affected Inhabitants there, for their care and good affections
expressed in the late Mutiny, and insurrection in that Town raised by Captain
Barley and others.

FINIS.

