A DESCRIPTION OF THE FORM AND Manner of public Thanksgiving.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Alsop, 1641.

decorative flourish at top of page C R

A DESCRIPTION OF The Form and Manner of public Thinkesgiving.
FIrst, to show what Thanksgiving is, And secondly the several Branches in it.
THanksgiving is an Acknowledging, and confessing with gladness of the
Benefits and Deliverances of God, both toward our selves, and others, to the
Praise of His Name.

The branches in it are.
1. Remembrance of the good done. 2. Mention of that good. 3. Confessing GOD to
be the Author and Giver of it. 4. Cheerfulness.
1. Thanksgiving is an acknowledging and confessing of Benefits, and
Deliverances: Thus when David incited the People to a public Thanksgiving, he
calls upon Israel, and upon the house of Aron, and upon all that fear the Lord,
to acknowledge and confess Gods benefits and Deliverances wrought for them.
Psalm. 118.2, 3, 4. verses, and have not we the like occasion to confess and
acknowledge the benefits and deliverances of God toward us, in working so
great a work for us, who could have wrought this peace and unity between us and
amongst us, but the Lord? Let us look upon those distressed Churches beyond the
seas, and upon what might have befallen us, had not the Lord wrought for us;
and then we cannot choose, but must needs acknowledge and confess, the great
benefits and deliverances that God has wrought amongst us.

2. This acknowledging and confessing to God, it is with gladness. Thus when
the Lord delivered Sion then was our mouths filled with laughter, and our
tongues with singing (says David) the Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad (says he) Psalm. 126.1, 2, 3. verses, and have not we as
great cause to rejoice before the Lord, to sing, and be glad, for the great
deliverances ye the Lord has wrought for us: surely we have very stony and had
hearts, if we be not touched with joy before the Lord for the same. 3. It is
for Gods deliverances both toward our selves, and others: The Apostle
exhorts that thanksgiving be made for all men. 1 Timothy 2.1. Let us but
consider Gods gracious mercies, and deliverances toward us, and toward our
whole Land; yea and toward our neighbor-united Nations, we had not only Rumors
of VVarres, but shedding of blood on both sides, wars were begun, the
subjects of one King and people of one faith, of one Religion, we and our
brethren were banded one against another; here was begun a sad Tragedy, here
was Isaake at the point of death, in the worlds apprehension, and to be admired
is the goodness of the Lord, that where as before this time, more plenty of
blood might have binshed in our streets, then we have had of rain; yet the
Lord has established peace. Ever blessed be our gracious God, that we, and
they, were not the ruin and destruction each of other? This was the mighty
hand of God, Oh let us therefore praise his holy Name.

4. Thanksgiving ought to be to the praise of the name of God; therefore (says
David) I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will sing praise to thy name, O
thou most high. Psalm. 9.2. The day of Thanksgiving is not a day of carnal
pleasure, and fleshly delight, to recreate the body with the pleasures and
delights of the word, but after a spiritual manner to rejoice in the Lord, and
to sing Psalms and praises to his name, and to declare the wonders that he has
wrought for us. There are some (says Hierome to Nepotianus) which contrary to
the common order, and nature of men, in their thanksgiving and fasting, will
neither drink water, nor eat bread, but seek for more delicate suppings, and
sweet meats, looking to be praised for such fasting: Fie for shame, do we not
blush, at such foolishness, are we not weary of such superstition.

But to come to the branches which are in thanksgiving. 1. Remembrance of the
good done. Remember the mavelous works which the Lord has done, (says
David) his wonders and the Judgments of his mouth. Psalm. 105.5. The whole
Psalm is excellent concerning this particular, in the story of Gods providence
over his people. And thus we to celebrate a thanksgiving to the Lord, we must
remember that good that the Lord has done for us, we must suffer our hearts to
be enlarged in the remembrance of his mercies: and ^his we may do by looking
upon our selves, as we were before Deliverance, and under the Cross; when we
were al, so distracted and troubled, that we knew not what to do: with
troubles abroad, and troubles at home, and fallen even into the mouth of war
and ruin, ready to fall before the sword: O let our hearts be touched with the
thoughts hereof, and remember that the Lord has delivered us, and graciously
overcome all these dangers for us, and now our wars are turned into peace; for
which let us praise the Lord, and not forget such great mercies. 2. Mention of
that good done, David says, My Tongue (says he) shall talk of thy
righteousness all the day long, for they are confounded, for they are brought
unto shame, that seek my hurt. Ps. 71.24. Thus may we say with holy David here,
O our Lord God, we will talk, and make mention of thy righteousness, all the day
long, we will celebrate a day of thanksgiving to thy name, for the mercies, and
the gracious Deliverances which thou have wrought for us, and have brought
those wicked enemies of thine, and ors (that sought to devour us) to shame and
confusion, therefore our lips, shall greatly rejoice, and sing unto thee, and
our souls which thou have redeemed shall praise thee. 3. Confessing God to be
the Author and Giver of all our blessings, deliverances, and benefits. For as
David says, it is in vain to rise early and to sit up late, and to eat the
bread of sorrows, for God gives his beloved sleep. Psalm. 127.2. It is not
all the plotting, and contriving that a state can do, it is not the policy of
all the wits of the whole Kingdom that could have effected this gracious
pacification, and wrought these great blessings for us, had not the Lord given
us rest; let us ascribe it not to man, for God is the Author of all our good;
therefore let us labor to be acquainted with Gods goodness, and render
thanks unto him, and praise his holy name of his mercyes toward as. 4. The
last b^anch is Cheerfulness being glad of an occasion to praise him, and
doing it ^ladly with joy, David could sing, the voice of rejoicing and
salvation, is in the Tabernacles of the righteous the right hand of the Lord
does valiautly. Psalm. 118.15. And has not the right gand of the Lord done
valiantly for us. to reduce us so graciously, and to confound, and put to
shame, all the Enemies of our peace: O then let the voice of rejoicing be in
our Churches, for the great salvation that GOD has wrought for us. This joy
which is a sweet motion of the soul, arising from the goodness, and mercy of
God wrought for us, not a worldly joy arising from Nature, but such a joy as is
spiritual, and heavenly, even such a joy as Christ would have to be full in
his members, Joh. 15.11. To seek the Lord and his strength, and to seek after
his face continually.

Obj. It may be some will say? what needs such a stir? Do not we know how to
fast, and how to pray, and how to give God thanks? Do not we know how to seek
the Lord, without so much ado?

Ans. To whom I answer with Calvin's own words, on Psalm. 105. The seeking of the
Lord (says he) is properly the mark whereby the faithful are discerned from
the worldlings: Howbeit they come far short as yet in seeking him as they
ought to do: and therefore they have need of spurs continually wherewith to
prick them forward, although they be running of their own accord; for they be
neither gadding persons, nor altogether dullards, nor such as be fast tied to
Earthly Dregs, whom the Prophet stirs up to seek God, but such as with a
forward mind went about it already: Verily because he sees them let with
many hindrances, so as they cannot run fast enough? What necessity then is
there think you to rouse up those Muckwormes, and Earthly minded men to do
their duty to God, as becomes Christians; lest pleasure, profit, or pride
hinder them, and choke their devotion, and so in stead of celebrating a day of
thanksgiving to the Lord, they offer the sacrifice of fools, and dishonor the
name of God, not regarding the spirituality of his worship? The worship of God
consists not in dead Ceremonies, but chiefly in the sacrifice of praise, God
requires also, that we be chearefully thankful to him, and do it
willingly. Therefore David called upon the people to make have to come into
Gods presence, Psalm. 95. Which is a thing very needful to be done in so great
slothfulness, as is bred in us by Nature, at such times as we are called to
give God thanks. Now like as the Prophet does nip the slothfulness of the
people in old time of singing praise unto GOD: so let us know that we have need
of the same spur at this day also, because we be no less unthankefull then
they were: and let us stir up our devotion when we come into the Congregation,
and consider that we are in Gods presence, there is nothing more to be wished,
then to offer in Gods presence the Sacrifice that God avoucheth to be most
acceptable unto him; God is present before our faces as a witness; therefore
let all those that fear the Lord consider with themselves that they shall not
lose their labor.

FINIS.

