A DESCRIPTION Of the Passage of THOMAS late Earl of STRAFFORD, over the River
of Styx, with the conference betwixt him, CHARON, and WILLIAM NOY.

Printed in the year 1641.

A Dialogue, etc.
Charon. IN the name of Rhodom^nt what ails me? I have tuggd, and tuggd above
these two hours, yet can hardly steer one foot forward: either my dried
nerves deceive my arm, or my vexed Bark carries an unwonted burden. From
whence come thou Passenger?


Straff. From England.


Char. From England, ha, I was counsaild to prepare my self, and to trim up my
boat, I should have work enough, they said, ^^re be long from England, but
trust me thy burden alone outweighes many transported Armies, were all the
expected numbers of thy weight, poor Charon well might sweat.


Straff. I bear them all in one.


Char. How ^ bear them all in one, and thou shall pay for them all in one, by
the just soul of Rhodom^nt this was a fine plot indeed, sure this was some
notable fellow being alive, that has a trick to cosen the devil being dead;
What is thy name? ( Strafford sighs)


Char. Sigh not so deep, take some of this Lethaean water into thy thin
hand, and soope it up, it will make thee forget thy sorrows.


Straff. My name is Wentworth, Straffords late Earl.


Char. Wentworth, O, ho! thou art he who has been so long expected by
William Noy, he has been any time these two months on the other side of the
bank, expecting thy coming daily.


Straff. Knows Charon Noy so well.


Char. Know him, I, I warrant you, he is known here very well, he can no
sooner get out of the Lawyers company (as w^ have a boundance of your Lawyers
here) but you shall have him sometimes with boys at nine pinnes, sometimes he
will by fudling with a Tinker, sometime he has a crotchet to venture a fall
with a wrastler, though he be sure to get the fall himself, he is for all
companies; he served me such a trick the other day.


Straff. What was it Charon?


Char. Tell thee, and thou will go near to show such me another trick thy
self before I part with thee, thou lookst just of his complexion; marry he had
begot a whimsey, what do you call it, a project, I a project, that out of the
small Incomes that I receive, which is but a halfe-penny a Ghost, I should pay
a penny out of every passenger I do transport, as a gratification, or rentage
to great Pluto, but had he come under the reacl^ of this my Ebon Oar, I would
have so spread his shade. Look yonder where he is.


Sraff. Charon take there thy waftage hire.


Char. What but one halfe-penny, I thought he would have paid me for a thousand
at least, this is just poor ferrimens fortune, when they have once landed
their passengers they may look for their fare where they can get it. Well, go
thy ways for a heavy Ghost, neither Pompey the great, nor Alexander before him
did make my boat to draw so deep, I do not think but that he has devoured
three kingdoms, and bears all the excrement and garbidge of them along with
him.


Exit. Charon. Straff. Either my discontinued eye or my remembrance much
deceives me or your name is Noy.


Noy. My Lord, when last I saw you, you were but Sir Thomas Wentworth, since I
have understood, the royal favors of his Majesty meeting with your merits
has made you Earl of Strafford. It was a dignity which your abilities and
your vert^ well may challenge.


Straff. An undeserved grace, Sir, which his Majesty was pleased to confer
upon me; the eye of my Prince is like the eye of heaven, shines where he lists,
and looked with as much influence and glory on me, his lowest shrub, as on the
proudest Cedars.


Noy. It is most true; nothing can parallel his royal virtues but themselves,
but (my Lord) pardon my curiosity, whose rudeness would enquire what late
news does our Climate vent?


Straff The last news is of my self.


Noy. It must needs be then a history that is full of honor.


Straff. It might have been so Master Noy,
But as a desperate Merchant, when he may
Sail with success to his desired port,
Does rather choose a day of wind and darkness,
A day of tempest, when the angry sea,
Tilts her bold billows against the baffeld clouds,
Deafes the fierce thunder with their louder roar,
And puts the fire out from the lightning skies,
Too late repenting of his rash advise,
Finds himself fast locked within the arms of death,
So I when honors circled me and peace
Did woo my safety with a courteous smile,
I rather chose to seek out ways to danger,
T'untye three Realms, and with a fatal trip
Ungrounde the foot of Justice, and the Laws,
To waken war, and from her brazen den,
To rouse my thunders from the Canons mouth,
And thus adventured whilst my Bark touched heaven,
Seas upon waves, and waves surmounting seas,
They danced me down into a vast abysme,
Where I lay dockt in quick sands to embrace
A certain ruin. Do you remember the petition of Right
Master Noy?

Noy. Yes very well, my Lord.


Straff. Oh, had I there continued I might, outlive all danger and secure my
right, nor in the honors of my thriving name, had I need doubt my fate, or
lose my fame, Strafford had livd, though your preventing fate, that did my
doom and death anticipate, called for a courteous dropsy.


Noy. My Lord, I thank God, I descended into the sleep of death, though not a
sound, yet a whole carcass.


Straff. But I dismembered lost my spited head.


Noy. My Lord, me thinks so vast a spirit as yours could do good service
without a head.


Straff. What odd conceit rides on your fancy now?


Noy My Lord, I will tell you, and since example is the most legible character
give you an instance, how many hundred years has Atlas borne heaven upon his
shoulders, yet I could never read of any head of his that was ever seen. I
know my Lord you have undertaken taskes would have made proud Atlas sloope.


Straff. And some of yours are imputed unto me: had I any head in such and such
Patents and Monopolies, master Noy, had I any plot at all in the Ship money,
and in many more projects that I could name which took their original all from
you.


Noy. Your Lordship may use what liberty of speech you please; but do you
think that my Lords grace of Canterbury is so pleasant above?


Straff. No, no, all the mirth is with you Netherlanders:
He like the Roman Anthony, when he
Tried his last Fortunes in sad Actiums fight,
And left the grappling Eagles and his honor,
To fly in's beauteous Cleopatra's Boat,
And quite ashamed that any one but she
Should own that Fame to conquer Anthony:
His heart quite broken, and his head bowed low,
Whiles eightscore minutes were in numbering out,
Their measured sands in the just glass of time
Durst not look up toward heaven, nor tempt her eyes,
Her eyes to him a thousand thousand heavens,
More dear then thousand conquests:
Just so his Grace, his sadded head being laid
On both his hands, his elbowes on his knees,
Will silent lean two or three hours together;
And in that posture (sad) he now must leave her,
Stoopes to his Idol, Greatness.

Noy. Are there no more, my Lord, of your party?


Straff. Yes, I believe, many: but this present Parliament has more eyes then
Argus, more clear then Lynceus, and as powerful as the Sun, and should
their numbers grow up like so many Hydra's, they can at once both observe them,
and dispell them.


Noy. My Lord, how thrives the Romish faction?


Straff. Troth I think but little, and I believe it is likely every day to grow
less and less, the grave deportment of the Friars, the sanctimonious
pretenses of their Priests, prevail but little, and work in the people rather
a suspicion then an imitation. It is thought besides, that even from their
Gowns and Cowles did arise the first grudgings and beginnings of the war.


Noy. I understood indeed that some Priests were severely looked after: that
news I heard from Mercury.


Straff. Now you talk of Mercury, there is a precious generation of Mercury's
above.


Noy. Of Mercury's? they are a people never before heard of, a Sect which no
age ever understood. I beseech your honor to instruct me who and what they are.


Straff. Why, there are men Mercury's, and women Mercury's, and boy Mercury's;
Mercury's of all sexes, sorts and sizes; and these are they that carry up and
down their Pasquils, and vent them unto shops.


Noy. How is that taken?


Straff. I know not; but their takings I believe are good enough. But had they
carried abroad such ware a year ago, these Mercury's had need in earnest to
put wings unto their feet to make more haste away.


Noy. They may do well to read Lucian, he will teach their Pamphlets wit and
innocence.


Straff. The Devil he will: excuse me, Mr. Noy, not too much innocence I
beseech you; but let them write even what they will, the dead bite not, and if
they bite not the dead I care not.


Noy. Will your honor vouchsafe to draw unto our quarters, it will make good
sport for your Lordship to observe what devout cringes on their first coming
the Atturney's and the Scriveners make to their little God Sir E. C. how with
both hands lifted up, as he passes by them, they will mumble their Pater
nosters to him.


Straff. Pish, I neither need such company, nor desire it.


Noy. In what place then will your honor choose to make your residence?


Straff. In any place, so that I might have that which I come for, Rest.


FINIS.

