Desires after Jesus: OR MEDITATIONS UPON THE Life and Passion Of our Blessed
Savior JESUS CHRIST. WITH Short Ejaculations and Prayers drawn from each
Passage thereof.

Very proper to excite our Love and Affections toward him, and to help us in
the Expression of our Desires for the Imitation of his Virtues, and to preserve
a due and thankful Remembrance of what he has done and suffered for us.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Sam. Keeble, at the Turks Head in
Fleet Street; and Rich. Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
School.

TO THE READER.
THE approaching Season (appointed by our Church for the Commemoration of the
principal Sufferings of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the most
remarkable Instances of his Love to Mankind, by which he also purchased for
them inestimable Benefits,) is therefore very deservedly to be observed in the
most Religious and Solemn manner, by all that pretend and desire to have a
share in that common Redemption: But because the Ingratitude of Christians, in
this respect, is grown so common (and though all hope to be partakers of the
Benefit of his Death, yet few will bestow any Pains in the Consideration of it,
or at least to very little purpose.) It is time for those who are any way
sensible of their Obligations to manifest their zeal for their crucified
Savior, by appearing publicly on this Occasion to testify their Love, that
others by their Examples may be put in mind, stirred up and encouraged to show
him also every one of them some Signs of their Gratitude; some Tears of Love,
Sorrow or Contrition, though never so few.

This moved me to Print the following Pages, and to lay before you therein, a
true description of the several Points and Passages of our Savior's Life and
Passion, in as little compass as I could; in a Method the best I could think
of, to move your Affections to the Love of his Goodness, and to provoke your
Courage and Resolutions to the Practice of his Virtues.

I have divided the whole into several little parts, and distinguished each
Passage in this manner, that it may be the more useful and serviceable to
ordinary Capacities, who may now easily pitch upon that part of the Life of
Jesus which is most suitable to their present purpose, and more deliberately
pause and meditate upon it to make the deeper Impression on their Minds, and
the better to influence their Lives and Conversations.

You will find herein, Prayers on all the remarkable Actions and Sufferings of
our Savior's Life, as well as of those near and at his Death. I thought it
therefore convenient to put a Title to each of them, that any one may find out
and pass (without trouble) to that which will answer his present Occasion, or
the reason that is ordained for the remembrance of any particular Passages of
his Life or Death.

But since so excellent a Pattern should be the continual Meditation of every
sincere Christian, we should not content our selves with only such a Portion of
Time for our serious Thoughts upon it, but resolve and endeavor to set it
always before us, for our Imitation and Practice in the whole course of our
Lives. And indeed, who can read at any time those glorious Instances of our
Savior's Love in what he did and suffered for us, and not melt into Tears of
Love, Joy or Admiration? Who can view the noble Examples of his admirable
Virtues, his profound Humility, inviucible Patience and Meekness, and not be
moved to the Imitation of them? Who can look upon the Captain of their
Salvation, wading through a See of Blood, and bearing the weight of a heavy
Cross all his Life, a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, and not resolve
with himself (if he have any Courage) to take up his Cross too and follow him?
Did he that was the dearly beloved Son of God, condescend to live a Life of
Labors and Difficulties, a Life of Trials and Afflictions, and at last suffer
all the Torments, Disgraces and Ignominies, that the worst of Villains could
invent? And shall we that pretend to be his Disciples and Followers, think of
living in Ease and Pleasures in the Opinion and Favor of the World, by our
Treachery to him, and false Complyances with its Allurements and Friendships?
It Is sure, the want of considering the Testament he has left us (wherein all
these things are so lively described) that so many faint and grow Cowards, and
Negligent in their Spiritual Warfare, and can do and suffer so little for him,
who has done and suffered so much for their Sakes. It Is either great Ignorance
or Infidelity of these great Truths of our Religion, or the greatest
Disingenuity, if we know, believe and love them, and do not set about the
Practice of them.

Let us therefore no longer delay, but begin now to show our selves Men, true
Disciples of Christ, such as love their Master, and prove it by their Obedience
to his Commands, by despising and falling out with the World that hated him,
and all its Deceits and Vanities, with a real intention to conform our selves
to his humble, suffering and self-denying Life; and let us every day press
forward to a greater measure of Love and Perfection of Obedience, that finding
his Yoke easy and his Burden light, by accustoming our selves to bear it, we
may experience more and more, the fullness of our Happiness and of our Joy to be
in the love and imitation of Jesus, and then we shall count indeed all things
in the World but loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3.8. Let us often be trying our selves by his example,
especially of that of Lowness and Meekness, Mat. 11.29. and be always in the
Exercise of that which was in a peculiar manner his Command; that which he, who
was all love so often pressed and inculcated; that amiable precept of loving
one another, John 15.12, 17. and thereby we shall not only know our selves, but
all Men will know us to be his Disciples, John 13.35. Let these three things
Humility, Meekness and Love, the peculiar Characters of Jesus, be constantly in
our view; let us often and diligently compare our Thoughts, Words and Actions
by this Rule, as, If we find our selves ready to think better of our selves
than our fellow Christians, and therefore despise those that are weak and
imperfect, if we slight those that are Poor, and avoid going near them or
conversing with them, if we are full of our own Judgments, and bitter censurers
of others Actions, we plainly show that we are not yet humble, like Jesus; If
we are froward and peevish, and impatient of Contradiction or Reproof, and
justify our selves upon every little occasion; if upon receiving a slight
Injury we complain and are grieved at it, or show any signs or desire of
Revenge. If for every little Trifle, we are inwardly and outwardly discomposed,
we may easily perceive upon an impartial view of our selves, how unlike we are
to our Savior, and how far yet from his Virtue of Meekness: If we feel within
our selves any bitterness or aversion toward our Neighbors, or are backward
in releiving the necessities of our poor Brethren when we are able; if upon
spying a little Fault in them, instead of pitying and compassionating him, we
are forward to reprove him, and apt to harbor hard Thoughts of him, we have
great Reason to think we are not yet become true lovers of our Neighbors or
Disciples of Jesus.

But let not those be discouraged that are still very far from the perfection
of his Virtues, and yet find to their great trouble much opposition of their
corrupt Nature, and strong Temptations to the contrary; for so long as they do
not deliberately consent to them, but strive against them to their utmost, they
may hope they are in a fair way in time to the attaining of it. For though the
Victory come on but slowly, yet if they persevere in Fighting with their
Enemies, in acknowledging their Imperfections and Weakness, and humbling
themselves before God for them, they shall infallibly come at last to the
desired conquests of themselves and a true conformity with their dear Lord
Jesus. To this end they should often be laying hold of his Strength, and
raising themselves up to the contemplation of his divine Countenance, and of
the glorious Virtues and Graces shining in his Person and Actions, in the
several occasions of his doing or suffering the Will of his heavenly Father,
and from thence fetch every time fresh Vigor and stronger Motives to their
desires and resolutions in following him, and purifying themselves from all
things that offend him.

And lest at any time they should lose Courage in approaching to him, either by
reason of their often failings, or their former Ingratitude, or perhaps out of
aw to his Majesty, or fear of their Indisposition to come into his Presence,
let them consider his gracious Invitations every where dispersed in the New
Testament, as this, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
Laden, and I will give you Rest. And in another place his provoking them to
come to him, John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have Life, with
many other such kind Expressions. We have also the same loving Savior, who so
freely conversed with Sinners and died for their sakes, at the Right Hand of
God, with all the Virtue of his Merits to intercede with him on our behalf, and
is not only able, but delights to bestow upon us, if we will but come to him
for it, all manner of good Things that are essential to our true Happiness,
which is our Sanctification, John 16.23. For whatsoever, says he, you shall ask
the Father in my Name, I will give it you, Mat. 7.7. Ask and ye shall receive,
seek ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you, Mat. 7.11. And if ye
being evil, says he, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give good Things? Or, as it is in another
Evangelist, Luke 11.13. The Holy Spirit to them that ask it? Let us therefore
who are so kindly invited, go often and boldly to the Throne of Grace to beg
his Holy Spirit with earnest entreaties in all our spiritual Wants and
Necessities: Let us fear nothing. Have we sinned? Let us return to him again.
We are his Sheep, and he is our Shepherd, and if we have straied, let us hasten
again into his Fold, for he calls us and will be glad to find us there: We are
his Friends, let us converse with him familiarly, that we may partake more and
more of the glory of his divine Nature, to be fitted and qualified for his
Company eternally in Heaven. O what Happiness! What Joy! What Honor! Romans
8.35. Let nothing therefore in this World be able to hinder or separate us from
the Love of Christ: Neither Tribulation, nor Distress, nor Persecution, nor any
Difficulties we can meet with, after this prospect of his Love and our
Happiness in the knowledge of it: No sure, (let every one of us say) now
nothing but Christ, my Love is fixed upon Christ, I cannot, I will not for any
thing take it off again. I can have now no pleasure in this World but in and
with my dear Savior Jesus, I will therefore now henceforward converse with
none else: All shall know now and bear witness by my Conversation, my
Sweetness, my Meekness, my Patience in bearing Injuries, that I have been with
Jesus, and that I delight to have none for my Companions in this Werld but him
and his Friends. Now am I fully resolved to apply my self to the imitation of
his Virtues, and to become his true Disciple indeed; too long have I been
ungrateful to so merciful a Savior and kind a Benefactor; too much time have I
spent in the vanities and fooleries of this World. Luke 15.18.19. I will
therefore now arise and go to my Father, and say to him Father, I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; I
do not so much as deserve the lowest place in thy Household, make me so happy if
thou please as to become one of thy hired Servants. I am wholly purposed to
leave all that is displeasing to thee, and from henceforwards to serve thee all
the Days, Hours and Moments of my Life, whom I taste now and see to be so
Gracious and Good. With such Holy Resolutions as these should every devout
Christian strengthen and confirm himself, that has been considering the
effects of our Savior's Love at the time of his Passion, that they may rise
again with him to newness of Life, and continuing close and faithful to him in
the denial of themselves, and in the forsaking the Pleasures and Vanities of
this World, may be made partakers of the inconceivable comforts of the Holy
Ghost here in his due time, and the incomprehensible manifestations and
communications of the Sacred Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in the World
to come: To whom be all Praise and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Meditations and Ejaculations on the Life and Passion of our Savior JESUS
CHRIST.
The Incarnation of Jesus.
PRaise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who for my Sake have
vouchsafed to come down from the Royal Seats and from the Mellifluous Bosom of
thy Divine Father into this Valley of Misery; and to be incarnated and made Man
by the Holy Ghost in the most chaste Womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Make my Heart, I beseech thee, thy Dewlling Place; adorn it, replenish it with
Spiritual Gifts, and wholly possess it.

O that I were able by profound Humility to unite my self to thee, and with an
ardent Affection to receive thee, and after having received thee, to retain
thee with me for ever!

O that I were so fastened to thee, that I might never depart, or turn away my
Mind from thee!

The Birth of Jesus.
Praise, Honor and Glory be unto thee O Blessed Jesus, who have vouchsafed to
be born of thy Virgin Mother in a poor Stable.

O that it were thy will to be continually born in me by a new fervor of
Spirit; And that I may be wholly Burnt with the Fire of thy Love!

O that thou were the only comfort, desire and delight of my Heart!

O that I could seek after thee alone think on thee alone, and Love thee alone!

The Swaddling of Jesus, and his lying in a Manger.
Praise, Honor and Glory be unto thee O Blessed Jesus; who being born in the
depth of Winter, did not refuse to be swadled in poor Clothes, and weeping to
be laid in the Manger, and as a little Infant to suck Milk from thy Mother's
Breast.

I adore thee most dear Redeemer, King of Glory.

O Prince of Peace, Light of the Gentiles, and most desired Savior; Grant O
Lord, that I may always stand in thy Sight, truly humble and truly poor in
Spirit.

Grant that for thy holy names sake I may willingly endure all kind of
Mortification, and may love nothing in this World besides thee, nor wish to
possess any thing but thee.

The Angels celebrating his Birth.
O sweet Jesus, whom the Heavenly Quire of Angels did Honor at thy Birth with
joyful Praises; and the Shephards, devoutly seeking found, adored with
admiration.

Grant that I may joyfully and unweariedly persevere in thy Praises and Service.

The Circumcision of Jesus.
O sweet Jesus who upon the eighth Day would be Circumcised like other
Children, and even whilt thou were a little Infant shed thy precious Blood; And
for our particular Comfort would be called Jesus, which signifies a Savior:

O that it would please thee to Circumcise my Heart from all evil Thoughts,
Words and Actions, that I might be admitted into the number of thy Children!

Thou O Lord art called Jesus, that is to say a Savior, be thou therefore my
Savior and Save me.

The Wisemen adoring and presenting him.
O blessed Jesus whom the Wisemen inquiring found by the direction of a Star,
and having found most humbly adored; Offering unto thee Gifts of Gold,
Frankincense and Myrrh.

Grant O Lord that with these blessed Men I may always seek after and adore
thee in Spirit and in Truth.

Grant that I may offer daily unto thee the Gold of bright shining Charity, the
Frankincense of sweat smelling Devotion, and the Myrrh of perfect Mortification.

The Presentation of Jesus in the Temple.
O sweet Jesus, who for our sakes would be subject to the Law, and to give us
an Example of Humility would be carried to the Temple by thy Mother, and be
Redeemed with an Offering ordained for such as were Poor; Where Just Simeon and
Anna the Prophetess rejoicing greatly at thy Presence, gave very glorious
Testimonies of thy Dignity.

O that all Pride were utterly thrown down in me!

O that all desire of humane Favor and itch of Self-love were cooled and cured
in me!

Jesus sought by his Mother, and found among the Doctors.
Praise, Honor and Glory be unto thee O Sweet Jesus, who staying in the
Temple, were for the space of three Days with great Grief sought by thy devout
Mother, and at length with great Joy found by her, sitting in the midst of the
Doctors, hearing them and asking them Questions.

O Communicate thy self to me on such sort, that I may never be separated from
thee, nor ever be deprived of thy Comfort!

Jesus Poor and Unknown.
O blessed Jesus who for the space of thirty Years remaining Poor and Unknown,
have vouchsafed to be reputed by the Jews the Son of Joseph the Carpenter and
of his Wife the Blessed Virgin Mary!

Let thy Grace I beseech thee pluck up and utterly root out of the very bottom
of my Soul all Pride and Ambition.

O that I may delight to be unknown to the World, and to be esteemed Vile and
Mean!

The Baptism of Jesus by John Baptist.
O Blessed Jesus who have not disdained to come to the River of Jordan, and
entering into it, there to be Baptized by thy Servant John the Baptist!

O that thou would wash me thoroughly from all my Wickedness and cleanse me
from my Sin!

Create in me I beseech thee, a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Jesus in the Desert and Tempted by the Devil.
O Blessed Jesus, who for our sakes did retire into the Desert to remain
among wild Beasts, there Fasting forty Days and forty Nights, and persevering
in Prayer, and did permit thy self to be Tempted of Satan; And when thou
had overcome him, the Angels came and Ministered unto thee!

Give me Grace, that I may chastise and keep under my Body, with all my
inordinate and vicious Affections.

Give me Grace, that I may constantly persevere in Prayer and other spiritual
Exercises.

Let no Temptation, I beseech thee, defile me; but rather let Temptations purge
me, and drive me to a closer union with thee.

The Preaching of Jesus, and his calling Disciples.
O Blessed Jesus, who to the end thou might gather together the dispersed
Children of God, have vouchsafed to Preach Repentance, to call Disciples, and
out of them to choose twelve Apostles to be eminent Preachers of thy Faith!

Draw me after thee and powerfully stir up my Heart to Love thee.

The daily Labors and Sufferings of Jesus.
Praise, Honor and Glory be unto thee O Blessed Jesus, who for my sake have
suffered many Afflictions, as, Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Labors and Miseries.

Grant that I may receive from thy Hand cheerfully all kind of Adversity.

Thou O most Amiable Jesus, thirsting after the good and conversion of Souls,
have past whole Nights in Prayer; Have been wearied with Traveling, have past
from City to City, from Country to Country, from Village to Village;

Let thy Love make me quick and ready to all good Things, that I may be never
sloathful in thy Service.

Grant that every where I may have a Zeal for thine Honor, and employ my self
wholly in thy Service.

The Miracles and Compassion of Jesus to the Miseries of Men.
Praise, Honor and Glory be unto thee O Blessed Jesus, who Conversing with Men
have vouchsafed most willingly to comfort them, and by many Miracles most
compassionately to Cure their Maladies and Discases.

Give me a Heart full of Tenderness and Affection, whereby I may pity other
Men's Afflictions, and may have a fellow feeling of their Miseries as if they
were my own; Whereby also I may patiently bear with all Men's Imperfections, and
chiefly to my Ability relieve them in their Necessities.

The Love and Familiarity of Jesus toward Sinners.
Praise, Honor and Glory be unto thee O Blessed Jesus, who have not shunned
the Company of Publicans and Sinners, but have offered them thy most loving
Familiarity, and ready Pardon of Sin to Matthew, Zacheus, Mary Magdalen and to
the Woman taken in Adultery, and to the rest that were Penitent.

Lord show thy merciful Compassion to me one of the greatest of Sinners.

Grant that I may embrace all Men with cheerful Love and Charity; May readily
Forgive those that Offend me; May perfectly Love-those that Hate me.

The Patience of Jesus in bearing Injuries, Blasphemies and Reproaches.
O Blessed Jesus who for my sake have suffered many Injuries, many Blasphemies,
many Reproaches and infinite Abuses of those on whom thou have bestowed many
Benefits!

Give me a Heart truly Innocent and Simple, that I may sincerely love my
Enemies and unfainedly pity them; And rendering Good for Evil according to thy
Command and Example, may through Charity, Meekness and Patience perfectly
please thee.

Jesus on an Ass, and Weeping over Jerusalem.
O Sweet Jesus, all Love, all Glory be to thee! who coming to Jerusalem in a
Meek and Gentle manner did ride upon an Ass, and amidst the Praises that were
Sung by the People that came to meet thee, did pour forth Tears, bewailing
the ruin of the City and destruction of the ungrateful Inhabitants!

O that I might never be delighted with the Praises and Favors of Men; But
always be profitably employed in internal Tears of Compunction and Devotion.

The Treachery of Judas to Jesus.
O Blessed Jesus, whom Judas the treacherous Disciple Sold for a little Money to
the Jews, who Persecuted thee and conspired thy Death!

Root out of my Heart all Affections to transitory Things.

Grant that I may never prefer any thing before thee.

Jesus Washing his Disciples Feet.
All Love, Honor and Praise be unto thee O Blessed Jesus, who in Jerusalem
did eat the Paschal Lamb with thy Disciples, and to give them an Example of
Humility and Holy Charity, kneeling upon the Ground did wash their Feet, and
having washed them did wipe them with a Towel!

O that this thy most admirable Example might pierce my Heart, and utterly
throw down in me all Pride and Loftiness!

Give me O Lord a most profound Humility, by which I may without difficulty,
cast my self at all Men's Feet.

Jesus instituting the Eucharist.
O Dear Jesus, who with an unspeakable Charity have instituted the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, and with wonderful Bounty have therein provided for the benefits
of our Souls!

Stir up in me a desire, and enkindle in the very bottom of my Soul a most
vehement Hunger of this most Venerable Sacrament.

Grant that when I come to that Table of Life, I may with a Chaste Affection,
profound Humility and perfect Purity of Heart receive Thee.

Jesus taking upon him the Infirmities of our Nature.
O Blessed Jesus, who immediately before thy Passion did begin to Fear, to
Grieve and be Sad, taking upon thy self our weakness; That by this thy
Infirmity thou might comfort and strengthen those that Tremble at the
expectation of Death!

Preserve me I beseech thee, as well from vicious Sadness as foolish Joy.

Lord prepare me against the last passage of my Life, and cover me then under
the Wings of thy Divine Protection.

Grant that I may often reflect upon my Ingratitudes to thee, to move me to
Tears of true Contrition.

The Prayer of Jesus in the Garden.
O Blessed Josus, who falling upon the Ground did Pray unto thy Father and
humbly offredst up thy self wholly unto him, saying Father, thy Will be done!

Grant that in all Necessities and Tribulations I may have recourse unto thee
in Prayer; And that I may yield and resign my self wholly to thy will; That I
may with a quiet Mind receive all things as from thy Hand.

The Agony of Jesus.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who being in an Agony
did Pray very long; And being Creator of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings
and Lord of Angels, did not disdain to be comforted by an Angel.

Grant in all Adversities and Distresses, in all Tribulation and Afflictions,
that I may seek Comfort from thee only; And that I may find help and assistance
at thy Hands.

O that I could in all Events wholly rely on thee; And leave my self wholly to
thy Fatherly Care!

The bloody Sweat of Jesus.
All Love, all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who by reason of the greatness
and vehemence of thy Grief had thy Body moistened all over with a bloody Sweat.

O that all the parts of my interior Man would Sweat out Holy Tears of
Contrition.

Jesus taken by Judas.
All Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who of thy own accord offerdest thy self
to be taken by Judas the Traitor, and other thine Enemies, thirsting after thy
Blood and desiring thy Death.

Grant that for the Honor of thy Name, I may not fly Adversities; But may
cheerfully go to meet them; And joyfully receive them as precious Tokens sent
from thee; And humbly and constantly endure them as long as it shall please
thee.

Jesus kissing Judas.
All Love all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did lovingly kiss the
Traitor Judas coming deceitfully to thee; Showing by the calmness of thy
Countenance, and sweetness of thy Words, that thou did Love him.

Grant I may show my self loving and mild to all my Enemies; That I may Pardon
them from my Heart, howsoever they shall offend me; And tolerate and love them,
as the Ministers of thy Will, and promoters of my Salvation.

Jesus laid hold on, and Bound.
Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did permit thine Enemies, most
suriously to lay their Sacrilegious Hands upon thee; And being Cruelly bound by
them, did not revenge but mildly endure the Reproaches, Blasphemies and
Injuries wherewith they did most wickedly Affront thee.

O that being freed from the Bonds of Vices, I may be fast tied to thee, with
the sweet Chains of Love!

O that thou woulst bestow upon me the Grace of true Patience. Amen.

Jesus healing Malchus's Ear.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did restore and
heal the Ear of Malchus one of thy furious Persecutors, cut off by Peter thy
chief Disciple; That so rendering Good for Evil, the riches of thy Mercy and
Mildness might shine forth to us.

Grant I beseech thee, that the desire of Revenge may never have place in my
Heart.

Grant that I may bear intimate Compassion and Affection toward all such as
offend me.

Strengthen my too great weakness, and make steadfast my too too great
Inconstancy with the most strong support of thy Grace.

Jesus led bound to Annas.
All Love, all Glory to thee O Blessed Jesus, who sufferedst thy self to be led
bound as a Malefactor and a Thief, by a Troop of Soldiers unto Annas, and to be
Persecuted before him; O unspeakable Mildness of my Redeemer!

Behold, whilst thou art taken, whilst thou art drawn, whilst thou art hated,
thou do not complain, thou do not murmur, thou made no resistance.

Grant O Lord, that these Examples of thy Virtues, may shine in me, to my Good
and Everlasting Glory,

Jesus receiving a blow on the Face.
O Blessed Jesus, King of Heaven and Earth, who standing humble like a base and
abject Person before the proud High Priest, did with great Modesty receive a
cruel Blow given thee upon the Face by one of his Servants.

Suppress, I beseech thee, in me all motions of Anger and Wrath; dull all the
Stings of Indignation, and extinguish all Desire of Revenge; That even provoked
with Injuries, I may not be troubled at it, nor contend, strive or make any
tumult; But suffering all things with a meek and patient Mind, I may render
Good for Evil, and ever be ready to favor those, who most Cross and Molest me.
Amen.

Jesus dragged from Annas to Caiphas.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did suffer thy
self to be shamefully led bound to Caiphas, that thou might bring us to true
Liberty, freeing us from the Bonds of everlasting Death.

Grant in the very midst of Derision and Contumelies, I may give thee Thanks
with all my Heart; And that by them I may be advanced in thy Love.

Jesus looking upon St. Peter, after his denying him.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, whom Peter, the chief of thy
Apostles, thrice denied; and yet thou most mercifully lookedst upon him, and
provokedst him to Repentance and holy Tears for his Offense.

O that it might please thee, in like manner, to look upon me with the lovely
Eye of thy Mercy; That with due Tears of Repentance, I may bewail my Sins past;
And having bewailed them, may not hereafter any more return to them again.

Jesus falsely accused.
Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who with a pleasing Countenance and modest
Look, standing before the chief Priest and Elders of the People of the Jews,
did not disdain to be falsely accused and suffer many Injuries.

Grant that I may never utter any Falsity, or Calumniate any Man; But may
suffer such Calumnies as are laid against me, with great tranquillity of Heart;
And referring all Difficulties to thee, with Silence I may expect thy Grace and
Comfort.

Jesus professing himself the Son of God, blasphemed.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who whilst thou did make
Profession of the Truth, affirming thy self to be the Son of God, yet did not
disdain to be esteemed a Blasphemer.

Grant that in all Places and before all Men, I may stand to the Truth, and in
awe of the presence of thy Divinity and Majesty, I may not sear the Censures
and Judgments of Men.

Jesus proclaimed guilty of Death, and condemned.
Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who by the wicked Jews wast proclaimed
guilty of Death, and without cause condemned; That by thy unjust Condemnation,
thou might deliver us from the Guilt of our Sins, wherewith we were justly
attainted.

Grant that I may reject all sinister and rash Suspicions; That I may suffer
without any bitterness of Heart, all wrongful Detractions and wicked Judgments
as others shall devise against me; And that on all Occasions, I may retain by
the help of thy Grace, a quiet and untroubled Mind.

Jesus made the Scorn and Derision of the Rabble.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who for my sake wast made
the Scorn and Disgrace of Men, and the Outcast of the People; And did not
turn away thy sacred Face, (which the Angels desire to behold) from the silthy
Spittle of thy Adversaries.

Grant that I may imitate thy Meekness and Patience.

Jesus beaten, buffetted and reviled.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did vouchsafe to be
most cruelly beaten and buffetted, and most unworthily reproached and reviled
for my sake.

Grant, I beseeh thee, that I may never refuse to be despised, and be reputed
Base and Vile; And that according to thy Permission, I may be contented to be
exercised with all kind of Injuries; That I may receive them, not as from Men,
but from thee, and of thy Fatherly Mercy.

Jesus Mocked and Blindfolded.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did permit thy self to
be mocked and scoffed, and thy lovely Face (which to behold is the chiefest
Happiness) for thy greater Derision, to be blindfolded.

Grant that the Veil of Ignorance being taken away, I may be endued with the
Knowledge of thy Will.

Imprint in my Heart a continual remembrance of thee.

Thou know, O Lord, how hard a thing it is for me to suffer, though never so
small a matter; Out of thy Mercy therefore assist my Frailty, and grant that I
may not Cowardly fall or faint at the coming of any Adversity.

Jesus carried before Pilate.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did permit thy self
(being mocked and bound) to be led to the Profane Tribunal of Pilate the
Judge, and in a disdainful manner to be presented before him; thou thy self
being the Judge of the Living and the Dead.

Grant that I may be truly subject to my Superiors, and all Powers over me
ordained by thee; That I may obey my Equals, and love and honor all Men.

Grant that I may not fear other Men's Judgments of me, but may receive them
with a ready and meek Mind. Amen.

Jesus silent while accused.
All Glory be to thee, O Blessed Jesus, who starding before Pilate, did
humbly hold thy Peace whilst the Jews did wrongfully accuse and calumniate thee.

Grant, O Lord, that I may never be troubled at other Men's slandering me; But
that I may with silence overcome all Injuries.

Give me the perfect Grace of Humility, by which I may neither desire to be
praised nor refuse to be contemned.

Grant that I may imitate thy Innocence and Patience; That I may both live
well, and living well, be contented to be Evil spoken of and despised.

Jesus used as a Malefactor.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who with great exclamations
and much noise of the People, like a most heinous Malefactor, was drawn from
Tribunal to Tribunal, from Pilate to Herod, through the midst of the City.

Grant that I may not be dejected with any Injuries of mine Enemies, nor
ashamed of Contempt; To the end that by thy gracious assistance, I may possess
my Soul in Patience.

Jesus refusing to show Herod a Miracle.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who by thy silence,
condemning Herod's vain desire, would not without good Cause, and for a good
End delight his curious Eyes by working a Miracle; and did thereby give us a
Lesson to avoid Ostentation in the presence of great Men.

Pour into my Soul thy Spirit of profound Humility; Mortify and Extinguish in
me, all tickling of vain Glory.

Grant that I may not seek to gain the Praises of Men, but to do all purely for
thine only Honor and Glory.

Jesus scoffed at by Herod and his Men of War.
All Love, all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did not disdain to be
scoffed at by Herod and his whole Army, and to be clothed in a white Garment
like a Fool or a Madman.

Grant that I may rather choose to be reputed Base and Abject with thee, than
Glorious with the World; That I may esteem it better and more worthy to suffer
Disgrace for thy Love, than to shine in the vain Honor of the World.

Grant that knowing thoroughly mine own Unworthiness, I may grow base in mine
own Conceit, and despise, reprehend and bewail my self.

Barabbas presented before Jesus.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who being compared with the
notorious Thief Barrbbas, wast judged more wicked and more worthy of Death than
he; The Murderer is set at Liberty; and the envious Jews demand thy Death, who
art the Author of Life.

Thou art indeed that living Stone, rejected by Man, but chosen by God.

O that I may prefer nothing before thee, nor change thee for any thing.

O that I could esteem all things as Dung and Filth, to the end I may gain thee.

Grant, O Lord, that the Blot of Envy may never stain my Soul.

Jesus stripped naked and scourged.
All Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who being stripped naked in the Palace,
and bound to a Pillar, did suffer thy naked and most immaculate Flesh to be
rent with most cruel Scourges, that with thy Sores thou might heal our
Wounds.

O amiable Jesus! I make choice of thee, covered with Stripes, for the Spouse
of my Soul; Desiring to be enflamed and burned with the Fire of thy most Sweet
Love!

Strip my Heart naked, I beseech thee, from all indecent, filthy and impure
Thoughts.

Grant that I may at all times patiently suffer the Scourges of thy fatherly
Correction, Amen.

Jesus clothed with a Purple Garment.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, upon whom all discharged
unspeakable Injuries and Contumelies; For they clothed thee, the King of Glory,
with a Purple Garment, for thy greater Affront; They fastened upon thy Divine
Head, a Crown of Thorns; They put into thy Hands a Scepter of a Reed; and
kneeling down in a scornful manner saluted thee, saying, Hall King of the Jews.

Plant, I beseech thee, in my Heart the Memory of thy Passion; Let Scorns, for
thy sake, be my Glory, and Injuries and Affronts my Crown.

Jesus beaten and buffeted.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did not refuse, for my
sake, to be beaten with a Reed, to be buffeted, to be spit upon, and to be the
object of all kind of Derisions.

I beseech thee by thy Wounds, by thy Blood, by thy Disgraces, and by all the
Grief and Sorrow which thou sufferedst, to endue my Soul with thy Patience, and
those Graces I so much stand in need of; That thou would Convert me and all I
have, to thine everlasting Praise and Glory.

Jesus made a Spectacls to the People.
O Blessed Jesus, who being defiled with Spittle, rent and disfigured with
Stripes, bound and wholly miserable, wast brought forth as a Spectacle to the
enraged People, wearing a Crown of Thorns and a Robe of Purple.

Grant, that with my Heart, I may utterly tread under Foot and have in
Detestation, all Ambition, Ostentation, worldly Pomp and Vanity, and all
earthly Dignities; That by profound Humility and true Contempt of my self, I
may incessantly run toward the Glory of thy heavenly Felicity.

Jesus declared Innocent, yet delivered to be Crucified.
All Love, all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who being declared Innocent by
Pilate the Judge, did not refuse to bear the furious Out-crys of the Jews, by
which they demanded that thou would be Crucified.

Grant that I may live Innocently, and not be troubled by reason of other Men's
evil Will toward me.

Give me this Grace, that I may neither Back-bite other Men, nor willingly give
Ear to those that do it; But that still I may have a good Opinion of others,
and bear other Men's Imperfections with a true Compassion; And love all Men for
God and in God, with a pure, sincere and cordial Affection. Amen.

Jesus unjustly condemned.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did permit thy
self in the Presence of thy People, to be condemned to the most ignominious
Death of the Cross; That thou might free us from the Sentence of eternal
Death.

Grant that I may seek thy Honor, and rather choose to be exercised with thee
in Adversity, than by forsaking thee to enjoy the Conveniences of this Life.

Jesus bearing his Cross, and fainting under it.
All Love be unto the O Blessed Jesus, who with many Disgraces and Injuries
offered thee, did carry thy Cross with great Pain upon thy sacred and torn
Shoulders; And being weary and breathless, did Languish under the Burden.

Grant that, with fervent Devotion, I may embrace the Cross of Self-denial and
Mortification; And with an ardent Charity, imitate the Examples of thy Virtues;
And may humbly follow thee even unto Death.

Jesus admonishing the Women that followed him.
O Blessed Jesus, who in that lamentable Journey in which thou wentst to thy
Death, did meekly admonish the Women that they should bewail themselves and
their Children.

Give me acceptable Tears of Compunction, with which I may truly bewail my Sins
and my own Ingratitude.

Give me Tears of true Contrition and of holy Love, which may melt my hard
Heart and make it grateful unto thee; That I may love thee alone, and rest in
thee only.

Jesus at the Place of Execution.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who having thy Shoulders
bruised with the weight of the Cross, did at length arrive weary to the Place
of Execution; Where Wine mingled with Gall was offered thee to refresh thy
languishing Forces.

O that thou would extinguish in me the Allurements of Gluttony, and the
Concupiscences of the Flesh; And cause in me an Aversion and Horror from all
impure and unlawful Delights; And that I may Eat and Drink soberly to the Glory
of thy Name; That I may Hunger and Thirst after thee alone; And in thee place
my Delight and Joy.

Jesus stripped naked.
O Blessed Jesus, who did not disdain to be stripped naked upon Mount Calvary
in the sight of the People; And to suffer a most bitter pain by thy Sores
renewed with the pulling off thy Clothes.

Grant that I may love poverty of Spirit, and not be troubled for any worldly
Want or Inconvenience.

Grant that by thy Example, I may endure and suffer any corporal Pains,
Necessities or Calamities whatsoever.

Jesus stretched upon the Cross.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who being naked did not
refuse to be rudely stretched out upon the wood of the Cross, and cruelly
fastened with Nails unto the same; In this manner did thou suffer thine
innocent Hands and tender Feet to be most grievously wounded, and all thy
sacred Joints to crack and be put out of Joint.

Grant me, O Lord, that with a faithful and grateful Mind, I may consider this
thy unspeakable Charity, with which, of thine own accord; thou did stretch
forth thine Arms and willingly offeredst thy Hands and Feet to be Pierced.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to enlarge and extend my Heart with the perfect Love of
thee; Pierce and fasten it unto thy self with the most sweet Nail of Charity;
And all my Senses, Thoughts and Affections, enclose only in thee. Amen.

Jesus hanging on the Cross.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who did hang (thy
Hands and Feet being Pierced) three Hours upon an ignominious Cross, and
shedding in great abundance thy precious Blood, did of thine own accord
endure unspeakable Torments throughout thy whole Body.

Lift up I pray thee, my miserable Soul grovelling on the Ground.

O healthful Blood, O reviving Blood!

O that thou would Purge and thoroughly Heal me, being washed with this thy
precious Blood.

O that thou would offer this thy Blood to thy Father, for a perfect
Satisfaction of all mine Iniquities.

Grant, I beseech thee, that mine inward Man may with ardent Affection mentally
receive the lively Drops of thy precious Blood, and may truly taste how sweet
thy Spirit is.

Jesus praying for his Enemies.
All Love to thee O Blessed Jesus, who wast so good, even to those that were so
wicked, that for the very same Persons who did Crucify thee, thou did pray
unto thy Father, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Give me, I beseech thee, the Grace of true Meekness and Patience, by which I
may, according to thy Commandment and Example, love mine Enemies; And do good
to those that hate me: And pray heartily unto thee, for those that hate and
persecute me.

The Title fastened to the Cross of Jesus.
All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who would that the Title
written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin (as it were the Trophy of thy Victory)
should be fastened to the Cross; that we beholding it, might courageously Fight
against our invisible Enemies.

Protect me (Blessed Jesus) under this Title, against the Wiles and Deceits of
the Devil; Teach me, under this Title, to overcome all Temptations and to
subdue all Vices; That having by Grace conquered them, I may freely praise and
glorify thy holy Name. Amen.

The Garments of Jesus divided by the Soldiers.
Praise, Honor and Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, whose Garments the
Soldiers having divided amongst themselves, did leave thy Coat which was
without Seam (and signifies the Unity of the Church) undivided.

Pour down into my Heart, I beeseech thee, the Spirit of Peace and Union; That
I may never, through my Fault, divide or trouble the Concord and Union of my
Brethren; But that I may always endeavor to repair Divisions and pacify
Troubles.

Jesus on the Cross, tormented and blasphemed.
O Blessed Jesus, who suffering upon the Cross incomprehensible Torments and
ineffable Anguishes, were shamefully reproached and scorned by the Jews, who
vomited out of their wicked Mouths, sundry Blasphemies against thee.

Grant, O Lord, that being mindful of thy Humility, Patience and Mildness, I
may quietly and cheerfully suffer Pains, Disgraces, Persecutions, Infamy, etc.
And may remain with thee nailed to the Cross, even to the end.

Let no violence of Temptation, no storms of Adversities, no tempest of
Reproaches, hinder me from effecting my good purposes.

Let neither Death nor Life, nor things present nor things to come, nor any
Creature separate me from thy Love.

Jesus merciful to the penitent Thief.
Glory be to thee O Blssed Jesus, who did tolerate one of the Thieves to
upbraid thee, and did most mercifully and bountifully promise the Glory of
Paradise to the other, who did humbly acknowledge his own Injustice, and with a
devout Faith, confessed thee to be his King and his Lord.

Behold me, I beseech thee, with the Eyes of Mercy, which thou did cast upon
the Thief repentant for his Sins.

O that by thy holy Help and Grace I may lead a Life so Innocent, that I may
faithfully serve and purely love thee; That at the end of my Life, I may hera
from thee (most merciful Redeemer) that most desired Voice, This Day thou shall
be with me in Paradise.

Jesus destitute of all Comfort.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who in a most pitiful
manner hanging upon the Cross, with wide gaping Wounds, did profess thy self
to be destitute of all Comfort.

Grant that with a firm Confidence, I may always have recourse to thee, my most
merciful Savior, in all Adversities, Temptations and Distresses; And wholly
distrusting my self, I may trust in thee alone; And commit and resign my self
entirely to thee.

Wound the inmost part of my Soul, with the remembrance of thy Wounds.

Imprint them in my Heart, and make my Spirit even melt with thy Sacred Blood;
That I may rejoice in thee, attend to thee, and thee only seek, find, hold fast
and possess.

Jesus Athirst.
O Blessed Jesus, who panting upon the Cross, thy Body being drawn dry for want
of Blood, becamest very thirsty, and did Burn with an unspeakable desire of
our Salvation.

Grant that I may most ardently thirst after thine Honor, and the Salvation of
Souls; And may with Courage employ my self in this Affair. Grant that I may not
be hindered or entangled by any transitory thing.

Jesus tasting Gall and Vinegar.
All Love, all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who from a Sponge dipped in
Vinegar and Gall which was offered thee to Drink, being then thirsty even to
Death, by tasting thereof, did leave us an Example of perfect Poverty and
Patience in the want of all Comforts.

Give me Grace to despise unlawful Pleasures, and to avoid all excess in Meat
and Drink; Also to use those things moderately which thou give for the
support of the Body.

Pacify the inordinateness of my desires, that whatsoever does please thee, may
please me, and whatsoever displeases thee, may be displeasing also to me.

Jesus Crucified.
All Love, all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, most enamoured of Mankind, who
duly performing the Work of our Redemption did offer up thy self upon the
Cross an Holy Sacrifice for the expiation of the Sins of all Men.

Be thou, I beseech thee, the scope and end of all my Thoughts, Words and
Actions; That in all things, I may with a right and simple Intention, seek thy
Honor.

Grant I may never grow cold or faint in thy Service; But that the fervor of
Spirit may be daily renewed in me, and that I may more and more be enflamed to
Love thee, Amen.

Jesus yielding up the Ghost.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who of thine own accord
did embrace Death, and recommending thy self to thy heavenly Father, bowing
down thy venerable Head, yeildedst up thy Spirit.

Truly thus giving thy Life up for thy Sheep, thou have showed thy self to be
the good Shepherd.

Thou did dye, O the only begotten Son of God! Thou diedst O my beloved
Savior, that I might live forever!

O how great Hope, how great Confidence have I reposed in thy Death and thy
Blood!

I Glorify and Praise thy Holy Name, acknowledging my infinite obligations to
thee.

O Blessed Jesus, for thy bitter Death and Passion sake give me Grace and
Pardon!

Grant that I may every Day more and more bear about in my Body, the dying of
my Lord Jesus.

Miracles at Jesu's Death.
O Blessed Jesus, at whose Death the Sun withdrew his Light, the Veil of the
Temple rent in sunder, and the Monuments opened.

O Son of Righteousness, permit not, I beseech thee, the Beams of thy Grace at
any time to forsake me; But let them continually enlighten the inmost parts of
my Soul.

Withdraw wholly from me the Veil of Hipocrisy; And shake the Earth of my Soul
with wholesome Repentance.

Rend my Stony Heart; That being wholly renewed, I may contemn all things
transitory and love only that which is Eternal

Jesus's Side pierced.
Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who would that thy Side should be opened
with a Soldiers Lance; And out of it pour out Blood and Water to revive and
wash our Souls.

Thou would O my best Beloved, that thy most sacred Heart should be wounded
for me.

O that it might please thee, to make a most deep Wound in my Heart with the
Lance of thy Love; And unite it to thy most sacred Heart in such manner, that I
may have no power to will any thing, but that which thou wiltest.

Bring in, O my Lord, bring in my Soul through the Wound of thy Side, into the
Bosom of thy Charity, and Treasure-house of thy Divinity.

Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee, O Blessed Jesus, that sufferedst all that
the Malice of Men or Devils could devise.

Behold with as much Devotion as possibly I can, I admire the Five principal
Wounds of thy sacred Body, which are the glorious Seals of my Reconciliation
and Salvation.

I humbly desire to abide and be hid in them, and so by that means be secure
from all Evil.

Jesus taken down from the Cross and buried.
All Love, all Glory be to thee, O Blessed Jesus, who being with great
Lamentation of thy Friends taken down from the Cross, would be anointed with
precious Ointments, wrapped in a winding Sheet, and buried where no Man was
buried before.

Bury, I beseech thee, all my Senses, all my Forces and all my Affections in
thee.

That being joined to thee through an efficacious Love, I may become insensible
in respect of all other things.

Jesus descending into Hell.
O Blessed Jesus, who have vanquished the power of the Devil, and did in Soul
descend into Hell, there to make known thy Conquest;

Let the virtue of thy Passion and of thy Blood descend now, I beseech thee,
upon my Parents, Kinsfolks, Friends, Benefactors and all Christian People, to
deliver them from the slavery of Sin, and all the power of the Enemy.

Jesus arising out of the Grave.
All Love, all Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who like a Conqueror with
glorious Triumph, did arise out of thy closed Sepulcher; And revested with
thy lovely Countenance, did replenish thy Friends with new Joy and Gladness.

Grant, O Lord, that leaving the old Paths of my vicious Conversation, I may
walk in newness of Life; And seek and savor those things which are above in
Heaven, and not those things which are here upon Earth; To the end, that when
thou my Life shall appear at the last Day, I may appear with thee in Glory.
Amen.

Jesus ascending into Heaven.
Praise, Honor and Glory be to thee, O Blessed Jesus, who forty Days after thy
Resurrection, did gloriously ascend into Heaven in the sight of thy
Disciples, where thou sit at the right Hand of thy Father, Blessed for ever.

O that my Soul might always Languish on Earth, and ascend and aspire toward
Heaven; May Hunger and Thirst always after thee.

Jesus sending the Holy Ghost.
All Love, all Glory be to thee, O Blessed Jesus, who did give thy Holy Ghost
to thy Disciples, persevering in the practice of thy holy Precepts, and joining
together with one Mind in Prayer; And did send them to Teach all Nations
throughout the whole World.

Cleanse, I beseech thee, the interior of my Heart.

Enable me, I beseech thee, to forsake all, deny my self, take up my Cross and
follow thee. Give me with a steadfast Resolution, and constancy of Mind, that
being a true Disciple of thine, and disengaged from all worldly and vain
Desires, the Holy Ghost may in due time, according to thy Promise, descend upon
my Soul, and make it an Habitation, fit for his continual Residence.

Replenish me with the special Gifts of his Grace, till I be totally changed
and sanctified both in Soul and Body.

O my Lord and merciful Savior, thou see how weak and frail I am; vouchsafe
therefore, I beseech thee, an extraordinary Assistance of thy Holy Spirit to
Comfort and Strengthen me in this my Pilgramage, that I may withstand and
overcome all Difficulties and Temptations, and at last come safe to my Journeys
end.

Jesus coming as a Judge at the last day.
All Glory be to thee O Blessed Jesus, who coming as a Judge at the last day,
wilt render unto every one according to his Works, either Punishment or Reward.

O my most merciful Lord God, grant that according to thy Will, I may so
innocently pass the Course of this miserable Life; That my Soul departing out
of the Prison of my Body, I may be vested with thy Merits and Virtues; And be
received into thy everlasting Joy; And with all the Saints, I may bless and
praise thee for ever.

All Love, all Glory, be to thee O Blessed Jesus, whom I have most grievously
offended all the days of my Life.

Alas! I have never ceased to be ungrateful to thee, resisting thy Grace in
diverse Manners, and always adding new Faults unto my former.

Behold, O my only Refuge, look upon me the very Outcast of all Creatures,
bringing with me nothing but bundles of Sin.

I prostrate my self at the Feet of thy Mercy, and humbly implore Pardon and
Remission.

Pardon, I beseech thee, and save me for thy Name's sake.

For I believe and am assured, that no Sins are so grievous and heinous, but by
the Merits of thy most Sacred Passion may be forgiven and washed away. Amen.

Certain amorous Speeches of the Soul to her self, to inflame her Desires after
Jesus.
O My Soul, when will thou be ready to follow the Humility of thy Lord Jesus!

When shall the Example of his Patience Shine in thee!

When will thou be wholly free from Passions and vicious Affections?

When will thou peaceably and gently endure all Injuries, Trials and
Afflictions?

When will thou truly and perfectly love thy Savior?

When will thou be pure, simple and resigned before him?

How long will it be e're thou be hindered no more from his charming Embraces?

O that thou did fervently love thy God!

O that thou could inseparably cleave unto thy chiefest good!

O my Soul, where is thy Love? where is thy Treasure? where is thy Desire?
where is all thy Good? where is thy God? when shall thou most happily enjoy him?

If thou have Sinned and art wounded, behold thy Redeemer, behold thy Physician
is ready to own thee.

Perhaps thou art afraid, because he is thy Judge; but take Heart; for he who
is thy Judge, is thy Advocate and Intercessor.

His Mercy is infinitely greater than thine Iniquity is or can be.

Thy Savior and thy God, is most Compassionate, most Tender and Gentle, and
wholly Amiable and wholly Desirable, and loves all things that he has Created.

Let not thine Imperfections discourage thee too much, for thy God does not
despise thee because thou art frail and infirm, but loves the exceedingly;
because thou desire and labourest to be more perfect, and to be a Disciple of
his dear Son Jesus.

Arise therefore, O my Soul, arise out of the Dust, forsake the Puddle of this
World.

How long will thou take Pleasure in Vanity? How long will thou set up thy Rest
among the Anxieties and Torments of this Life? How long will thou sleep
securely so near Destruction?

Return now unto the Lord thy God, and give thy self up wholly to him, for he
expects thee.

Make have, do not delay any longer, for he is ready to receive thee: Join thy
self to Jesus, enclose thy self in him, in the Merits of his Passion, and he
cannot deny thee.

Alas! O my Soul, how ungrateful have thou been to so gracious a God? He has
promised those things to thee, which neither Eye has seen nor Ear heard, nor
has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive.

O my Soul, if it were necessary daily to suffer Torments; yea, to endure Hell
it self for a long time together, that we might see Christ in his Glory, and be
joined in Fellowship with the Saints in his Heavenly City; were it not worth
while to sustain all manner of Misery, to be made partakers of so great a Good,
so great a Felicity?

Love him then, love him of whom thou are beloved. Love him, who has first
loved thee; and who is the Fountain from whence thy Love flows.

O my Soul, sigh ardently and aspire fervently to that glorious City so highly
spoken of.

Heaven and Earth and all Creatures, do continually exhort thee to love thy God.

Fear not therefore, O my Soul, nor be ashamed or disquieted or troubled; hope
thou in God who will be the help of thy Countenance.

Draw near to him and be enlightened that thy Face may not be ashamed.

The sweet and amiable Jesus is present with thee, be therefore ready to
embrace him, and with reverence and love attend unto him.

Short Representations of the Sufferings of Jesus, taken out of the Prophecies
of the Old Testament, being another View of his Love.
O My most loving Savior, who being the Brightness of thy Father's Glory and
express Image of his Person, did humble thy self and take upon thee the Form
of a Servant; how shall I express my love to thee, sufficiently admire and
praise thee?

Thou wast Poor and in Labor from thy Youth; thou stretchedst out thy Hand all
the day, to a faithless Generation.

All we like Sheep have gone astray, and the Lord laid on thee the Iniquities
of us all,

Truly thou have borne our Griefs and carried our Sorrows, yet we did esteem
thee stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.

Thy Lovers and thy Neigbours stood looking upon thy trouble, and thy Kinsmen
stood afar off, even he that did eat Bread with thee, lift up his Heel against
thee.

Thou the Breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, wast taken in their
Pits.

Thou gave thy Cheek to him that smote thee, thou were filled with Reproaches,

False Witness rose up against thee, they laid to thy Charge things that thou
knew not; yet thou heldst thy Peace, wast Silent, wast Patient.

Thou gave thy Back to the Smiters, and thy Cheeks to them that pulled off
the Hair. Thou did not hide thy Face from Shame and Spitting.

The Plowers Plowed upon thy Back, and made long Furrows.

Thou were brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before his
sheerers is dumb, so thou openest not thy Mouth.

The Kings of the Earth stood up and the Rulers took Counsel together against
the Lord and against his Anointed.

Thine Enemies beheld thee with a terrible Countenance, and they that were mad
upon thee were sworn together against thee.

They questioned thee with Reproaches and Torments, and condemned thee to a
cruel Death.

Remember O Lord thy Affliction and Misery, the Wormwood and the Gall.

They pierced thy Hands and thy Feet, they might tell all thy Bones; They stood
stareing and looking upon thee, they divided thy Garments amongst them and cast
Lots upon thy Vesture.

They gave thee Gall to Eat, and when thou wast thirsty they gave thee Vinegar
to Drink.

The Lord has made thee the offscouring and refuse in the midst of thy People,
and thou wast numbered among the Transgressors.

All they that passed by the way, clapped their Hands at thee, thine Enemies
hissed and wagged their Heads at thee.

They said, we have swallowed him up, behold this is the Day we looked for, we
have found it, we have seen it.

Thou did deliver thy Soul to Death, thou were cut off from the Land of the
Living, for the Transgression of thy People wast thou smitten.

Thy Soul went down into the Lake, and they laid a Stone upon thee.

O what great Troubles, how many and how evil did thy Father show thee, and yet
did he return and quicken thee, and brought thee from the depth of the Earth,

Thou ascendest up on high, thou leadst Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts
unto Men, even to thine Enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

Behold how thou have loved me, thy love was strong as Death.

What could thou have done more for thy Vineyard which thou have not done and
wherein could thou have commended thy Love more to us, to suffer so much for
us, even while we were Sinners and rebellious against thee?

What shall I render unto the Lord, for all these benefits that he has done
unto me?

Let Heaven and Earth praise thee, and all that therein is, for Praise becomes
thee, O thou hope of Israel and his Savior in the Day of his Calamity.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

For thou wast slain and have redeemed us unto God by thy Blood, out of every
Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People.

Be mindful of thy Word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have caused me to put my
trust.

Thou have said, that if I be lifted up, I will draw all men after me.

Behold thou art exalted above the Heavens, O Lord, draw me after thee, and let
me run after the adour of thy Ointments.

FINIS.

