CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Duty OF LOVE, AND OF THE CONTRARY EVIL,
Uncharitableness. Written by Thomas Devenish.

1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and have not
Charity, I am become as a sounding Brass, or as a tinckling Cymball.

LONDON, Printed by R. Oulton and G. Dexter, for William Larnar, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE Denzil Hollis Esquire, Brother to the Right Honorable the
Earl of CLARE, all Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
RIght Noble Sir, this Pamphlet is for the most part such notes as I had taken
some five or six years sithence for mine own private use, but now have made it
for the use of my friends also; And howsoever (for want of such a dress as
Learning might have set it forth in) it has lost that grace which otherwise
it might have had; yet by reason of the matter, I assure my self it will be of
some account with so many as prefer substance before shadows; which has
made me adventure the publishing of it, though no better furnished then you
see; and the sure knowledge of your noble disposition and former experience of
your favor, has imboldened me to present this little Book unto your Honor,
being well assured, that by your Patronage, it will find the more favorable
entertainment, especially amongst some, which otherwise, perhaps, would have
scornfully rejected it, and it may be, will tax me of, resumption, that for the
credit of a trifle, shall crave the assistance of so eminent a person, but my
duty and true affection to your Honor, and hope of your pardon, has made me
wilfully repel all reasons that might dissuade me. Accept therefore, I beseech
your Honor, this small gift, as King Artaxerxes did the water which a poor
man brought in his hands and gave him, who received it with a smiling and
cheerful countenance, measuring the gift, not according to the value, but
according to his good will that gave it; and thought it no less an act of
Kingly greatness, to take small presents in good part, then to give greater:
neither is any eminence disgraced by so doing. I think it needless to trouble
your Honor with many words of entreaty, and therefore conclude, wishing your
Honor all happiness here and hereafter,

Your Honors to be commanded, THO. DEVENISH.

To the READER.
FRiendly Reader, I know that great wisdom is requisite to write well, and
there is need of greater deliberation then in speaking, because a rash word may
be presently corrected, but that which is set down in writing cannot be so
easily amended; yet this is chiefly to be observed by Scholars and great men,
who ought to consider well what they utter, and to use words of another phrase
than that of the vulgar sort; but for such as my self, may take more liberty,
not wronging so much our reputation; so we speak the truth, which has
imboldened me to publish this Book; for as it is lawful and fit to ask such
things as we stand in need of, so also to profit others what we can by
speaking or writing, though we want that sweet grave and eloquent speech,
which is not to be neglected by such as have it; and for any to refuse a truth
when it may be profitable, because it comes in homely words, were gross folly,
I am sure men will not do so in the things of this life; for I have often
known wise men of this world, and learned, discourse long with a poor
Countreyman, and have been very ready to hearken to his advice, when it may
be profitable; and you shall hardly find any so mad, as to refuse directions
(from the meanest Shepherd or Beggar he meets withal) in a way he knows not.
But you will say, it is a shame for any man to be so ignorant, as not to know
the way to his own home, and that in the clear light, at noone day, but such
is the wilful ignorance of the most, that they know not, or if they know, they
forget, and walk not in this heavenly path of Charity, yea, men of high
esteem for their great wisdom, are not ashamed to declare their ignorance of
this Royal Law of Love (which ought to be the rule of all men's actions)
Witness that great man, who at his trial made this excuse; That he fell upon
those evils with which he was charged, for want of Buoy to guide him; if he
had but looked on the law of Nature, he might have found Buoy enough; for a
Heathen could have told him by the light of that Law, that it is injustice to
take that which belongs to another man from him by force, much more would the
Law of God have been a perfect rule to have kept him from those uncharitable
ways, and he could not miss directions there almost in every leaf, which
implies not only the necessity and excellency of this duty, but also our
want of it, and the great need we have still to be put in mind; and this is
also manifested by our Saviors speech to Simon Peter, Ioh. 21.15. For as if
this could never be sure enough rooted in the heart, he asks him three times
together whether he loved him? sure Christ did not ask so often to inform
himself of Peter's love, but to teach him and us all the necessity of this
duty, which is the sum of all; for without it we can do nothing well, and
with it and a right judgment we can do nothing ill. The best affected look
more to the truth then to the person or manner of delivery, which leaves me
not altogether hopeless, but that this may do some good; and so I commit it
to the charitable acceptance of all that read it, desiring to gain so much
entrust hereby in the affection of Gods children, that I may have a part in
their prayers, which I hope they will not deny me and in that hope I rest,

Yours in the Lord, THO. DEVENISH.

JOHN 13. VERSE. 34. A new Commandment I give you, that ye love one another,
as I have loved you, etc.

GAL. 6. VERSE. 2. Bear ye one another burdens etc.


BEfore we learn our Duty, it is good to set before our eyes the haynousnesse
of our sin; and the best way for a man to come to the true sense and
knowledge of the nature of sin, is first to consider the glorious Nature of
God against whom we sin; his infinite essence and power; his excellent
wisdom; his wonderful goodness; his free love; his exact Justice; his
unspeakable Mercy, and his infallible Truth, with all the rest of his
Attributes: And in the second place consider what God has done for us; he
created us of the dust of the earth, and that in his own Image; Genesis 1.27.
That is, in the likeness and exquisite resemblance of divine Essence or Deity:
Hence we may see the blasphemy of Papists in making an Image of God, which
cannot possibly have the least resemblance of Divine Nature: Also in the first
and second Chapter of Genesis we may see at large what God did more for man, he
gave him all the creatures, not only for necessary use, but also for delight;
and when amongst them all he found not a meet help for Adam, he made him one,
endued with reason like himself, fit to converse withal; and what more? Made
him the great Monarch to rule the whole earth, Genesis 1.18. Psalm. 8.6. Hereby we
may so far take notice of that infinite love of the Creator to the creature,
that we may be able in some measure, to see the haynousnesse of the sin of our
first parents, and the punishment due for the same, unto which we are all
liable by nature. There be diverse circumstances that may exceedingly aggravate
this sin; as the time when: it is thought presently after God had bestowed
these favors, whilst they were fresh; The place where, even in the midst of
them in the Garden; The little need they had, who wanted for nothing that their
nature was capable of, as the woman confessed, Genesis 3.2. They had the free use of
all but that one tree, which also shows the unreasonablenesse of the sin,
that would not suffer God to reserve one that had freely given them all: Also
it was a strange thing, that our first parents should so readily hearken unto
the Serpent, of whom they never received good, and balance his suggestions,
with the unfallible truth of their Creator, of whose goodness they had as much
experience as possibly they could imagine should be manifested in so short
time; there are many other which we may very easily find out; but there is one
thing above all that shows the desperate nature of their sin, that they would
adventure upon the breach of that law of God, and make themselves thereby the
subjects of his heavy wrath, when neither they, nor any other creature in
heaven or earth could know, or conceive any way of redemption; If any man can
but meditate on this, it will wound the heardest heart; O what shall a poor
soul think in such a case? What have I done? What have I lost? Is there no
help? Shall I never see the face of my God again? Yea, there is help, and by
that which is the greatest aggravation of our sin, which is, we have sinned
against that infinite Majesty, and there is none but that Majesty can help us,
and that has wrought our peace; Here we may take notice of Gods wonderful
goodness in redeeming our souls, and the glorious working of all those
attributes formerly mentioned, in freeing us from that miserable condition: As
first, Gods excellents wisdom in finding out the way, which was it that the
Angels desired to behold, 1 Pet. 1.12. His infinite power in effecting it; his
wonderful goodness toward his creature; his free love in bestowing it; his
exact Justice in the sufferings of Christ, more then can be expressed; his
unspeakable mercy to us in the greatest misery that any creature could; his
unfallible truth, in keeping promise to all ages, all this agreeing with the
holiness of his nature, there is not any of these particulars, but may fill a
heart with meditations, and afford matter enough for a bigger Volume then this,
but I only mention them for the farther aggravation of our actual sin, and
to show thereby how justly God may require all love and obedience from us, that
has denied us nothing that is fit for us; Let us see then what it is that
Christ requires to be performed on our parts; That is, faith to believe, lay
hold on, and apply all the promises of God unto us and this is not a dead
faith, but such as works by love, as we may see in the Scriptures, Gal. 5.6.
For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love, and in the 13. Ver, the
Apostle says, love is the fulfilling of the law; Saint James calls it the
Royal law, James 2.8.

Love then, being the substance of all the duty that God requires, as we may
see, Mat. 22.37.38, 39. I shall say no more, but go on with what I intended,
concerning this duty of love, and of the contrary evil, uncharitableness, in
1 John 3.10. we have this laid down, as a character of the child of the
devil, in the later part of the Verse, namely, He that loves not his brother,
such a one is not of God: Now we must understand, that in the Scripture, such
as love not, are said to hate; hence we may see what uncharitable persons are,
they belong to Satan, this we may see plainly proved, 1 John 4.16. and 1 John
29. and Gal. 5.2. It is reckoned up amongst the works of the flesh; and in Tit.
3.3. it is set down as the note of a wicked man. Now we must not understand
every unkindnesse to be the hatred here meant, for amongst good men many times
this may fall out; as Acts 15.39. Paul and Barnabas parted company upon a
private difference, but the uncharitableness here spoken of, is a perverse
disposition of the mind, whereby we are made unfit to perform any office of
love as the Lord requires, but rather the contrary; nay further, uncharitable
men are like the devil whole they are, and to whom they do belong; for the
devil may be said to have knowledge, faith, fear, and such like, James 2.19.
but the devil has no love, he loves none, but hates; and as God makes
himself known unto us by this, so he makes it the true sign whereby we
shall know those that belong unto him. John 13.35. By this shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples, if that ye have love one to another: by all this we
may see what a hateful sin, uncharitableness is, and what cause it gives us
to suspect our sincerity when we feel in our selves the marks of this sin,
which may be briefly these.

The first note of an uncharitable man, is such as take things in the worst
part, or worse then they are meant: As those wicked Princes of the Children of
Ammon persuaded Hanun, 1 Chronicles 19.3. or as they dealt with our Savior Christ,
turning his words into other sense then he meant; for he spoke of his body,
they would needs have it the Temple; John 2.19. And to this purpose see how
love is described, 1 Cor. 13.4. amongst many other things, it is said, love
thinks not evil; also uncharitable men will put a bad end upon all is said
or done, as if all were done in hypocrisy, and so put the worst construction
that may be.

A second note is, when men are so easily provoked, fly out upon every slight
occasion, or show of offense, as if their uncharitable nature were as
touch-powder, kindle with the least spark, we see in that, 1 Cor. 13. Love
suffers long, it is not of this touchie nature.

Thirdly, when a man seeks his own; For what is the saying of the world,
just as Kain; am I my brothers keeper? see to this purpose that forenamed, 1
Cor. 13. Love seeks not her own; but we know the divellish proverb, Every
man for himself, and God for us all, we may well say, and the Devil for us
all.

Fourthly, when one is hardly drawn to communicate any thing for the good of
his brother, we know, 1 Cor. 13.4. Love is bountiful; and Psalm. 112. A good
man is merciful, which is also a fruit of love, and Esai. 32.8. A liberal man
devises liberal things, etc.

Fifthly, when we blase abroad other men's faults, casting them many times in
the teeth with them, when they have repented, or at least might have done, if
we had carefully put in practice our Saviors rule, Math. 18. see a sweet
Scripture, Prove. 10.12. Love covers all trespasses, but there is commonly in
good people, a strong disposition to this evil, they are very apt to offend in
this, to whisper secretly, other men's faults, as if they should thereby render
themselves to their hearers, to be religiously wise, when indeed they do the
contrary; for we are directed, Gal. 6.2. to bear one another burden, and are
said therein to fulfill the law of Christ; Now there is no sorer burden then
sin against God, it is able to break of the strongest Christian, without Gods
help, what an uncharitable thing then is this, to lay upon such a poor soul,
all our hard and uncharitable speeches, this is so far from easing such as
are overladen, or helping to break their burden, that we hereby help to
break their back, as it comes to pass.

Sixthly, when men are inwardly vexed at the good of others, thus was Saul
against David 1 Samuel 18.9. Thus many times men do upon the same ground of
Saul's hatred, that is, they think other men's goodness darkens and eclipses
their glory, and this I have known amongst men about matters of Religion, when
one is in a more forward way of reformation or differing something in
judgment, how do they labor to find some Spot or Blemish in that person, or
persons, which thus stands in their way? I can speak this by experience, there
are many aggravations of this sin of uncharitableness.

As first, when its done to them that love us, as we may see the Prophet David
complain, Psalm. 109.5. And they rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my
friendship; also when men hate such to whom they are bound in any special
bond, Husband, wife, Parents, Children, etc.

Secondly, When they hate others for performing the chief Office of love; thus
we may see Amos 5.10. or when they hate others for godliness sake, because
they follow the thing that is good, Psalm. 38, 20.

Thirdly, when they carry a show of love, and hate them inwardly, this was the
practice of Ioab 2. Sam. 20.9. Thus also dealt Judas with his Master, and the
Devil with Evah, see then the evils of this sin of uncharitableness,
spoils, and sowers all we do, and makes that God will not accept it, it is
like that leaven of maliciousness, 1 Cor. 5.8. see what we are commanded, 1 Timothy 2.8 I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands
without wrath, see also what is said, 1 John 3.15. and Math. 6.15. It Is said,
if we forgive not, God will not forgive us: How should we then strive for a
loving disposition in respect of God, our selves, and our brethren? In respect
of God; consider first, it is his command; 1 John 4.21. So Ioh. 13.34. A new
Commandment give I unto you, that you love one another, etc. It is good for us
to consider upon what occasion, and at what time this was spoken by our blessed
Savior, he was then to have them, and it was just before his passion; we
always take notice of the words of our dying friends; and account that the
strongest obligation: mark also, Christ calls it a new Commandment (Why new?)
not in regard of the matter of it; But first in regard Christ renewes the
practice of it; Again, it was proposed by a new example, the like was never
heard of (such love wherewith Christ loved his children) neither indeed has
any man such love, for our Savior says, Ioh. 15.13. Greater love then this
has no man, then to bestow his life for his friends; see the height of man's
love, and this is very rare too, as we may see, Romans 5.7. Doubtless one will
scarce dye for a righteous man; but yet for a good man it may be one dare die,
but see what Christ did, as is set forth in the 8. verse, whilst we were
sinners, Christ died for us, when we were at greatest enmity against God; We
see now that if this duty be neglected, we sin not only against our brethren,
but against God himself; as indeed there is no sin whatsoever, but it is
against God, this appears by Joseph's answer to his Masters wife, Genesis 39.9.
There is some resemblance of this in the laws of our land; for if a man steal
from his neighbor, the indictment runs thus: against the King, his Crown and
Dignity, because he breaks the Kings laws; just so is the case betwixt God and
us, all our sin whatsoever is against the great Lawgiver; let us consider,
this was the counsel of a dying friend, that sweet Savior of our souls, how
should this pierce the hearts of Gods children, when they think of the
wonderful neglect of this duty? If a dead father should know his last words
slighted, would he like it; much more then the Lord Christ; for what ever he
requires must be done; if Abraham be commanded, to sacrifice his son; Let us
learn then of the servants of Naman, who said to their Master, if the Prophet
had required some great matter, would thou not have don it? how much more
when he says, Wash and be clean? so we: love is all God requires, and why
desires he this? he gains nothing by it, we have the benefit our selves. Saint
John in 1 John 3.16. sets before us Christ's own practice to move us to the
performance of this duty: see also farther, 1 John 4.9.10, 11. Herein was the
love of God made manifest, etc. Shall he that is every way infinite do this,
and we neglect it that are so many thousand degrees below; There are diverse
motives to this duty: also in respect of our selves, as first, he that loves
not his brother is a murderer, 1 Ioh. 3.15. If God should not punish such, how
should he be just; we know what we say, or at least think, many times of a
Judge or Jury, when a murderer is suffered to escape: see also what is said, 1
John 2.9. The second motive; he that has this virtue of love, may be able to
resolve that great question of being in the state of Grace, 1 John 4.7. John
13.35. There is also something to this purpose, 2 Pet. 1.7.8, 9, 10. and we
know that love has this promise, never to fail; The next motive in respect of
our selves, is. This inableth us to perform what ever God requires to be done
to our brethren, it is said, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal, and to that purpose in the last verse of
this Chap^er, the Apostle advises us to desire the best gifts, having formerly
mentioned diverse, but concludes in that verse, that he will show them a more
excellent way which he shows in the next Chapter to be love, and makes it
plain, that without that, all the other were, or would prove unto them
unprofitable; it is most singularly set forth unto us in that 1 Cor. 13.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and in conclusion, he crowns love with this above all the
rest, that it shall never fall away, verse the 8. Love does never fall away,
etc. and therefore the Apostle advises us, Col. 3.14. And above all things put
on love which is the bond of perfectness; this indeed ties all together, and
when this bond is broken, we cannot perform our duty as we ought; we see
Nabal, he could not help David, he had no love; The fourth motive, is, every
man looks that others should love him, and supply his wants, is it not most
equal we should do the like to them? See what Christ speaks to this purpose,
Mat. 7.12. Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, the
same do ye unto them, etc. want of love then is a most unreasonable sin.

There are diverse motives also to this duty in respect of our brethren; first,
in regard of the near relation we have to them, they are of our own flesh,
Esa. 58.7. we would not hurt our own flesh; but we know there should be a
nearer relation of the same spirit: Secondly, there is not the worst, but has
some thing in him to be beloved, or whereby we may exercise our love, that is,
delight or pity: Thirdly, the poorest and meanest may help the richest, as we
see David used the help of the poor Egyptian, 1 Samuel 30.11. Also the poorest
are, or may be beloved of God. Now, to show what this love is; It is a fruit of
the grace of Gods spirit, no fruit of the flesh; Gal. 5.22. and hence it is
said, 1 John 4.7. love comes of God, and the Apostle Saint Paul says that
he need not write unto them of this duty; for this was taught them by God
himself, 1 These. 4.9. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I
write unto you, for ye are taught of God to love one another: Thus we see then
we have not love by nature.

Now there are diverse conclusions may be drawn from this. First, that must
needs be an error in such as maintain that the first act of love is in man by
nature, we may see this cleared, by that the Apostle speaks, Col. 3.14. And
above all things put on love; showing, that by nature men are without it: so
likewise see to that purpose, Tit. 3.3.

The second conclusion; What may be in man by nature, is not love, as we see,
John 3.6.

The third conclusion; That love which friend bears to friend, parents to
children, etc. is not this love, 1 King. 3.26. so the very Heathen may do,
Mat. 5.46.

The fourth conclusion; if love be a fruit of Gods Spirit, then wicked men can
never love one another, as we see betwixt the men of Shechem and Abimelech;
such friendship we shall find in the Alehouse, amongst drunkards, the greatest
show of love, when perhaps that was the first of their acquaintance, and before
they part one stab another; it is little better with all carnal men, they
cannot love, never therefore keep company with such, neither trust a wicked
man, for at best he will be sure to leave thee in time of greatest need; thus
we see Ahab left Iehosaphat, 1 King. 22.30. and of this the Prophet David
complains, Psalm. 41.9. Yea my familiar friend whom I trusted, which did eat of
my bread, etc. See also an example in Judas, Christ made him not only an
Apostle, but also an especial officer amongst the Apostles, yet he could not
love him; such men's friendship is like that of Jupiters Priests, and the rest
of the people, mentioned, Acts 14.13. that would have sacrificed to the
Apostles, and in the 19. verse, were ready to stone them.

The fifth conclusion then may be this; Labor all we can to entrust our
selves in the affections of Gods children; for if there be any love, it is
amongst them; this did the Prophet David, Psalm. 16.3. To the Saints that are on
earth, and to the exellent, all my delight is in them: Let us now see the
general nature of love, it is ready to do good, etc. therefore the Lord is
said to wait Esa. 30.18. Thus it is also in men, or at least should be: See
what the Apostle speaks, Act. 21.13. What do ye weeping and breaking my
heart; for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus; thus also to the brethren, Romans 1.15. Therefore as
much as in me is, I am ready, etc. So 2 Cor 12.14. See likewise what is said
in commendation of the people, 2 Cor. 9.12. For I know your readiness of
mind, etc. this also is commanded 1 Timothy 6.18. Now the readiness is seen in
these two things: First, when we do good without entreaty, as we see the
Disciples did, Act. 11.28, 29, 30. Whenever they heard of the wants of the
Saints, sent them succor: Secondly, when we do good at the first motion, as
Hyram, 1 King. 5.7. he rejoiced at the motion, thus it is said of that wisdom
which is from above, James 3.17. Easy to be entreated, etc. Some will perform
an act of love, with much entreaty, as the unjust Judge, Luke 18.36. this was
not love, for love will constrain us; as we see Acts 16.15. of Lydia. But when
men are troubled, and think much that any man should move them to this duty;
it is an ill sign; we ought to lay down our lives, as Saint John speaks, John
10.11. and to do good, as the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 122.9. and so Heb.
13.16. To do good, and to distribute, forget not, etc. Love is like the good
woman spoken of, Prove. 31.12. She will do him good and not evil, all the
days of her life; Hence arises three conclusions:

First, love consists not in words and complements; as James 2.16. This is no
more love, then the sons was obedience, who said, that he would do it, but
did it not; see what Saint John advises, 1 John 3.18. My little children, let
us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed and in truth; The
second conclusion is this; If a man do that which pleases a friend, and is
not good, this is not love, as we see by the counsel given to Amnon, 2 Samuel
13.4, 5. And hence it is said, Prove. 13.24. he that spares the rod, hates the
child, because he does him no good: The third conclusion; such as say they
hurt no body, and yet do no good, have not love; the poor fig tree was cursed
because it was ba ren: so likewise Christ arraignes men at the last day because
they have not done good, Matthew. 25. Now, this good must be done to body, soul,
estate, and that freely, not having respect to our selves, as in the 1 Cor. 13.
Many will do good, because they look for the like again, this is not love,
Math. 5.46. For if ye love them that love you, what reward shall you have, do
not the Publicans the same? Thus then we may see what men are that have not
love, like Ishmael, Genesis 16.12. Wild men, their hand against every man, and
every man's hand against them; or like that Judge spoken of Luke 18.2. He
feared not God nor reverenced man, such men's love (if we may so call it) never
over-looks their own doors; just like Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall I then take
my bread and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and
give it to them whom I know not whence they be? It Is worth your pains to read
the former part of the Chapter, whereby you shall see a perfect character of
such a person, especially in the 10. verse, our love should extend farther, as
we see, Hebr. 13.2, 3. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, etc. we know
not what our own condition may be; we may see what has been the condition of
Gods Saints, Hebr. 11.37. They were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were
tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down in sheeps
skins and Goats skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented. Sure the
Nabals of the world will have no acquaintance with these poor souls; but
suppose we acknowledge all this, as indeed who can deny it, yet there is more
to be done, we must love our enemies, and do them good, as we are commanded,
Exodus 23.4. But who is this? Whom may we take for an enemy? not every one that
does us a discourtesie, as David to Mephibosheth, he did him an ill turn, but
could not be accounted his enemy; for he loved him; but he is an enemy that of
set purpose does a man wrong causelessly, and continues therein; Saul hated
David that gave him no cause, 1 Samuel 28.2. such an enemy ought to be beloved of
us, it is Gods commandment, Mat 5.44. But I say unto you, love your enemies,
etc. Prove. 25.21. If he that hates thee be hungry, give him bread to eat;
and if he be thirsty give him water to drink, a man that loves not his enemy,
does more hurt to himself then his enemy can do to him, for he hurts his
own soul, as we may see, Matthew. 6.15. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, no more will your Father forgive your trespasses; also Col. 3.13.
we have many encouragements to this duty; God himself glories in this, as a
most excellent thing, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that takes away
iniquity, and passes by the transgression, etc. Prove. 16.32. Another motive
(is) we cannot serve God, or perform our duty without it, as Math. 5.24. We
must leave our offering, etc. So in prayer, we mock God if we pray not
without wrath, we desire him to plague us, neither can we come to the Lords
Table, 1 Cor. 5.8. So likewise for receiving the Word, James 1.21. Besides, if
we do not forgive, our sins lie upon our own score, Math. 6.15. and 18.27.
So likewise, there shall be no mercy to him that shows no mercy, James 2.13.
Besides, this is the most equal thing in the world, for the vilest person
would have God forgive him, as in Deuteronomy. 29.19. This reason cuts off many
objections that men usually make against this truth: As shall I stoop to him;
if I should do so, I should encourage him: 3. It Is not the the first time: 4.
Low him no love: 5. I have often told him his fault: 6. I have deserved better
at his hands: 7. I should be accounted a coward, etc. 8. He will not sue or
speak to me: 9. This is a singular thing, and diverse like this; true, Gods
children must do singular things, Math. 5.47. We know what example Christ
gave at his death, he forgave them, so did Stephen, Acts 7. Now, there are
four excellent properties in forgiving wrongs and injuries: as,

First, It must be done speedily, let not the San go down upon our wrath; for
then twenty to one but it will rise upon our wrath.

Secondly, it must be done constantly, that is, always, every offense, Math.
18.22. We know we are bound to pray continually and we must not lift up our
hands in wrath; we must not be overcome of evil, but let patience have her
perfect work, James 1.4. And let Patience have her perfect work, that she
may be entire, lacking nothing.

Thirdly, we ought to forgive truly; so we desire at the hands of God, Mat.
35.18. 1 John 3.18.

Fourthly, it must be done willingly, not by constraint; there is no duty
accepted by God, but such as is willingly performed; Gal. 4.15. But if I should
do all this, my enemy will think I am guilty; at his peril, if he will do
so, abuse his neighbors patience; if this be so, that we must love our
enemies, there is no doubt but we must love our friends, and those are of three
sorts; By nature, grace and choice; That by nature the heathen will teach us;
and we may see how they are condemned, that are without natural affection,
Romans 1.30. 1 Timothy 3.3. Now, this duty is not performed only in the things of
this life, but also in that of the better life; we see an example of this in
Cornelius, Acts 10.24. He called together his kinsmen and special friends; so
John 1.41, 42. One brother brought another to Christ. Next is the love of our
friends by grace; he that loves shall be sure not to lose his reward, Math.
10.41, 42. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, etc. so 2
John 1.2. we have the example of Christ for this, 1 These. 4.9.10. So the
Prophet David, Psalm. 16.3. Also God is well pleased with this, and takes it as
done unto himself, Matthew. 25.45. Ye have done it to me. Next thing to draw
our love, they are worthy of our love, and are said to partake of the divine
nature, 1 Pet. 1.4. Again, they are best able to require our love, they can go
to God for us, Job 42.8. My servant Job shall pray for you, etc. The next is
our friends by choice, as Jonathan loved David, 1 Samuel 18.1.2. So also Paul
loved Philemon, The ground of this love should be our love to God, and that
Image of God in them. Now, there are diverse things wherein this love is to be
showed; as first, in imparting to them what ever we know may be for their good,
as our Savior Christ teaches by his example, John 15.15. Next, we must keep
our friends from hurt, all we can, as Jonathan did to David, 1 Samuel 19.2. It Is
a question whether Jonathan were a better son or friend in that he did; Next
we should give our friends the best counsel we can, Luke 12.4. And I say unto
you my friends; be not afraid of them that kill the body etc. The next duty we
should bear a part with them in any affliction, Psalm. 35.14. I behaved my
self as to my friend, or as to my brother, I humbled my self, mourning as one
that bewaileth his mother. Change of estate should not change friendship, Prove.
17.17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity: So
also in the first of Ruth. 16.17. And Ruth answered, entreat me not to leave
thee nor to depart from thee, etc. There are diverse things wherein this love is
abused: as when the ground of it is our own advantage, and we look upon them
whilst the sun of prosperity shines: Next, when our agreement in evil is
the cause of our friendship: also when we honor our friends in stead of giving
them good counsel, as Ionadab to his brother, to abuse his sister, 2 Samuel
13.5. and thus one drunkard gives counsel to another; we shall see a notable
example of such counsel in Zeresh, Hamans wife, and his friends, Hest. 5.14.
where they gave advice, that a gallows of fifty cubits high should be set up
to hang Mordecai; it was notable counsel, and so it proved at last. Such also
offend against this law, that leave their friends in the time of their greatest
necessity; thus we may see how Jobs friends left him, Job. 6.20. Yea, many
times they betray their friends, as Judas did his Master; of this we have
plenty of examples. Let us then consisider how this duty of love is neglected,
yea, almost out of use amongst us now; in 2 Samuel 15.31. it was told David for
strange tidings, that Achitophel was one of the conspirators. I think we
cannot now account it strange, to see one that has been a familiar friend (as
this Counselor was to David) found amongst the conspirators; but it were more
to be admired, to find him any where but there, especially when the sun of
our prosperity is setting, as David's was then thought to be, we shall be sure
to find green leaves after the strongest Winter frost and storms, as to
find a friend stand fast in the time of adversity; but they will do as David's
friends mentioned, Psalm 38.11. My lovers and my friends stand aside from my
plague, and my kinsmen stand afar off. This is not only found amongst those
fained friends, as the world is full of, but even amongst such, from whom we
should expect better, as we see in Jobs friends, they were such as would be
thought good men, as may appear by all their discourse; and yet see how
cruelly they deal with their poor friend in his affliction, far worse then
David's friends spoken of formerly, they were strange, and stood a far off,
but these came near to help to grieve and vex Job in his greatest extremity,
as if that were all they had now to do for their poor friend, to strive who
should grieve him most; It is a sad thing to find this love wanting in our
friends from whence we expect better; and this made the Prophet David to utter
that bitter complaint against his hollow hearted Counselor, It was my familiar
friend, etc. Psalm. 41.9. But what may the Lord say, Look back David; how was
Vriah that poor friend of thine dealt with; his life taken from him in the
highst proof of his friendship: Thus we complain of the want of love in
others, but do not think of our want of love to them, but are of the same
mind with Simon the Pharisie, whose formality made him believe his condition
to be better then it was, as Christ shows him, and all us, by setting before
our eyes that penitential pattern, Luke 7.44. Then he turned to the woman,
and said unto Simon, see thou this woman? I entered into thy house, and thou
gave me no water to my feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, and
wiped them with the hair of her head; thou gave me no kiss, but she since
the time I came in has not ceased to kiss my feet, etc. and then concludes,
Verse 47. That where little is forgiven, they will love little: who can read
this Scripture with dry eyes, to see how short we come of this woman which the
Pharisee thought so vile, that it made him to call in question, whether Christ
were a Prophet because he admitted her to come so near him; she came behind,
not presuming to behold that holy Savior, and at his feet, accounting it
happiness enough to enjoy the meanest place about Christ, and then see how she
expressed her love, she washed his feet with tears, wiping them with the hayres
of her head, kissing and anointing them; her love forced all this from her, but
the sense of her sin stopped her mouth, we hear no word she spoke; our
practice is contrary, we speak much, and with boldness, but we have no other
expressions but our words: where is our love to the Saints, where is our
washing, weeping and anointing? sure the want of these show that we are
ignorant of that great love of our sweet Savior to us, and by the little love
we have, witne^ to God and the world that we think little is forgiven us, and
as little do we consider what is given us; How has God blessed this Kingdom of
England, made it fruitful, suffered none to prevail against us, but delivered
us in a most unheard of way, and left us to praise his name, and made other
nations examples for us of his displeasure, when he might in Justice have made
us examples for them; but this is nothing to what he has done, he has given
us his glorious Gospel; our Savior testifies of John, that there was not a
greater borne of woman, Math. 11.11. and yet he that is least in the Kingdom
of Heaven is greater then he, this is our condition in this Kingdom of grace;
Moses desired to see God and could not, God has manifested himself unto us in
his Son Christ, who is the image of the invisible God, Col 1.15. so Heb. 1.3.
What more can be said? in him he has given us all things; How should these
meditations raise our thoughts from the things here below, and settle all our
love upon Christ, and all his Saints; for he takes that as done to himself;
take h ed how we deny him any thing, that has given us all things that are
fit for us; he has redeemed our souls from hell; set him have soul, body,
wife, children, strength, credit, riches, honor, and all; for Christ tells us,
he that will not part with all for him, is not worthy of him; read that
heart-melting fifth of Cantic. it is a most sweet place of Scripture, wherein is
most lively set forth the most glorious and perfect beauty of Christ how worthy
he is of our love above all things; the Church complaining, that whilst she
slept, that is, followed the things of this world, she had lost her beloved
Christ; see what a charge she lays upon the daughters of Jerusalem in the 8.
verse: I charge you. O daughters of Jerusalem, that if ye find my welbeloved
that ye tell him that I am sick of love. Those that had not tasted the sweet
of Christ's love, admired this strange manner of inquiry, and demand in the 9.
verse, What is thy beloved more then others, that thou do so charge us: Why?
she tells them in the following verses, and sets forth by all possible ways of
expression, the beauty of our sweet Savior, in so much, that the faithful
hearing of the excellency of Christ, desire to know, how to find him also, as
is sweetly set forth in the last verse, O thou fairest among women, whither is
thy welbeloved gone, whither is thy welbeloved turned aside, that we may seek
him with thee? O let this be the desire of all the Saints, Give me Christ, and
take all the world besides; Let us then consider where this comfortable
enjoyment of Christ is to be had, it is in that Garden, the Church, which is
spoken of, Cant 5.1. There are all those sweet fruits of Christ's gracious
presence; O then let us strive to set up Christ's Ordinances, and order
according to his own institution, and amongst all the other blessings that God
has bestowed upon us, praise his holy name for those great hopes of
reformation, wherewith he has at this time filled our hearts, nothing
doubting, but he that has begun will perfect it amongst his servants; God
has left us a sufficient rule for the matters of his worship and service in
his holy Word, if we would but lay aside all carnal policy, and apply our
selves to that, the business were ended; but we having a long time accustomed
our selves to be guided by the Ordinances of man in the service of God, can
hardly find a way out of it, but rather fit our selves with some bad arguments
to maintain our old practice, not much unlike the Papists, that because their
fathers did so, they will believe it to be right, though it may be it is more
then their fathers did to believe it, though their practice were so, but we see
by experience, the conceit of a former received opinion, is a great bar to
keep men from embracing the truth; it behooves us therefore as in all things,
so especially in that which more immediately belongs to the service of God, to
look unto the rule; Thus it was still urged upon the Israelites: so in the
Gospel, Christ always directs us to the rule, and indeed, when we forsake
that, we are apt to fall upon any thing, though never so dishonorable to God,
as we see, Exodus 32.1. the people would have Aaron make them Gods, so many
amongst us would have some one or other make us such gods, we know what they
were, to make us a Religion, or a way of worship, which work belongs to God
only. Let us take heed of this, and let our love to Christ carry us through
all difficulties that we meet with; for if we consult with flesh and blood in
Gods service, we are not worthy to be his, neither can we have any assurance
that we love him as we ought; but we shall still find our selves apt to leave
the ways of God as hard and troublesome, and so take our leave of Religion (as
Orpha did of her mother in law) and die in Moab; let not therefore an old
received opinion, honor, credit, riches, friends or any thing separate our
affections from the love of Christ; but take up that resolution to follow him
in all his O^dinances; as Ruth did to follow Naomi, Ruth 1.17. Where thou die
will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also,
if ought but death do part thee and me. See what this good woman did for the
love of one which she confesses death might deprive her of, how should this
very consideration knit and unite our love to our dear Savior; death cannot
separate us, neither shall our love (if it be true) ever have end; All then
that has been formerly said, being considered, one would think it strange
that all should not love Christ; but indeed it is as strange that any should
love him, if we consider our natural inclination to sin, and to follow our
sensuality; Oh how feign would a man have Heaven and earth, Christ and the
world; part with nothing but would feign go to heaven at other men's cost; but
our Savior teaches us another lesson, Matthew. 18.45.46. The Kingdom of Heaven
is like to a Merchant man that seeks good pearls, who having found a pearl
of great price, went and sold that he had, and bought it; certainly we must
part with all for Christ, and this I am persuaded is many times the desire and
resolution of Gods children, but the flesh so prevails by the help of our
common adversary, that we are strangely carried away, as I am able to witness
from mine own sad experience; for upon such meditations as these formerly
mentioned, I have resolved, sure I will follow Christ, nothing shall draw my
heart from my Savior, but such has been the frailty of nature, that I have
suffered such thoughts speedily, to cold and die as if they had never been;
sometimes the Devil takes advantage of necessity, when he sees us in some
straights, as 1 Samuel 21.2. and thereby weakens our faith and dependence in the
all sufficiency of our good God, and so yield to that which is unlawful and
unwarrantable; as if when in all ordinary ways we see no supply, presently
conclude there is none; it was that the Devil tempted Christ withal: But how
should our Saviors answer be a strength to our weak faith in such cases,
Matthew. 4.4. Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God: God can make any thing besides bread, serve for his
purpose, he can supply our wa ts any way, and deliver us out of all straights,
and will surely do it in such a measure as is fit for us, if we can forbear
our own unwarrantable ways; again, I found the example of other men a strong
temptation to draw away from the love of God; I have thereupon thought it a
fair smooth way to walk as others do, to stand right in their opinion
however the case stands betwixt God and my soul; again, another thing has
been, the desire I have had to please and ingratiate my self with great
persons, yea, and many times have thought this a very good way to help and
further the way of Gods providence, and so have made shipwreck of a good
conscience to keep their friendship; again, our company is a great means to
draw us either way; for the Devil who wants no malice, nor diligence to effect
our ruin, watches such opportunity, when we are in company with wicked
persons, and thereby alienates our affections by little and little, from duty,
till at length we fall into liking of their evil ways; it is (we know) a
dangerous thing for a man that is apt to take infection, to keep company with
an infected person; again, the credit and estimation of the world is a strong
allurement to draw us from the love of Christ, and from the sincerity of
Religion, how strangely does our nature desire this, and labor to fit all our
performances, that they may credit us before men, yea, even in the worship and
service of God; as in the duty of prayer, we desire to get an habit of words
and expressions, such as may please our selves and others, and so neglect the
pouring out of our souls before God, that which is indeed prayer; Thus we see
the things of this world, and the glory of them, are a strange bait, and looks
like that fruit in the midst of Paradise which beguiled our parents, a fair
outside promises much, but performs nothing; The Devil told Eve it would mak^
her like God, but she was deceived in her expectation; so will the things of
this world deceive us; we are apt to make them our confidence, and think if
we have honor, credit, riches, friends, strength, and such like, we shall be
able to do well with little or no Religion; It is true, commonly that at first
looking upon the ways of God, and our entrance into fellowship with Christ's
children, we seem to neglect these outward things a little, and being
surprised with our new acquaintance, we are very free for a time, and all for
good duties, and love to the Saints, and what not? I remember, when at first I
was entered into this way, the love of Gods people was precious, and I rejoiced
in their love, and so ready and willing to any good, there was no son of
consolation should do that thing but I would carefully follow; but afterward,
finding many professors (that had been longer in the way, and better
acquainted) cold in their practice; And in places eminent for Religion, they
would do no more then would please the Prelates; I grew by little and little
into a lukewarm temper, and could be content, in all things to learn
discretion. Take heed of this: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, Hebr. 10.31. This many of God Saints are able to witness
from their own experience, how dreadful the apprehension of Gods wrath has
been, when their sins have been made to appear, when their own conscience
shall stand up and say this have thou done, thou have been afraid to confess
me before the world: O what answer shall a poor soul make, how shall he be
able to behold the angry countenance of his God, whom he has so grievously
offended, how hardly shall we be able to apply the sweet promise to our
selves, when we hear God speaking in the holy Scriptures; Whoseover shall deny
me before men, him will I deny also before my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew.
10.33. but we will be ready to answer with those wicked persons, Mat. 25.44.
When did we do this? Christ will tell us when, and how, that we shall not be
able to reply, as we may see. Tit. 1.16. They profess they know God but by
works they deny him, and are abominable, etc. Here we see plainly, that to
walk in wicked ways, is to deny God; nevertheless, in the time of
prosperity, this is not thought on, until God in tender love and compassion
strip us of these outward things which we trust in, and makes us see there is
nothing can help in the day of wrath, but only the Lord, it is good that
these outward thing fail us here, that we may see there is no trust to be put
in them; I have many times had great confidence in friends (as I have thought
upon good grounds) but when I have had most need, they have been taken away,
or have left me, and proved unconstant, just as it was with the Apostle Paul,
2 Timothy 4.16. At my first answering no man assisted me, but all forsook me, etc.
O then trust in God, and he will never leave nor forsake you, and take heed of
setting your affection upon any thing but God alone, it is a very hard matter
to enjoy these outward things, but they will steal away our hearts from the
love of God; I never yet found but that the plentiful enjoyment of them did
more hurt then the want of them, yet all experience can hardly restrain our
desires from these things, the reason is our diffidence in Gods all sufficiency
and fear of falling into poverty, which through error of judgment, we
account a very great evil (though sent by God for our good) and many times
fall to murmuring, and so lose the benefit that we might reap thereby, and
provoke God against us: I remember a good speech of a wise man to this purpose.
In a feast (says he) We content ourselves with that is set before us,
thinking it an impudent and vile part to a ke any other thing of him that
entertaineth us; And how can we be so impudent and shameless in this world as
to ask those things of God which he will not give us? It is the last remedy
that God uses to reclaim us from our evil ways, to take f om us those
things wherein we trusted, that we might cast our selves wholly upon him, which
is his honor and our safety, without which we are in a miserable condition; O
let every one make haste to fly unto God, now is the time, this is the day of
expectance when he knocks at the door of our hearts by affliction, if
therefore God gives us any tenderness of heart, lay fast hold of it, and keep
a tender conscience, as we keep our lives; take heed of deading our hearts
with giving the least allowance to sin, or omitting any duty; It is a hard
matter when we have neglected the constant use of performing duties, to bring
our hearts to that pitch again from which we have slipped, as in hearing,
praying, conference, meditation, and such like; let us then hold fast, and
keep close our acquaintance with God; if any thing be omitted at one time,
double it the next, especially prayer, that is it whereby we have familiar
access to his glorious Majesty, and the ground of our faith: In the next
place, we must be careful in reading and hearing the Word, and however it be
of mean esteem in the world, we must know it is Gods Ordinance, that which
leads men into error, and makes them ignorant of their duty, is want of
knowledge in the Scriptures, and mis-interpreting of them, not making one place
to clear another; I know we must not now look for divine revelation from
heaven, but God has left us his holy Word, by which we may be taught all
things necessary to our salvation, and howsoever it is true, that many are, and
more shall be in heaven, that never saw that glorious light which we see; yet
that is no ground for us to shut our eyes in the time of this light, nay, it is
our shame, and exceeding aggravation of our sin so to do; as we may see,
Acts 17.30. Besides, I am persuaded all things are not yet revealed that shall
be in due time, there is a prophecy to be fulfilled, Esa. 30.26. The light of
the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, etc. the doctrine of grace under
the Gospel, is a fountain unmeasurable, Ezec. 47.5. It behooves us then to
walk as children of the light, searching the Scriptures like those men of
Berea, Acts 17.11. This is a truth undeniable, commanded by God, and very
profitable, and in this as in all things else, the better the more opposed by
the Devil, as we find in all times, not only amongst Papists, but also
amongst those that will condemn it as an evil in them; I have often heard
some press this duty of searching the Scriptures, and blame the Papists for
hiding the light; yet I have heard those men bitterly speak against such as
have been forward in the practice thereof; The Bereans were commended for
searching the Scriptures, whether those things Paul taught were true, although
he was an Apostle, and the Penman of the Scriptures, but if you make the least
inquiry or doubt of what is received and professed by these men, you shall
find the change of their countenance toward you, and scarce ever have their
good report after; or of any other, if they can help it; and why do they this?
Sure upon the same ground with the Papists, they know if men look into the
truth, they must then see their error: Also other men's knowledge bewrayes their
ignorance, of which they are or have cause to be ashamed, and sometimes shows
their wickedness, that know many things to be evil, and yet will for
by-respects practice them; take heed of such, you shall know them by their
favorites; they will hold such in great esteem, that desire to know no more in
Religion then may serve to advance their credit, and can say of all they hear,
it is excellent doctrine, though they know no reason for it, but because such
men spoke it; let not such, nor any other draw us from this duty, neither keep
us in ignorance in these times of great light; we should therefore strive to
make good use of our time, whilst God holds forth this light unto us,
whilst it is called to day: improve to our best advantage all the helps God
has afforded for increase of knowledge, amongst which the followship of the
Saints is not the least; it is a sad thing, to see how cold and fruitless the
company of Gods people is, the Devil knows well that Christian society is a
great help to godliness; and therefore does labor by all ways to hinder it,
and has so prevailed, that for Gods Saints to meet in that Church way as they
should, is almost out of use amongst many, and we are ashamed to use our
Christian fellowship, but suit our selves with the times, and grow strange to
each other, in so much, that if a familiar friend pass by us without due
observation (as we think) our want of charity is such, that we presently
conclude, it was purposely done, and so in the pride of our hearts withdraw our
selves from his not only familiarity, but almost acquaintance; we know what
is formerly said, Love thinks not evil; let us then show our love in this, to
have good thoughts toward our brethren, and do as we would be done unto;
would we have Gods children upon every surmise withdraw themselves from us;
let us then be more mindful of this duty, and labor to stir up one another
to the performance of it, and to win their affections by our humility and
loving carriage toward them: we know not how long God will continue these
opportunities, we see how he has dealt with others, they are deprived of
those things which we enjoy in abundance, if God should deal so with us, as we
know how justly he may; Oh how grievous will be the remembrance of our
negligence! we may wish and desire again to see those times, but to no
purpose: Let us then call to mind what we have received, and how we have
requited the Lord for all his benefits; how little our love has been to our
good God, whose love to us is infinite.

FINIS.

