THE DESIGNS AND Correspondencies of the present COMMITTEE of ESTATES AND That
part of the Scottish Nation which is now entered into this Kingdom in Hostility,
In some measure discovered by two PACKETS of LETTERS intercepted in the North,
and sent up to the House of COMMONS.

WITH AN INTRODUCTIVE AND Some Marginal Notes and Animadversions, By a private
Pen.

DAN. 2.26. There is a God in heaven that reveals Secrets.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
August 16. 1648.

THat the great and glorious work of erecting a throne for the Lord Christ, and
promoting the powers of godliness by a through Reformation in Church and State
(which is a principal part of that Cause the Parliament has hitherto traveled
with) shall prosper, and notwithstanding the fraud and force of men or devils,
shall ride on conquering and to conquer, till captivity be fully lead captive,
and grace become glory; no pious heart but believes, But whither the Lord will
honor this generation of men, and make them an instrument in his hand to
accomplish this work in these Kingdoms, we cannot so confidently determine:
For, when we reminde our high Rebellions against our God, our want of real and
personal Reformation, and neglect of executing judgment upon the Enemies of
this Cause (in which sense it cannot be denied but our solemn Covenant has
been as solemnly broken) we may have cause enough to expect, That the Lord will
so visit upon us those provocations, as to make England an Aceldama, or as
Germany, a perpetual desolation, and bury this Parliament in their own ruins,
by the unjust indignation of those very people, whose life and welfare is bound
up in theirs; and yet endeavor in a blinded zeal, Sampson-like, to pull down
those pillars that should support them, and let fall the Vindication of his
Cause, to be resumed by some more faithful generation that shall succeed. Yet
if we do but consider, with what Vicissitudes and Alternations the Lord has
been pleased to dispense his providence, suffering us many times to be brought
to the pits brink, and thence as often recovering us, and blasting the highest
expectations of the Enemy, we may with some reason hope, That the Decree is not
yet gone forth against us; but rather that he beholds us, as once he did
Israel, with a troubled heart and repentings kindled together, when he said,
How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? How shall I make thee as Admah? etc. as it
were unresolved what to do with England, and Englands sometimes dear and
desired Parliaments. But if we add thereunto the consideration of the manner of
our Deliverances, wherein he has imprinted generally some character of special
favor and mercy; and of the great and glorious things he has done for this
Parliament, the mere works of an Almighty arm, to which the creature could not
pretend, not only of old, when his hand was so lifted up, that all the world
saw and confessed his mavelous doings in behalf of his servants; but even that
now again, since the like troubles have been renewed, he has repeated the like
Administrations, giving us in the midst of our dangers (by so much the more
formidable as relapses are worse then the first diseases) many seasonable, and
little less then miraculous Deliverances; as, in Wales, the North, Kent, Surrey
and elsewhere, the least of which we could not want, or having wanted, must
probably have perished. We cannot without a sinful ingratitude, and inobservance
of former mercies, which with God are arguments and obligations for future, but
think that he will yet do this Parliament good at the latter end; and having
been at the cost of so many mercies and miracles for them, That he will carry
on this Cause by these hands, unto a happy and blessed issue for these
Kingdoms. But in no sort of Dispensations has he more remarkably appeared, and
testified the continuance of his favor to this Parliament and his people, then
in discovering and disappointing the secret Plots and Machinations of such, as
under the character of friends lay in our bosoms, to which he has always
hitherto given a miscarrying womb and dry breasts; and in unmasking and taking
off those specious vizards, wherewith those apostatized friends, and other more
professed Enemies that have risen up in arms against us, have clothed their
undertakings, to lure our people from us, and proselyte them to their
assistance: By means whereof, and by the good hand of God, the affections of
those that first engaged with us, and were in some measure withdrawn, seeming
to sleep in the ashes of discontent for their long continued burdens, and long
delayed reparations, have been reinlivened and recovered to us, they by such
providential Discoveries being brought to see as well the wickedness as the
unsuccessfulness of their Designs; and from thence gathering cause to resolve,
That as the Enemies malice levels at the Destruction, so their welfare is only
to be secured in the Preservation of this Parliament, That in the ruin of this
they may bid Goodnight to all future Parliaments, and in the change of this
have small hopes of bettering their condition: A fresh occasion of this is
given in from our Neighbors of Scotland, who being entered this Kingdom in open
hostility, yet by their plausible Declarations and public Overtures, would
have the world think their errand honest and honorable, that they have nothing
in their eye but the good of Religion, the Preservation of the Kings Person
according to the Covenant, and those other ends of the Covenant and Engagements
in the joint Declaration of the 6. of January; whereas by that which follows it
will appear, That it is even amongst themselves a question, whether Duke
Hamilton, who commands their Forces in chief, be at all a friend to Presbytery
(by which generally they understand Religion) that those conditions in the
Covenant with which the Defense and Preservation of the Kings Person is
qualified, are wholly forgotten, as always omitted in their public Expresses;
and that instead of bringing Delinquents and the Enemies of this Cause to
condign punishment, which both by the Covenant and recited Declaration they are
jointly with us engaged to, their principal assistances are raised, and
correspondencies laid with such, and particularly those Northern notorious
Incendiaries, Glemham, Langdale, Musgrave, with Hartford and Holland, and other
Southern Malignants; and, not to be infinite, That their Intentions of good to
this Kingdom are so worthy of suspect, as that the Lord Lauderdale, who might
be thought (though misguided) to have some honest principles left, is judged
fit to be packt away to France, as a likely opposer of their bad ends; and the
Prince himself, who is content to use their ayds, doubts to trust himself
amongst them; and not without reason, if it be true, as many wise observers of
Affairs believe, That Duke Hamilton, with the help of the active Secretary his
brother, has got himself in the head of these Forces, more with Design
(according to some old pretentions and predictions) to get the Crown of
Scotland, and the conquest of England to himself, then for any service to this
King or Kingdom; and though much of this lay hid and unsuspected by many well
meaning men (that having lost their way in a Scotch mist, and out of zeal to
Presbytery, in which both the Scots and they concentred) were (in compliance
with them) gone further on the malignants errand then ever they intended, yet
now they are printed in such legible Characters, as he that runs may read them,
in two packets intercepted; which having stated the occasion by which they come
to the Parliaments hands, without further anticipation of the Readers
judgment, shall be left to speak their own sense, with this only Observation
premised, That though much thereof be in Cipher, yet those instruments which
God has qualified with skill to open them, will be able to evidence to any
competent understanding, that the language they now speak is most genuine and
natural; which will the rather be believed, if it be considered that the
translation put upon the Naseby and other Letters which came in Characters, by
the Decipherers were never yet disavowed or contradicted in the least. But now
to the occasion, When the new Committee of Estates had all things in readiness
for their expedition, and invasive entrance into this Kingdom, they dispatched
from Edinburgh (upon the very same day that Duke Hamilton entered into England)
their Vaunt-currier or Agent Mr. Haliburton, to give the Parliament an account
of (the Reasons we cannot call them, but) Pretenses of their march and return
into this Kingdom, by a Letter and Declaration from them, and another to the
King, for which he was qualified by Commission, and for that only; upon
considence whereof, he approaches Major General Lamberts Quarters for his pass
and safe conduct, which was not denied him, but finding him possessed of diverse
other Letters doubtfully directed, and by Characters, he caused them to be put
in a case under both their seals, and him to be fairly waited upon by persons
of trust and credit, that the judgment of Parliament might be had concerning
the same: Being thus sent up (having in his passage principally desired
conference with such as were known abetters to the Kings cause) the House of
Commons, though tender of the Laws of Agencies and public Ministers,
observing (besides that he pretended no Commission for bringing those other
Papers) that the Committee of Estates in that public Express to the Houses,
held forth as one cause of their coming in, that they were invited by diverse
persons in this Kingdom engaged in Covenant with them; for the more hopeful
discovery of the persons that might have invited them, Ordered them to be
opened and viewed by a Committee of their own, and a report (of such as were of
any importance or signification) to be made, which after the difficulty of
Deciphering them (that were in Characters) was mastered, was done accordingly,
and by their Order thus made public.

The first that is thought worthy of public view, is directed to a person of
Honor here, and sometimes a zealous Asserter of the Parliaments Cause, by a
Character endorsed, which besides that the Postscript clears it, is known to
signify the Countess of Carlisle, and comes from the Lord Lauderdail, written
partly in Ciphers, but all with his own hand, as by comparing it with another
written to his own Countess residing at Highgate, will be demonstrated.

8 July, 1648.
MADAM,
It has been an old observation, That there was never any great Treason
carried on without a Woman and a Priest: Since your Ladyship is pleased to lead
the Van in this, it is thought Time may discover some of our late Dissenting
Brethren and non-Subscribers of the Clergy that will bring up the Rear.
AT last our business is brought to some ripeness; for D. Hamilton 30 writes,
That this day he enters England 22: but this Bearer will more particularly
acquaint your Ladyship, for he goes by the Army. He brings up to the Honorable
Houses of Parliament the Declaration of this Kingdom, of the Necessity, Grounds
and Ends of their undertakings, and of the return of our Army into England;
your Ladyship will receive a copy of it: I dare both answer for the honesty of
the matter, and the rudeness of the form and language; for truly it was the
work of How long this Cockatrice Egg has been hatching, we are not yet so
instructed as to affirm; but they that have observed the cold and listless
prosecution of the War by the Scottish Army, called in and well paid for that
Service, from the Siege of Hereford downward (at which time Treaties and
Negotiations were admitted by some principal persons in that Army, to which
this Epistler was no stranger, with Sir William Fleming in the Kings behalf)
will reasonably judge, That the Design cannot be of a much younger date, but
laid there.
very few hours, not above Great bodies commonly have slow Births: Naturalists
observe, That the Elephant goes three years with young; but this great Lord is
(ye see) of quicker dispatch, and may perhaps repent it at leisure.
four and twenty: but God willing it shall be honestly pursued. This Gentleman
has order absolutely to obey your Ladyship in every thing. We owe so many
obligations to E. Holland 31, and I have no cipher with him; therefore E.
Lanerick 35 and I have written this enclosed to him, which you will please to
deliver: it is only a testimony of our respects, and an assurance, when ever we
are able, of our service. E. Lanerick 35 thought it fit also to write a general
Letter to the Lo: Hartford, which is done; and I have from my self written to
E. Manchester 39, I know not if he will tell it you. Your Ladyship will please
to address the Bearer to 164. 197. 193. and If the City or (that which
represents them) the Common Counsel shall take occasion from hence to put a
Test upon their Members for discovery of those that have invited the Scots, or
correspond with them, they shall justify their Integrity, and rear a Monument
of their Praise to all succeeding generations.
our Friends in the City. I can add no more to what I wrote so fully by the
last Express, but that I am most faithfully and unfainedly,

Your most humble Servant.
I would not write to your Brother Northumberland, but none is more his
Servant. Be pleased to send the copy of the Declaration to L. Jermin 28.

Endorsed)^( Count. Carlisle.




This enclosed in the former, though without any Superscription to direct it,
must according the intimation in that Letter, belong to 31. the Earl of Holland.

My Lord, Your Lordship has given Which have not been without some convenient
and prudent intermissions, varted and alternated pro temporum ratione.
so many eminent Testimonies of your Loyalty to the King, of your good
affections to both Kingdoms, their Unity, Peace and Happiness, and of your
particular respects to More respects to his own Nation might more have becom'd
his Lordship; for want of which it may be said, Hic amor est Odio majus seclus.
our Nation, That we thought it fit to appoint this Gentleman to wait on your
Lordship, to acquaint you with our Resolutions, and our proceedings in order to
all those we have been engaged for. If we had not thought it too public a
way, the Committee of Estates would have said thus much to you. Be pleased
therefore to let us know how we may We know not how you may better serve him,
then by sending a competent sum (worthy your great obligations to him) for his
ransom.
serve your Lordship, and we dare answer, This Kingdom will ever be ready to
give testimonies of their respects to your Lordship, as we shall be
particularly to approve our selves, My Lord,

Your Lordships most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick.
Edinburgh, July 8.

MY Lord, Your Lordship has given such eminent proof of your Loyalty and
Fidelity, as that we are confident (now while His Majesty is in the His
Lordship might do better to repent himself of counselling and abetting the King
in his defection from the Parliament, which has brought him to this extremity;
from which, a clear and cordial compliance with the Parliament can only rescue
him with Honor and Advantage.
extremity of a low condition) your Lordship will show your self for His
Rescue. The Bearer is commanded to represent to you our condition and
Resolutions here; by whom we will earnestly desire you would please to convey
to us such Advices and Commands as you shall think fit, for he may be
absolutely trusted, and they shall be faithfully obeyed by,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick.
Edinburgh, 8 July, 1648.

Here follow a few (of many) Letters of Credence, by which their Agent Mr.
Haliburton, was recommended to diverse persons in this Kingdom, some of which
remain yet undiscovered.

JULY 8.
RIght Honorable, You know this Bearer, therefore I shall only say, you may
trust him as you would do

Your most obedient Son and Servant, Lanerick.
Endorsed, For the Right Honorable the Earl of Derlton, but known in England by
the name of Mr. James Maxwel, now or late Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod to
the Lords House.




If this Noble Courtier shall not without the rack confess what he knows of
Design against this Kingdom, where he has Reapen so many golden Harvests, and
which Transplanted into the other, have prospered into an Earldom, I shall
think the stool of Repentance too good a Penance, and a Horning from hence but
too gentle punishment for high Ingratitude.

JULY 8.
SIr, This is only to beg an absolute trust to the Bearer hereof, in every
thing which he shall impart to you from

Your faithful Servant, Lanerick.
It is so long since I heard from Mr. 52.6.8.44. that I dare not write to
him, if his It Is hoped many gallant men will change their inclinations, since
you have so notoriously changed your Cause; and upon that account only were
your friends, 1. usque ad aras.
Inclinations be changed we will lose a gallant Friend; Let this Bearer receive
his directions in conveying his commands to me, if he has yet any good wishes
for us, which certainly we never so much deserved from Men of Honor as now.

Endorsed, 409.




JULY 8.
MAdam, The little we have more to say then what we did by the last Express,
will be fully offered to your Ladyship by this Bearer, for whose Fidelity and
Secrecy I dare absolutely engage my self, and that he will faithfully obey such
commands as you shall think sit to lay upon him. Madam,

Your Ladyships most humble and most obedient Servant, Lanerick. Endorsed, 367,
154. 17.


What use their Agent Mr. Haliburton was to make of the great trust and power
conferred upon him by these absolute and unlimited Credentials, will appear in
this that follows.

JULY 8.
SIr, This Bearer has full Authority to engage the Public Faith of Scotland,
for such sums of money as can be procured upon a National security: We dare
not hazard to put your name in the Commission, for we cannot answer for the
Secrecy of all that have signed it; beside our fears of having it miscarry, and
so a possibility of wronging you: But he has so positive a command to follow
your directions, as he will address himself to none but such as you shall
advise him; he will fully show you our Condition, and the best ways in our
Judgments of your being assisting to us, give him the same trust you would
give to

Your most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick. Endorsed, 189.


John Done, I am commanded by the Committee to let you know, That this
Gentleman Mr. Haliburton is employed by them to London to the two Houses of
Parliament, and to go to the King: you shall direct Letters as he bids you, and
receive and direct our Letters as formerly, when he is in the Isle of Wight.

He carries up Copies of our large Declaration, which you shall transcribe, and
in our Though the fashion be old, certainly it never became you; and though
while you lived amongst us you were with an unexampled patience suffered to
publish your scandals and our wrongs by our own Instruments, insooth 'twere
high time now to leave it off, lest it stick upon you with the superadded badge
of a shamoless Impudence.
old fashion provide a Printer, and see that he print it correctly: I am
confident many Printers will be glad to print it You have so long plowed with
our Heifers, that you may be confident of the Beasts that they will do your
work: But, my Lord, afford us the like in Scotland, and I shall not envy it, if
you enjoy that liberty here to your utmost wish; in the mean time I shall
content my self with that easy Reproof, Licebit Clazementis turpuer agere: I
hope you know the Story, which fits you but too well.
without a Warrant; therefore you shall be careful that it be not false
printed: Before you can get it printed there, we shall have it printed here. I
rest,

Your assured Friend, Landerdale.
Edinburgh, 8 July,
For Mr. John Done.

The other Packet was intercepted by the Northumberland Forces, and transmitted
to the House of Commons by Sir Arthur Hesilrige Governor of Newcastle; It was
directed to Mr. John Done, the Agent to the Committee of Estates for the
Kingdom of Scotland, at his Lodging in Blackfriars.

Barwick: 19 July, 1648.
MAdam, I have received two together, one of the 6. the other of the 11. till
now I thought it not possible a Letter from your You see, my Lord, a fair hand
may draw black lines; but comfort your self, for Sables and Crosses are good
bearing in Heraldry.
Ladyship could have brought me so much trouble as your last has done, for the
sad disaster of so many gallant persons. I could digest the ruin of that
Design (though I was raised to a greater It Is happy with England when the
Enemies best hopes lean upon such brek in Reels; and considering the (...) you
had of that (...) valor, when he commanded the Kings Horse in Scotland, we
wonder upon what Basis you raised such great Expectations from him; you know
who said, (...) cerborum Duce Loone quam Leonum Duc. cervo.
expectation from it then any thing else in England) but the great loss by the
imprisonment of the Earl of Holland, I confess I cannot Have a little patience,
my Lord, and you shall have some Mustard after your dinner to help your
digestion.
digest, nor your Ladyships trouble which you express in the end of your
Letter. But I will insist no more on so sad a subject; only thus much I may
with confidence aver, That except the King, who is a prisoner, none in England
could have been made prisoner, that Scotland would have been so ready to
relieve as the Earl of Holland, and none in the world more forward to it then I.

From France we are strangely neglected; I got not so much as a Letter, except
what was directed in common, not the half of the Ammunition promised, and that
was Mustard Since your Lordship is so unsatisfied with the method of your
service, I wish you had had your Mustard before dinner.
after dinner, after our Army was marched; not a penny of Not a penny, my Lord
perhops it come all in Cardecues, or else 'twas thought that the clippings and
filings of our English money which you carried hence in your last, might defray
the charge of this Expedition. Ammunition by haives, and Money by nulls, so let
our Enemies be always supplied.
money: but that which is worst, is the strange It is not strange, but reason
enough to make a prov^^, Crete ^sis agere cum ^^^^isibus, to break Faith with
Faith breakers.
conditions demanded, contrary to all our engagement, and showing a great
distrust of Scotland; but I will repeat nothing of what you may read here, and
after you have read it, be pleased to send it away.

Your most humble Servant. Endorsed,)^( Count. Carlisle.


Barwick: 10 July, 1648.
MY Lord, We have at last received the Queen's and Prince's pleasure by Sir
William Fleming, with about the half of that Arms and Ammunition we expected;
yet as much as he could get at Amsterdam, though he staid long for it: but It
may be the Queen and Prince were informed and satisfied with the Advice D
Hamilton gave in Scotland, who to that preposition in Parliament, concerning
supply of money for this Service, bade, Set the Lads into England; and they
would do well enough; which we found a sober truth, when they came hither upon
an honester Errand.
no Money, whereof we stood most in need. And as we are very sensible of, and
thankful for Her Majesty and His Highness gracious favor expressed in the Letter
they honored us with; so we cannot but let your Lordship know, how much we are
troubled with those hard conditions in the additional Instructions, which
indeed are such as we dare not make them known but to very few: For should it
be known in Scotland that the Prince demands in our Army the exercise of that
It Is much that they have concell'd all Obligations of Honor and Honesty, lost
the remembrance of what we did for them in Q Elizabeth's day and what we would
not do against than in the beginning of these. Troubles, that have broke then
Vows to God, Faith and Treaties with men, should stick at any form of Worship,
(...) scruple a Service Book, Qui ^emth modesciae limits transierum, oporta^
naviter esse impudenies, which they could afford, were it not to give advantage
to their opposers
Form of Worship formerly used in England (which the King never had with us it
would give so great advantage to the violent opposers and have such an
operation, as we shall not be guilts of: Some of the other Demands look so like
Wonder not, my Lord, at that, since every Age has afforded instances of them
that have loved the Treason, but hated the Traitors.
distrust, as we dare not show them. But we have sent Sir W. Fle^^no to the
Army, and when he comes back, and brings the opinion of D. Hamilton and
Calendar, such a return shall be made, and such assurances given, both by the
Committee in the Name of the Kingdom, and by those that wrote formerly, as
shall witness our loyalty and fidelity to their Majesty's service, and of our
duty to the Prince, whose It Is thought the Prince remembers his Fathers usage
amongst you, and may expect, (...) your Army meet with a disaster, his person
may be made a price for your redemption, with some money pernaps into the
bargain
presence with, and confidence in the Scots, will be found to be the best, if
not the only means of the Kings rescue, and the Princes real good.

The Scots Army is now at P^erith, Lambert retires before them Fast enough;
they are in a condition to stand upon their own legs: The greatest part of the
Forces expected from Ireland are landed in Scotland; as soon as they come up to
the Army, and some Regiments now upon their march in Scotland, the Army will
march into better quarters, The Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick are sent to
Barwick with Forces to secure a Garrison there This Parenthesis was writ in
Characters in the sust person, which proves them the Authors of this Letter;
the rest of the clause being in words at length, and in the third person, to
blind the Reader.
(which we have done) They are to return to EDINBURGH, where the General
Assembly now sits, as violent against us as ever the Commissioners of the last
were. The misfortunes of our friends in the South, and at Pomfret is sad, most
especially the taking of the Earl of Holland. But no difficulties nor
discouragement can make us less active, as we shall, God willing, (however we
may be look upon) give real proofs of our zeal and constancy to the Kings
service; and that we are most faithfully

Your most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick.

For my Lord Jermin.

Another enclosed.

Barwick: 19 July, 1648.
MAdam, We have now lost all our hopes in the South, since the Earl of Holland
his sad misfortune and restraint; but as our Difficulties grow, so does the
justness of our quarrel; for to the rescue of the King is now Nothing to
nothing will not advance the sum, nor one bad Cause to mother mend the matter,
but iniquity to iniquity may increase wrath against the day of wrath, if not
prevented by a timous repentance.
joined our best and noblest friend. With Gods We hope he is left out of all
your correspondencies, for we may safely say, God is Independent, and will not
associate with such faithles pretenders to Presbytery, as have the powers and
piety of it under the notion of Impertinercy
assistance we will effectuate both, or bring our selves to the same condition.
This is a Madam, it is ill trusting to such votaries; he is ill like to keep his
personal vow, that has broken his National, more solemnly made then this, and
with a hand lifted up to the high God.
vow now solemnly made, and shall as faithfully be kept by

Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Lanerick.


Barwick: 19 July, 1648.
Mistress, Yet more Ladies! sure that war which at first, and with the Scots was
Bellum Episco ale, and since in England Bellum Basilicum, will at last resolve
it self between both into Bellum Faemininum; but that God who has enabled us to
outride the storms and impetuous force of our Masculine spirited Enemies, will
not let us fall under the attempts of such effeminate conspirators.
If the satisfaction of two long Letters from you had not allayed it, yours of
the third of July would have made me quarrel, there is a great deal in it too
like Complement; and then you tell me in plain English, 4 will employ
Lauderdale no more, what ever necessities he have; and that upon a great
mistake, as if I had by that woeful little sum prejudiced my occasions: But I
must say no more of this, lest again I grow angry. You will, I hope, by the
next, do Lauderdale more right, and send your picture, which will make amends.

Now for answer to your two last, you desire to know i is taken to signify the
Lord Jer^^in.
how i and Duke Hamilton agree, I wrote you my mind of that already, which it
seems you had not then received, but it came that night to London, so I shall
not repeat it. Since that time, Informations are come to Lanerick, that i does
Hamilton and him ill offices in France, which renews the distance, I do what I
can to mend it, but I cannot do you the good offices you expect with Duke
Hamilton at this distance, 'Twas observed in the Preface, That Duke Hamiltons
affection to Presbytery is suspected by their most confident Abettors and
Cabalistical correspondents Here Is my Voucher.
yet I have told Lanerick what a Champion you are. Your next question is, of
the affections of Lauderdale to 163. which I assure you is as great as ever, as
also to Presbytery, though he abhors the impertinencies of some Presbyters,
most especially Gilespy: And this affection is most consistent with all duty to
the King and to England, which Lauderdale can demonstrate, though for his own
part, to both he believes it much above dispute. I shall here write nothing of
News, it comes to you by another address, as you desired. I am most unsatisfied
with the Princes delay, and more with those hard conditions Sir William Fleming
has brought, which indeed argue a great mistrust of the Scots, and an unjust
one: For assure your self, what ever you may think of other Designs, It is hard
to distinguish between the Nation and Parliament of Scotland, that under a
present distemper is engaged in this Design: yet I dare not call it National,
when I find so many there that have not bowed the knee to Baal, and amongst
them so considerable a body and Society of men, as the Reverend Assembly, and
others our Covenant-ingaged Brethren of all qualities and degrees, who desire
to serve and save the King and England.
It is Scotland, and Scotland only must save the King and England, all others
have their rise from the expectation of Scotland, and I am sorry with so little
success, most particularly for E. Holland. And now whilst Lauderdale is so
unsatisfied, and indeed almost despairing that the Prince will come to
Scotland, if he can chose; I am earnestly pressed to go to France to invite him;
Lauderdale shuns it, and opposes it with all his strength, but is resolved,
rather then the blame of not inviting Him should be charged upon him, he will
go, although he should be laughed at at his return, for coming without his
errand: 2 will go, though Lauderdale has no hope of prevailing, as to his
Regiments full establishment. But all shall be done that is possible, which you
easily expect from me: if Lauderdale go, he shall not relieve 4. yet you will
know his Regiment by the Cornets, which are hair-colour'd and white. I have
ventured so long a Letter, though I have no hope it will go safe, always if it
be intercepted, you are eased of so much trouble, and they that gets it may let
it go, for they will not be much the wiser, for there are no State-matters in
it. Adieu.

Endorsed, DD.


This Letter is not without some obscurity and inconsistency; but far be it
from this hand to add or supply any sense that seems to be lest in the
Character on Decypherer: Gods Cause needs not our lie. Beside, the next of the
same Direction, whith runs in a more current uniformity and analogy of sense,
in many parts expounds and justifies this.

YOu will be clearly persuaded it was not want of resolution to part, made me
stay here so long, when you see that since I wrote last, I have taken a firm
one to go to France within ten days at most: It is both the desire of i
signified by Sir William Fleming; and every thing else invites, and is fully
ripe for it: One singular instance is, Lauderdales going along with me, as you
will hear fully from himself: I get a Letter from the Committee to the King of
France, one to the Queen, another to the Cardinal, to get my Regiment
established with all advantages, which I know will take no effect, only it
will conciliate some respect to my affairs, and furnish me a handsome retreat
when I list to come off, having got a refusal; both which you may make an
account of, for it is very like this summer will go near to make an end of the
greatest part of my men, and unless the Country undertake the recruits, and
that upon terms granted by France, for the sure payment of the Regiment, and
admission of it to guard the King, it were madness to look after it any more:
Lauderdale will take course for Address, and you shall hear from us at all
occasions: The General Assembly here will go as high against the engagement as
can be imagined, but it is now So thought Haman, when he had gained a
Commission for the destruction of the Jewish Nation: but though the Medes and
Persians could not reverse such Decrees, the God of Israel could, and did
control and invert them to the ruin of the Designers.
past their hindering, and all that oppose it will be ruined, unless some
strange accident hinder it; Duke Hamilton and Calendar have not both the same
spirit; If Lanerick rule Scotland, D. Hamalton, who is the elder Brother, has
the more wrong; but if either rule it, King Charles wants some of His Right.
Lanerick does now absolutely rule Scotland, and though it be indeed most
perfectly necessary for Lauderdale to go, yet the Hamiltons press it vehemently
to have him out of the way, that they may rule all without any impediment,
which is impossible (while he is present, at least) to bad ends, so that things
will surely go strangely here shortly: all other particulars of our voyage
Lauderdale will communicate; and all I add is, that you fail not to write us
Lauderdales addresses, what you will have me say to i.

Endorsed, DD.


These three that follow, amongst many others that speak the same sense, being
writ at large, are added as concurrent Testimonies to those in Cipher, though
it needed not, when the principal contents are so universally, and (by that
unhappiest way of proof, Experience) found to be too true; as namely, That the
Earl of Calendar has the Command of Carlisle in Cumberland (as the Earl of
Lauderdale has of the Countess of Carlisle at Westminster) The same Lord
Lauderdale and Lanerick were sent to secure Barwick, upon an Information that
some thousands of English Horse were in Northumberland; and that the
Information proving false, they resolved to prove false too, and secure the
place notwithstanding, with the breach of Faith, and the Articles of the
National Treaties: And lastly, but that which is worth all the rest, That
learned Gillespy is Moderator of that Reverend Assembly, that will never (to
say no worse) pray a Blessing upon this horrid Violation of the Public Faith
of their Nation, by many ancient Obligations, and the late Covenant and
Treaties, so solemnly and religiously engaged with this.

For the Countess of Lauderdale at Highgate.
My deart heart,
IT is very likely this Letter may come to other hands before it come to you,
yet I may tell you, that I am well, thus much nearer you then I was; for it
pleased the Committee of Estates to command my Lord Lanerick and me to come
hither and secure this Town, which we have this day very quietly done: The You
had no reason to expect other from those Renegado English, who were sent into
that Town by your selves, to keep it for your coming.
English are marched out, and we in, we have made Col: Lodowick Lesley Governor
under my Lord Duke, the Earl of Calendar has the command of Carlisle: As for
the condition of our Army, I send you the last Letter I had from thence, which
comes from one that is in the English Army; within two days or three I go back
to Edinburgh, where Mr. Gillespy is Moderator of our Assembly.

Be careful of the enclosed Letters, you know to whom 151, is, the other is for
Mistress 108.23.71.13.65.95.109.21.45.104.11.60.66.17. I pray you cause write
on the back of it and send it to her: This is all at this time shall be said by

Your own LAUDERDALE.
Barwick, 19 July.

For 151.
I was sorry to see you trouble your self and me both, with an account of what
money you received, you need no more but take upon my account as you need it,
and advertise me.

I can tell you but few news: Our Army is at Peerith, Lambert has still
retired, but our Army will not go in far, till the Forces from Ireland come to
them, most part are landed; the General Assembly sits, and Gillespy is
Moderator: The Committee sent the Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick to secure
Berwick, upon an information that some thousand English Horse were in
Northumberland, and gave them power to take what force they could get for that
service, but the information is proved false, and they are gone with no more
then are necessary for the place: Sir William Fleming is returned with a good
proportion of Ammunition and some Arms: This is all I can tell you at this time.

For Mr. GEORGE HALIBURTON.

19 July, 1648.
George,
Until I know of your being at London, I shall not direct the Packets to you; I
can say little by this Post, the condition of our Army being better known to
you then to me. Most of our Irish Forces are now landed, and within few days
will join with our Army; two hundred of them in their passage were taken by one
of the Parliaments Ships, and carried to Col. Monk, Whence you may see all
fairness (I hope it deserves no other name) toward the Scots, none from them.
Omnia adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum.
who as we are this day informed, did immediately cause send them back to Major
Genesis Monro, declaring, That he had no Order for hindering of Scottish men to
return to their own Land; most of our Forces in the North are likewise upon
their march, and within few days will be up with the Army. This day the Earls
of Lauderdale and Lanerick have secured the Town of Berwick from the Sectaries
with a Scottish Garrison, and have placed Col. Lodowick Lesley Governor there:
It is impossible to satisfy this General Assembly, who are resolved to fly
very high in their Censures and Declarations, though many pious and eminent men
of the It Is likely there wants the word Episcopal, who only will be scandalized
at their proceedings in pursuance of their Covenant.
Clergy are so scandaled with this rigid procedure of theirs, as they can
hardly force themselves to live under their Government: This is all which for
the present shall be said to you by

Your Friend.


FINIS.

