A MESSAGE Sent from the Earl of DERBY Governor of the Isle of Man, To His
Dread Sovereign, CHARLES the II, King of Scotland; And his Lordships
Declaration to His Majesty, concerning the Treaty, and Major General IRETON.
WITH The discovery of a strange and dangerous design against the Parliament,
the Lord Lieut. Cromwell, Major Genesis Ireton; and his Resolution to sacrifice
his life, rather then to sell his loyalty. ALSO, The Proposals of the said
Major Genesis Ireton, to the Earl of Derby, his Lordships Answer thereunto, and a
true account of the strange and incredible Relation of his seizing upon his
person, and sending him for a Present to the Prince. Together with the last
Intelligence from Dublin.

Printed at York by T. Broad, and reprinted for W. R. 1649

A MESSAGE Sent from the Earl of DERBY Governor of the Isle of Man, To his
Dread Sovereign, Charles the second, King of Scotland; concerning the Treaty
between his Lordship, and Commissary Gen Ireland.
Right Honored,
THe Earl of Derby (King in Man) having entered into a Treaty with the
Commissioners of Parliament, touching the surrender thereof to their due
obedience and authority, Commissary Genesis Ireland propounded to his Lordship,
That it was the pleasure of the Parliament of England to receive him into
favor, and to mitigate the Fine of his Lordships estate, by taking off the
Sequestration thereof, and to make his Composition for 15000. li. provided,
That he would surrender that Island, with all the Forts, arms, ammunition, and
other warlike provisions thereunto belonging, for the use and service of the
State and Commonwealth of England; and after mature deliberation on the result
thereof, his Lordship returned a very strange answer, saying, That he abhorred
with his soul, the rescenting or harboring the least thought of
persidiousnesse, that he would never be isntrumental, in casting such an Odium
upon the House of Derby, as to betray the trust reposed in him by h^ Sovereign,
and that he was resolved to sacrifice his life, and all that was near and dear
unto him then to forfeit his Allegance and sell his Loyalty for 15000. l.

These resolutions seem exceeding strange and opposite to such fair overtures
and propositions, insomuch that the transactions of the treaty are like to take
little effect, as may appear by his Lordships Letter, to the declared King of
Scotland, wherein he remonstrates,

That he was resolved, never to alienate or divert his loyal affections from
his sacred Majesty, but to improve all possible interests whatsoever for the
propagating of the Work in hand, and advancing so glorious a Cause, tending to
the honor of God, the peace and prosperity of his Church and kingdoms, and the
liberty freedom, and tranquillity of all loyal Subjects throughout his
Dominions; and as for the present Treaty, he was resolved to wave the same, he
having no other end nor intentions therein, but only a demur to the present
advance of the English Army for Ireland; in prosecution whereof, he was
resolved not to desist, assuring his Majesty, that for faciliating of the same,
no means should be left unattempted by

Your Majesty's loyal, faithful, and obedient Subject and Servant, DERBY.


Yet notwithstanding the non-prevailing of the present overtures, we doubt not
but a good account will (in process of time be given of the reducement of that
Island, and his Lordship be forced (for the future) to make a final
recantation, for his former presumption and disobedience.

As for our intelligence from Ireland, I shall refer you to the enclosed
letters, which came out this day in print, viz.

SIR,
SInce the taking of the three Impregnable and strong Garrisons of Tredagh,
Dundalk, and Trim, the enemy has exceedingly straightened us, and have now
gained more than ever they lost before, having encamped themselves within half
a mile of the City, and many of their Outworks and trenches are less then
musket shot of our walls: The last night about 10 of the clock they alarmed
us, our Governor and the Captains of the Guards were soon in a readiness to
receive them, and gave them a great volley; insomuch that we received some
respite of ease, till two in the morning; at which time, the Lord Inchiquin
(with a select party of horse and foot of his own Brigade) gave us a visit, and
very desperately and resolutely fell upon our man in some in the Outworks, who
being overpowr'd, were forced to quit the respective places, and make their
retreat to the next place of sanctuary, but not without loss; for by their
sudden assault, the poor Defendants sel^ the terror of their Bloodthirsty
Sword, and about 30 sacrificed their lives in the place; which action being
with great vigor prosecuted, Inchiquin returned to his Tents, singing
hallelujah for his tryumphant success; but we doubt not, but to make our
scores even, before many days are expired.

The Enemy make their near approaches to our Live, to threaten a storm; but its
believed, their repuls the other night at the storming of Patrick Fo^t, will
somewhat ret^rd that work; for they were disorderly beaten off with the loss
of about 50 men. The Lord Inchiquin has sent a peremptory Letter to our
Governor, intimating, That he heard Crumwell was advancing into that Nation
with an Army of English Rebels, to relieve him; but if he durst come thither,
he should be welcome, and better entertained by his Lordship then he was ever,
either by England, Wales, or Scotland, etc. Our Governor returned a very
modest and resolute answer, That as he had undertaken a Trust, so he should be
faithful therein to the last moment, whether any forces or none, came for
relief of him.


But the thing that our Soldiery are most doubtful and dubious of, is, that
they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the additionall forces
landing, but that they will rather betake themselves to the ^ogs and Woods.

And although we cannot but represent our selves in a very sad condition
(without timely relief) yet we cannot but exceedingly rejoice at the gallantry
of faithful Col. Jones our Governor, under such a state, in this his present
condition.

Since the enemies receipt of the intelligence of the Lord Lieutenant Crumwels
designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger
allarms, and (as we hear) have entered into Protestation, to live and die, stand
and fall together, and to fight it out to the last man, and that upon receipt
of the foresaid intelligence, Ormond called a Council of Officers, at the head
quarters near Fingles, the result was, whether they should prepare for a storm,
before his Lordships landing, or whether they should begirt the City,
streighten other Garrisons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw
into a Body, and give him battle at his landing: Upon mature deliberation
thereon, it was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Prolaticall
faction, That if he set footing there they would fight him; in the mean time
they would us^ their utmost endeavors for the reducing of those Garrisons
which the Parliament had in possession.

On Wednesday morning last, a party of the Marq. of Ormonds horse and foot
faced our frontier Guards, keeping a great careering up and down near the City
Wa^s, and -- making several bold attempts within Pistol shot of our Line,
Spurs, and Sconces, which continued for the space of half an hour; till at the
last Cape, Cambray (Commander in chief of the new Fort) made a salley out with
a party of horse and foot, who placed the Musketeers in an obscure trench, for
an Ambuscado; he himself being the Coy, for the calling in and ensnaring of the
adverse party; but upon his first advance toward them with his horse, he found
it a Work very full of difficulty, by reason that they had used the like point
of policp: However, he resolved to dispute the place, and thereupon divided his
horse (being 60 in number) into two parties, he himself commanding the one, and
^ornet Jackson the other; Capt. Cambray charged the Van of the Enemies Forlorn,
Corne^ Jackson flanked them, and upon their first charge exchanged ground, with
the loss of three men on both sides; but upon their present wheeling, both
parties received each other with a second desperate Onset, who with great
courage and resolution kept their stations, disputing the place with great
gallantry; but at last our men being overpowred (by the coming on of a fresh
supply of horse) were forced to embra^^ an honorable retreat; the enemy
pursued to the very ^^^n; pikes, where they were soon welcomed by the sons of
Mar^, both from the mouth of the Canon and Musket, at which Volley, 7 of them
were forced to yield obedience to the earth, which caused the enemy to desert
further dispute or engagement, leaving dead and wounded upon the place about
17. of our party five slain and two wounded.

By Letters further from Dublin it is advertized, that the Marq. of Ormond, and
the L. Inchiquin with 20000 Horse and Foot, have in^renched themselves (in many
places) within Musket shot of the Walls, and by their strong allarums (being
very resolved, since the taking of Tredah) keeps us in continual action: the
last night their Pioneers wrought exceeding hard, and raised an half Moon
within musket shot of our Outworks, where was placed about 400 musketeers, and
four pieces of Ordnance; it was contrived very artificially and strong, with a
running Trench from their frontier incampings, which secures their men from
great annoyance of our round shot: this morning we sallyed out upon them, with
a resolution to beat them off from the said Fort; but finding too much
opposition retreated to our Redout, which was within Pistol shot thereof;
about 4 of the clock several parties of horse and foot were drawn forth on
both sides, who engaged each other, and after a sharp conflict disputed with
great gallantry the enemy retreated, and having a Reserve ready at hand our men
durst not embrace the pursuit, but returned Victors with 17 prisoners, and left
dead and wounded upon the place about 15 with the loss of 14 men, which the
enemy in the night time set off, and buried.

Thus having given you a brief account of that which is most remarkable and
extant amongst us, I remain

Yours, etc. W. A.
York 26. July, 1649. As for the rumor, that the Earl of Derby has seized
upon Commissary Genesis Ireton, and a suit of Clothes amounting to the value of
700. l. and sent them both for a Present to the Prince, it is false and
incredible.



FINIS.

