Vindiciae Magistratuum.

Or, A SOBER PLEA FOR SUBJECTION to PRESENT GOVERNMENT.

According to the Command and special Direction of God himself, in his Holy
Scriptures.

By the meanest of the Lord's tenderers of his great Honor, and weal of his
SAINTS.

1 These. 5.14. (...).

London: Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold by Thomas Brewster, at ^he
Three Bibles, at the West end of Paul's. 1658.

To the unbyassed Peruser.
I Cannot but with great trouble of heart take notice (good Reader) that our
present condition and state of affairs is differently understoo^ by the several
parties whereinto we are fallen, some looking this way, some that way upon it:
But all that can discern any thing that is to be seen, or judge of the Reasons
of what they see, may conclude this of our condition, That we are neither
settled in, nor much inclined to entertain peaceable affections; that we are
strangely biased, and broken in pieces in our ways and actings, that the most
of us are beset outwardly with difficulties on the one hand, pressures on the
other, and many possessed inwardly with perpl^xed thoughts about the way to be
eased. The Reasons of which, I conceive to be chiefly two. First, because we
are many ways discontented the one with the other, in reference to that which
is past on all si^es; And secondly, because there is no Agreem^nt among us
about the way of future settlement, (...), etc. says Naz. Orat. 14. I verily
fear, lest Antichrist should come suddenly upon these our divisions, and lest
he should take the advantage of these our offenses and distempers, and raise
again his power over us.
in expectation of what is to come. And what ever any may hope or think upon
spiritual grounds, yet sure it is, that none can look with the eye of a
Christian upon our present condition, occasioned thus by distempers and
animosities among our selves, but he must confess that we are under a visible
Judgment, which may end in our utter d^struction, if God in mercy prevent it
not by a happy union and settlement. Nor can any rational man be so sensl^ss,
as not to perceive this to be a truth; nor is it credible, that any true
Christian will be so stupid as not to lay this to heart. And yet alas! he that
runs may read the several misconstructions of, and assays at the work of
Reformation at this day, by the attempts and rash interposes of many, who not
so much foreseeing the sad events of such actings, as pondering and eying their
own indulged wills, are ever accustomed to judge and determine of matters,
rather according to the uncertain Rule of their own desires, then by the
Right-line of a composed Judgment; and being neither willing, nor indeed the
most capable to discern the proper rise, causes, and chief motives that manage
and produce the effects, do with more confidence then consideration obstruct it
frequently in its second causes, until they ravel it into a hopeless Chaos. But
this being the proper work of the ensuing Discourse, I shall not detain you
here.

Only a word or two by way of Apology for this my undertaking, considering
the ordinary or extraordinary influence which the right or wrong management
hereof may have upon the spirits of men to effect good or evil to my self or
them thereby, wherein I o^ght to be exceeding careful that I give no just
offense.

Upon this very account, this little Model near these seventeen months has
lain by me, the mean esteem by reason of my great insufficiency, I had of it,
and the experience of the many censures I should every way incur by it,
begetting a resolution to bury it in the Manuscript; but many uncontrollable
reasons (some of which you may gather up as they lie here and there dispersed)
still coming in upon me, have now at last unclasped it to the view of the
World; wherein the curious eye (unless there be withal the greater ingenuity
and candor) will be ready to except almost at every thing. Sometimes accusing
me for playing the Pl^giary, sometimes disliking the Reiterations, and then
finding fault with the Style. I must ingenuously confess the fault of crowding
my self among the flocks of scriblers, wherewith this age is too much infested:
Docti indoctique, Eras. in praefat. in 3 Ser. 4 Tomi. Hieron. p. 408.
multi mei s^miles hoc morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nes^iant, tamen a
scribendo temperare non possint, as Erasmus formerly could note; yet my self I
trust with this difference; many of them out of a voluntary applause, to get a
Name, I by a kind of necessity to defend my present practice; they (I speak of
Scribes in my form) with the wisdom of this World, I with the simplicity of
Jesus; they triumphing, and with a self-exaltation trampling with disdain upon
the proudest of their opponents, I mourning, and with a holy fear and jealousy
of every sentence, nay, word, lest the one, while it strives to render the
sincere intention of my heart, the other may look too boisterously upon my dear
Brother for whom Christ died. At qui candidus erat nominare eos per quos
profecit, quam eum quem notat, says Eras.
But lest you may think I have forgotten the three main Exceptions before
cited; to the first I do concede, That I have been cr^pping in many Gardens,
and yet I have, for the most part, stuck down my stick where I took any Flower^
and truly, if I must needs be stoned for this, I crave only but the favor,
that the guiltless may cast the first at me: In my little time of reading, I
can cast my eye no where, but I can find the same in others, Diverso stylo, non
diversa fide.
either in so many words, or to that effect, still confirming the truth of
Scripture, Nihil novi, etc. and my betters (I hope) may well be my excuse
herein. For the Reiterations you will find fault with perhaps, be pleased to
consider duly, the nature of the Subject, that it is persuasive, and withal
weighty and of great concernment, Quia nimis indociles quidam, tardique sunt,
admonendi videntur saepius.
together with the persons to whom it is tendered, that are, alas! not so apt
to hear truths of this nature, as that the inculcations may prove superfluous
in any thing but in their acceptance, which I have most cause after all to
fear. And as for the style, that it is various and uncertain, as one says of
his, like a River, now deep, and then shallow, now muddy, then clear, sometimes
rough, Burton.
and then smooth: It is so indeed, as the Author, Tam Mart quam Mercurio, and
the matter that which you will like, If any seeming Pleonasms, Redundances, or
deficiency in any phrases or words may appear to any herein, l^^, etc.
and surely dislike, so must the style flow; which was so well foreseen, that
neither had troubled you to pass thi^ censure upon, had not the honor of God,
and tru^ Christian duty, more then ambition to have bee^ this way taken notice
of, thus exposed it. My purpose therefore was not, if I could, to compose
affectedly, but plainly, which the truly Christian (a whose like I chiefly aim)
will best like; and ye^ with Augustine I can say, Ita stylo moderabor ut huic
operi in Dei voluntate peragendo, nec ea^ quae supersint dicam, l. 17. de
Civit. Dei. cap 1.
nec ea, quae satis sunt prae termittam: My care has been (according to m^
ability) so to temper my style, that neither thing superfluous should be
inserted, Si cui legere non placet nemo comp^lli^ invi^um, was Hierom's mind.
Jul Caesar.
nor things necessa^^ omitted. For the Critical, and Captious, I nev^^ yet
thought them worthy the notice, there are Boo^^ enough already extant, that
will fit their humou^ of less importance; but if they will needs be bar^ing at
me, let them know I am professedly a stranger to them, and therefore I neither
care nor wonder. Jacta est alea, as the Emperor said. I ha^^ put it to the
hazard, I value their applause, a censure alike; Jewel against Harding.
faults will escape a man betwixt his fingers, let him look to it never so
narrowly, said a worthy Defender of the truth. Some plain Soloecisms, and harsh
expressions have been found in Tullies own works, Aug.
and many more no doubt in mine, which is not written to teach, but to practice
more. But lest I should be upbraided most of all, with the City of Myndus, for
making my Porch too big, I conclude, assuring thee, Reader, that all these
things were duly weighed before hand, and how I should incur almost every man's
displeasure, and Viz. That I am a Court Sycophant, That I cite Popish and
Profane Authors, That I am fallen from my Profession, That I write this to get
Honors and Riches; and an hundred such uncharitable imputations. But O! my
God, I appeal to thee, who have given me mercy to be faithful! 1 Cor. 4.3.
Job. 34.29
censure: But while I was musing hereon, the fire brake out; it was so much on
my heart, lest I should be sinfully silent in this general distemper, that I
could no ways longer conceal it, and be faithful. The Lord Jesus, for whose
sake I am now entered upon the Stage in this Iron Age, bless these my unbyassed
endeavors to the honor of his Name, the taking off some unchristian
imputations, which by imprudence and lustful exorbitancies have sullied the
bright face of Religion, and the settlement of some sober heart or other in
their most Christian duty toward Authority. Amen.

C. D.

Vindiciae Magistratuum: OR, A sober Plea for Subjection to the present
Governors and Government.
NOt Syllogistically, to enwrap my Grounds and Reasons for submission to
present Authority, In legendis libris non quaeramus scientiam sed saporem,
says Beru.
from the understanding of the meanest capacity; nor with flowers of Oratory,
strains of Wit, or elaborated Sentences to deck the Truth, whose nakedness is
beauty far above all; give me leave immediately to aver, (which surely were
enough, if I should say no more)

Powers and Authorities under whom we live: Because it is the Lords express
will and command that we should do so.

For proof of this, I find the Holy Ghost in his declarative will, the holy
Scriptures, thus energetically delivering it.

Romans 13. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers; For there is no
Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. verse. 1, 2, 3, etc.

Let me crave your patience a little in the breaking open this Text, and see
how each word affords us a most manifest proof of our assertion.

In these verses, etc. the Apostle having before forbidden to recompense evil,
and to avenge our selves, V. 12.
teaches that Magistrates are set up of God, to be his Ministers for that end,
and therefore we ought to reverence and obey Governors which are so helpful
to mankind. Wilson.
Now the reasons that moved Paul to make as it were a set Treatise touching the
honor due unto Rulers, are, First, to stop the mouths of such as affirm the
Gospel of Christ to be an enemy to Authority, Pet. Martyr.
as Christians were slandered in the Apostles time: Secondly, in respect of the
Jews, who being freeborn of Abraham, and Gods peculiar people, did seek to
shake off the yoke of the Romans that were now their Lords: Thirdly, Because it
might seem to be far unmeet for the faithful, who are governed by Gods Spirit,
to be ruled by heathenish Governors: And Fourthly, to meet with such as
imagine that Christian liberty and civil Magistracy could not stand together,
and that we need not be subject to politic Laws, because Paul had written
before, that we are not under the Law, etc.

Therefore, that God might have his glory before the face of the world by his
professing people, that publicly owned his Son the Lord Jesus Christ, Mayer in
his Preface to Romans
(who was every where so much contemned, his suffering at Jerusalem fresh in
their memories, Suetonius. Dr. Lightfoot Harmony, fol. 122, etc. Willets Synop.
q. 3. an. 1. Afflicti suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis nova
and maleficae. Tacitus Annals, lib. 15. cap. 10.
his doctrine called Nova and malefica, by the Rabbis and Philosophers of that
idolatrous time. And Nero then Emperor of Rome, seeking to cast infamy upon
the Professors thereof, (when he had wearied himself in tormenting them) by
fathering on them many most false imputations and aspersions, as his own most
cruel firing the City of Rome, giving out, to take off the general murmur and
suspicion of the people, That it was the Christians, whose seditious principles
(says he) is, that no Jurisdiction on earth is to be owned, etc.) Our most
prudent and wary Apostle sends this Epistle to the converted Romans, and Jews
then in Rome, with this especial direction and caution, as to their deportment
toward the civil Authority, which he imperatively delivers, Let every soul be
subject to the higher Powers. This as to the occasion.

Let [every soul] be subject.

Every [soul.] It is an Hebrew Synecdoche, (as some observe) the Soul for the
whole Man: Leigh. Wilson.
so Genesis 46.26. Acts 27.37. which word our Apostle does use rather then man, to
teach us, that the subjection required must be voluntary, Note.
and not of compulsion. And [every] soul, without exception, of what condition,
sex, or age soever, Dutch Annotat.
even as many as have souls must yield this subjection.

Origin would by a nice distinction except one sort of men from this obedience;
says he, Such as be utterly spiritual, and do not follow the affections of the
flesh, are not to be subject to Princes, because Paul wrote, Let every soul,
not, Let every spirit, be subject. But this subtilty is soon detected. for none
were more spiritual then Christ and his Apostles, and yet we read, Note.
none were more subject then they: And therefore Chrysostom herein proved the
wiser Father, who says, That this universal particle [All] does comprehend all
without exception of any, etc. Who then can exempt his neck from this yoke? (as
one says) Si omnis anima, Liegh. Si omnis anima subjici debeat, quis vos
excipiet ab hac universalitate? quisquis conatur Clericos excipere, tentat
decipere. Bern. ad Cler. Romans Ep. 24.
and vestra; quis vos excipit ab universitate? si quis tentat excipere, tentat
decipere.

Be [subject] i. e. subordinate; the Greek word may be translated Erasmus and
vet translat.
passively, subdita sit, but more properly here Crit. sac. Dr. Usher; defin. of
subjection. f. 253.
actively, as in our English Translation, submit your selves, Ephesians. 5.22. where
is the same word. Put your selves under another in an orderly subjection, (...).
with a ready mind, humbly submitting to be guided and governed, and
acknowledging the power of Government, and the necessity: It implies the
reverence of the heart, respectful language and gesture, unto the person or
persons placed over us; or an orderly disposing between the Ruler and the
ruled, by consideration whereof, the inferior which is set under, must give
place to the superior which is set above, which emphasis the Learned
constantly observe in the word. As in the elementary bodies, the more heavy and
massy are subject and under the more light and subtle, Gr. over having. Dutch
Annot.
the Earth under the Water, the Water under the Air, the Air under the Sky,
the Sky under the Starry Firmament, and that under the third Heavens, the
supposed seat of the Angels. And as Chrysostom observes, the Apostle does not
say, be obedient, but subject, which is a very general word, comprising all
other duties and services, as acknowledgement of their power, taking Laws and
commissions from them, arming at their lawful command, reverence, love,
prayer, thankfulness for protection, Verses 6, 7. of this 13 Romans obedience,
etc.

Higher Powers, or super-eminent Powers, (...), which are (...), in Authority.
1 Timothy 2.2. Anastatius the Emperor has this Constitution, That he which
enters into any profession in a College, should be obedient to the Governor
thereof, so that notwithstanding he yield obedience to the Magistrate. Cod. l.
3. tit. 13. par. 7.
i. e, not only to Ecclesiastical Governors, as to Pastors and Teachers in
the Churches of Christ, (as some others beside Papists would construe it,) but
such as take Tribute, and bear the Sword, v. 4.

He calls them Powers, to show that they bear the Image of God; and hence
Elohim, the title of his power, is attributed to the Magistrate, Psalm. 82.1, 6.
So he calls them Powers (as Paraeus observes) because they are endowed with
great power and might above other men, to suppress the wicked, Paraus in Romans
13.
and defend the good: And Powers, not Princes, to show, he speaks not so much
of the Persons as the Order it self to be ordained of God, which Paul could
well enough see through the dark and black practices of this Tyrant.

Ordained of God, i. e. instituted of God among mankind, to rule and govern men
in order, Engl. Annot. in locum verbatim.
as in Gods stead; for God is the Author of this Order in the world, and all
those that do attain unto this equity or excellency, do attain unto it either
by his manifest will or approbation, when the means are just and lawful, or
else by his secret providence with permission and toleration, when the means
are unlawful: And it is just and equitable (says Mr. Diodate) that man should
approves and tolerate that which God himself approves and tolerates, Diodati
ibid.
which we cannot by any lawful means appointed by him decline and avoid.

The Powers that be are ordained of God. The Apostle having before laid down
his Proposition, That every soul must be subject to the higher Powers, here he
insists upon his proof: His first reason was, because there is no power but of
God; this may be his second, or an illustration of the former, they are of God,
that is, they are ordained of God, i. e. have God for their ordainer as the
efficient cause, not chance, or fortune of war, as some most Atheistically will
impute it to. The Emperors of Rome that then were the Powers, had usurped the
ancient Rights of the Senate and People of Rome, and Nero (as I have said) then
Emperor, was a notorious Tyrant, he got the power by his Mothers poisoning the
former Emperor, Tacitus lib. 13. c. 6. lib. 14. c. 2. lib. 16. c. 2.
and kept it by his poisoning the Son and true heir; he was most unnaturally
cruel, he after slew his own Mother, and took pleasure in the matricide by
beholding her dead body, Suetonius.
he murdered his Sister Antonia, Aure. Vict.
his Aunt Domitia, his Son in law Rufinus, his two Wives, Octavia and Poppaea,
the latter by a kick on her great belly; there was no kind of affinity or
consanguinity, Orosius.
were it never so near, but felt the weight of his deadly hands: He was a most
egregious persecutor of Gods people, the first Persecution was under him, In
Apologet. c. 5. Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 25. Lactant. l. 14 de vera ^ap.
c. 22. Tacitus annal. l. 15. Called Tunica molesta.
and therefore Tertullian calls him, Dedicator damnationis nostrae, the first
that made a Law to condemn Christians to death: He put Peter and Paul to death,
James the greater, and the less, Philip, Bartholomew, Barnabas and Mark:
Christians were covered with Wild beasts skins, and torn in pieces with Dogs,
fastened on crosses, burnt in fire, and when the day failed they were burnt in
the night, put in pitched coats to flame as torches, that they might have the
better light for pastimes; in a word, so fierce was the bloody rage of this
Emperor against Gods dear ones, that as Eusebius says, Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 4,
25, 26.
Usque adeo ut videret repletas humanis corporibus civitates, jacentes mortuos
simul cum parvulis senes, faeminarumque absque ulla sexus reverentia in publico
rejecta starent cadavera. i. e. Insomuch that a man might then see Cities lie
full of men's bodies, the old lying there with the young, and the dead bodies of
women cast out naked, without all reverence of that sex, in the open streets.
With many other unparallelled tragedies, and barbarous cruelties, as may be
read at large in Tacitus, Dion, Eusebius Suetonius, etc. And yet this power was
ordained of God, as Augustine says, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 21.
He that gave Sovereignty to Augustus, gave it also to Nero; he that gave it to
the Vespasians, Father and Son, sweetest Emperors, gave it also to Domitian
that bloody Monster. So,

Ordained of God, that is, (...), distributae. Beza.
as the word properly signifies, an ordering and disposing things in their
place, and that by institution or command: Then be the Powers good or bad, he
that knows how to manage ill things to good ends in wisdom, orders them, and
commands obedience to them: And therefore, he that

Resists the Powers, resists the Ordinance of God.

Briefly, the Powers may be resisted three ways: By subtilty and craft, which
is an underground Rebellion, an under-board plotting, a secret whispered
opposition in cabinet councels: By contumacy and disobedience, this may be in
more open dealings, as by opprobrious words, etc. which is a stubborn and more
sturdy resistance: 3ly. By public opposition and defiance, either as Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, upon a conceit of co-priviledge and equal worth; or more
hostilely, (...).
as Absalom; and so the word is military (as it is observed) and signifies to
resist, or by open force to oppose Authority, which who so do (says our
Apostle) shall receive to themselves damnation or Judgment. This is the third
Reason of the Apostles assertion, and a sad one to the disobedient. Poenam sibi
auferunt, says Piscator, They shall receive punishment, viz. from the
Magistrate: But I rather think the word (...) (with Learned Willet) which in
most of our late Translations is rendered in English [damnation] intimates a
more severe meaning of the Apostles, Dr. Willet on Romans 13.2. Beza, Geneva, and
our New Translat. Numb. 16.35. comp. Jude 11. 2 Samuel 18.9, 14.
viz. either such a Judgment as may occasion loss of life, as Korah by fire,
Absalom by hanging by the head, and after thrust through with a dart; or else
eternal death, as Jude to me seems to hint, Jude, v. 8. compared with v. 13.
Now as to Judgment, or as Mr. Beza renders it, condemnation to our selves,
viz. extremest punishment in this life, be it with loss of life it self, Gods
own people by this disobedience may occur, from which God will in no wise
exempt the best, if they are found guilty, but if they will needs sin with
Babylon, When a house falls, all that are under the Roof must of necessity
perish, says Paraeus in Revel. 18.4. As those Protestants did with the Papists
(curiously desiring to hear their Mass) at the fall of Blackfriers, anno 1622.
The sword of fire cannot distinguish between friends and enemies. Eng. An.
therefore stand further off, Numb. 16.26. 1 Timothy 1.9. Romans 13.3, 4.
they shall surely partake likewise of her plagues, Rev. 18.14. as in that case
of unworthy receiving the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.30. many were sickly and weak
among them therefore, and many died. The best of Saints, if they offend humane
Laws will be taken hold on thereby, and are no more privileged from the stroke
of Justice, then the converted Thief, that suffered the Cross, though he was
afterward to be with Christ in Paradise.

(a duplice fine) v, 3, 4. For Princes are not to be feared for good works, but
for evil; so says the Apostle in another place, The law is not made for a
righteous man, that is, as a man acts righteously; but for the lawless and
disobedient, Peter Martyr in Romans 13.. 1 These. 5.14. (...), out of rank.
etc. 1 Timothy 1.9. The Magistrates of Rome had not their bundle of Rods, Sword
and Axe carried before them to deter the orderly Citizen, but to warn the
unruly, such as would keep no station in the Commonweal: See 2 These. 3.10, 11.
Such as would leave their own business, to do another, to which they have no
call, viz. be handling the Scepter instead of the Last or Shuttle.





Tiberius threatened death to such as should molest the Christians, says
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 2. Pet. Mart.
to make wholesome Laws for our freedom of conscience: As to instance in Nero
himself, as bad a Governor as any, after his first quinquennium or five years
Reign, when he in his Government oppressed the whole World, yet were matters in
controversy decided, neither was the strength of Laws utterly taken away from
men; for under him Paul was by the Centurion delivered from the danger to be
torn in pieces of the confused people, and malicious Jews; another time escaped
stripes by pleading his Roman freedom; at another time, to escape the liers in
wait for his life, was by night led away of the Roman Soldiers to Antioch,
where oftentimes he had liberty to defend himself; and lastly, he pleaded his
own cause before a Roman Judicature, and escaped the devilish plots of his own
Contrymen by appealing to Nero Caesar.

Wherefore [ye must needs] be subject. v. 5. In this the Apostle does briefly
conclude the chief Reasons which he had before alleged, and refers them
either to Vengeance, or to Conscience, both being exceeding dangerous; ye must
needs be subject therefore, there is no shuffling your duty off, you cannot by
any just means evade it, you may not shift your neck out of this yoke, it must
needs be, it must of necessity be that you must be subject.



Hos. 13.8. But he was angry with the cause of their request, their faith and
hope was in a manner spent, and they conceived more hope in a King then in God
that had been such a King to them so many years. Byfield in Pet.
Secondly, Men must needs be subject, because God has here bound men's
consciences to subjection, of which more by and by. Thirdly, Because Governors
are heads of the people, and therefore as members it is agreeable they should
submit, and be ruled and guided. Fourthly, In respect of the benefit we receive
by them, both in inwards and outward, as was touched before, receiving not
only protection, peace, and quietness, but if godly, nursed and encouraged in
Religion by them, as it is promised, Isa. 49.23. whose Courts have been Innes
for the Church to lodge in, and themselves principal Presidents of Piety in the
same. Jos. 24.15. Psalm. 101. Psalm. 42.4 etc. Nay it is recorded of Titus
Vespasian, a moral heathen Emperor, Suetonius. Lest some might say, we doubt
not of David's and Joshua's.
That he was generally called Delicias publicas, whose death even good men
lamented, as if they had been deprived of a perpetual Protector. Tantus luctus
eo mortuo publicus fuit, ut omnes tanquam in propria doluerint orbitate.
Aurelius.

Also Constantius, as Eusebius says, was a Sanctuary to the Christians under
him from the violence of their enemies. And Pius Constantine, another Roman
Emperor, kept them always in the bosom of his especial esteem and favor.

To proceed, We must needs be subject, not only for [wrath,] but for
[conscience] sake: Here the Apostle does strengthen his Conclusion with two
main Arguments. The former (a metu poenae) because of Wrath, which signifies
that punishment or revenge mentioned v. 4. because it proceeds both from the
wrath or anger of God, and the Magistrate. The second (a metu Dei) for
conscience sake, that is, lest we hurt our conscience by offending God, who
sets Rulers over us, and commands us to obey them, or as Beza has it, (...),
says Basil. So good Rulers we must obey as God, bad, for God.
De metu Dei and conscientia praecepti. Because God has ordained Rulers, and
commanded subjection, therefore we cannot with a good conscience despise or
resist them.

Now that it may more clearly appear what subjection is hence concluded in
conscience, suffer me to express the Argument in form thus.

Power is such; Ergo, etc. Thus the Argument holds for conscionable obedience
in matters pertaining to God, which do not then first become good or evil, when
the Ruler commands or forbids them, but are so of their own nature by
virtue of Gods commanding or forbidding them. And therefore the Authority of
Superiors, although it cannot reach to the conscience properly, they having
indeed no power to command or punish conscience; yet that which ties conscience
to submit unto them, is such like Commands as this of God in his Word, God and
his Law having the power simply and absolutely to bind conscience, that is, to
urge it to require obedience of a man, to accuse it if it obey not, and to
excuse it if it obey. Men may make Laws which we are not bound to keep, as if
they command any thing that is contrary to the Word of God, Act. 5. Dan. 3. yet
all Gods commands bind, yea enjoin obedience upon the inward man as well as the
outward, and inflict upon the disobedient eternal punishment as well as
temporary; and the good Laws of the Magistrate, although they bind not by any
immediate power of their own, yet by fear of Gods Word, that injoyns us to obey
their lawful Authority: Beza.
And in regard he is in Gods stead as his Minister, he cannot be resisted by
any good conscience, Chrysostom.
it being directly against conscience to resist such benefactors as protect the
good, and punish the evil doer, or prick that does sting the conscience of
rebellious persons. We must therefore obey for conscience sake, or for the
maintenance of the peace of a good conscience, Pet. Martyr.
these two enormities like Furies else will torment it, viz. the contempt of
the good Ordinance of God, and our great ingratitude to Rulers, to whom for
their protection, peace, and liberty (as I have said) all mankind are obliged:
But of this more in its due place.

Now in the prosecution of this weighty Exhortation (as by this time I hope it
is, to the serious) I find Paul himself in his own practice so far justifying
this precept, as to appear before a Court of Justice, no less illegal in regard
of the Nation of the Jews, then corrupt in respect of the Judges, where by the
Rhetorical expressions he uses, he teaches to own all Jurisdictions God has
been pleased to endow with an Imperative power. Nor can I think Paul would have
showed less compliance, or used courser language, had his Trial fallen out in
the days of Galba, Otho, or Vitellius; the which had no stronger title then the
sword estated them in, being all strangers to the line of the first Caesar's, or
any adopted by them.

Again, Proof 2.
We find the Apostle Peter to this purpose exhorting and confirming the people
of God, 1 Pet. 2. cap. 13, 14, 15, 16. verse.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men; As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

Give me leave a little also to unfold the pertinency of this most excellent
proof, for this our duty.

Our Apostle in the very first word [submit] implies Obedience, Honor to
Magistrates bearing the Image of God, Sovereignty, Reverence, by which we are
to judge the best of them and their actions, not conceiving undue suspicions of
them, nor receiving evil reports, or daring to speak evilly against them, but
thankfully acknowledging the good we receive under them; Loyalty to their
persons, endeavoring faithfully to preserve them, making all manner of
supplications for them, 1 Timothy 2.1. for the removal of evils from them, that if
they sin and God be wroth with them, we should stand up in the gap, and make
intercession for them: And lastly, we should pay them Tribute, Romans 13.7. and
subject to their punishment, yea and in some sense to their injuries, as David
did to Saul, Christ to Pilate; and that City in Phrygia which Eusebius relates,
Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 11.
was burnt with fire for the sake of Christ, and all the souls therein, not
using the least resistance.

(...) accipitur pro omnis generis, pro ullus, pro totus, in omnibus atatibus,
in omni tempore, inter omnes, etc. Crit. sacra.
Submit [your selves] i. e. yield obedience of your selves, do it uncompelled,
voluntarily, cheerfully, stay not till you be forced to it: Again, your selves,
not your goods, but persons also: Thirdly, your selves, that is, every one of
you, believers as well as others.

(...).
Every Ordinance of man: The word (as Mr. Leigh observes out of Grynaeus,) is
very general in its acceptance, signifying all things that are done in the
World, whether well or ill; but rather taking it here in a more restrictive
sense, whether concerning Magistrates themselves, or the wholesome Laws of
Magistrates, both are true, the former is included in the latter, and the
latter implied in the former, both to be submitted to; Ordinatio divina
secundum substantiam, humana, ratione subjecti, causa instrumentalis, finis.
although the Ordinance or Government in the manner of its institution be from
Man, yet because of the necessity of it, it is from God, ordained of God for
man as the proper subject, and for his profit as the proper end of it: Thus in
regard of the Author it is not humane, and therefore to be submitted to for the
Lords sake; for although it is called here Man's Creature or Ordinance, as I
say, either in respect of man, the subject by whom it is exercised, or man the
object about whom it is conversant, or of man the end to whose emolument it
tends, yet it is still the gift and institution of God, the primary Author,
and provident Ordainer: Aug. cont. Faust. Man. l. 22. c. 7.
A Deo sanc est (says Aug.) sive jubente, sive sinente; of God it is surely,
either so commanding, or so suffering it to be.

For the Lords sake: These words do import the cause and manner of submission,
submit for the Lords sake because he ordains it, and therefore for his sake
that sets them up we should obey them; and because it is Gods command, and
therefore there is no excuse for it, but yield obedience we must, because they
bear his image, because it makes for Gods glory and honor, and the repute of
Religion, when Christians live as they ought to do, obediently and peaceably:
And lastly, for Gods sake, that is, as if it were done for God himself. But I
must but mention these things.

Whether to the King: Here our Apostle descends to particulars, that there may
be no color for evasions. By King, I understand the Chief, whether by this or
any other Title distinguished, as in the afore-instanced place Romans 13. Higher
Powers, or super-eminent Powers, and so the Apostle here in his next words
explains himself (as Supreme) the Greek word signifies, (...).
one that has above the revenues of other men: Here no doubt the Emperor
Caesar is meant, under whom the dispersed Jews in Pontus, Galatia, etc. to whom
he wrote, 1 Pet. 1.1. then were; whom the Grecians did familiarly call King,
(...). Byfield. Qui supereminet. Sic nova translatio.
but the Romans disliked the name; and therefore the Latin renders it
Praecellenti, the highest and chiefest in a Nation that sits at the stern
thereof to order, rule, and govern it.

Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. By Governors is meant all
sorts of Magistracy besides Monarchy, the word signifying any that have
Authority under a King, (...).
or chief Governor, whether the Apostle meant Herod, or Agrippa, Lieutenants
to the Emperor, or any other Sive Ducibus, sic vet. translat.
Commanders or Viceroys in his Provinces and Jurisdictions: It holds forth to
us the great care he had that Christians should adorn their profession by their
submission, although in Babylon, from whence its probable Peter wrote this
Epistle; Dr. Lightfoots Harmony, f. 148. 1 Pet. 1.2. Misc. Ep. ded.
yea, and though to the very Elect he writes it, yet there must be no excuse,
but they must submit to the Authority that is over them, and that for the Lords
sake. This makes holy Zanchy admire, In the Kingdom of Christ (says he) this
is wonderful, That he wills and commands all Princes and Potentates to be
subject to his Kingdom, and yet he wills and commands likewise that his
Kingdom be subject to the Kingdoms of the world. As it follows,

For so is the will of God. Here is the great Reason that for ever should
silence all gainsayers, and more especially the Saints, whose principles and
practice should correspond with their prayer, That the will of God may always
be done on earth as it is done in Heaven, where the blessed company of
glorified Saints made perfect, are all obedient. If then, the Apostle should
have said no more but this, Ita est voluntas Dei, Note.
it had been abundantly enough to put his servants upon the duty, with all
alacrity. It is the good pleasure of God, so says the Spirit of God, who best
knows the mind of the Father and the Son, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. And the will of the
Lord be done!

That with well-doing. What is this e^press will of God, that the Apostle does
thus urge? To submit to Governors, which here he terms a well-doing: But the
Greek word (...), is not the same with that in the former Verse, for here it is
a Participle of the present Tense, and notes more emphatically the continual
custom of well-doing, q. d. This laudable custom so much agreeable to the
will of God, nay so expressly commanded of God, must not be laid down or taken
up at our pleasure, according as it makes for our advantage or disadvantage,
but it must be done, yea persisted in; nor to what person we like best of, but
to all that are in Authority, indifferently, constantly.

Ye may put to silence. This is one good end of your submission: The Original
word signifies, to halter up, or muzzle up the mouth. (...).
Obtumescere faciatis imprudentium hominum ignorantiam: Stop, or put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, bridle up the tongues of silly beasts that will
be braying against the people of God, Capistro fraenetis. 1 Cor. 15.32.
and endeavoring to asperse Religion, and the sincere Professors thereof by
this imputation, That they are Anti-Magistratical. These wide mouths must be
buttoned up, these amens.
mad opponents with your contrary practice, ye must powerfully confute. Psalm.
39.8. Tit. 2.6, 7, 8. Phil. 2.15.

Dutch and English Annot.
As free, viz. from the Dominion of Satan, not of the Magistrate, so not a
civil, but spiritual freedom is here meant, called Christian Liberty. In
maxima liberate, Salust. in conjurat. Catilini. Gal. 5.13. Downam on Chr. lib.
minima licentia, could a Heathen say; Gods people are free in respect of their
consciences, and yet as the servants of God, bound in conscience to obey him in
obeying them. Thus, as in the two former Verses, the Apostle confirms the
exhortation by reasons: In this he answers the the Objection, That Christians
being made free by Christ, are therefore not to be tied with the bond of humane
Ordinances, or subjection to men? The Apostle answers, That it is true that
Christians are made freemen, but so as they must not abuse their freedom by
sinning either against God or Man. And therefore he says,

The Greek word (...), (as Mr. Leigh in his Annot. notes) is no where else
found in the New Testament. Sanderson, in locum.
Not using your liberty for a Cloak of maliciousness: Cloak in the Greek, (no
where else found in the whole New Testament) signifies here a Covering, and in
that notion our English tongue does probably use it, and may note some fair and
colorable pretense, wherewith we disguise and conceal from the knowledge of
others, the dishonesty and faultiness of our intentions in something practiced
by us, Joh. 15.22. 1 These. 2.5. Alas! Religion is an ill Cloak of maliciousness
(as Mr. Trap observes) and will surely serve hypocritical Libertines as the
disguise Ahab put on and perished, 1 Kin. 22.30, 34.

But as the servants (or sons) of God, walking without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, among whom by this well-doing ye should shine
as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15. In a blameless and harmless walking, the
proper badge of Gods sons and servants, to be of Dove-like spirits, (...), of
(...), and (...).
harmless, the word is the same with Mat. 10.16. without opposition,
inoffensive, simple concerning evil, Romans 16.19. as the spotless sons of God in
pure white Robes of innocence. Malice, disobedience, contumacy, are not the
spots or badges of Gods servants, but inconsistent with their sonship. Deuteronomy.
32.5.

And thus as in a glass, according to my ability, I have presented you the
express mind and will of God, as to this duty of Obedience to Magistrates
placed over you: wherein I have been the larger, by way of Comment on each
pregnant clause, because though by most the Scriptures are well known, yet by
some perverted, by others slightly passed over, and by the fewest, alas! at
this day so duly and conscionably considered as they ought. Some I confess
plead them to set up their lusts by a Law, but against these (as the blessed
truths themselves) are the very points of my endeavors most avowedly pressed, as
the sequel manifests. There are others, who though they cannot but confess,
that these Scriptures, and such like, do plainly point out such a duty; yet
they make them not much their concernment, and less fear the sad consequences
(which truly has often been my amazement) though they sin against them
continually: Others to take away their guilt, make them sound quite another
thing, so far from the meaning of the holy Spirit, as that it is most contrary
to right Reason, and these, ah poor souls! most uncontrollably indulging their
own wills, wrest them, as they do other Scriptures, to their own confusion.

I could have enumerated Scriptures to prove my present assertion; but having
so much indulged my own desires of thoroughly setting home the duty, in these
already cited, I must content my self to interweave the rest in the ensuing
discourse, as I shall find opportunity. These (I suppose) by all serious
observers will be granted most evidently to prove, That obedience to present
Powers is due by all men. But if this will not suffice, then

Secondly, Weigh with me seriously further, how terribly the Lord denounces
against evil surmizings, murmurings, disputings of Authority, and such
disorders as, upon what pretense soever, are fomented against the Authority and
Powers that are placed over us.

Give me leave to prosecute this point home, for, if I mistake not, here is the
very rise of our distemper, viz. the coar of maliciousness, and root of
inveterate dislike (to say no worse) from whence those fruits of Sodom grow;
which I shall not spare to cut freely at, though it displease many. Wherein I
shall, as I have begun (although in something an unusual method, especially in
discourses of this nature; for I aim at conviction, not form of words.)

1. Endeavor to make obvious these particular evils mentioned, and show Gods
displeasure against them.

2. Aggravate them further in their several causes and circumstances.

3. Answer such Objections that seem to lie in the way, in opposition to the
truth asserted.

4. And then bring home all to the further confirmation thereof.

Evil surmizings: which ye may find laid down in 1 Timothy 6.4. as one of the
notes of a proud man, are nothing else but suspicions, and false conclusions,
arising from either arrogance, or ignorance, or both, begotten between a
self-conceited brain, and an envious heart, which, like a Tympany, swells up the
man until he burst asunder with unthankfulness to God for others prosperity,
(...) blown up.
and scorn and disdain of Men, bespattering their fame with secret calumnies
and aspersions. Thus Eli, of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.14. Saul, of David, 2 Samuel 10.3.
those incorrigible ones of Israel, against Jeremiah, Jer. 43.2. and the
Barbarians, Act. 28.4. of Paul. O! that Professors at this day were not sick of
this malady: Utinam, etc.

Murmurings, and disputings of Authority. The Apostle, Phil. 2.14. exhorts
Christians to do all things without murmurings, and disputings; how is that? The
Greek word for murmurings; (...).
signifies wrath, rancour, or discontent, which makes men's tongues (as one
wittily says) like rusty hinges, seldom to move without creaking. Mr. Trap.
Murmurings (as Zanchius says) are secret complaints, and mutterings, Zanch.
in locum.
like to the grunting of Hogs, confused and churlish; as, Why should we pay
this? and wherefore should we do that?

Disputings of Authority: open contentions and quarrels against such as are set
over us, which are the proper effects of the former; cross, and perverse
arguings, subtle insinuations, or perverse brawlings without either proof or
profit; contemptuous undervaluings, whereby we would draw away the hearts of
the people, from the lawful Magistrate to our faction, as Korah against Moses,
Numb. 16.3. (...). 1 Timothy 6.5.
etc. The word signifies galling one another with hard speeches, rubbing one
against another, as scabbed Sheep will, and so spreading the infection. These
practices were frequent among (I cannot say the Royal Priesthood, but) the
Priesthood of Royalists, stuffing their Pulpits with invectives against the
present Powers, while they were suffered, and now acting it to purpose in their
private assemblies and meetings against him, Act. 7.25.
whom God has notwithstanding set up in their Masters stead. And now also,
alas! by such, though upon a different account, as I would willingly think more
honest men.

When I am perusing this Scripture, I cannot but call to mind a like
description of men (though of a far lower pretense) which I have formerly read
of, and I suppose hundreds besides in this Nation, in their youthful times,)
who are brought in to speak out their own discontents in this language.

Our Lords and Masters now gotten up into the Chair of Authority, disdain us,
but they could never have gotten thither but by our assistance; and what were
this pomp and splendour, if our arms maintained them not? Who would esteem them
honorable, if they had not a people to serve them? That their Government is to
be looked into, how the great Treasures with so much necessity levied among us
has been spent; why none but such, and such as serve for their own ends, must
be admitted into Councils, and the Commons, as they call us, forsooth, too
plain-headed to tender our opinions; but yet our blood and sweat, our labors
and cares in our Callings for bread for our own Families, must be parted with
to maintain all: And since the Nation is ours and the Government adherent to
the Country, why are we not as meet to consider of the one, as inhabit the
other? etc. O! weak trust of the many headed multitude! Vide Dr. Halls med. 23.
whom inconstancy does only guide to well-doing.

Alas! is there not the like disputings of Authority, the same liberty of
Speech taken at this day, by such as would be accounted more serious? What
rippings up of all reports that can be raked together against Authority to
subvert it? 'twould make a sober ear to tingle to hear them, to the eminent
hazard of the ruin of all. Simile.
For as in a Ring of Bells skilfully rung there is a delightsome harmony, and
on the contrary in their jambling either a portend of fire, some disaster, or
at least a harsh and troublesome noise; So in a Commonweal, when every one
knows and keeps their due stations, there is a melodious consort of peace; but
when distances and proportions of respects are not mutually observed, when
persons will be clashing, the discords are extremely unpleasant and
prejudicial, such confusion either notifieth a fire already kindled, or
portendeth it. The incendiaries of which in this Nation, if they have an ear to
hear, let them hear and tremble at what the Lord denounces against them.

2 Pet. 2.9, 10. The unjust shall be reserved to be punished, chiefly them that
walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government;
presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of
Dignities, whereas Angels greater in power and might bring no railing
accusation against them before the Lord: But these as natural bruit-beasts made
to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things they understand not, and
shall utterly perish in their own corruption. etc.

Reader, with what heart thou considerest this sad and terrible Scripture, I
know not, mine, I assure thee, never duly pondered it without astonishment; and
how it will be evaded by some at the great day, truly I cannot possibly see.

Again, that Text afore-cited, Romans 13.2. speaks home and solemnly, Whosoever
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselvts damnation.

Jude also in his Epistle, speaking of what shall sadly come to pass in the
latter days, confirms the very same thing with the Apostle Peter (verse. 8, 9,
10.) and denounces a woe against them, ver. 11, 13. which I refer the Reader
to, for brevities sake.

Indeed, when I read such fearful denunciations, and seriously consider the
persons that too truly incur them, I am so far from aggravating, that I find it
more my duty to mourn in secret for them, and incessantly to implore Divine
pity and mercy, Numb. 16.22.
graciously to avert those Judgments, open their eyes to be sensible of their
ways, and free every one whose face stands Zion-ward, from being found in such
soul-hardening, and God-dishonouring practices.

In a due consideration whereof, we may find the Apostle exhorting, Tit. 3.1,
2. (which is my clear call to this present undertaking) Put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, 1 These. 5.14.
to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers; to warn the unruly, etc. that
speak and do they care not what, nor against whom, that the Lord will cut them
off, Psalm. 12.3, 4. Comp. Exodus 22, 28. warn them, because men are very apt to
forget their duty in their heat, and lest, any root of bitterness springing up
thereby, others be defiled. Heb. 12.15.

For, there is too much experience daily, that in the conjunction and
nourishment of such lusts, these four prodigious brats of Hell are brought
forth as their natural issue, and so the more out of measure sinful.

Bernard. Wilson. Irenicum, fol. 103.
First, Envy, which the Apostle James, cap. 4. discovers the nature of, where he
shows, that all our jars and strivings come from our inbred lusts, that these
beget an extreme disorder in all our carriages toward God and Man, v. 2, 3.
that the object our lusts are conversant withal is nothing else but this World;
then he confirms this last assertion by the testimony of Scripture, and further
declares, that the root of all our lustful disorderliness is nothing else but
Envy. Now the imaginary good thing (which naturally between all parties, Trap
decad.
as they are parties, is the object of their mutual Envy) is Pre-eminence, for
which they strive in comparison one of another, that either they may subject
others unto their will, or at least exempt themselves from being subject unto
the will of others, both which are most opposite unto the spirit of
Christianity, which, being humble and charitable, does set it self to speak
well, think well, and do well through a principle of love, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 7.
of which hereafter. And thus Envy, like a predominate bad humor in the
stomach, turns all the good it receives into evil digestion, and at last grows
unto that Epidemical plague of hatred and malice, which breaks forth into the
sores of poisonous railings, and bitter invectives, running and spreading like
a leprosy over the whole thoughts, words, and actions, with a natural desire
to infect others they come near, or have converse with; Willet.
and therefore Tanquam pestem fugiendum esse.

2. Another production (twin like, and yet inseparable) is Jealousy and Fear.
Mr. Dury.
Jealousy is the suspicion which men have of other men's intentions, of their
affections, and of the designs of their affairs: Fear is properly the
apprehension of Evils which may befall us by their means; those reflect upon the
counsels, these upon the actions of men, and upon the events of businesses. Now
the passions may be harmless, if the love upon which they are grounded be pure:
Wilson.
But if pride be mixed therewith, as in this sense, then we are jealously
affected toward others, but not well, as the Apostle terms it, Gal. 4 17.
Comp. cap. 6.13. when Fear will be nothing else but rage, distrust, and
prejudice, as Satan fears, etc.

3. A third Brat of this brood, (for I must but hint at things) is, Private
censuring and tale-bearing; which I put together, because they do not only
hang together dis-junctively, but increase and multiply each other infinitely.
And because the proper seeds of all our disorderly passions and behaviors,
which the cunning adversary sows among us, to our great ignominy, if not ruin,
have their preservation and nourishment here.

Tale-bearing and shedding of blood are alike forbidden by the Lord, the former
as the cause of the latter, Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a
Talebearer among thy people, neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy
neighbor, I am the Lord. They do not only cool the affection of him to whom
the tale is told, but murder the very life of him of whom it is told. Aynswort.
Therefore (says the Lord) Thou shall not walk as a Talebearer, or
calumniator, or not walk with tale-bearing, Rokel.
and crimination. The word signifies a Merchant or Traffiquer that carries his
wares up and down to vend, Rakil. From whence (it may be) our English word
Rake-hell comes.
1 Kin, 10.15. one that makes merchandise of words, going from place to place
to hear and to spread abroad criminations of other men. His property is
described to be a revealer of secrets, Prove. 11.13. his end to shed blood,
Ezekiel. 22.9. conspiring with the wicked to that purpose, provoking others to it,
as Doeg did, 1 Samuel 22.9, 18. Psalm. 52. yet pretending friendship and pity,
Jer. 9.4, 5. wherefore the 70. render it, Thou shall not walk with guile, Eng.
Ann. (...).
double tongued, Prove. 11.13. and 20.19. as a false accuser, or makebate, so
in Dan. 6.24. So the Hebrew, Rakil, the Greek, Diabolos, and the English,
Calumniator, are all one. Aynswor. in locum.
Daniel's accusers are rendered as having a bloody intention under a plausible
pretense, Thou shall not divulge accusations or criminations among thy people;
and it follows, v. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother, etc. From whence I
conclude, That strife and contention will never cease, nor true brotherly love
be practiced, and much less a conscionable submission to Authority out of a
principle of love, until the Talebearer be removed, and discountenanced, Prove.
26.20. The pride of whisperings and private censures (in which persons without
control can take their swinge) like a pair of bellows, blow up the coals the
Talebearer has kindled, till it break forth into a raging fire, which will
not be quenched by all the means the wisdom of a State can invent, without the
ruin of many, if God in mercy preserve the whole; for the simple will believe
every word, although the prudent (unum millibus e multis) will look well to
their doing, Prove. 14, 15. It is a true saying, Reports lose nothing but truth
in the divulging.

4. The last Evil that is usually brought forth, by the aforesaid Liberty we
take to our selves in contempt of Authority, is, Revenge: The thoughts of
which, although they are nothing else but the consequence of the sense of evils
which we have suffered, as they take hold on our affections, and therein center
in a passion, which can have no rest but in requital unto those that have
wronged us, of evils equal unto those we have suffered, or imagine to suffer;
yet in this respect they are something more then a bare result of the sense of
former injuries or sufferings, for they contain (and ah how unperceived) a
secret resolution of acting either by word or deed, or both as occasion is
offered, and that to the utmost extremity, though with Sampson to the ruin of
themselves in the downfall of others. Judge. 15.6, 7. and 16.30.
Brethren, if our consciences accuse us herein, God is greater then our
consciences, and knows all things. 1 John 3.20.

And now to gather in all to our present purpose; having taken this pains to
show you our calamities in general, both from Gods Word, and right Reason, the
sure Rules, both as we are Christians and Men, with short applications only
here and there interweaved, that by the continuance of the discourse so
universal, we might not forget to whom it is spoken; I come now more
particularly to manage the present Plea, as it is more especially intended.

And First, that I may exactly discover these exorbitances in their causes as
well as in their effects, I shall (and I hope without much offense) rank the
offenders into two sorts of men (to whom all others may be reduced, as
partaking more or less of their ways and principles.) The one sort relying
only upon themselves, are full of self-conceit, enamoured with a high
confidence of their infallibility: The other look more to a consent of
combination, in the declaration of their joint opinions. The first think
themselves strong, because they pretend wholly to the direction of the Spirit
in their way; the second, although they contradict not the truth of the Spirits
direction promised to the children of God, yet they put their strength rather
in a humane then spiritual way of acting. But the truth indeed is, that neither
the one nor the other, in matters of debate, hold forth to any, or follow
themselves, any approved Rules by which they govern themselves to edification
about these controversies, either to the spiritual or rational part in question
therein. And although this may be said of both, yet it cannot be denied, but
that the second sort of them, for the most part, are more capable of
entertaining Rules, when offered, then the first, because many of the former
(incircling all within the narrow Idea of their own imagined perfections,
transported with a like conceit of acquaintance with the aenigma's of
Scripture, yea, and with the very punctum's of circumstance, time, persons, and
matter of every Prophecy therein, and therefrom giving the free reins to a
strange kind of liberty which they call spiritual,) take up the principles of
such disorders, both as to themselves and others, equally as insensibly as
irrationally; insomuch as it becomes a thing almost impossible to fix them to
any thing, especially if it never so little run cross to their espoused
resolutions: whereas the latter are rather too inclined to fix upon
insufficient Rules, and humane reasonings; but yet in both this is evident,
that whenever either of them set themselves to promote any belief of their
own, or maintain any supposed truth, it is ushered forth for the most part, not
so much with the warrant and countenance of Gods unerring Word, (the right
understanding of which, if any place by them be alleged, they will not easily
be drawn to) as with unmeet passions, tergiversations, etc. or else evasive
incongruities, rather to uphold (and that professedly) the outward interest of
a party, to vindicate it from aspersion, or to gain some advantage to its
proceedings by the disgrace of others, then to make (truly I may with charity
enough suspect) a discovery of naked truth in relation to the honor of Christ,
or his Kingdom, that the necessity of the former, and the evidence of the
latter may become indifferently recommendable to the consciences of his people;
or that the conscience of those who have not so duly tendered the same as they
ought, may be brought back again unto their duty, and right understanding
thereof. Whence we daily see, that the result of such passionate undertakings,
fomented (as I said) by the private censures and whispers of some, and enflamed
by the rash pens of others, has brought forth no other fruit then the
dis-repute of Truth, and scandal of Religion.

To come yet more nearly and plainly: I am not ignorant how much, and in what
way some complain of those evils which we now conceive our burden, how they
cry out against the inconveniences thereof, and what an Odium they endeavor to
cast upon some, by whose fault (as they conceive) we are fallen into them; O!
say they, this is by reason of evil Magistrates, and the ill management of
Government; and so they are censured and aspersed according to the
apprehensions of each party: O! says one party, if I had had the modelizing of
the Government, I would have put it in such a method as should have been
against all exceptions; if I had had the choice of the Magistrate, I would have
set up such as Christ himself, when he comes, would have approved of, that
should have been a nursing Father indeed to the Saints, Thus like heedless
Flies some play with the light until they are dazzled therewith to their ruin.
D^. Hall, Med. 34.
an other David, etc. Say a third, The truth is, in this time of light and
knowledge, I see no reason that there should be any set up to Lord it over Gods
heritage, etc. but if any Rulers or Lords, it should be over the world who
cannot guide themselves. By which it is too evident, that to please any party,
had been highly to displease all others, and indeed to ruin all; and that the
way to peace and settlement is a general submission and obedience on all hands:
And that it is a mercy, that as the present Governor was established without
us, so, that he carries it so indifferently, without adhering to any party, but
impartially endeavoring to preserve all in a just freedom and protection; for
if the Government had been of such a Size, then it had been too narrow and too
short for the dimensions of such an Opinion; and if proportionable to such,
then too broad and too long for a third, and so it would never have fitted the
mould of all Judgments, the meanest of which would not have wanted both
Scripture and Reason too, in their conceits, that their advice might take the
precedence. And so for the Magistrate himself, who has therefore found it his
wisdom, and we our safety; that he rather (as he was wont to say) play the
Constable to preserve the peace, from the violence and rage of each persuasion,
which would willingly, besides it, have no other in the world. Furthermore, to
me truly it seems altogether as irrational as un-Christian, to judge of the
constitution of Government, or worth of the Administrator, by some contrary
effects. But why shall we wonder at this? the truth is (as one well observed
long ago, Thucydides.
) It ever was so, where affairs succeed not to men's desires and humors, though
there want neither piety nor providence in the conduction, yet with such as
judge only upon the events, the way to calumny is always open, and Envy, in
the likeness of Zeal to the public good, easily finds credit for an
accusation. Thus (as Cicero complained of the exorbitancy of the Romish State,
Salust. in Conjurat. Catil.
(too like ours) In the censure of the State we still do wander,
And make the careful Magistrate the mark of slander:
What Age is this? where honest men, placed at the Helm,
A Sea of some foul mouth or pen shall overwhelm;
And call their diligence, deceit; their virtue, vice;
Their watchfulness, but lying in wait, and blood the price!


I may add his Prayer.

O! let us pluck this evil seed out of our spirits,
And give to every noble deed the name it merits:
Lest we seem fallen (if this endures) into those times,
To love disease, and brook the cures, worse then the crimes.
Such detractors are like unto Flies, that ever swarm to the galled part, and
sit feeding on that worst piece of flesh: Or like another sort of them, that
are always raking in dung until they are colored by it. It is truly an envious
self-love, and inhumane cruelty that causes this ill disposition; in the mean
time this only they have gained, it must needs be a filthy creature that feeds
on nothing but corruption, and too much like the Devil, to seek out still
matter for accusation. Alas! how are ye able to pray, Forgive us our debts, as
we forgive our debtors; when your selves, debtors in a large arrear to Powers,
in your true subjection, according to Romans 13.7, 8. cannot forgive your
Creditor? Neither are you (besides) a little deceived, who think that by
blaming others you exempt your selves from the guilt of these calamities:
However, suppose this would make you guiltless, yet the complaints of such a
kind are no Balsome or mollifying Ointment to heal these putrefying Sores in
any, they are like a corrosive Plaster to make them worse in all; for this
ripping up of matters past, or accidentally now happening, if true, to
represent evils suffered on the one side, and injuries done on the other, is
the very method to foment bitterness, hatred, wrath, clamor, and
evil-speaking, which the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.31. commands at all times to be put
away from us, but should then do chiefly when we are about a way to cure
distempers, or profess our selves to be able to do it; for this way is so far
from reclaiming any, that it tends rather, not only to dishearten in all good
endeavors, We are made (says Nazianzene) a scorn to wicked men in their
Markets, their Feasts, their Plays, in all their meetings. The most vile people
jeer us, and all this for warring and contending one with another. Naz.
Apologet. Orat. 1. Dr. Richardson in locum.
but also to increase our divisions by publishing them in Gath, with more
severity against the person, then true desire of reforming the evils, raking up
old matters of dissatisfaction upon that account, which by all true Christians
were long ago buried in oblivion. The wise man says, He that covers a
transgression, seeks love; but he that repeateth a matter [or raketh into
frailties] separateth very friends.

I shall humbly beg of such to retire a little into themselves; you quarrel
now, my friends, (...). says the Proverb, Let us begin at home, there every
wise man's care should first be seen.
with the surmizes and appearances of faults in the Magistrate, and the seeming
compliances of such as cannot speak at your rate, act as you do, nor
conscionably follow your steps in the heights of invectives against Authority,
The motions of Divine Providence are so dark, so deep, so various, that the
wisest and best souls among us cannot tell what conclusions to make, nor to
what appointments to affix them, and much less circumscribe God in them, who
therefore expects we should resign up our wisdoms in a quiet waiting on him
(says a good man.)
that cannot interpret the blessed Prophecies and Promises in Scripture to your
times and seasons, nor to your aims and ends; Hoc disco mea experientia, quod
non habeo tam magnam causam timendi extra me, quam intra me. Luther. A me, me
salva Domine. Aug.
why should you not rather turn the edge of your contests against your own
inconsistencies and woeful confusions, which in the Shop of our own evil
hearts, upon the Anvile of our desperate wills, to the so much dishonor of
God, and infatuating our first honest purposes, are forged by Satan, while we
are so much abroad in others affairs, which as Christians, never in the least
concerned us? Is it too much indulgency that has occasioned this? I beseech
you be not so dis ingenious, nor so injurious to others (if to your selves) who
upon the bended knees of their souls desire to bless God for their liberties,
and to prize the mercies they enjoy under the Powers at a higher rate!

You may say they are guilty of much; alas! they are never-the-less out of the
danger of your darts, by any innocence you can pretend to above them. (...).
Man commonly, Joh. 8.7.
purblind with partiality, looking through a false medium (as children upon a
white object through a piece of red or green glass) may imagine so, when it is
neither so, nor so. Conscia men's recti famae mendacia ridet; They will slight
our censures, if they can approve their hearts before God, 1 Cor. 4.3. who
alone knowing the heart judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23.

We would fain be altering the Ship of Government, one finds fault with her
Keel, some with her Masts and Tackling, others fear her Cables and Anchors,
some take offense at her Top-gallant, and some at all; some like the Vessel
well enough, but would (as I said) be placing in her another Master or Pylot,
and other Mariners. Were it not more discretion to leave all as it is (which
will be so whether you will or not) seeing she has so admirably prospered now
for some years in the greatest tempests, under him who now governs her, that
her proudest enemy has been forced hitherto to strike sail to her, and will (I
trust) be still sailing on to your peace and advantage, although you at present
are as far from being pleased with it, as you can be safe without them.

For such as would have no Government but that little that is in themselves,
truly they scarce deserve the notice of a reply; Lib. 1. de Monogam. Errors in
Judgment produce many great evils, not only (ad intra) in men's own souls, but
also (ad extra) in humane affairs, as one well observes.
as an Ancient observes of one of his Contrymen, Primo regulam adulterans
fidei, and ita ordinem adulterans morum; First they adulterate the rule of
Faith, and then corrupt the order of Discipline. I shall entreat such to view
seriously that place in Judges, (if they allow the Authority of the Scriptures)
cap. 17. v. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did
that which was right in his own eyes. Why was not that best of all, that they
were free from any Lord or Ruler that might possibly have tyrannized over them?
seeing they were the chosen people of God, and had grace enough to govern
themselves? No truly; it is noted by the Holy Ghost as a Judgment upon them,
that they were so Head-less, and Master-less, left to their own wills: this is
here, and in the following Chapters, more then once rehearsed, as a reason of
the gross looseness and licentiousness, Ducth Annot.
that every one did, not that which was right and good in the eyes of God, but
in his own eyes, what himself best fancied; and observe then what followed, v.
5. they were led away to Idolatry, and cap. 18.7. they dwelt secure and
careless, having no No Possessour, or Heir of restraint.
Magistrate to keep them in any politic order or discipline, Hebr.
either to offend or defend an Invader: and what then? why their Enemies were
so far encouraged by their Spies hereby, that they win and possess their
Cities, v. 9, 27. and so the Danites enlarged their possessions, etc. Josephus
in his Lib. 5. c. 1, 9. l. 4. c. 5. and 6. and 7. ye may read this at large.
History of the Jews Wars, tells us of some in his time, that out of a strong
fancy of their absoluteness, and perfection, shook off all obedience to
Authority, and under the name of Zelots committed all riots and licentious
wickedness. It may be they were some of those Jews that lived at Rome under
Claudius Caesar, whom Suetonius reports to have been banished thence for their
tumultuousness; it is well if these we are mentioning, can derive themselves
from more peaceable Ancestors, their natures and principles so unhappily
agreeing. One observes, the great fallacy of Satan, with which he deludes such
men as these, is, that Logicians call, a been compositis ad male divisa; when
he gets them to take Religion into pieces, and then take one piece for
Religion: As while they cry up Liberty of Conscience, they forget Obedience to
Authority and Civil Jurisdiction; so while some in the conceit of Faith,
grounded rather upon the Sand of Fantasy, or soaring upon the Wings of the
Wind, than elevated upon the sure Rock the Lord Jesus, are carried on to say
and do most ridiculous things, forgetting in the mean time true Love and good
works; whereas true Faith is not without both Love and good Works. But I may
not spend all my time here, since by their frequent and manifest weaknesses
they have attracted the Eyes of almost every one upon them, some with pity, and
others with scorn, and all with dislike. And yet by the way, me thinks, I
cannot in Justice but wipe off some of that dirt, which, under this pretense,
some, more maliciously then judiciously, do cast upon all Professors without
distinction, slandering all that do walk more closely with God then they, that
they are seditious and rebellious. See much to this purpose, Mr. Burrough's
Gospel Convers. fol. 281, 282.
The truth is, they throw this black Mantle of Reproach over all Gods People,
that the bright Lamp of their Religious Conversations might not discover and
disgrace their sinful and bestial courses, as their Fathers did before them,
Mat. 22. to Christ himself, v. 15.16, 17, 18. and his Disciples and followers,
Act. 17.6, 7. So Sulpitius Severus observes of Nero, that it was his own bad
life that made him hate Christians; for he still thought they censured his
licentious life by their strict living. But however, let me tell thee, who ever
thou art, that dare still be so wicked, under so much Gospel means that this
time mercifully affords, How bad soever they are who profess the Truth, yet the
Truth which they profess is never the worse; if they offend and wrong their
souls, why should thou be offended at Christ and his Profession? and so
wrong thine own soul? And as for such who in our distinctions at this day are
called Anabaptists, because I find, not only of all sorts in our times, nay
even some good men, that are most ready to clap this brand on their backs; but
also former Writers, And yet Pet. Martyr on Romans 13. rather charge it on the
Pope, instancing in Bonifac. 8. Nostrum est, non quid ex quovis sequatur
dogmate, sed quid illorum sequatur conscientia spectare, says Bucer.
as often as they touch on this subject, bring in their Principles as
Anti-Magistratical; and yet I cannot find they truly ground it so much from the
Principles of them of that Judgment, as from the practices of some that were
so called, viz. they at Munster, etc. whom, if they had lived at this day, you
would rather have termed Ranters, whose abominations differ from the principles
of such as you call Anabaptists, to my observation, as far as light from
darkness. And truly (Reader) what ever thou may judge of me, It is one of
the greatest sins of this Age of light (said an eminent Minister of London
lately in a Sermon) to love our own Image in men, and not the Image of Jesus
Christ, in whomsoever we see it.
I am the rather, out of a true principle of love to all Saints, indifferently
as Saints, inclined to believe their peaceable affections and faithfulness to
Authority, because I find not only the dissatisfied of our times to be as many
of other Judgments (if not more) as of that, but also the many Declarations,
and public Protestations of men of that Judgment, upon all occasions, for
submission to present Authority, and particularly, that of their Church at
Leith in Scotland, Printed 1655. and dedicated to the Commander in chief there,
and others in England at the same time; together with the obvious practice of
the Congregations of them in and about London, especially those led by Mr. John
Sympson, Mr. Knowlis, Harrison and Tull, Kiffen, Jesse, etc, that orderly
adhere to those Pastors at this day, do clearly evince. But I fear I have too
much trespassed upon your patience by this digression, and yet I could not
fairly have stepped over, and have been impartially just to all; for I hold it
the duty of every honest man, especially he that undertakes to give Rules to
others, Vide Mr. Brooks Unsearchable Riches, etc. fol. 128.
to be most exact himself; and that if it were the will of God, the scandal of
this imputation, either upon Presbyterian, Independent, or Anabaptist, as Gods
faithful people are now among us so distinguished, might be henceforth taken
away, and the transgressors of either may abstractively bear their own infamy,
See Buroughs Irenicum, fol. 171. cap. 25. and fol. 177. Toll jam nominis
crimen and nihil restat nisi criminis nomen.
being fully persuaded, that as the Members of either in their several places
of Trust, Civil and Military, have all along given ample testimony of their
abilities and fidelity to the present Power, so through the Lords assistance
they will do still, to their utmost endeavor, Joh. 6.26. v. 66.
even in greatest straits, for Conscience sake; when such as make a greater
bustle while the Prove. 19.
Sun shines hot on them, will then evanish and desert. Christianus nullius est
hostis, nedum Imperatoris quem sciens a Deo constitui, A Christian is an Enemy
to none, much less to the Governor, whom knowing to be appointed of God, he
must of necessity love, reverence, honor, salvum velit, wish his prosperity,
health and safety, Lib. ad Scap.
etc. says Tertullian.

But to return: To such as would be accounted more rational then to live
without a head, and yet rather then they would have their present Governor, It
was said of Caius Seius, Ronus vir, sed Christianus, non amo te, non possum
dicere quare, hoc tantum possum dicere non amo te. Jam. 3.8.
(although it is confessed on all hands, as Tacitus said of Galba, Omnium
consensu capax Imperii, nisi imperasset; No man fitter to be a Governor, if he
had not been a Governor) would gladly take the occasion to rebel against him.
and in the mean time pray against him, and clamor in most unheard of
expressions, and put forth Books weekly to dissuade others from their due
obedience. Alas! what shall be hoped to be spoken effectually to you? whose
passions have transported you beyond all wholesome counsel, and whose espoused
interest has hurried you far beyond recall! I may say with Abraham, You have
Moses and the Prophets; nay I can say more to you, You have Jesus Christ and
his Apostles to warn you from this disobedient practice; and if ye will not
hear them, neither would you if an Angel came from heaven, or one rose from the
dead. Yet let me faithfully discharge my duty, that I may be free of your guilt
at the great day.



Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2, 13. 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. Jude, etc. And consider how you will be
able to answer your contempt, Tantae ne animis coelestibus irae?
to the Lord Jesus! Remember what spirit you are of, which you seem to forget
with those Disciples, Luke 9.55. when the gall of your own private spirits has
so much imbittered your souls. You know the Spirit of God is Dove-like, i. e.
meek, harmless, pure, peaceable, Gal. 5.22.23.
gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. His Saints were also so of old; Holy David
would not take vengeance on cursing Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. See his frame, verse. 10,
11, 12. how much less act the part of a Shimei. See 1 Samuel 26.9. 1 Kin. 24.5,
6. and thus sweetly resolves, Psalm. 101. I will set no wicked thing before mine
eyes, verse. 3. The Hebrew is, No word of Belial: Now [Jagnal] as one observes,
signifies, one that is without yoke, and disorderly; therefore the Seventy
commonly translate it [Paranomos] that is, one altogether irregular, or
lawless. So then David's meaning is, with James, cap. 3.3. he would bridle in
his tongue, set a watch over his lips, Prove. 29.11. A fool utters all his
mind. The 70. translate it (...), utters all his anger. The Hebrew word that
signifies a fool, and that which signifies suddenly, rashly, is from the same
root, as M. Buroughs observes.
curb his words, that he might not speak at random unbeseeming words, how ever
he might be seemingly induced thereto by any provoking object. Indeed Seneca
was wont to say, Invalidum emne natura querulum; the weakest spirits are ever
the most quarrelsome and contentious: We see it too manifest at this day.

Again, v. 4 A froward heart shall depart from me, who so privily slandereth
his neighbor him will I cut off. verse. 5. or as the Hebrew phrase is, that
betongueth, traduceth, or calumniates. Aynswort.
He that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight, Illic incipit, and illuc
rapit. (...). Mr. Manton.
etc. This is the tongue (as the Apostle James speaks, cap. 3.6.) that is set
on fire of hell, and sets on fire the whole course of nature, the whole course
of our lives, as the Greek renders it, there is no action, no age, no Estate
privileged from the influence of it.

There is a great resemblance between an evil Tongue, and Fire. 1. For the heat
of it, it is the instrument of wrath and contention, which is the heat of a man,
a boiling of the blood about the heart. Solomon says, Prove. 17.27.
A man of understanding is of a cool spirit, hot water boyleth over; so do
passions in the heart, boil out into untoward words, because in his lips there
is a burning fire, Prove. 16.27. 2. For the danger of it; the Tongue is a
powerful means to kindle divisions and strifes. The fool casts firebrands,
and says, Am I not in sport? Prove. 26.18. We throw fire abroad, scalding
words, and do not think of the danger of them. 3. For the scorching; Reproaches
penetrate like fire: David compares them to coals of Juniper, which burn
hottest and longest, desolating coals, as the Seventy render it. O! labor with
our humble Prophet, to keep anger from being a scorching fire in your tongues,
Psalm. 39.3. etc. And with him, Psalm. 131.1. let not thy heart be lifted up,
(through pride) nor do thou exercise thy self in things too high for thee,
Deuteronomy. 17.20.
(which do not suit with thy calling) but behave and quiet thy self, as a
Child by his Mother, (wean thy soul and mind thus) be as lowly minded, meek
hearted and full of simplicity, Mat. 18.1, 2, 3. This was the practice of this
blessed man after Gods own heart, and must of necessity be of all that profess
to be the servants of the most high God; for when this blessed practice does
fail, or is cast off by any, as then he will be taken off from the way of
holiness, so he will be set to follow the imaginations of his own heart, Psalm.
140.1, 2, 3, 5.
which sends forth nothing but seeds of corruption, and the roots of
bitterness, which will spring forth into poisonous weeds of slanderous
untruths, peevishness, unchristian detractings, and what is worst.

Now the way to prevent the growing of these roots of bitterness, and keep cool
our tongues, is to keep the heart possessed with the principles of saving graces,
that make the soul calm and serene within, from whence will be sent forth such
an odor into the world, such a beauty discovered, such a pleasantness in sound
speech, that can in no wise be condemned, that every one will be able to
discern with some approbation and relish, the ornament of that Christians meek
and quiet spirit, and be ready to speak well of his Profession, admire the
splendour of his conversation, although they remain themselves (poor souls) all
the while in their filthy lusts, and fling their dirt upon others.

Observe with me, (a little further to set home this duty) that blessed
Exhortation of the Apostles, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all bitterness, and wrath,
and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all
malice, and be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, etc.

Here the Apostle treats of Wrath in a double acceptance; that which is less
grown, and that which is settled with maliciousness: The first is set down as it
is in the affection, the second as it is in the word. Definition of Bitterness.
Bitterness is a smothered displeasure of which one will not be known, that
makes a man a burden to himself and others, till it be digested: This Wrath
being fuller of discontent then revenge, like a fret that ranckles inwardly;
and like a fire that has no vent, it is exceeding violent, and like Water cast
upon Lime, Mr. Bayns.
the fairer you deal with it the more it burns; Simile.
and as the face by the yellow Jaundies receives the color of the disease when
the Gall overfloweth, In facie legitur homo.
so our looks will be ready to discover the heart, when all our behavior has
tasted of the Gall of Bitterness. Wrath, or Fierceness, Definition of Wrath.
Ira furor brevis est. Anger, notes of it.
notes an impetuous Anger, that is manifestly and headily carried, being soon
up, and soon allayed, as too violent to hold. Anger is that which sets us upon
the desire of Revenge: This sinful Anger has these Symptoms and causes. 1.
When men are moved, because their minds are not served, or because something
crosses their designs or expectations. 2. When our Anger keeps no due bounds,
is excessive, and against the innocent as well as the nocent, is inconsiderate,
etc. 3. When it hinders good duties, breaks off love, occasioneth other
sins, as Clamor, which is a disorder in words, accompanying the former
disorder in affections; Clamor, its effects.
for as a fire kindled here or there, will fasten unto the next things unto it,
so this fire of Hell burning in the heart, will fasten on the tongue; and as
the Jews once stirred against Christ, could cry no other thing then Crucify
him, crucify him, so the language of the clamorous is nothing else but Kill,
stay, and destroy, pull down and consume, as Stephens enemies cried aloud and
run upon him, Act. 7.3. As Drums in a battle, to drown the moans of the hurt.
Evil speaking,
executing their fury in their inveterate acclamations. O! therefore, in your
Anger have a special care to rule the Tongue. Evil speaking, is a blaspheming
either of God or Man, imprecations, revilings, etc. He loved cursing, it shall
light on him. Psalm. 109.17. A man may be denominated from his language; Thou
art one of them, for even thy speech bewrays thee, said the Maid to Peter.
The Godly bless such as curse them, for the Language of Canaan is their Speech.

Malice; what. (...).
With all Malice. It is a sinful affection, which does separate and make us
evil disposed toward others. The word may as well be rendered Mischievousness,
signifying one special kind of sin, which is directly opposite to Brotherly
Love and Charity, sweetly expressed by the Apostle in the following contraries,
viz. kindness one to another, tender-heartedness, forgiving one another, even
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. It properly discovers it self in
speech, Prove. 26.26. A malicious man is envious at the prosperity of another,
as Cain, Saul, etc. in rejoicing at the evil that befalls another, as the
Philistines at Sampsons misery, Judge. 16.25. These the Apostle warns us to put
away from us, that is, pray them down (as one says) for otherwise we are
endangered, by yielding to grieve, by grieving to resist, by resisting to
quench, by quenching maliciously to oppose the good spirit of God. Chrysostom. in
Moral. hom. 14.
v 30. The speech of Chrysostom is very moving herein, If any man should abuse
a vessel (says he) that is appointed for the Kings meat, by filling it with
dung, durst he again in the same present meat unto the King? surely he durst
not. So he who has dedicated his mouth to the honor and praise of God,
joining herein with the Cherubim and Seraphim, should not dare, for the
indignity of the thing, to have it filled with bitterness, wrath, anger,
clamor, evil speaking, etc. and then come again to bless the Lord. It follows.

And be ye kind one to another. Here (as I hinted) the Apostle goes on to
exhort to the contrary Virtues. Kind, that is, sweet-natured, facile, and fair
conditioned. It is used of things, (...). benigni.
and persons; of things it signifies Facility, Mat. 11.30. Utility, Luke 5, 39.
of persons, it signifies One that is desirous to do all offices of Love, ready
to gratify. The Precept commands two Christian affections, Courtesy and
Mercy, and their Fruit manifesting them, Forgiveness; for many will say they
are gentle, quiet persons as need be, if they be let alone, Note.
and yet offended they will not forgive: Now these are neither courteous, nor
merciful. Kindness, what it is.
Kindness or Courtesy then is a Virtue which makes us to carry our selves
amiably and sweetly toward others, not in Bitterness, which is its contrary:
And it may well be called the Flower or Cream of Love, for it does swim on the
top of all offices and good turns of Love, and makes the things we do,
exceeding lovely; every where in Scripture required of us, Col. 3.12. Gal.
5.23. Jam. 3.17. etc. showing it self in matter and manner of Speech, See
Luther in Gal. 5, Romans 14.19. Act. 7.26. Phil. 2.3.
in respectiveness of our carriage, in gesture and reverence, and in some
appropriate works of it. Thus Abraham toward the Angels, Genesis 18.3, 4, 5. and
to the Children of Heth, cap. 23.7, 12. Paul to the Governor Felix, Act.
24.10. to Agrippa, cap. 26.2.25. preferring others above our selves, in all
lowliness of mind, and esteem of them. And then it imports Mercifulness in the
Reason the Apostle gives here to back his Exhortation, Levit. 19.18. Mat.
18.32, 33. Col. 3.12, 13.
Forgiving one another, etc. i.e. That which Christ has done to you, you must
do to others; Christ has showed mercy to you, therefore you must, etc. labor
for the affection of Mercy, sympathizing with others, bearing their burdens;
this is not to lay greater loads of reproach, scandal, and accusation upon them.

(...). notat eos qui ex imis visceribus, aut ex cord, plane, medullitus
miserorum misereantur, eorumque calamitatibus vehementissime afficiantur. says
Illyr. in N. Test.
Tenderhearted. Ad miserecordiam propensus, says Piscator: ad intimam
miserecordiam pronus, says Beza: It is then, the yearning and sounding of the
bowels in pity and compassion toward another, in a natural sympathy, and
fellow-feeling of their state and condition; meltings of spirit, kindly
affectioned from the heart, Romans 12.10. See that ye fall not out by the way,
says Joseph to his rough spirited Brethren. Arctior est copula cordis quam
corporis, says one: This is clothed with the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, to which Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 3.4. and is always attended with those
two excellent graces of Humility and Charity; you may find the one set out by
the other in that full description, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. Whosoever desires to
view the Opinions of others? touching this blessed Scripture, may find them
collected to his hand by Mr. Mayer, in his Commentary upon the place, Text 71.
Charity suffers long, and is kind, etc. which Bullinger thinks the Apostle
here sets down in opposition to morosity and churlishness, that he might
thereby meet with the Corinthians in their ill conditions; for they were at
this time much out of Order in their Church, being full of prosperity, and
numerous, whereby their minds were puffed up strangely, 1 Cor. 11.
most irreconcilable to their offending Brethren, and yet abounding in Errors
among the best of them, above any other Church of Christ, as whosoever will give
themselves to mark diligently this and the other Epistle of Paul to them, will
easily discern.

But I must not enlarge here, nor would I have been guilty of this elsewhere,
remembering I have yet the most material part of my work behind, did I not by
sad experience daily observe how transient the bare naming of a Scripture is in
the mind of most of us, especially if it has been often read by us before, or
run any thing contrary to the Bias of our Resolutions: 2 Pet. 1.12.
And therefore the Apostle Peter thought it not impertinent to be always
inculcating Truths of absolute concernment, upon the hearts of those elect
strangers to whom he wrote; 1 Pet. 1.1, 2.
they knew them, and were established in the present Truth. Wherein without
application I have contented my self only to hold the Mirror before your
eyes, each well enough knowing their own faces when they see them.

Now to come a little home again, Are these the qualifications of Gods people?
Alas! how contrary hereunto are some men's practices, that because the
proceedings of such as manage the public affairs do cross their wills and
designs in relation to the settlement and government of this World, therefore
they ought to be cross in all things, and to oppose them with their greatest
might; yea, and although the matters be exceeding lawful, good, and acceptable
in themselves, yet in their hands they must be opposed, disparaged, and
misconstrued: And although I probably foresee, that this kind of opposition
will hazard ^o imbroyl, and what in me lies, ruin the State, yet still I must
oppose them: How consonant to the aforesaid Exhortations of the Apostles, the
rules of Charity, or the least Christianity, let the sober judge. And I humbly
beseech you, consider solemnly, what are the pernicious effects of looking back
with a carnal discontentedness upon the Affairs which so much disturb our minds
by the management of others, rather then of looking forward with uprightness
and simplicity upon the good which we ought to do our selves; true Christianity
teaching, not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with goodness. Romans
12.21.



Note.
with a design rather to oppose hatefully, then as Christians to endeavor to
rectify our selves, or others, lovingly; we shall hardly ever suffer our
selves to be disengaged again, because we do not know where to stop our course
of opposition, in respect of new provocations daily brought us by Tale-bearers,
and fomented by more crafty heads then our own, having evaded once the
thundering power of the Scriptures by some private interpretation, and for ever
banished the least charitable opinion of any one that is contrary affected to
our undertakings.

Precedents in Scripture to warrant reproof, and to witness against sin in any,
yea in Kings: So did Elijah, Jeremiah, and the Saints of old.

Elijah or Jeremiah had? are you so qualified for it as they were? have you the
same measure and infallibility of Spirit? Surely it is too manifest to the
contrary.

2. They did not bespatter them to others, but being immediately sent of God,
did humbly deliver their message to the person concerned, and were silent,
expecting Gods issue.

3 It Is one thing to deliver a message from the Lord, or (if you will) to bear
your testimony against the Magistrate; and another thing to rise up
calumniously and opprobriously in opposition to the Authority. In some cases
(as the instances brought) some especial persons may have a call from God for
the one, but no Divine Commission, or Command for the other, but the contrary,
as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. namely, that prayers, intercessions,
supplications and giving of thanks be made for them; and accordingly it was the
practice of the primitive Saints in their Assemblies: Says Tertullian,
Apologet. c. 39.
Oramus pro Imperatoribus, pro Ministris eorum, pro statu saeculi, pro rerum
quiet, etc. Supplications are made for all in Authority, etc. that is,
Persecuting Nero then ruled, says Hierom.
(says one) craving pardon of God for them in case of their miscarriages;
Intercessions, or Deprecations of those evils and judgments which we see cause
to fear hang over them; Thanksgiving for peace, protection and liberty we enjoy
by and under them, v. 2.

We find Abraham praying for Abimelech King of Gerar; and that of old there
were Decrees about praying for Kings, as Ezr. 7.23. and what trouble ensued
upon their ceasing to make public prayers for their Kings, and such as were
set in Authority over them, which were Heathen Tyrants, Joseph. de Bell.
Judaico. l. 2. c. 17.
Josephus does declare.

I argue hence, 1. If it be our Duty to pray to live peaceably under our
Governors, then surely it is our Duty to practice it. 2. If we ought to pray
thus for evil Governors, then much more for the good, that they may be
preserved still to be nursing Fathers to us: If for Heathens, then more
especially for Christians, and for professing Christians, whom the Lord by so
many signal testimonies has owned, and wrought by such wonderful
deliverances, of which hereafter. 3. If I ought thus to pray for them, then
surely I must do them all the good I can; for I take this to be a clear
principle in Christianity, as an undeniable Argument against all opponents,
That whosoever I am bound in duty to pray for, I ought in my utmost endeavors,
by all good ways and means, to procure good unto: But I ought to pray for all
in Authority, Ergo.

That is to say, I should make my paths straight toward them, giving them no
cause of offense in any thing, behaving my self humbly and faithfully toward
them, lest my profession of the Gospel be blamed.

I must apply my self in love toward them, doing my duty in my place and
station, to my utmost, for their peace and tranquillity. You have a notable
place for this, Jer. 29.7. where the Prophet sending to the Jews then in
captivity under Babylonish Tyranny, exhorts them, To seek the peace of the
City, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof they should have
peace. O! this is to be Christians indeed, Mat. 5.44. this would make Religion
shine indeed before the world, far above all the fair shows, good words, and
glorious pretenses that can be made; for Hypocrites, like Pharaoh's Magicians,
Exodus 7.12
can imitate those to the life: But this will make a Moses appear to be the
true servant of the most High, maugre Men and Devils, as Exodus 8.12. These are
the Saints fit indeed for the work of their generation, and (however others may
pretend above them) will bring most glory to God therein.

In a due consideration of which, I, as to my own Duty and Practice, thus
positively conclude;

1. That I ought carefully to watch my heart, that I do nothing through strife
or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, esteem others better then my self,
without murmuring, without disputing. Phil. 2.3, 14.

2. That in the way of my lawful Calling, if I must needs contend for truth
and righteousness, yet even then to remember that I ought to be slow to speak,
and slow to wrath, because the wrath of Man works not the righteousness of
God. Note.
Jam. 1.19.

3. That in telling the faults and errors of any absent party to others, under
pretense of warning them to whom the relation is made of the evil and danger of
that party, or to exasperate them against him, I conceive I am neither
charitable, nor positively edifying; not charitable, Note.
because the discovery of the persons failing, to others, can proceed from no
love, for love covers a multitude of faults; nor positively edifying to
strangers that are made acquainted therewith, because nothing does so edify as
the manifestation of truth and righteousness, which will and must needs be dark
and uncertain therein; but the Apostle commands me to follow the things that
make for peace, and wherewith one may edify another. Romans 14.19.

4. That in my laying open the faults and miscarriages of any, either to
themselves, or to others, otherwise then in order to the course that Christ
has appointed to rectify the same, and with a charitable design to bring him
that erreth from the error of his way; I am altogether therein far more
exorbitant and disorderly my self.

Now then, for me, upon what pretense soever, to make it my work to resist the
Powers ordained of God over me, by calumniations, detractions, hard speeches
(as David's enemies did, and indeed Gods enemies, Psalm. 140.1, 2, 3, 5. which I
pray read) nay, to pray against them, that God would ruin them, instead of
praying for them, and doing my duty as before laid down, is not only to pull a
curse and ruin upon my self, instead of hurting them, but withal to brand my
self to posterity with infamy and impiety, as what greater can be?

Shall I need to add prohibitions? where the very thoughts of it would make a
Satyr to blush in abhorrence! Read Eccles. 10.12. Curse not the King, In thy
no not in thy Conscience
thoughts, nor the One that has above the Revenue of another, as in 1 Pet.
2.13.
Rich in thy bedchamber; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter. You shall find Paul upon this occasion,
Act. 22.5. call to mind this Precept, Exodus 23.28.

Blessed be God! we can say of our present Governor, that though men have not
ceased to inveigh, and unworthily to design against him, yet with Joseph his
Bow abides in strength still, Genesis 49.23, 24. of whom it is said, The Archers
sorely grieved him, shot at him, and hated him; yet the arms of his hands were
made strong by the mighty God of Jacob. The Archers that sorely grieved him
were his unkind Brethren, and the barbarous Egyptians, with such as falsely
aspersed him because they could not serve their ends upon him; all these shot
sorely at him: They were not unskilful Archers neither, (...) sig.
Arrow-Masters, i.e. skillful Shooters.
as the Original word manifests, they were cunning enough to hit the mark, and
they shot at him as at their prey; but yet his Bow abode in strength. When God
in the midst of dangers makes a soul strong, that soul shall not only face
enemies and difficulties, but triumph over them. Those that are strong in grace
seldom want courage or counsel, when they are at the worst. They always find
their Hopes to be an Anchor at Sea, and their Faith a Shield upon Land; and
therefore triumph against all oppositions in safety.





2 But say it is Reproof you mean thereby, you may err as surely in the cause,
Vide Buroughs Irenicum, Jer. 20.10. f. 167. c. 26. He that believes every
thing that is reported, and reports every thing which he believes, will report
that which should not be believed, and believe that which should not be
reported. Mr. Venning.
as in the manner of your reproving. You say you reprove the Evil in the Ruler,
pray what Evil? why such as is in every man's mouth; in every busybodies mouth
you mean, who love to have an Oar in every man's Boat but their Many of our
divisions and hard thoughts are fomented, either by such as want employment, or
by such as will not be well employed at home. Iren. f. 292.
own, which in the mean time leaks, and grows rotten for want of honest
improvement.

I have read of a sort of people called the Lamiae, which having their Eyes to
take out and in at pleasure, never put them in their heads but when they went
abroad, and when they returned, put them up in a box again. You can make the
application.

Like Gnats, which play up and down all day in the Sun, and at night sting the
next face they light upon.
It seems then the Evils you reprove at that distance in the Magistrate, you
have by hearsay, and most of it from those Athenian News-mongers, Act. 17.21.
who commonly love to make, as well as carry News, or at least more then it
truly is, it seldom passing through prejudiced channels, without some fully or
tincture of the conveyance, as our daily experience shows us.

3. But admit you reprove a real fault in the Magistrate, pray (as I said
before) where is your call as a private Christian thereto? Did ever Christ or
his Disciples teach Christians so to do? or did Christians in the primitive
times practice any such thing? You have heard it cleared to the contrary. But
you say you have an eminent Call thereto by impulse of Spirit. The Apostle bids
you try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1. The Spirit in your selves as well as in others.
whether they are of God, or not; take heed, I pray you Brethren you dance not
after the gingle of your own brains instead thereof: The Spirit of God teaches
otherwise, as you have heard, whose fruits are, meekness, long-suffering,
gentleness, patience, etc. Gal. 5.22. But have all of you this inward Call?
Truly, I fear, if we should enter upon the discussion of a true Call, we should
all be found without it; but such is the disorder notwithstanding, that there
is not a discontented person among you, though he never understood what the
duty of a Magistrate were, and much less his own, but has some dirt to cast on
his Robe.

4. And then you greatly err in the manner of your reproof. For true Christian
reproof is not to reproach behind the back, but humbly, and with a just Call,
to do it to the person failing (as they did before instanced) or rather
persisting in Evil. Elijah, etc.


You are then right Reprovers ( Prove. 25.12. Definition of right Reproof.
) when being free of the sins your selves, and exemplarily good and just, and
having (as I say) a clear Call thereto, Reproofs are not very like to take,
when in reproving we commit the Evil which we condemn, said Plato to Socrates.
you do with an humble discreet heart, in unfeigned love to the person,
premeditately, and tacitly admonish and counsel, observing the disposition,
time, place, and present frame of the person you reprove.

Now take this description solemnly into your consideration, and examine
impartially your hearts thereby, (you that take so much liberty to vent your
minds at random against the present Power) and if you find your selves meet
and orderly therein, you have some ground on your side to like your practice;
but if you do find you do rather exceedingly sin in it, O! then, Breve sit
quod turpiter audis; hear, and see, Juvenal.
and do no more so presumptuously.

and encourage in evil practices; and so involving our selves in their sins, we
shall consequently partake of their plagues?



2. I answer Secondly, That if the Governor had been set up and established
according to the judgment and humor of every man, then those Exhortations of
the Apostles for obedience to Powers, were needless; for no man would be
unwilling to obey a Magistrate of his own setting up, as I said before, and
ruling according to our wills and pleasures.

3. It is but your Opinion that the Powers have set up themselves, they have
solemnly made their Appeals unto God to the contrary, yea, and unto the
principal of the State also, who have had the public management of the Affairs
of the Nation all along; His Highness Speech at White Hall to the Officers
about December. 1656.
calling them to witness, in the presence of most of the chief Commanders of
the Army, and others, Whether the present Governor did seek this Public
Charge wherein he is now invested, or whether it was not rather imposed upon
him by the frequent and earnest solicitations of those Patriots, and before,
and after that, abetted, and petitioned thereto, not only by the unanimous
Address of the Armies of the three Nations, but of most of the good people of
each County: As in his Highness several Speeches to the Parliaments, September.
4, and 12. 1654. etc. are evident.

4. But Fourthly, for you to conclude, That a thing in it self so good and
laudable (as this of an humble and free closure with our duty) may accidentally
tend to confirm some man in an evil course, that therefore I should be bound
not to apply my self unto it, although I am clear that the practice in its own
nature has no tendency to such an effect, is neither agreeable to Godliness,
nor Reason. For Example. If I should pray for the Magistrate, according to the
Exhortation in Tim. afore-cited, I should thereby harden him in evil, is a
strange conclusion; Paul was not of that mind at that time of that
Exhortation, which was, as I have often said, when Nero that Usurper reigned.
Again, We find Moses praying for Pharaoh and his people, and yet no man can
say, that he did thereby intend to harden them in their evil, that was
accidental; and though Moses might know it would possibly fall out so, yet he
did it no doubt with a sincere intention of good.

5. Lastly, You are exceeding careful to shun partaking with the Magistrate in
Judgments, upon the surmize of his Usurpation; which you have no ground at all to
fear in the discharge of your Duty: Why are you in the mean time so regardless
of the plain Commands of God, as you have heard laid down, and so fearless of
those heavy Judgments denounced against the disobedient, as your practice
gives evident cause to suspect? I say therefore, that this inference consists
more with your wills, then the rules of Piety, or right Reason, which has more
sad effects then I have hope to convince you of, until you feel not only the
chastisement of the Magistrate as evil doers, but also Gods just displeasure
for contempt of his Ordinances, Romans 13.2.

Obedience to Powers? We do not deny to give submission to the worst of them:
Do we not pay their impositions? And where with a good Conscience we cannot
actively submit to them, have not they the command of our bodies at their
pleasure?

Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. and practice, cap.
17.27. of which hereafter. Yet these Collections are not properly for the
Magistrate, but for the maintenance of Peace, both by Sea and Land, Vide Peter
Martyr in Romans 13.6.
and defense of you from such as would not give you this liberty ye now (though
grudgingly) enjoy, and for the administration of Justice, and twenty emergent
occasions, in relation to the weal of the Nations, which we private folks are
ignorant of. And therefore Paul exhorts to pay Custom and Tribute, Romans 13.6,
7. and not be a debtor in any thing, v. 8. but love, which must ever be paying
to the Magistrate, and to others, with whom we can never quit scores while we
get into Heaven together.

2. But you say, you give passive obedience: I could wish you would do as you
say, with a Christian mind, if you can do no more; for this would adorn your
Profession, and put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, to whom you give
too much occasion to charge you (and others that little deserve the imputation
with you) with contumacy, yea and rebellion, as inseparable from profession.
You are submissive with your bodies when you publicly offend, because you have
not power to resist; Our unruly deportments puts me into fear of our falling
into like confusions as were in Junius time. See his Comment upon Psalm. 122.
where he most sadly pours out his soul in complaint thereof. Certe sunt oves
Christi adhuc, sed etc.
but are you so with your tongues the while, which you judge are without
control? What then means those bitter invectives so frequent among you, uttered
against the Authority over you? while a number of malignant and discontented
persons are drawn together, yea and Jesuits too (though unperceived by you I
believe) have their harbor in your bosoms, and secretest confederacies
thereby; who wishing well neither to you, nor the peace and welfare of the
Nation, carry on their own designs, and cry, Ah, ha! (...). Naz. Orat. 14. We
do not consider (says he) how unsafe it is to put weapons into our enemies
hands. Mat. 5 44.
so would we have it, as a readier way to their rise again and wicked purposes,
then ever their keenest swords and sh wits could hitherto procure them.
Therefore look about you; and if you have not quite forsaken all consideration,
consider, there is a great difference between patient submission, and violent
opposition.

3. Consider again, Submission, though passively, is ever accompanied with true
Christian Charity, which draws you forth to love your Enemies, to do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute
you; but you quarrel with your friends, and such as with long patience and
forbearance toward you, seek by all fair means possible to do you good against
evil.

Charity you know the Apostle tells us suffers long, 1 Cor. 13.4. Do you suffer
long? or rather how long are you suffered, to admiration? you rather herein
teach the Magistrate a passive submission. Truly the great indulgence I have
observed in him toward you, notwithstanding your very strange deportment
toward him, without any end or measure, makes me often call to mind the like
practice of those worthy Emperors Theodosius, Willet on Exodus 22. Q. 51.
Honorius, and Arcadius, whom Galesius upon Exodus 22.28. brings in thus saying
of those that speak evil of them; Si ex levitate, contemnendum; si ex insania,
miseratione dignum; si ab injuria, remittendum; If it come from lightness of
spirit, it is to be contemned; Compare Prove. 10.20. with Psalm. 64.8. Didicit
ille maledicere, and ego contemnere, says he in Tacitus. 2 Samuel 16.17.18.
if from madness, it is worthy of pity; if from injury, it is to be forgiven.
Tully confirms the same of one of these Caesar's, Nihil oblivisci solet, nisi
injurias; That he forgot nothing but injuries. Indeed, Conscia men's recti famae
mendacia ridet; If all is quiet within, the noise without is little considerable.

Charity is kind: ['tis the same word that ye had in Ephesians. 4.] Are you kind?
Is this your kindness to your friend, to take part against him in your words
and counsels?

Charity envieth not: View your words and gestures against Authority, do you
not envy at their prosperity?

Charity vaunteth not it self: the Greek word is here very significant. (...),
Chrysostom.
Nihil temere, and inconsiderate, and praecipitanter agit cum proximo. We use
to say, a vaunting boasting man is the most rash and inconsiderate of any;
curiose scrutari res alienas, says Theoderet, will undertake to judge and
censure of any person or thing, Non garrit, non tumultuatur, non agit perperam,
non est fucata, non est procax, etc. says Syrus, Beza, Clemens, Erasmus, etc.
loves to be prying into other men's concernments; the most empty vessels sound
loudest, Vasa quo magis continent minus eo sonant. Seneca.
so these puffed up things like a Drum are ever inciting to discord, search
your hearts herein.

Again, Charity seeks not her own: Not her own pre-eminence, honor, or
reputation; but prefers another good before her own. 1 Cor. 10.24. Examine
your selves seriously whether you desire to do this or not, nay do you not
rather covet what is another? say ingeniously, do you not think your selves
more fit to govern then he that now does? and is not all your endeavors to get
him down, that you may set up your selves? at least one of your selves.

Charity is not easily provoked, falls not into sharp fits of Choler (as they
Act. 15.39.) so as to seem in a frenzy thereby; thinks no evil, does not
suspitiously turn all into the worst sense; rejoices not in iniquity, is not
glad to see another commit sin, or hear he has failed, that he may disgrace
him thereby; but rejoices in, or with the truth: Therefore says a grave man,
D. Sclater.
Nulla est inter malo^ charitas, sed conjuratio potius. It is not charity but
conspiracy that is found in wicked men. Bears all things: (...), metaphora a
tignis, (says Paraeus, a Lapide, and others.) And herein it may be said of our
Governor, Magistratus indicat virum.
Covers faults with her large Mantle, swalloweth down whole many Pills of
discontent, that would otherwise prove very bitter in the chewing. Or thus:
Bears all things, that is, supports a State (notwithstanding all contrary and
cross events) by magnanimity of spirit, as the Master beam of an house, does
uphold the stress of the whole Fabric; believing all things, hoping all
things, viz. the best; enduring all things, etc. I am most unwilling, the Lord
Jesus knows, to discover your nakedness; the Lord help us to try our selves
impartially by this straight and unerring Rule! and yet truly I will declare my
persuasion in this one word, That such a spirit as shall be guilty of this
uncharitableness, shall never be honored with a discovery of Truth and
Righteousness above their Brethren, (let them pretend to what they will) but
when the Lord calls in the cool of the day, Guilty Adam alluded to, Genesis 3.8,
9, 10.
shall rather hide themselves, having not only been guilty of betraying their
liberty, and Christian reputation to the world, but lost their pure and
innocent Robe of Love, and lie naked to the scorn of all men.

Power, is equally to be reproved and censured with the chief Actor therein:
Thus Jehosaphat was reproved and punished for helping Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and
therefore such are not to be suffered in a Gospel Society, because abettors and
maintainers of the Evil, Persecution, and Oppressions, and thereby sadning the
hearts of the Saints whom the Lord would not have sadned, and upon wilful
persisting, to be withdrawn from, etc.

to take this whole discourse in answer, or else crave their patience until we
come to the Fourth Argument ensuing, and so proceed to that which more relates
to our present undertaking: But yet, lest this may seem to them an evasion,

1. I answer; That I must, until I see further cause to the contrary, as
confidently deny the imputation upon the present Governor as so aspersed, and
therefore no such cause of offense justly given by submitting to him, or
serving under him, as is pretended, whereby the spirits of any sober minded
Christians that walk in the fear and truth of the Lord, should be grieved.

2. But neither the instance propounded, nor any the like, will reach the case
in hand. For Jehosaphat was not under Ahabs subjection or jurisdiction, and
therefore his assisting of him was a mere voluntary act of his will, without
any such obligation engaging him, as the Liberty of Gods people, Civil Right in
our Estates, general Peace of the Nation, etc. did call us forth unto, under
this present Authority, (and still does) through the blessing of God, upon
whose Conduct we now enjoy the same; and therefore far otherwise engaged to
assist and serve the present Authority, then Jehosaphat was to Ahab, who was
warned by Micaiah the Prophet to the contrary. 1 Kin. 22.19.

Baal, nor to that Golden Image which Nebuchadnezzar has set up; the stream of
self ends, popular applause, and worldly advancements, carrying back most
treacherously from the interest of the Lord Jesus, multitudes of pretending
Christians of this Age.



2. You say there are few that bow not the knee to Baal, viz. that are not
corrupted by the Court, as I suppose you mean. Surely obedience to Authority
does not lessen the number, but rather increase them, demonstrates more
Courtiers rather to the King of Kings, whom we do chiefly eye in our obedience
to his Substitutes on Earth, and whose orderly walking herein putting a greater
luster upon Religion, Tit. 2.6, 7, 8.
will attract more eyes in love to embrace it.

Indeed if the word be considered in a strict sense, A double diminutive in the
Original, (...).
according to Luke 12.32. Gods flock is but a little, very little flock; and
doubtless as much of you to be laid to heart, as of us all, how few shall enter
with the Lord into his Joys, not only of such as shall fall by connivance and
flattery at Court, in your sense, but of such as have Lamps, yea, once,
burning, shining Lamps, (for it is said, Mat. 25.8. their Lamps were gone out,
which implies they were once in) and are called Virgins, viz. such as judged
themselves undefiled of the world, (free enough from Court taints, for they
defy to come near it) and that wait for Christ's coming, and do prophecy in
his name, eat, and drink in his presence, viz. partake of the Ordinance of the
Lords Supper in the most Gospel societies, and manner, and pretend to be
altogether devoted unto the service of Christ, and for the exaltation of his
Kingdom, nevertheless at his coming, Christ knew them not! Read I pray once
again seriously (however you think you are so well acquainted with) those sad
words, Amos 5.13, 14, 18, etc. compared with Luke 13.24, 25, 26, 27. Mat. 18,
etc. And the Lord help us all in this our day, to know the things that belong
unto our peace! as Christ with tears said, unto Jerusalem, Luke 19.42, 43.
which he did foresee by their intolerable pride, envy, and divisions would be
miserably ruined, which after came to pass, as ye may sadly read in Josephus,
De bello Judaico, lib. 6, and 7.

3. There is but a few in your opinion that will not bow the knee to Baal, nor
to the golden Image that Nebuchadnezzar has set up, so thought Elijah, 1 Kin.
19.10. I only am left alone; but he was deceived, v. 18. it may be so are you,
we have not found you so infallible hitherto, as to believe your bare say so:
There was a Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and it may be there was many more,
that would not bow the knee to the unjust Edicts of that Caldean Monarch, but
rather Christian-like bow their bodies to the fire; for Daniel (the man greatly
beloved of the Lord) is not mentioned, who no doubt did not bow neither, and
why not many more faithful ones with him also? whom the Holy Ghost with other
immaterial things, does not think fit to mention among the Truths more
necessary, as it is said of Christ's doings, Joh. 21.25. all which to insert
would be too voluminous for the continent of the whole world. There be hundreds
in these Nations, that are the precious ones of the Lord, Heavens secretly
imploring Saints, though not allowed of in the Calendar of many Judgments, and
yet notwithstanding England really fares the better for. See 1 Chro. 12.32.


But admit there were no more then the few your selves, it will yet be a task
too hard for you to prove, blessed be God, that the present Governor is a
Nebuchadnezzar, as you allude to; and therefore to yield you that he sets up
any Golden Image, to try the Consciences of his tender hearted Servants by, or
tempt them with the Gold thereof, from the sincere following of Christ, is so
eminently contrary to his Gospel Principles and practice, that it would be to
bow rather to the Idol of your uncharitable imaginations: The not ready belief
of which is the very ground of your displeasure toward us, and nothing else.

The most carried away by the stream of worldly advancements, Riches, etc.

4. I will not go about to justify the ends of all that have stood by this
Power. It may be, as Alexander said of his two Courtiers, professing so much
love to him, That the one loved the King, and the other Alexander; so there may
be some that are more for his Highness, then the righteous Cause he manageth;
they are better able, knowing their own Consciences, to vindicate themselves;
yet I can say for some of them that are rich and honorable, that without doubt
they do enjoy it with honest hearts, having by Gods blessing upon their just
aims and endeavors, attained to what they now are and have: And no question
many more can with clear Consciences outface their detractors in a full
defense, whose rise and actions have not lain within my notice. But this I do
verily believe, that the Person in Authority never was a means to prefer any
(in these troubles) that went about to manage their own personal advantages
abstractively from the public good, as near as he could discern them. But I
may say herein, Non persuadebis, etiam si persuaseris.

I am sure I can speak for one, that having faithfully adhered to the Authority
from the beginning, with utmost hazard of life and fortune, has been so far
from possessing great things, that he has rather declined. And although his
Estate impaired by so many years losses and sufferings has called aloud by all
lawful ways and means for the better provision of himself and family (1 Timothy
5.8.) yet he has refused to be more or greater then what he now meanly is, (as
is eminently well known) partly to take away any occasion of such aspersion,
from the mouths of such, who, suitable to their pretensions, should be found
rather rejoicing in the prosperity of his people; but chiefly (being conscious
to his own weak heart above he believes many others) fearing to turn them to
snares and temptations, and so divert him from the pure honor of God, and that
sincere discharge of duty to the Magistrate, and to the Nation, that God and
Man justly expect from every honest undertaker.

But it is said (I would to God it never could be said of Professors) that it
is an Epidemical Disease among men of this All-Ruling Age, Diogenes apud
Laertium. l. 6.
as Diogenes of the sullen Grammarians of his time, that they were better
acquainted with the Evils of Ulysses, then with their own. O Saints! labor I
beseech you to free your selves of this imputation; let your Humility and Love
bear your rather in the hearts of men; and when you go about to pull out the
moat out of your Brothers eye, be sure keep your hands clean, and remember it is
Christ's precept, Mat. 7.5.
first to pluck out the beam out of your own.

Fortiter calumniare, aliquid haerebit.
having turned his back upon his former Profession, and taken part with the
World in its Pomps and Vanities?

Joh. 8.48.
Say we not well, thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Truly, I may return
to you, as our Savior to his revengefull Disciples, Luke 9.55. Surely, ye know
not what Spirit ye are of.

I confess, it is of all things the most irksome to me, to praise any man that
may possibly hear of it again, or to do any thing that may have the least
suspicion of flattery in it: Besides, to speak of Great Persons in a just
measure, is a hard matter; and though one do, yet he shall seldom get the
truth firmly believed, the favorable hearer, and he that knows what was done,
will perhaps think what is written, short of what he would have it, and what it
was; and he that is ignorant, or prejudiced, will find somewhat on the other
side which he will think too much extolled, especially if he hear ought above
the pitch of his own nature; for to hear another man praised, finds patience so
long only, as each man likes it, or as each man shall think he could himself
have done somewhat of that he hears; and if one exceed in their due praises,
the hearer through envy presently thinks it false. Nevertheless, having this
clear call, I shall adventure, censure who will, to say some of that truth, by
way of just Vindication of the Power thus unchristianly aspersed, which is so
plentifully known to me.

1. I must needs tell you, that it is a very great evil to raise false reports,
Exodus 23.1, 2, 3. and rashly (as I have showed) to credit them, as much a
weakness; and truly I find it very natural, to have an ear ready for such as
whisper out what makes to the prejudice or defamation of such as we dislike,
and altogether deafned to whatsoever runs not with the current of our partial
humors, by which means we become so sadly deluded at this day, The Objection.
as this strange piece of confidence manifests; wherein we have not the
Justice of Heathens, of one of whom it is recorded, that sitting in Judgment,
he would ever stop one of his ears, to hear the contrary party withal; for he
that condemns a man till he hear him, does unjustly, though there may be just
cause to condemn him: One tale is good while another is told.

2. Some men indeed bring him things in the name of the Spirit, that he judges
weak and foolish fantasies, Molliter, in epte.
rather the vapors of a distempered brain, as some distracted persons that I
have seen come to him, and some deluded poor souls, disturbing his more
important affairs, and deviating his thoughts, almost tired out about the good
and for the weal of the Nations: these sometimes it may be he may slight,
sometimes chide for their impertinencies, yet most times, if he had any
leisure, most patiently hear while they had a humor to vent; but they going
away displeased, that their Castles which they had built him, De lana Caprina.
or others, in the Air, were no more regarded, they say he slights the Spirit,
but does any reasonable person think so?

3. I dare confidently say, No man ever yet heard him speak against the
persuasion of any Party, how far different soever from his own Judgment; but
on the contrary, he has ever had the repute, even by his worst Enemies, for a
general lover and countenancer of all honest men, of whom I know not that man
this day alive, that I can so truly say it as of him. It may be he may blame
the person of some Professor for walking scandalously, or contrary to his
Profession, as he has had many times too much cause to do, but to charge the
Judgment therewith, he has been eminently most tender. And I can truly say
further in his behalf herein, as it was the honor of Vespasian, that he was
more ready to conceal the vices of his friends then their virtues; so I have
often known him to conceal, and that with no ordinary care, the several
scandals, and other imprudencies of Professors acting foolishly against him
and the peace of the State, when he has been tempted thereby to whip them with
their own rod, and to suffer their own reproach to light on their own heads.

And as to the imprisonment, persecution, or oppression of the people of God; I
think those that say it, do scarce believe it themselves: He has been a
Sanctuary to all that walk orderly of any Opinion, as the ingenious of all
parties do acknowledge. But of this, after.

Indeed some that I have cause to believe well of, have been yet so peevishly
imprudent, as to make their own Mittimus, and in a rash dissatisfaction (even
with those friends that have been their chiefest encouragers) have turned the
Key upon their own Liberties, because they could not bias his public care and
affection, which ever stood equally poized to all. There are others like
froward Children too much indulged of their Parents, cannot be pleased with any
thing, because they are so much pleased and born with in every thing; and while
by the rattling of their Chains they find Music to some people, they complain
seemingly against them, while (alas) they like well to have them. Many will be
popular by restraint, rather then die unregarded. But I delight not to help
forward the afflictions of any, nor to unvail the nakedness of such whom I
trust Christ has cast his Mantle of Love over, but rather bear their burdens,
according to the Apostles Exhortation, Gal. 6.2. and practice, 2 Cor. 11.29.
and therefore shall pray for them, that God would mercifully give them more
meek and humble spirits, prudent hearts, a sober and impartial understanding of
their duty, and of things which they now concern themselves in, and release
them, when they may come forth most to the honor of his Name, and their own
thus laudable improvement! To the rest of the Objection, see further in the
next Argument.



I am indeed for obedience to all the Lords commands that he has made known to
me in his blessed Word: And I would fain bring a little honor to God (through
his assistance) in my due obedience to the Civil Authority he has placed over
me, and persuade others also so to do (if it be the Lords will to make me his
happy instrument) that the mouths of wicked men might be stopped (as I have
said) that are too much opened against Religion, by our disorderly practice,
which was the main incitement to this public undertaking. But to the Objection,

Witness their banishment into far Countries, and imprisonment and silencing of
such as staid it out.
to ruin and destroy Profession and Professors out of the Land, and to
introduce Ceremonies, and encourage a looser sort of Ministry in the room.

2. Was it not apparent, that he intended to take away the Liberty of the
People of the Nation, Note.
the common Birthright of every English man? by imposing what he pleased, See
Mayer Comment. on Romans 13. Text 34. f. 128, 129.
not only upon their Consciences, but Estates and Persons also; and all this
by his own Arbitrary Will, without any consent of Therefore the Apostle says,
Be subject to the Higher Powers, not Power. Romans 13.1.
Parliament, or necessary constraint by War, etc. And that he might Tyrannize
without control, and make us absolute Bondslaves, I shall confirm by this
passage.

When the Earl of Essex marched into Cornwall, in the year 1644. to subdue those
parts to the obedience of the Parliament, some Officers of his Army ventring
too near the Kings quarters to visit the Lady Moon, were surprised by a party
of the Kings Forces, and among the rest that thus went to visit, D' Albere (an
ancient Low Country Soldier, Quartermaster General to Essex) was one, and
the only one of those Officers that escaped taking, which he did by
counterfeiting himself the Ladies Butler, having had some little time before to
fit himself in such a disguise. Whereupon I well remember it was expressed by
eminent persons of the Army, and after became the talk of all, That it was well
D' Albier had so escaped the Kings fingers, for he would have been surely
hanged (notwithstanding the Law of Arms) for that he had received a great sum
of money privately of the King, and had not only run away therewith, but
betrayed the Kings Counsels: Which was explained thus, That something before
the breaking forth of these troubles, the King, that he might levy money, and
do his pleasure on his Subjects, had resolved to raise a flying Army of Horse
and Dragoons, to remain in this Nation, to execute his Commands, and compel the
refractory, and had chosen this experienced Soldier D' Albier to command them,
and had already in order thereto delivered him a competent sum to effect it.
But the Wars coming on before it could be done, D' Albere, to keep the Money he
had received, takes Command in the Parliaments Army. But after, while the King
was in restraint, that he might (as he thought) the better gain a pardon,
revolts with the Earl of Holland in the last insurrection, and lost his life in
the same.

3. Did not (not only some few, but) the generality of Gods people engage
against this exorbitant Crew, and go forth as one man to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty?

4. But Fourthly, and chiefly, It Is eminently known, and has been often
asserted upon undeniable grounds, Note.
That we had the Authority of Parliament for what we did, which was the Grand
Authority of the Nation, not only by a free and legal Choice of all the
Nation, as the true Representatives thereof; but also by a special Act of
Establishment by the King himself, to sit at their own pleasure, without other
dependence; whereby the whole Power that could be in any wise pretended to by
the King, was devolved upon them: Which Supreme Authority sufficiently cleared
and warranted our undertakings, that in so assisting the Legislative Power of
the Nation, we did not fight against, but for the Chief Authority. But this
being sufficient to remove the stumbling block out of the way of our present
business, I shall rather refer the further inquiring Reader, to those passages
in Mr. Buroughs to this purpose, in his Christian Contentment, fol. 304. and
308. to the Parliaments Declarations and Remonstrances, Anno 1643. and so
forward; as also to those Books extant in Defense hereof, and particularly,
that since come forth, entitled, A true state of the Case, etc. then swell my
Book with a large Digression.

5. Lastly, The righteous Lord did accordingly decide the Controversy,
appearing very gloriously in behalf of his servants, and did by many signal
Providence and gracious Deliverances assert, and maintain our righteous cause,
crowning the Faith and Prayers of his imploring ones, with eminent success and
victory, which we have great cause to remember with all humble thankfulness,
showing it forth in a pious and peaceable conversation under him whom God has
so eminently used, as his principal Instrument for the accomplishment thereof:
Which is my third Argument for Submission to present Authority, viz.



What great and wonderful things the Lord has wrought for these fourteen or
fifteen years among us, who is such a stranger in our Israel as not to know?
the sound whereof has reached all the adjacent parts of the world; how God
has put down the Mighty from their Seat, and exalted the Humble and Low; how
he has stained the pride of all flesh, and brought into contempt the
Honorable of the Earth, to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of
Iron, has been the honor of his English Saints, one Success, as so many
billows of mercies, following in the heels of another, until the flesh of
Captains and mighty men were given to the fowls of the Air, and to the fish in
the Sea: Yea, the great Whore, in her Deputies and Agents, sitting as Queen of
Consciences in this Island, decked in superstitious trinkets, and drunk with
the blood of the Saints, in the height of pride, when she promised to her self
all felicity, is taken with her false Prophets, which deceived them which
received her Mark in their Foreheads and Hands, and that bowed down before her
Images; while the remnant the Lord has brought into subjection, exalting his
Mountain upon the top of their Mountains; so that his poor despised ones, that
were before as it were wandering in sheepskins and goat skins, hidden in Dens
and Caves of the Earth, not suffered to have a being, as the troublers, nay
abjects of the World, banished into far Countries among the Heathen, afflicted,
imprisoned, tormented, put to death, seeking out private places and corners to
worship God in, from the molestation of their wicked Enemies, who in all places
were breathing out threatenings and slaughters against them, sending out their
Paritors and Pursivants with Letters to their Surrogates and Officials, that if
they found any of this way, whether men or women, they should either punish
them in their own Courts, or bring them bound to the Metropolis, where the
great Beast sat as Lord over the Consciences of men.

Insomuch as truly, when the Lord had brought back again the Captivity of Zion,
we were like Men in a Dream: Now, O! blessed now, he has swallowed up Death in
Victory, he has wiped tears from our faces, yea, the rebuke of his people he
has in a great measure taken away (according to his promise Isa. 25.8.) that
we may in the face of the world say, Come and let us go to the House of the
Lord. Now the doors of the Sanctuary are open, and the Lords People may serve
him freely in a Gospel way, and there is none to make them afraid. In Psa. 88.
Concion. 2.
And as Augustine said of his time, Modo nemo insultat Christianis, aut si
insultat, non public insultat; sic loquitur mala, ut plus timeat audiri, quam
velit credi: Now no man insulteth against Professors, or if he insult, he
insulteth not publicly; so that he is more afraid to be heard, than willing to
be believed, etc. That Christians may walk as strictly and sincerely with God
as the Lord shall enable them; and the more the power of God is seen in their
orderly conversations, the more cherished and esteemed.

And now what shall I say? Psa. 107.8.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to (us) Children of Men. O give thanks unto the Lord (ye
English Saints) for he is good; for his mercy endures for ever. Psalm. 136.1.
To him who alone does great wonders; for his mercy endures for ever. 4.
Who remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever. 23.
And has redeemed us from our Enemies; 24.
for his mercy endures for ever. 26.
O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for his mercy endures for ever.

And that the Lord has eminently used the Person in present Authority, as his
Moses, his Joshua, his principal Conductor I may say (though we have had others
in their parts) to lead his people into Canaan, who will be so maliciously
disingenious as not to acknowledge it? May I beg your patience a little to look
back upon his former deportments, and consider how the Lord has framed him for
this great work. Was not always his heart knit to the interest of Gods people?
How industrious was he, in the beginning of our troubles, to get an honest
Regiment, even then when the power of Godliness was almost a Crime in the Army,
(such an earthly and scandalous rabble by the wisdom and providence of God,
who rules all things to his own purposes, Revel. 12.16.
was then gotten together to help the Church?) how did he punish Drunkenness
and Profaneness in the Soldiers under his Command, that he was a wonder to
the wicked of the Army, and an ensample and encouragement to the good? And
afterward in his place and station, was he not a principal Instrument in the
modellizing of an honest Army under the Lord Fairfax, at least in the placing
in of honest Officers? how did he invite and encourage Gods people from the
several Churches of the Nation to come in, and countenance and stand by them
upon all occasions when they are in, against the proudest of their opposers?
How did he make the profane tremble at his presence, and cashiere themselves in
apprehension of their own guilt and deserts? I remember well his very name to
me was a dread, while I under the captivation of Satan endeavored to keep my
idle courses together with my Commission. And how did he encourage meetings for
Prayer, and mutual edifying in the most holy Faith? and all this to honest men,
as honest men without exception: Let them that had the honor to serve the Lord
and their Country in the year 1645. witness the truth with me. And is not he
at this day a protection to us all? does he not preserve us from our selfish
zeal against one another? has he not the same tenderness to all Saints as
ever? It is said of Cato, that no man saw him changed, though he lived in a
time when the Common weal was so often changed, he was the same in every
condition, though he run through varieties of conditions: And he that says
otherwise of our Governor, (though they may have the confidence to object it)
can never prove it; he of all men now living, that so eminently have had to do
with all overtures as he has had, is said (by such as have all along had the
nearest acquaintance with his judgment and practice) to succeed that excellent
Queen, as in her other Virtues, so in desert of that most Christian Motto,
(semper idem) to be always the same.

Brethren, I beseech you bear with me a little, since you have taken so much
freedom on the contrary; seriously, for my part, I cannot see any thing that
is praiseworthy in you, that is not so in him. Have you the gift of Gods
Spirit? It is a saying, That they that stand in slippery places (as all in high
places do) had need be much on their knees, and then they are in no great
danger of falling, at least of falling dangerously. If this be truth, then the
present Governor persisting in accustomed duties is happy, maugre all his
Enemies. Romans 12.12.
hear him in the Duties of Gods Worship and Service, and judge your selves. Are
you frequent in the exercise of your gifts and graces, having leisure enough?
so is he amidst the multiplicity of distracting affairs. Do you appeal to God
in the integrity of your hearts, as to your profession, and aims? hear his
earnest and solemn appeals likewise; and the Lord answer you both, not
according to the righteousness of the best of you, but according to his
infinite love and mercy. Have you love to your own fellow members? why, behold
him more Christian-like flowing in bowels of love and care of all Saints as
Saints, yea, in in pity and admirable patience toward you, forbearing to
revenge injuries upon you, and retort your own unkind dealings, bearing with
your imprudencies, and stopping his ears at the report of your disorders: Which
puts me in mind of what I have read of Augustus the Emperor, That when the
Senate informed him of what some had said of him, Tush, said he, Non tantum
habemus otii; We are not at leisure to listen to every slander that is raised
against us. So, bad reports (like the mis-haps of Job seldom freeing his
Threshold in these latter times) of the sad and unchristian invectives, because
they come from such as call themselves good men, are slighted away by him; ever
being (as it is said of Severus another Emperor) more careful of what is to be
done by him, then of what is said of him. Let me ask you, Would you demean your
selves so toward such as should so bitterly oppose you, were you in his place
and power? Truly, I fear you would not. Let me offer you Chrysostomes Lesson
for your edification herein, who in an Homily upon those words, Chrysostom. 13
Hom. ad pop. Antioch.
Mat. 7.12. thus descants. Those things ye would have others do to you, do ye
to them: q. d. There needs not many words, let thine own Will be thy Law; would
you receive benefits? bestow benefits; would you have mercy? be merciful;
would you be commended? commend others; would you be beloved? then love. Be you
the Judge your self, be you the Lawgiver of your own life. That which you hate,
do not to another. Cannot you endure reproach? do not you reproach others:
Cannot you endure to have others envy you? do not you envy others. etc.

But to return. These wonders of the Lords mercies were neither done in a
corner, nor out of memory: For as Moses said to the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy.
11.2.
so may I say to you; I speak not with your Children, which have not known, and
which have not seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his
mighty hand, and his stretched out arm: 3
and his miracles, and his acts which he has wrought for you, etc. 7.
But your eyes have seen them, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.3.
Therefore are you bound in a more especial manner to return love, obedience,
and thankfulness to him for the same (as it follows in the Chapter) because you
are not only Eyewitnesses, but living Monuments of his mercy, Engl. Annot. in
locum. Psalm. 148.13, 14.
(your fathers being cut off for their murmuring) Oh! let not your teeth be set
on edge with your fathers sour grapes, but offer him a willing sacrifice of
praise and due acknowledgement, as I doubt not many a serious heart does at
this day, who have all these mercies fairly written on their hearts in an
indelible character, and send up many a secret return to God for them, and do
not cease to pray, that the Lord will mercifully incline the heart of our
conquering Governor, as an instrument in his place, to be conquered by the
perfect way of his blessed Rule, and therein by the Law of Love still, and make
him still as singular for moderation and tenderness, as his success has
proclaimed him famous for Valor. And as it is our duty to wish and desire this
for him, so we are bound to give thanks to the Almighty Lord for his great
mercy in so ordering his heart for the time past, and giving hopes for the
future, that our Liberty (if we use it not as an occasion to the flesh) may be
still preserved by him; and that we, and all that desire to live a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty under him, may be encouraged,
protected, and countenanced, and so by the special direction of God in his
pious choice, under others, until he please to come, whose right it is to
Govern, and take the Diadem, as in order thereunto he has promised, Ezekiel.
21.27. who when he comes, will chain up Satan, burn up our dross, and make us
free indeed. And therefore, O my discontented Friends, you that have nor one
good thought for the Power that God has placed over you, in the midst of this
great Liberty and Peace which you now enjoy under it, and could not, a few
years since, so much as hope it: Deuteronomy. 8.
Beware, lest while you thus quarrel with your mercies, you forget not also the
Lord your God that has done these great things for you. Truly, Isa. 1.3, 4.
Many favors which God bestows upon us, ravel out for want of hemming by
thankfulness; for though Prayer purchases Blessings, giving Praise does keep
the quiet possession of them. Fuller.
I am afraid to think how soon we can forget the Lords goodness, deliverances,
gracious dealings, toward us; ah! how quickly are they put behind our backs,
slighting them, lessening them, or at least in such hands, even while they are
yet as it were between our teeth, expecting new, even while we are exceedingly
on the score to God for the old. How Jesurun like do the rich mercies of our
dear Lord wantonize rather then humble, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
while rage in the unlimited reyns of our wills disturbs the heads and hearts
of our Neighbors! O! how froward and peevish are we with Gods blessed, allwise
dispensations: if God will not go our way, or our pace, act as we dare, even in
our pitiful, dark, narrow conjectures, chalk out the truth, how angry are we
presently with second Causes, as the main obstruction!

O! will ye live and die in base ingratitude to God and Man! Once, give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods; due
acknowledgements to both. The Jews have a saying, That the World stands upon
three things; the Law, Holy Worship, and Retribution; and if these things fall,
the World will fall. If the murmuring ungrateful Jews shall exceed Christians,
nay if herein they shall turn Christians, who should be ever humble and
thankful, and the Christians turn Jews, stiff-necked, and murmurers; we may
say, either the World is falling, or turning up-side-down. It is said, Judge.
2.7. That the people served the Lord (in all due acknowledgements, and fear)
not only all the days of Joshua, but (also) all the days of the Elders that
outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord that he did for
Israel. But alas! we forsake our own mercies, ( Jonah 2.8) even while we enjoy
them; are we not then worse then Jews? So much dishonouring the God of our
mercies, and weakening, what in us lies, his faithful Instrument, that formerly
did so freely venture life and limb, and what was dearest to him, to purchase
this your liberty; and now with no less toil, and endless care, has undergone
the frowns and censures of all men, to purchase and preserve your freedoms to
you, and pressed to the ground with the insupportable load of an entangled
Government, to establish your tranquillity, even while you are adding to the
burden the merciless lumber of your discontents. O! height of ingratitude! not
to be paralleled. Lycurgus (says Musculus) among all his Laws made none
against men ungrateful; because that was thought a thing so prodigious, as not
to be committed by man. Ingratitude, it is the Epitome of all Vices, but this
is the Epitome of all Ingratitude. The Laws of Persia, Macedonia, and Athens,
condemned the ungrateful to death; certainly he stinks alive that rolls
himself in the worst of ingratitude, which all men that are but the least
civil, in detestation vomit up, and disgorge their stomachs of.

The Holy Ghost sets a brand upon the Israelites for their ingratitude, not
only to God, Note.
but to Gideon, Suetonius reports of the Emperor Titus, That the Senate gave
him more thanks when he was dead, then ever they did living, and present. Of
whom it was said, Morte praeventus est, majore hominum damno quam suo; He was
prevented by Death, to the greater loss of his people then of himself. Tantus
luctus eo mortuo publicus fuit, ut omnes tanquam in propria doluerint orbitate;
Such a general Lamentation there was for his decease, as if the whole World had
been deprived of a perpetual Protector.
whom the Lord had mightily appeared with, and made a happy instrument of their
deliverance, as ye may read Judge. 8. the two last Verses. What may we fear he
will do to us, if after all our mercies he find us sitting in the seat of the
scornful, and walking in the ways of sinners? What a scandal will this be to
Religion, when the World shall be able to say of Professors, that they are the
most dis-ingenious and ungrateful of men? Well, my friends, you may fling and
vex thus peevishly at your comforts, and your mercies, and find many faults
with the Governor now over you; but when it shall please God to take him away
from you, as now in course of nature he is declining, I fear you will be none
of the last that will have cause to bewail it; when another may arise, who will
not with his wonted patience know you, nor interpret you from evil doers. For
my part, the more I consider him, and duly weigh the state of our Affairs, and
temper of all in them, with what may come hereafter, me thinks truly I can
never sufficiently prize him, nor be thankful enough to God for him, although
I would not limit the Holy One, nor sink in my due trust and confidence in his
never failing mercy to his people, I have lived now ( says Basil) the age of a
man, and see more union in Arts and Sciences, then in Divinity; For in the
Church I see such dissentions as do not only divide them asunder, but leave
them open to the ruin of their enemies.
nor yet distrust a faithful choice by the Governor. Ah, poor souls! My
hearts desire and prayers to God for you is, that you may never sin away your
mercies into their hands that cannot call mercy, Mercy: That you may not set
open your gates for the wild Boars of the Forest to come in, and spoil your
tender branches, and lay waste your Vineyard, that with so much care and toil,
blood and expense, has been walled about for your defense and safety.

Quis non vita etiam sua redimat submotum istuc infinitum dissidii scandalum?
says Mr. Bucer, in his Letter to Amb. Blaterus.
Christians, I say, think on it; It is the true nature of a Saint, much rather
to suffer for Religion a thousand times, then that Religion, or Religious men
should suffer once for him. And what if things fall not out as we would have
them, yet let it content us, that they fall out as God would have them to be.
God attains his end, though we miss ours. It may be we know what we would have;
but, what we should, is better then what we would. Can we be better disposed
of, then by wisdom, goodness, and faithfulness it self? Let us, I beseech you,
argue it calmly: Does not God do all things well? He looked upon that he had
made, and behold it was good exceedingly: We therefore should not open our
mouths (to complain) because it is his doing; but in every thing give thanks,
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us.

The Dominions of the Earth shall be the Lords, and his Christ's, and the Saints
shall reign with him for ever.

Mat. 24.11, 12. 2 Timothy 3 2, 3, 4, 5. (...), It is often love of self, i. e.
self-applause, revenge, etc. rather then a true love to Christ, that draws us
to these exorbitances against the Magistrate.
That because Iniquity should abound, the love of many should wax cold: When
men shall be lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
fierce, traitors, heady, etc. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof.

I could say much to this, but I shall carefully observe a due tenderness
toward you: And therefore passing by many things that possibly might offend, I
shall only by the way wish for us (that circumstantially differ from you) with
Paul to some that had as high conceits as you, 1 Cor. 4.8. Now ye are full,
Vide Dr. Lightfoots Harmony, f. 9, 10.
now you are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us, and I would to God ye
did reign, that we also might reign with you. For the Kingdom of God is not in
word but in power. verse. 28.

That obedience to Magistrates is a standing Duty until the coming of Christ,
see 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. Let this be a caution to us all, That in our expectation,
as to Christ's reign, and ours with him, let us fear, lest we be more carnal
then truly spiritual, lest we too much interest our selves under pretense of
the Interest of Christ: For herein lies the great mistake (as Mr. Buroughs
well observes) to think that the Kingdoms of this World, Gospel Convers.
and the Kingdom of Christ cannot stand together. If Christ's Kingdom be not
of this World, See the Dutch Annot. on Joh. 6.15.
as himself averreth, Joh. 18.36. it is not opposite to the Kingdoms of the
World, and much less dissolves them into it self. So that the Kingdoms of this
World may be set up, and the Kingdom of Christ too. Herod indeed upon this
account persecuted Christ, because he heard a King of the Jews was born, but it
was without cause; Jesus Christ did not come to take the Kingdom of Herod away
from him; and therefore it was the great wickedness of the Kings of the Earth,
Psalm. 2. to conspire against Christ, who did not envy them or their Kingdom;
but they may live, and be the Kings of the Earth still, and yet the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ may prosper; It does not entrench upon any Civil Liberty of men.
Therefore I say again, It is a very great mistake of such as imagine, when the
one rises, the other needs must fall or that the one must swallow up the other,
or at least, that the Saints having the one must needs therefore possess the
other: It does not any way take away subjection to Civil Power on Earth, but
rather make its Subjects more conformable thereto. And therefore this Opinion
is of evil tendency (and I fear much the cause from whence your present bustles
take their rise) and gives the Powers too much cause at this day (which was
carefully prevented by Christ and his Disciples, Orig. tract. 21. in Mat. also.
as the Scriptures clearly show) to be jealous of you upon this account,
imagining your principles to be concentrick with Of the like, see Joseph.
Antiq. l. 20. c. 2. l. 18. c. 1. l. 17. c. 12.
Theudas and his gang, Act. 5 36. among the Jews, Sleidans Com. lib. 10.
Knipperdoling, etc. among the Germans, and Stows Chron. of Rich. 2.
Wat Tylar, John a Straw, etc. among us. No, Christ, nor the Subjects of his
Kingdom, do not intermeddle with the least Right of the Civil Authority: As
when God converts a Wife to be under the Kingdom of Christ, he does not take
her off from subjection to her Husband, but rather teaches her more her Duty
and Loyalty; so doubtless, those persons as are brought to obey Christ as their
Spiritual Lord and King, are so much the more faithful and obedient Subjects
to the Civil Jurisdiction and Authority placed over them: And let the Powers be
assured of this, however some may carnally mistake their obedience.

To enter upon the particular. Kingdoms and Dominions shall be given to the
Saints, and they shall reign with Christ for ever. Ye have it promised, Dan.
7.18, 22, 27. and cap. 2.44. etc. They are called the Cap. 7.27.
Saints of the most High, that is, of the most high things, because God has
chosen them out of this world, that they should look up to the Heavens where
all their hopes are.

The meaning of the words.
The Father gives unto Christ Dominion and Power as Mediator, v. 14. in regard
of both his natures, and distinct from the essential power of the Divine
nature: Which argues not the constant visibility, and outward flourishing
estate of the Church on Earth; but the duration of Christ's Dominion in his
Church, in this world, even in the midst of his Enemies, Mat. 16.18. by the
only Power of God, without force and humane Art.

The occasion of the words.
These promises are principally to the Jews that then were under hard Captivity,
dispersed under other Jurisdictions, to comfort them, that their misery should
have an end at length by the restoration of Christ, which the Prophet very
prudently insinuates under the term Saints, considering as well foes as friends
were to have the viewing of his works; but where he comes to write in the
Hebrew Tongue, Huit in locum. The ornament and pleasure of all Lands. Zach.
14.3, 4. 1 Cor. 15.24.
he is then more plain, calling them Tzebi, cap. 8.9. and the holy people, v.
24. This he does, that the comfort of the holy Jews be not concealed in their
affliction, nor yet the Pearls of such Divine Mysteries might be cast before
the Chaldean Swine; and also that his Church might be assured of rest and
quietness; which though they did not fully enjoy here, (as I can find no place
in so many words to warrant, viz. The Dominions [of the Earth] shall be given
to the Saints, The nearest to it, is in Revel. 11.15. which as to time and
manner has been generally mistaken. See Dutch Annot.
etc. And we will not rake up the Well resolved by Paraus in Apocal. cap. 28.
f. 515.
Opinion of the Chiliasts from Revel. 20.4. to establish it) yet they might
have it in hope, from the promise of truth, and by the clear manifestations of
Gods Spirit working in their hearts more eminent gifts and graces, (meant, as I
conceive, v. 27. by these words, Under the Heaven) they might find the
comfortable beginnings thereof here, which shall be a sure pledge of the
consummation of their Joys with Christ hereafter. Remember the Saints must
reign with Christ, and that for ever; which denotes a spiritual and eternal
Kingdom.

But Brethren, I would have you think, that the blessed and glorious Prophecies
and Promises in Scripture made to Gods people, are as truly upon some other,
though more silent hearts, as on yours, and as much heighten their expectations
with assured hopes of spiritual enlargements, as to righteousness, love, peace,
truth in the inward man, soul-sanctifying knowledge, a clearer, and yet humble
insight into the excellent mysteries, treasures, fountains of our Lord, now
sealed up in his sacred Writ, or very darkly understood; and more strength and
grace to walk in conformity thereto: These and many the like mercies are with
faith and patience looked for in Gods own time to be graciously given in, and
that by such as you judge to be Sanballats and Tobiahs rather, because out of
faith, Nehem. 6. Note. Romans 9.33.
according to Isa. 28.16. they take no unlawful course for the accomplishment
of their desires.

But as to the full extent of these and the like blessed Promises you seem to
hint at, upon your account, or the time exactly of their fulfilling, etc. I
doubt the best of us are much in the dark in. And however we may with great
confidence prosecute our designs in the imagination of their sounding agreeable
to our sense, yet in the mean time, this others conclude, from daily
observation of our disorderly practices, that we produce no fruits of Christ's
Kingdom.

Now therefore, as to the coming of our blessed Lord, give me leave freely as
in his sight and presence, to impart my thoughts to you, that seem to have it
so much upon your hearts by your frequent mentions: Ah! friends, I confess you
talk much of it, but alas! who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings!
and who shall stand when he appears! I am verily persuaded, did we know what
dross and stubble we are composed of, had we a true sense of our conditions, of
our vileness and uncleanness, and of its Majesty and purity, we should be so
far from flying out into those exorbitant passions and demeanours in the
presence of it, as that we should rather hide our selves in self-abasement,
until we come forth in the wisdom, purity, and spirit of the Lord, with
meekness, righteousness, and patience, shining in the very face of gainsayers
(as Stephen, Act. 7.55. and 6.15.) with the reflection of Christ's beholded
splendour: Otherwise, whatever we may persuade our selves, others will fear,
that when this glorious Kingdom shall come forth in truth and power, we shall
not be able to stand before it. And truly, this I do verily believe, That had
we all had hearts to have ^ightly tendered, Isa. 59.12.3, 4, 5, 8.10.
and Christianlike made use of, as became a people of such mercies, the Lords
gracious beginnings toward us; we had not stuck in the birth, as we do at this
day, of far more glorious Receptions. Jer. 5.25.


I beseech you, friends, suffer me, out of the abundant trouble of my heart, to
tell you that which the world are ready upon all occasions in a triumphing
manner to throw into your faces. Instead of a greater measure of Gods Spirit
poured out upon you, and a more full and clear Revelation of Divine purposes,
seasoning the heart with abundant holiness and integrity (for such manner of
persons the Scriptures say, 2 Pet. 3.11.
shall they be that truly wait and expect the coming of the Lord Jesus) Alas!
what pride, envy, covetousness, * gluttony, censoriousness reigns among us,
Amos 5.18. comp. with 21. (...) etc. says Naz. While we would have Charity, we
study hatred; while we seek to set up the cornerstone, which unites the sides
together, we are loosened our selves; we are for Peace we say, and yet we
prepare for War. Naz. Orat. 12.
that highly condemn it in others? What neglect of Duty to God and to our
Neighbor, yea to our Brother for whom Christ died? insomuch, that if they are
but thoroughly enough engaged, if but bitter enough against the present Powers,
and can but declaim high enough against them, no matter how scandalous in
conversation, those matters will be passed over well enough. I speak not
without too evident proof, but I forbear the mention.

By this means, instead of searching again the good old way of faith and
repentance, mortification of corruptions, and the means thereto, conferring
experiences in communions of Saints, fasting, prayer, etc. whereby the deceipts
of our own hearts, and the redoubled and Among the which I am persuaded this is
none of the least, To put the people of God a quarrelling about that which
least concerns them, thereby to prevent them from doing greater and more
glorious works for God.
refined wiles of Satan in this his last season, Rev. 12.12. might by the Lords
blessing be discovered and suppressed. Now, what have we but views and reviews
of State-miscarriages, Anti-Magistratical Lectures, designs and contrivances
against the Civil Peace of the Nation, inviting men to leave their Trades and
Callings, and take part with them, etc. that your Societies which use to be
more Evangelical, are turned into mere Cabals. [But blessed be God! the
Churches of Christ do at this day with heart and hand abhor these practices,
while they can faithfully love your persons.] By which means, ah! how many
disponded and bewildred souls are there! who when they repair at any time to
your Assemblies, cannot meet with one word in a whole days exercise, that may
tend to binding up, or suppling such wounded spirits; nay, do they not rather
tend to the further distracting and confusing the weak heads and hearts of
such? And how many others have we of those Auditories, that can give a better
account of Court-failings, and Councils, then distinctly (I fear) of the
Fundamentals of Religion, or, much less, of the present state of their own
hearts. Thus God is in the mean time wonderfully dishonored, enquiring hearts
after the ways of God obstructed and prejudiced, wicked men in their ways of
sin and malignity encouraged and hardened; and all, some way or other
damnified. Alas! are we fit to bear rule with Christ, that cannot rule our
selves? Jam. 3. Do we indeed look for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of our Lord, Tit. 2.13. when we are thus unruly in our speeches, v.
8. and deport our selves so disorderly, unrighteously, and unholily? Isa.
33.15. Psalm. 15.
v. 12. Let me tell you, my Brethren, It is those that walk uprightly, that
backbite not with their tongue, nor take up a reproach against their neighbor;
Mat. 10. v. 16.
That are Doves and Sheep, meek, harmless, inoffensive, without rancour, Luke
6.28.
That bless them that persecute, and do good to them that despightfully use
them; That do not behave themselves unseemly, 1 Cor. 13. Rev. 14. v. 3, 4.
seek not their own. That are Virgins not defiled with the World, or the lusts
thereof, following the Lamb in truth and holiness. Mat. 5.14. v. 16. Mat. 25.
v. 4, 10.
It is these that do glitter with the luster of the Spirit amidst the dark
world, with whom my soul covets to join her glimmering Lamp, in the waiting for
our Lords coming, as being assured they shall enter with him into his Joy. To
conclude in a word, Brethren, the Scriptures were written for our Rule, also;
Romans 15.4. and there is no different Privileges to the Saints of our Age, more
then before, only in this, a breaking forth of more light, for which God
expects we should be more humble, and more thankfully holy.

etc. Yet that hinders not, but that the Godly called to places under him, may
lawfully serve him, and their Generation, without infringement of Conscience,
or blemish to Religion.

My Reasons are briefly these.

1. First, Because the people of God in places of power and trust (the Lord
strengthening them, and giving them a heart to improve it rightly) may shine as
lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation (as a Beacon set upon
a hill) that others seeing their good works may glorify God: directing, and
provoking others to the same laudable practice.

2. They may hereby have a more eminent occasion, not only to put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, according to 1 Pet. 2.5. but also be as a bridle
and awe upon their spirits, to deter and restrain them from that excess of
riot, into which they would otherwise with more freedom run.

3. It is a good means to keep good men more closely and heedfully in the ways
of God, so David Psalm. 39.1. and Nehemiah, cap. 5..9. lest by them occasion be
given for the ways of God to be evil spoken of.

4. They thereby keep out worse, that by wicked Magistrates would surely be
preferred; and possibly by misinformation and confident insinuations may
supply their rooms, even under the best, and most careful Prince.

5. They are hereby more capacitated to cherish, countenance, and encourage the
poor members of Jesus Christ, that are distressed in the world, and oppressed
by the wicked, 1 Kin. 18.4. etc. Mat. 25.37, 40.

6. They may be instrumental in doing a great deal of good to such as are under
them, by their care of their souls as well as bodies. Psalm. 101.

7. They hereby make it appear to the world, that Christians are no such
turbulent persons as the black mouths of their malicious adversaries would
make the world believe; but that they are men of quiet, meek, and peaceable
spirits.

8. The people of God desisting, and (of themselves) leaving their public
places of Trust, sin against Gods merciful dispensations, betray their trust,
slight, disanul, frustrate (as much as in them lies) the blessed breathings and
struglings of the Spirit in the Saints of former Ages, and of the faithful in
this, whose prayers and tears have been to God without ceasing for the
accomplishment of this very thing (among others) namely, that such as truly
fear God may manage the affairs of this Land in holiness and peace.

9. And as to this present Authority I would only ask you this Question, What
unlawful injunctions are now put upon good men in Trust, whereby they should
wound their consciences, or be in the least discouraged from serving under the
same?

possession, though unlawfully entered, Tyrants, Oppressors, etc. is not evil,
but on the contrary our express duty. This, as I have already from Romans 13.
etc. proved, so I shall further prove by Precepts and Precedents in Scripture,
by testimonies of sound Christians in all Ages, and from Arguments justly
deduced from both.

Not that I pretend here to take upon me the defense of the present Title, or
to discuss the legality of the coming in of the present Magistrate to that
Authority which now he exercises over us; there are enough that are already
stepped in to that defense, to whose works I refer such as scruple it: The
tendency of our present undertaking being rather to prove the necessity of
obedience to present Powers as we are Christians. And thereupon I aver, Let the
Title of him that stands now in place of Rule be what it will, whether it be
called a conquest of the former Estate, yea, or no; or whether as a Conqueror
he may justly claim all the Rights which the State could pretend unto, yea, or
no; or whether it be a vindication of the inherent Power and Liberty in the
body of the Nation from the hands of those that had enslaved it, yea, or no; or
whether it be (as you call it) an irregular Usurpation, and abuse of Powers,
and Trust, yea, or no; I leave it to the righteous Judge, Eccles. 5 ^.
before whom we must appear, 2 Cor. 5.10. It concerns not me as a Christian to
intermeddle with it, and much less to discuss it with a carping spirit; because
in Christianity I must rather respect my Duty, without respect of persons, at
all times, and toward all men; Note.
for suppose (as to men) that their standing had no place, and should be
thought (not only in respect of the National, but even of natural Laws)
altogether unjust; yet if I must look upon them as they are by Gods permission
and direction set up, if I find them over me in place of Trust and Government,
as such in whose hands he has put the full administration of Power over the
whole Nation; I must conclude, that by virtue of Gods command, I am bound to
pray for them, that they may have grace to manage their Talents and Power
rightly according to his will, for the good of the Nation, and for the City of
God therein, for whose sake I ought also to assist them with my best abilities
received for public service, It Is truly said of God, that he is Omnia super
omnia.
to enable them so to do. The most High of all ruling in the Kingdoms of men,
and giving them to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.17. I must leave them to his own
effectual determination.

We find that Jacobs actual obtaining of the blessing, Pet. Martyr.
was that which God had ordained, though his obtaining it by deceit was only
by Divine permission: And Jeroboams person as a Magistrate (though not his
practice as an Usurper) was to be obeyed, being from Divine Ordination
appointed King, and the power in his hand (though an Usurper) the Ordinance of
God: Consult 1 Kin. 11.31, 35, 37. with 1 Kin. 12.15, 24. and you shall find,
That the constitution of New Powers come not to pass, either by accident, or by
the counsel or treachery of men only, neither was it without the knowledge, or
against the will of God, but because he ordained, or would have it so; and the
Prophets and servants of God (as I shall endeavor here following to make
evident) gave obedience to them accordingly.

Of this judgment and practice were those Jews that feared God, in their
several Captivities and servitudes, and the ancient Christians, who quietly
submitted to the Chaldean, Assyrian, Persian, etc. Grecian and Roman Monarchs,
with great alacrity, observing their lawful or indifferent Edicts, and
passively, whereto for Conscience sake otherwise to submit it was not lawful
for them; Vide Paraeum in Romans 13.
as the Persecutions in those days in Red Letters manifest.

And it is observable, what time the Apostle Paul wrote to the Romans to submit
to the Powers; Mayer, in his Preface to the Epistle to the Romans
it was when he was entering into his sufferings by them, first in Judea, and
after in Rome under Nero: And the great care he, and the rest of the Apostles,
with Christ himself, lest Christians should (especially under such great
trials) give occasion of scandal to Profession, by contumacy and disobedience.
For we read of the great incidency of weaker Christians to this evil, and the
rebellious Jews under Claudius Caesar were banished Rome for their
tumultuousness, Sueton. Act. 18.2.
with great detestation, and disrepute to the good ways of God: Yea, Byfield on
Pet. f. 422.423.
many (as Mr. Byfield observes) that were somewhat inclined to embrace the
sincerity of the Gospel, have been cast back hereby, and profess, that
therefore they abhorred such people, because they observed their disobedience
against humane Government, either through indiscretion, or nice scruples, or
perverse wilfulness. One little miscarriage in the eyes of the world, does
overshadow all a Christians graces, as one little Cloud does sometimes
overshadow the whole body of the Sun, and much more such an interposition of
Earth as this. Therefore it is that Paul (as Peter Martyr says) by so many
ways and means commends unto us Obedience toward the Magistrate; Pet. Mart.
in Romans 13.
for it is otherwise an hard matter to bridle and keep under the proud stomachs
of men in this Duty; for we would all be Lords, and be obedient to no man.

To take off this aspersion from Christians, did those blessed Martyrs, under
those persecuting Princes, Hen. 8. Q Mary, etc. to the great honor of God,
patiently suffer, almost within our memory.

But more particularly, that I may instance by way of proof for this practice,
the judgments of approved Christians in all Ages, I shall begin with Ignatius,
Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn.
who living in the first Age, says, It behooves all to honor the King, for
there is none more supreme then the King.

Just. Mar. Orat. ad Antonin.
In the second Age, Justin Martyr says, We adore God only, and in other
matters (speaking to the Emperor) we willingly obey you.

And again, to the same Antonius Pius, he says, Apolog. 2.
We (viz. Christians) are helpers unto peace, more then any other men beside,
because we teach, that no Malefactor, etc. ( lier in wait, etc.) can be hid
before God. (...).


Annot. Joh. 1. ang. ibid.
Iraneus. Know ye, O Emperor, what is committed unto you, the whole world is
subject under your hand.

Tertullian says of the mad Opinions of the Valentinians (amongst which, That
they were not to be subject to Powers on earth,) Illa tantum demonstrare
destruere est. And in defense of the true Professors of Christianity, Apologet.
c. 30. Ad Scap. c. 2. De Ido. c. 18. etc.
Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris, quem sciens a Deo
constitui, etc. A Christian is Enemy to none, much less to the Emperor, whom
knowing to be appointed of God, we must love, etc. As before I have quoted.

Orig. in Romans 13.
In the third Age, Origin says, God will have all temporal punishments to be
inflicted by the Judges of the world.

Victorinus calls the Caesarian Empire, Regnum regnorum, because above all
Regiments.

In the fourth Age, Gregory Nazianzen says, speaking of Kings, Naz. Orat. ad
subdit.
That all men must be subject to the Higher Powers. And again to the Emperor,
The whole world is subject unto you; Orat. 25.
those things above are only Gods, those below are Gods and yours.

So Ambrose, Orat. de obitu Theodosii.

In the fifth Age, Hom. 2. ad pop. Ant.
Chrysostom says of the Emperor, That all ought to submit unto him as Chief
on earth. See him further (because I would be brief) in his 13 Hom. to the
people of Antioch. Also Hom. 42. in Joan. Optatus, lib. 3. cont. Parmen.
Bernard de consid. lib. 2. cap. 4. Hilar. ad Anx. Ambrose in 2 Timothy 2.4. Also
Dr. Crakenthorp, in his Treatise, tit. Defense of Constant. lib. 2. cap. 4.
etc. Whosoever desires to have more ample testimony from the Ancients touching
this Point, may there be abundantly satisfied.

Of later times, ye will find many approved Divines plainly of this judgment.

Peter Martyr thus to this purpose delivers himself; Nihil hic anxie
disputandum est, quo jure quave injuria, Principes adepti sint potestatem suam;
illud potius agendum est, ut Magistratus presents revereamur: Haec enim
Epistola scribebatur cum Romani jam adepti essent Imperium orbis terrarum, quod
eos per vim scimus occupasse, etc. Pet. Martyr in Romans 13.
It shall not here (says he) be scrupulously disputed, by what right, or with
what wrong Princes have gotten their Power; this rather is to be done, that we
reverence the present Magistrate: For this Epistle ( viz. to the Romans) was
written when they had now gotten the Empire of the World, which we know they
did possess by force, and that afterward the Emperors by policy (nothing
better) drew to themselves an universal Power; yet Paul does command that
Magistrates be obeyed.

Quum igitur quaeritur cui parendum, non est spectandum qualis sit qui
potestatem exercet, nec quo jure vel injuria quis potestatem invaserit, quave
ratione eam administret; sed tantum si potestatem habeat: Si enim quis
potestate pollet, jam indubitatum est illum a Deo illam potestatem accepisse,
etc. Martin. Bucer.
Again, I find Martin Bucer thus affirming. When a question is made whom we
should obey, it must not be looked at, what he is that exercicises the Power,
or by what right or wrong he has invaded the Power, or in what manner he does
dispense it; but only if he have a Power: For if any man do excel in Power,
it is now out of doubt that he received that Power of God. Wherefore, without
all exception, thou must yield thy self up to him, and heartily obey him.

Maxim autem in re controversa, judicium sibi privatus sumere non debet, sed
possessionem sequi. Sic tributum solvi Caesari Christus jubet, quia ejus
imaginem nummus praeferebat, i. e. quia possessione erat Imperii. Grotius de
jure pacis ac belli. l. 1. c. 4. sect. 20.
Grotius also in order hereunto thus positively concludes. Most certain it is,
that in a controverted case, no private person may presume to make himself a
Judge, but must give way to Possession. Thus Christ commanded that Tribute
should be given to Caesar, because the money bore his Image, that is, because
he was in Possession of the Empire.

I might further quote at large the ample testimony of sound Mr. Perkins, in
his Treatise of Callings, page 742. with many other modern Divines, but that me
thinks I hear some say, (as truly to my trouble I have often done) and at whose
ignorance I have not a little wondered) What does this man thus trouble himself
for? does he think to convince any of us by citing these old doting Papist
Priests? Therefore I shall proceed to prove my Assertion by the Ensamples of
the Saints, recorded in the unerring Book of God, which are not a few, both in
the Old and New Testament.

Joseph served that Egyptian hard-hearted Pharaoh, and for his good service,
Genesis 41.47. is in great request with him, and the God of Joseph acknowledged
and much honored thereby; Ver. 16. comp. with v. 39, 40. etc.

Again, We find David (a man you know after Gods own heart) serving Achish, a
heathen King, who was much taken with David's faithfulness, and good service,
and thereby God was much honored, as ye may see, 1 Samuel 29.3, 6, 9, etc. And I
find it no where charged upon David as a sin.

See him also in Saul's service, though he put upon him the most hazardous and
difficult employments, thereby to take away his life, 1 Samuel 18.25. And after
Saul had falsified his word with him; yea, and after the Spirit was departed
from Saul, 1 Samuel 15.11, 23. 1 Samuel 16.14.
and the Lord intended to make no further use of him, as in 1 Samuel 17.25. and
cap. 18.17, 19, and cap. 25.44. ye may read at leisure.

We find likewise good Obadiah serving wicked Ahab, and thereby had the
opportunity to shelter the Lords people unsuspected, from the fury of their
Oppressors, 1 Kin. 18.3, 4. And so did Elijah.

Elijah served Ahab indeed as a most faithful untainted Christian; I wish we
had more servants of his temper at this day, that would tell their Master in
Power as roundly of his evils, as he did to Ahab. Thou and thy fathers house
are the troublers of Israel. 1 Kin. 18.18.

Elijah, would be so orderly, as to go and tell their Magistrate what they
conceive they have against him, (and not utter their discontents at this
distance behind his back;) for in so doing, there would be some hopes of
begetting a right understanding of things, which at second hand are so
pitifully depraved and mistaken: Insomuch that it is no great wonder men run on
so erroneously, that take up the c^y more from others, then a due proof they
have made of it themselves. Which the better to prevent, I have known the
present Governor lay aside very important affairs, to spend some hours, not
refusing patiently to hear the most incongruous objections and scruples that
any dissatisfied person that would come to him could propound, that had the
least seriousness in them, or the least repute for conscionable; and I well
remember what good effect it wrought upon some that had before suffered for
open contests against him, and were as high as any therein, who (as themselves
confessed) went away so fully satisfied after such a conference, that they
resolved to be more heedfull for the future, and did afterward keep to their
good resolutions, though sometime after, by the instigation of some eminent
discontents, they a little deviated.

2. But to return to your Objection, since you mention Elijah, I call to mind
your eighth Objection (as here you seem to hint) how you bemoan therein, the
number at this day that are carried away by self ends and flatteries, in the
stream of this present tide, and how few stick close to the interest of the
Lord, etc. I find in 1 Kin. 19. (formerly cited) Elijah just thus complaining,
I only am left alone, etc. Elijah thought there remained none that adhered
faithfully to the Lord but he (and a few more that kept with him) because they
did not appear in that vigor of spirit, It is said, that Luthers hot spirit was
calmed by Melancton in the repetition of this Verse, Vince animos iramque tuam,
qui caetera vincis. Manlii, loc. com. p. 248. Elijah, a man subject to like
passions, etc. Jam. 5.17. Vide Trap in locum. Amos 5.13.
and heat as he was in; yet you know there were thousands, to whom God himself
did bear witness, They had not bowed the knee to Baal, yea, and whose mouths by
flattery had not kissed him, v. 18. though Elijah could not so interpret by
them, it may be, because they were silent in that evil time there might not be
that occasion to take notice of them.

And so I may return to you that make this Objection, It may be, however thou
may judge of them, and what slight thoughts soever thou may have of many
silent Christians in these times, and of such as out of conscience adhere to
present Authority, The story of Pendleton and Saunders is very applicable here,
so well known that it needs not be related. Act. and Mon. fol. 1363. One says
of Peter's self-confidence, Mat. 26.34. That he was melius semper animatus quam
armatus.
that through the strength and assistance of him alone who judges righteously,
they may as soon and as cheerfully suffer for the sake of the Lord Jesus, if
the Lord should see it fit to turn our present mercies into such trials, as he
that makes a louder Bravado for the Lord and his interest.

Further as to Elijah, what strange work the Lord set him upon, I believe few
of you would cheerfully obey, had you the same command, v. 15, 16. See also 2
Kin. 10.29, 30. which I would desire you to consider. But if we will be
sincere, as we pretend, for the Lord, we must learn to submit our wills and
wisdoms to him who is the only wise God.

I might have been here very pertinently enlarged, as in some other places of
the latter end of this Discourse, but that I find my self happily prevented by
a more ready Pen, whose thoughts, The Animadvertor on the Welsh Papers.
since I had the comfort to peruse them, have been no small encouragement to my
far weaker, that yet they have borne any similitude with them, truly to my
admiration! which yet, if I had been before acquainted with in the least, I
think would well have put a stop to my mean endeavors: But not so much as
hearing of it, Did obscure it for some months, as in the Preface.
(being in another Country when I wrote this) until I had almost finished it,
together with some important Reasons, have prevailed thus to expose my first
assay (to do my Country service in this kind) to their candid censure.

Nevertheless, before I leave this instance, give me leave to mind you, That
Elisha having the Spirit of Elijah redoubled on him, was so much the more meek
and temperate, Gal. 5.22, 23. which denotes thus much, that the more we abound
with the spirit of meekneess and love, the more like unto God, the more we
partake of his Spirit, the more meek and humble we are.

But to return to our Scriptural Ensamples. We find Jeremiah counselling
Zedekiah King of Israel, and his people the Children of Israel, to be obedient
to the King of Babylon, Jerem. 21. and for disobedience thereto, they came to
great misery, 1 Chronicles. 36.10, 13, 17, etc.

Daniel, the man greatly beloved, Dan. 10.11. Dan. 6.2, 5.
served the Chaldean, Persian Tyrants, cap. 249, etc. whereby, besides the
opportunity he had to do for those blessed ones, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego,
etc. the Lords captived people, he and they, by their righteous and most
eminently faithful walking with God, put to silence the worst of their
Enemies, wrought great deliverances, and by their blessed convictions, the Lord
working with their Doctrine and Ensample, the proudest of those Monarchs were
wonderfully brought down to acknowledge the great King of Kings, and make
Edicts to the honor of his Name, and welfare of his People.

And likewise in the New Testament, we find Paul most eminently for this
practice, as all along has been showed, notwithstanding he was a sufferer
under one or other of those Roman Tyrants, Sueton. Tacit. Eusebius. tells us,
there were many Christians in the Emperor Alex. Mammaeaes family. Eccle. Hist.
lib. 6. Tertul. Apologet. c. 5. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Mali corvi,
malum ovum. Suet.
above the rest of the Apostles and faithful servants of the Lord Jesus, as
himself reckons up, 2 Cor. 11.25, etc. Again we find him, Phil. 4.22. saluting
the Saints in Caesar's, viz. Nero's house, [among whom, as History reports, was
his Butler, whom he esteemed much of, and one of his Concubines, who after
refused his bed.] So that it seems the Saints refused not the service of the
worst of Princes, even that most Antichristian, bloody Monster, of whom it is
said, Qui scit illum, intelligere potest, non nisi grande aliquod bonum a
Nerone damnatum; That whosoever knew him, would easily judge Christianity were
good, because disliked by him. That Beast, that when it was told him he had a
son born, said, That of himself and Agrippina there could nothing come into the
world, but accursed, detestable, and to the hurt of the Weal Public. And so
cruel was he, that they use to call them that were cruel, Nerones, and those
that were more cruel, Neroniores. But I have said enough of him before, and yet
those blessed Saints quitted not their employments under him.

Nor did that good Centurion, Luke 7.6. (of whom Christ himself gives that
blessed testimony, verse. 9.) lay down his Commission, by any such advice from
Christ, or scruple in his own conscience, for ought we read in Scripture,
though his sword then assisted the Roman Power which was over Gods heritage.

Nor did John the Baptist to like Soldiers under Tiberius (who for his
drunkenness was called Biberius) although occasioned by that question of
theirs, Anno Reg. Tiberii 15. and Christi nativit. 29. Dr. Lightfoots Harmon.
f. 9. Sueton. Tiber. numb, 61.
Luke 3.14. And what shall we do? Whereto John does not return, Lay down your
Arms, and assist no more those Oppressors and Usurpers; but rather implying a
confirmation in their employment, only with these directions in the Christian
discharge thereof, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your pay.

These put me in mind of what the Roman Historians record of that Christian
Legion that did such eminent service under many of the Emperors, good and bad,
for many years together, and whom God did signally own, to the honor of the
Lord Jesus; and particularly, in the Reign of Antonius Philosophus, when his
Armies were almost famished for want of Water, this Legion by their Prayers
procured Wine from Heaven, to their great refreshing, and their enemies were
consumed with Thunder and Fire; whereupon the Emperor mitigated his rage
against Christ's Professors, the Church had peace in his Reign, and the Legion
the honor afterward to be called Fulminatrix. As Tertullian in his Apologies
reports.

And after, under that bloody. Tyrant Maximinianus, they most patiently
suffered death in the Cause of Christ without the least resistance; which for
the eminency of the Christian act, and pertinency to the matter in hand, give
me leave to insert.

Maximian, Otho Phrising. lib. 2. c. 54.
at Octodurum commands his Army to sacrifice to false Gods; the Theban
Legion, consisting of 6666 Christians, remove their Quarters to Agaunum, to
avoid (it possible) occasion of discontenting the Emperor; who summoneth them
to perform their parts in this Devilish worship: They return an humble denial,
with their resolve not to disobey God, for whose sake they would ever continue
faithful to him. He unsatisfied with this answer, puts them to a
decimation, to which they submit with cheerfulness, praying for their
murderer. His commands are renewed, but prevail not on the remainder, who are
therefore butchered without resistance, there being no delay in their death,
except from the weariness of their executioners. Mauricius their Colonel could
not contain his joy, when he saw the first decimation gallantly suffered. How
fearful was I, said he to his a while surviving Soldiers, (for armed men may
be tempted to defend their lives, which is sweet to every man) lest any of them
might, upon color of just resistance for self-preservation in an innocent
cause, have strugled against this blessed slaughter! I was watchful, and had
Christ's example in readiness, who commanded his Disciple to put his sword into
his scabbard. Salus vestra non periclitabitur, nisi armis vestris.

But to come to that eminent pattern of obedience, the Lord Jesus himself, who
upon all occasions, and especially twice together, he by precept and example,
Our Lord in his meek return to his abusive Adversaries, Joh. 18.23. convinces
them most of their Injustice, complaining as infirm man, yet being also God
omnipotent, and could easily have otherwise avenged it. But as Ambrose says,
Sermon, 20. in Psalm. 118. Q^aeri maluit, quam vindicare: To give us example, he
had now rather complain then revenge. Annot. in locum.
teaches us to submit to the Ordinances of Man for the Lords sake, Mat. 17.
where, when the Tribute-gatherer came to Peter, v. 24. to see if he could
entrap him and the rest, according to the usual calumny that past on them, to
be Enemies to Caesar; Christ to show to the world how malicious an untruth that
was upon him and his doctrine, it is said, v. 25. that he prevented Peter, who
came to acquaint him therewith, with his miraculous taking order for the
payment, v. 27. It is observable, Marlorate. Dickson, on Mat.
that Peter, without further enquiry of Christ, from former practices, could
readily answer, Yes, to the demand, v. 25. Christ never being unfriendly to
Magistrates and Rulers, nor any ways a hinderer of paying any dues unto them,
nor would he exempt his followers from the common, civil duties, whereunto
other Subjects were liable; therefore Peter, whose house and family was here,
Mat. 8.5, 14. must pay too; Christ might easily have excused himself, because
though he had no certain place of residence, yet he was the Son of God; and as
the Children of Kings are naturally free from Tribute, so is the Son of God
much more, as he is heir and owner of all things: Notwithstanding, lest we
should offend them. O! golden words, fit to be engraven in a Diamond, and
placed always before the eyes of the Saints. However Christ, as the rich Heir
of Heaven, coequal and coeternal with the Father, was far above the
Jurisdiction and Edicts of men, yet that his followers by his obedience might
learn how to behave themselves to Powers, while they are on Earth, he
dispenses with his own Right Civil, and vails such outward accomplishments to
the Ordinances of Humane Authority; which he argues, not to show his
unwillingness, v. 26. but that the Disciples might take notice, he understood
his Power and Privileges, which were not thereby at all diminished or
infringed; but till the glory of his Kingdom should be revealed, he was as a
Servant, to become a pattern of obedience and humility; and rather then he
would want a ready occasion to demonstrate it, he embraces this, and honors
it with a miracle, making the fish to become his Purse-bearer, and
Tribute-payer, for him and his.

The second Demonstration, we have in Mat. 22.15, 16. where the inveterate
Pharisees, by their Disciples, and those of Herod's Faction, sought again to
entangle him, Judge. 16.
not doubting (with Sampsons enemies) that they now had him fast enough in this
stratagem, presuming he would have denied the least act of respect to Herod,
that Fox (as Christ upon a spiritual account called him, Luke 13.32.) and to
his persecuting Master the Emperor, but they were mistaken: For upon the view
of the Sea Dutch Annot. on Mat. 22.19. and cap. 18.28. Also English Ann. ibid.
Money, which being (...) and nomen suum, and vim ipsam habet, (...), says
Grot.
coined and stamped with the Image of Tiberius, as Gerbard averreth in his Harm.
Caesar, and currently passing among the Jews, sufficiently entitled the Roman
Authority to the Sovereignty over them. He therefore readily returns them this
answer, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Whereby Christ takes
occasion to confute their error (says Marlorate) which thought that they were
not the people of God, except they were free from all subjection to humane
Power, [even as in Romans 13. the Apostle Paul diligently endeavors himself,
lest that the Romans should think that they served the only God the less, if
they obeyed humane Laws, if they paid Tribute, and were subject to Civil
Powers] but Christ here pronounces, that the Law of God is not violated, nor
Religion hurt, if the Jews in respect of external policy obeyed the Romans, but
that they are made subject to the Romans by the will of God, by this command.
Wherein our Lord (mark it) says not Give, but Render, as who should say, You
give him but what of right belongs to him, and that which he may justly require
of you (although indeed an Usurpation of an ancient Jewish Rite.) English
Annot. on Mat. 22.17. Exodus 30.13.
In reddend host^mentum paetrocinii, and defensionis; In lieu of his care
toward you. Obedience to Powers in all civil things are but the dues, the
[things] of Caesar's, which Christ himself will neither offend them in, nor
suffer his Saints to do it; and therefore it was Paul's great care accordingly,
1 Cor. 9.19, 20. and is to express Christ to the World to be like unto him.

Let me therefore humbly beg of the Authority, that as Christ is careful that
their due be given unto them, The Greek Article is twice repeated, (...). to
show, that our special care should be to give God his due.
they in a due thankfulness unto him, still go on to protect and encourage his
people, though many of them thankless and undeserving; for this will be to
render unto God his dues, which are more especially required of us.

Now from what has been alleged, let me infer Mr. Beza in Mat. 22.21.
Beza's conclusion, Quod si parendum est Magistratui profano, certe multo magis
obedire oportet sancto and Christiano. If it be so much the care and will of
God, that we should give all due obedience to such heathenish, bestial Tyrants,
then how much more think you does he expect your love and reverence to the most
pious and Christian Governors.

I might proceed to more Precepts and Examples for this laudable practice, but
to the serious Reader, I know they are sufficient to give them light to so
manifest a Truth, to the refractory too many, to rise up in judgment against
them, which the Lord in mercy yet prevent, by some more efficacious means, when
my poor endeavors shall miss of their aim.

I shall shut up all with the observation of a good man upon Christ's answer
unto the Message of John's Disciples to him, Art thou he that should come, or do
we look for another? They thought it strange, that Christ, among all his
miraculous workings, would not work John's liberty out of thraldom, who lay a
prisoner for him (now in one of Herod's Castles called Macharus,) and for the
Gospel he preached before him: They received a full answer to their question,
by the miracles they saw wrought, which abundantly proved, that it was he which
was to come. But as to their expectation of his miraculous enlargement of John,
his answer was, That his work was to preach the Gospel; and that it was a
blessed thing not to take offense at him, but to yield and submit to his wise
dispensations. O! that all that pretend to him at this day, would so learn
Christ.

Hosea under the person of God, Hos. 8.4.
They have reigned, but not by me?

Peter Martyr, Because Evil Princes, and such which after that by wicked means
have obtained the Kingdom, do by worse means govern it; these, I say, in that
they thus beastly behave themselves, have not a respect to the will of God,
revealed either by the Law of Nature, or in the holy Scriptures; for by that
will of God, their doings are most manifestly reproved. And in this manner they
are said not to rule by God, for that they apply not themselves to the written
and revealed will of God. But nevertheless it cannot be denied, but that God by
his hidden and effectual will would have them to reign to that end which I have
now declared. For indeed, that is not enough which is answered, That God does
not these things, but permits them; for the Scriptures do manifestly
testify, that he called the Babylonians, Isa. 54.1. Isa. 44.28.
the Assyrians, and others, over the Israelites, for this end, that though
these men being thus raised up, have no regard at all to the will of God, but
wholly addict themselves to sin and wickedness against God, yet God by them,
(though never so unjust and wicked) executes his most just and righteous
judgment, and gives no account of his matters.

It is not unworthy your notice, how Baasha, 1 Kin. 15.27. slays Nadab the
lawful King of Israel, and usurps the Kingdom; and yet, cap. 16. 2. God tells
Baasha, as a check for his great ingratitude in reigning evilly, that he was,
Exalted and made Prince over his people Israel, by himself.



Romans 13. they that thus rebelliously and murtherously resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. Indeed, God sharpens his Arrows of Judgment against
against such principally, as the Scriptures I have quoted, and many others do
fearfully manifest; and therefore it is that David, though established by God
to reign over Israel, and Saul God had forsaken, and left to the lusts of his
own wicked devices, and though brought twice into David's power to effect it, 1 Samuel 24.4. and cap. 26.8. yet David says, The Lord shall smite him, or his day
shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle and perish, (as ye know he
did) but God forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords
Anointed, v. 10, 11. for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed, and be guiltless? as he says to Abishai, v. 9.

If the supreme Power of the Nation by the Laws of the Land cut them off for
their high exorbitancies, it is one thing: But surely, for any private person,
or forces to execute it, were absolutely murder; yea, if David should have
done it, he could not have been guiltless. And therefore has God made that
promise of protection, No weapon forged against them shall prosper; and made it
good to David, Isa. 54.17.
Solomon, and most of the good Princes, and in our Land to Queen Elizabeth, and
to our now Governor, blessed be the Lord! although all the ways and means that
Men and Devils could invent have been attempted, as is notoriously known.

And therefore, such as by traiterous attempts have set up themselves, as
Baasha did, though the Person for the Authorities sake is by any private hand
inviolable, yet God has severely met with them, as he did with Baasha, in that
forementioned place, 1 Kin. 16.3, 4. and several other such treacherous
Usurpers, as the Bible records; wherein, as also in profane Histories, sundry
testimonies of Gods sore displeasure against them are taken notice of, few
dying in their beds, (making good that pronunciation, Psalm. 55.23.
The bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his days) nor indeed
without exquisite tortures.

Now to draw toward a conclusion. Let me humbly persuade from all that has
been said, That in this unsettlement of our minds wherein we seem rather to
pull down what others have built, and set up something of our own imaginations
in the stead thereof, then by our counsel, charitable endeavors and prayers,
to uphold jointly what ought to be settled (which is a sad presage) we make it
our concernment now at last, to consider what becomes us in our several
stations, lest we be given over to delight in each others destruction. Let us,
I humbly beseech you, reflect upon our ways, and order our behavior rightly
toward God and Man, according to his Word, (...). I discipline my self upon
all occasions. Do nothing but what thou could wish thou had done at the
hour of Death, and day of Judgment, was the wholesome advice of old Mr. Dod.
and the ensample of Christ and his people, Act. 24.16. and upon the discovery
of what is amiss, let us labor henceforth to make it such as beseems
Christians as do indeed expect the Lords coming. And as a good means hereunto,
in the midst of our hard speeches, and that which we call acting in
faithfulness to Christ, let us seriously ask our selves this question, Would I
be doing this at my Lords coming? You know that you should not be overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness; why do not ye in this live up to your
light? You know that you should do good to those that do hurt to you; why do
not you in this live up to your light? You know that you should perform your
duty of love to others; why do not you in this live up to your light? You know
that you should hope and believe the best, and labor to cover the infirmities
of others; why do not you in this live up to your light? Let me tell you, that
if you set your selves thus to murmur at the changeableness of humane affairs;
thus to control Gods counsels, thus to sin against your light, you do
exceedingly unfit, if not utterly prevent your selves of the comfort (which
will be the crowning comfort to all true waiting Sons of Zion) at our Lords
appearing. And if we shall set our selves to discover and condemn the faults of
other men under these changes, How can their hands be clean, that cast so much
dirt upon others. Cypr. de unitate Eccl. Numb. 29.
and calumniate others as the supposed causes thereof, rather then to seek to
find out an expedient to compose the same; truly we shall not be able to esteem
you Saints, but others will be ready to call you Incendiaries and irreligious
Make-bates rather. For, as Cyprian says, how can the fierceness of Wolves, the
madness of Dogs, the deadly poison of Serpents, the bloody rage of Beasts,
lodge in a Saints breast?

Pliny tells us of Apelles, that drawing the face of Antiochus the King, who
had but one eye, Plin. l. 35. c. 10.
that he might hide this deformity, he devised to paint him turning his visage
a little away, so he showed but the one side of his face; and from him (says
Pliny) came the invention first of concealing the defects and blemishes of the
visage. But the Painters of our time (says honest M. Buroughs) are quite in
another way; if there be any deformity or defect on any side, they will be sure
to paint that side in all the lineaments of it; that must be set forth fully to
the view of all men; yea, if it may be, to look more ugly and monstrous then it
is, all the skill they have shall be improved to do it. But, my Brethren, this
ought not to be, God does not so with us, he takes notice of the least good of
his people, but conceals their evil; and those that are his, will surely
imitate him therein, 1 John 4.11. And undoubtedly, they that set themselves to
act thus maliciously against this extraordinary hand of providence that has
brought us under this Authority, do act, not as he acted, but against God
himself; and however they may pretend themselves the Sheep of Christ, that hear
his voice, and follow him, yet by these fruits are shrewdly to be suspected to
be inwardly ravening Wolves. Therefore in the fear of the Lord, you that have
an ear to hear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches of Christ. Heb.
12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness; why? because without these no
man shall see the Lord. Mark it; Peace and Holiness are put together; no
Holiness without Peace endeavoring, and that not with such as best please us,
but with all men, that is, mind, intend, and keep peace, and do all that may
procure and keep peace, between your selves and others, by all good means and
expedients, viz. be found in that work that God calls us to, use all gentle
language, be humbled for our proud hearts; never contend, but be sure we first
understand what we contend for; not to lie at catch for advantages; to yield to
those we contend with, so far as reason and conscience will give way; keep a
due respect to all persons in the rank God has placed them, pray much without
reservations: And thus endeavoring all mutual quietness without hurtful
thoughts or attempts, that the Christian good will of being helpful in our
stations against common miseries, may not be utterly lost and obstructed among
us. Now this is a practice which Christians are bound to endeavor to be found
in toward all men, if it be possible (as I said) so far as in them lies, Romans
12.18. even as Christ Jesus the Prince of Peace did maintain it toward
sinners, Mat. 12.19, 20. in the midst of their greatest opposition and
contradiction against himself. For in that it is said of him, that he did not
strive, nor cry, or caused any man to hear his voice in the streets, his
quietness is commended; and when it is said, that the bruised reed he did not
break, nor did he quench the smoking flax, his harmlesness is set forth; and
when it is added, that by this means he should bring forth Judgment unto
Victory, and that the Gentiles should trust in his Name, his helpfulness unto
all mankind against their common miseries is declared, as the true end and
proper effect of that peaceable behavior. And if the thoughts of peace should
be thus extended unto all, and chiefly by Saints, how will it be warranted to
any, or in any respect, for you to exclude the Power under which we are set for
the same? and that by an aim to strive against him in all things, yea, though
they be things in themselves, and for the public, never so good and useful?
Christianity does set (you see) Rules to the spirits of men. Note.
Now if the frame of men's spirits be wholly bent to strive against and oppose
some men in particular continually, how will they clear themselves before God,
whose command is, that they should follow peace with all men in general? As
much as in us lies, that is, at all times, and upon all occasions, whenever
they have to do with them.

And now, if for all that can be said (my friends) it seems evil unto you thus
to serve the Lord according to your bounden duty laid before you; choose you
whom ye will serve, whether the Idols of your own fancies, or, which is as bad,
2 These. 4.11. (...). To love the honor of being quiet. Romans 12.16. Pro. 13.10.
the failing dictates of your Oracles. As for me, I am resolved, in the
strength of the Lord Jesus, to be found in the practice of his blessed
commands, to study to be quiet, and to follow my own business, viz. judge of my
own ways, how to keep them pure and without offense to all; not to mind high
things, but to condescend to things of low degree, of pride there coming
nothing but contention; to discharge my duty in my calling and employment
humbly, industriously, and faithfully, with singleness of heart as unto the
Lord, in the patient expectation of the merciful accomplishment of his good
promises in his own best time. And if in the mean time, the Lord sees fit to
bring in cross providence (or at least, such as may seem to me so) yet not to
be of a hasty spirit, Isa. 35.4. cap. 26.16.
too rashly, too selfishly impatient, but still firmly believing that God is
faithful and just, who has promised, and therefore not troubling my self with
needless solicitations about the events and successes of his purposes, nor
precipitately prosecuting any thing in order hereunto, as if I would help out
God with his work; considering to my abundant comfort, the Almighty power and
wisdom God has to manage and bring about his own designs, I desire to arm my
self with a cheerful submissive spirit, and so with contentedness in all
conditions, laboring to make the best construction of doubtful and dark
dispensations, Psalm. 39 9.
wholly silencing my self in the Lord: So to show all meekness to all men; in
respect of those that are of a quiet disposition, to be of the same mind
toward them, Ephesians. 4.3.
endeavoring to keep with them the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
not envying them, Gal. 5.26. 1 Cor. 13.4. (...), Pursue, as the persecutor. 1
Pet. 3.11.
not provoking them, nor, being desirous of vainglory, vaunting my self over
them; in respect of those that are of an unquiet spirit, to follow peace, and
ensue it toward them, and that, so far as it is possible, and as much as in me
lies, to do all things without murmuring and disputing against them, in a
blameless and harmless way, that they may justly find no cause to murmur at me,
Phil. 2.14, 15.
or contend with me; and in respect of those that are injurious, to recompense
no evil for evil, but with long suffering to bear in love, Ephesians. 4.2, 23. and
when a door is opened to me (as I conceive it is at this time) as a Christian
to labor to reconcile to duty, (so far as the Lord has lent me a Talent) to
do my utmost to remove mistakes, to allay heart-burnings, prejudices, unmeet
passions, so dishonorable to God, and so destructive to truth, in a Gospel way
with all tenderness and humility, through love to his chosen ones.

And as I trust, without respect or worldly end, Jer. 45.5. (what ever any may
uncharitably interpret by these) never to be wanting in this; so beyond this
line, or consideration, no man nor thing whatsoever, the Lord assisting, shall
ever draw me. And this I am freely willing to impart, not only to show the
true grounds by which I am led to these undertakings, unto such precious sons
of Zion, who adorning their professions with the sober practice of truth and
peace, I do most affectionately honor; but also to obviate something, (if the
Lord so please) in the minds of my honest Antagonists, which I do too well know
to be destructive to the entertainment of so necessary a truth; and withal to
evince, That through the goodness of God (to whom alone truly I desire to
approve my heart) I am neither selfishly blinded, wilfully inapprehensive,
carnally and stupidly careless (as some will brand all of this mind to be) nor
indeed afraid of the thoughts and censures of men concerning my self.

The great Jehovah, that overrules the hearts of all men, grant, that while we
strive to set up the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus (which by all the powers of Men
and Devils cannot be resisted, or one minute deferred) we do not promote the
ends of such as are real Enemies thereto! to the destruction not only of such
as are now in Power, but of our selves, and all that mean well to Zion! Grant!
that the sound of these discontents may not be so heard in other Nations, to
the ruin of the happiness of our own, that hereby the ears of those that
delight in War be so tickled, Psalm. 35.25.
that the Sea this Island is enclosed with, would prove too shallow to keep
them out, were it not assisted with the greater and more wonderful depth of
the Lords never failing goodness; and so after it has endured so many several
changes and shakings in these latter years, without any considerable diminution
to her splendour and felicity, it may not run a severer hap hereafter! Which for
my part, I know not how can be better prevented, then for all parties in their
several stations quietly to submit to, and peaceably demean themselves under
the present Authority.

FINIS.

