AN APOLOGY FOR THE REFORMED CHURCHES; Wherein is showed The necessity of
their separation from the Church of Rome: Against those who accuse them of
making a Schism in Christendom. BY JOHN DAILLE Pastor of the Reformed Church
at PARIS. Translated out of French. And a Preface added; containing THE
JUDGMENT OF AN UNIVERSITY-MAN, concerning Mr. Knot's last book against Mr.
Chillingworth.

Printed by Th. Buck, Printer to the University of Cambridge. MDCLIII.

To the Right Worshipful the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Honorable
Company of Mercers, LONDON.
Right Worshipful;
THough I am very much obliged to the Author of this Book, and other friends,
for whose sake I translated it; yet I am to none more than unto You, whose
bounty enabled me: of which I have been a partaker, until the year last
passed, ever since the fifth of my age, through my education at S. Paul's
Schole. And that it is not still continued to me, is not any cause in You, but
my superannuation.

Thus (though my catalogue be short) I have reckoned up almost all the friends
I have living; which (as my books) I ever desired might be few and good; if
they be not, it shall never be my fault.

And with You, (whom I number among the chief of them) I here deal as Sinaeta
in the Persian story did with Artaxerxes; who knowing it was the custom of the
Country to offer the King somewhat, each time he rid abroad, meeting him
accidentally, and having nothing in readiness, ran to the riverside, where
snatching up his hands full of water, he presented it to his Sovereign,
crying, (...) Who considering the grateful mind wherewith it came, graciously
accepted it.

If You shall, in like manner, vouchsafe to look upon this small book; which is
presented (with the same affection, and with my hearty prayers to God for the
continuance of His Blessings on You, and your Munificence to poor Students) as
a tender of my many humble thanks, which I shall ever acknowledge due to You, I
shall think it (next to the glory of God, and conversion of souls) the greatest
reward to this devoir, that can be hoped for, by

Your obliged servant, THO. SMITH.
Christs-Coll. Cambr. Aug. 2. 1653.
A Table of the Chapters.
I. THE occasion and importance of this Treatise Page 1 II. The necessity of an
union among believers page 2 III. That it is sometimes lawful to separate from
a company of men, professing Christianity p. 3 IV. That our separation from
the Church of Rome, was not made rashly, wilfully, or unnecessarily. p. 6 V.
Reasons of our separation from Rome, founded upon the diversity of our beliefs
p. 8 VI. That our separation arises not from particular matters of fact, or
private opinion; but from such things as are believed generally, by all the
Roman Church. And so, that it is not like to the schism of the Donatists. p.
13 VII. That there are two sorts of Errors; the one overthrows the foundation
of faith, and obliging man to separate; and the other not. That the opinions of
the Church of Rome, which we reject, are of the first sort; and those of the
Lutherans are of the second p. 18 VIII. That the adoration of the Eucharist, as
it is practiced by the Church of Rome, does overthrow the foundation of piety
and religion p. 26 IX. That the opinion of the Lutherans, which we bear
withal, does not bring with it the adoration of the Eucharist, either de jure,
or de facto p. 32 X. That the dignity and excellency of the Eucharist, does
not hinder it from being a mortal sin to adore it, if it be bread in
substance, as we believe it to be p. 37 XI. That the opinion which those of the
Roman Church have of the Eucharist, excuses not such as adore it p. 45 XII.
The error of those, who think they may give to the Host of the Church of Rome,
that reverence which she commands, without adoring it p. 55 XIII. That he who
believes the Eucharist to be bread in substance, cannot give it the reverence
which is practiced in the Church of Rome, without evident falsehood, hypocrisy,
and perfidiousnesse. p. 61 XIV. That every man who exercises the ceremonies
and services which the Church of Rome renders to the Host, declares thereby
that he adoreth it, and takes it for his true and eternal God. p. 65 XV. An
answer to the example of Naaman the Syrian, objected by some p. 72 XVI. That to
think it is lawful for a man to exercise the ceremonies of a Religion which he
believes not, does by consequence diminish the glory of, and cast a slur upon
the Martyrs p. 78 XVII. That this dissembling is condemned by our Lord in the
Scriptures p. 81 XVIII. That this dissembling, grievously offends God, and
scandalizeth men. p. 85 XIX. That there are many other beliefs in the Church of
Rome, which overthrow the foundations of our faith and salvation, as the
Veneration of images, the Supremacy of the Pope, etc. p. 91 XX. A conclusion
of this Treatise. That They, who are of our persuasion, are obliged to forsake
the communion of Rome; and, They who are not, are to prove and try their own
faith, before they condemn our separation from them.
The Preface.
THe particulars which I intend to premise, are chiefly these two. 1. What was
the occasion of writing this Apology. 2. What is the occasion of printing it.
The first will lead me to say somewhat of schism, which is the subject of the
book: And the second to take notice of a large book, lately published by the
English Jesuits, entitled, Infidelity unmasked, etc. I shall speak of both
with as much brevity as may be; remembering, I am to write a Preface, not a
Treatise.

I. Of the first. Some seditious people in France did in the year MDCXXXIII,
endeavor to raise a bloody persecution against the Protestants in that nation;
inciting the Magistrates to constrain them to adorn their houses on that
Festival, which is ordinarily called in that nation la Feste de Dieu, and do
other acts of reverence to the Host; or to put them to death, or banish the
refusers. Whereupon Monsieur Daille, conceiving in what eminent danger he and
all of his Religion were, wrote this Apology; which being publicly approved,
was presented by Monsieur Drelincourt, Mestrezat, himself, and many others,
deputed by the Protestants of France for that purpose, unto the King of France
and Lords of His Counsel: as containing the Doctrine, and resolution of all the
Protestants in that Kingdom. And, through Gods blessing, it prevailed with
Them, so far, that the said destructive counsels were rejected.

And let not any man imagine, That because Adoration of the Host is the chief
sin mentioned in this Tract (as being indeed one of the chief causes of our
Separation) therefore Protestants have nothing else to allege for themselves
(though one unanswerable reason is enough) and I am persuaded, that any
unprejudiced Reader will think this such.) For he that will but recollect, in
what condition the Church of Rome was, when Princes and People, Clergy and
Laity, did first desire of the Pope a Reformation, in faith and manners, shall
find 1. That they gave (and still do) to the B. Virgin, and other Saints
departed the titles of Mediator, Redeemer and Savior, in their public
Liturgies and hymns. 2. That they began their sermons and other solemn duties
with Ave-Maries, and rendered not to the B. Virgin only; but to relics,
pictures, Agnus Dei's (and several other creatures, animate and inanimate) the
worship, which is due only to the Creator. Briefly, to omit many Doctrines
destructive to piety, and even civil society, which are warranted by other
Councels (as in the Council of Constance Sess. 19. 3. That it is lawful to
break promise with heretics) and to instance only in some few positions, of
the last Council, held at Trent, Sess, 25. 4. The decree for veneration of
images is against Exodus xx. 5. Lev. xxvi. 1. Esa. ii. 8, 9. xliv. 13, etc. 1
Cor. x. 7. vi. 9, 10. Rev. xxi. 8. ^ 5. How contrary is their invocation of
Saints and Angels, ibid. Sess. 27. unto Romans x. 14. Luc. xi. 1, 2. Matthew. iv.
10. Col. ii. 18. Act. x. 25, 26. xiv. 14, 15. Rev. xix. 10. xxii. 89. 6. Their
Communion in one kind decreed, in the very words of the Canon Sess. 13. and 21.
Can. 1. and 2. with a non obstante Christi instituto, notwithstanding Christ's
express decree, how opposite to Matthew. xxvi. 27. Mark xiv. 23. 1 Cor. x. 3, 4,
16, 17? 7. Their Transubstantiation, Sess. 13. chap. 9. Can. 2. how
contradictory not only to the Apostles Creed, but also to 1 Cor. x. 16, 17,
20. xi. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28? Matthew. xx. vi. 29. 8. In a word (for such
citations may be numerous) who ever can reconcile their decree for Service in
an unknown tongue ibid. Sess. 22. chap. 8. and Can. 9. with any part of all the
1 Cor. xiv; I will not wonder if he think that fornication is not contrary to
any law of God, and that forbidding marriage to all the Clergy does no way
oppose Heb. xiii. 4. and 1 Timothy iv. 3. Some of which positions are touched in
the 19th chap. of this book: and the rest excellently confuted in Monsr
Daille's books de poenis; de imaginibus; but; contra Meliterium; and other
Protestant Authors. Who ever, I say, recollecteth how these and the like
Doctrines (which overthrow the fundamentals of Christian Religion) were then,
and still are, not only the private opinions of her Doctors, but the public
decrees of her Councels;

And then lastly, who ever considers with what rigor and tyranny she threw
them who disbelieved them, First out of the Church; and then (if she could) out
of the world, merely for being of the young man's mind whom Sr Tho. More
commends, and tells a pretty story of [pag. 1438. of his works in English]
whose name was Company, because they would not sin with their neighbors and
be damned for good Fellowship. So destroying whole Cities and Provinces, and
with them in Tacitus, Solitudinem facientes pacem appellavere, Insomuch as none
could communicate with her without approving both her tyranny and doctrines (
which was the indespensable condition of her Communion) Who ever, I say,
considers these things will I conceive, never wonder why the Protestants
departed from Rome, any more than why the Philosophers did of old, when they
were banished; or why he is out of the house, who is thrust out of doors.

But if none of all this could have been truly pleaded, yet the Church of
England might have been excused from schism, by him that duly considers, That
the Anglican Church had of old, and still may justly challenge many
privileges, as well as the Gallican, set down by Marc. de Vulson, Counselor
to the King of France, in his book de la puissance du Pape; and by Pythoeus and
many others, but most largely described in two vast tomes, written by the
appointment of Cardinal Richilieu, when he advised the King of France to set up
a Patriarch in opposition to the Sea of Rome, entitled Preuues des libertez de
l' Eglise Gallicane. Second Edition. A Paris. MDCLI. (If our secession was
schism, what would that have been?) Both these Churches being (...), by force
of the Ephesme Canon (among others) in the case of the Archbishop of Cyprus;
whereby it was Ordered, that the Churches should continue as they were, and not
be subordinated to any foreign Patriarch. And again, he who considers, That
perpetually under the Old Testament, and for many ages under the New, Kings and
Emperors were acknowledged to have a power of reforming the Church, under
their Dominions; That even our Q. Elisabeth (who is most railed at by
Romanists) claimed no other title, but what Q. Mary and other Roman Catholic
Kings and Princes claimed before Her; as may be seen in authentic Records; and
That, by our Ancient Laws, the Kings of England, (as the Christian Emperors of
old) had Supreme jurisdiction, in matters Ecclesiastical as well as Civil; and
That, by these laws, it was death for any man, to publish the Popes Bull,
without the Kings license; and if any Ecclesiastical Court did exceed its just
limits and jurisdictions, the Kings prohibition was to be obeyed. All which
appears in Caudries case, reported by Sr Edward Coke, in his fifth book, fol.
8. etc. Concerning our ancient Ecclesiastical laws, see Sr. H. Spelmans
Councels. Bp Carltons consensus Ecclesiae Cathol. adversus Tridentinos p. 271.
272. Dr. Hammonds answer to the six quaeries p. 414. and D. Blondel's Primaute
en l' Eglise. p. 796. And that the Reformation in England was in this
particular as regular as possibl^; the Clergy desiring it (in Q. Elisabeths
days there were not a hundred Incumbents turned out of their livings,
throughout all England) the King, Lords and Commons unanimously concurring to
it. See a book entitled, An answer to that groundless calumny, A
Parliamentary Religion, by E. Y. printed at Oxford MDCXLV.

And lastly; I request those, who are so prone to term us Schismatics, to
examine, what obligation there lies upon us to conform any more to Rome then
Geneva; and why not to the poor Greek Church, as well as to either, if it have
as much truth; or indeed, why not to the Primitive rather than any. Certain I
am, that they will never be able to prove out of Antiquity, that if the Bishop
of Rome (or any other Bishop) require subscription to any error (especially to
any that is damnable or dangerous) as the condition of their Communion, any man
was any longer bound to communicate with them (because then he were bound to
communicate in sin) or by consequence to be obedient to them. Whence it will
follow, That if the Pope make a new Creed: and put in some things that
contradict the Apostolical (as he did at Trent: If he will force us to
profess and practice the contrary to Christ's precepts (as in mutilating the
Communion; and several kinds of superstition, idolatry, and tyranny,) We are
not in a Schism for not subscribing and obeying, but He for imposing. And also
it will follow, that Monsr. Daille has taken a very right method; And that the
question of schism ought to follow, and not go before that of heresy or
error. For if the Bishop of Rome be in schism, we are not then in fault for
not remaining under his government, although we had been under it ever since
the first plantation of Christianity in England ( hoc dato, non concesso)
since he now exacteth our assent and subscription to a damnable error, as a
part of our Communion. And therefore I cannot but wonder, That the contrary
method being so preposterous, and against both reason and the practice and
opinions of the Ecclesia non in parietibus consistit, sed in dogmatum veritate:
Ecclesia ibi est, ubi sides vera est. Caeterum ante annos 15 aut 20, parietes
omnes hic Ecclesiatum haeretici possidebant. Ecclesia autem illic erat, ubi
fides vera erat. Hieron in Psalm. 133. Nemo mihi dicat, O quid dixit Donatus,
aut quid dixit Parm. aut Pontius, aut quilibet eorum? quia nec Catholicis
Episcopis consentiendum est, sicubi forte fallantur ut contra Canonicas
Scripturas aliquid sentiant. August. de unit. Eccles. c. 10. in Edit. Lugdun.
Honorati. Anno 1562.

Ecclesiam suam demonstrent si possunt, non in sermonibus and rumoribus
Afrorum, non in Conciliis Episcoporum suorum, non in literis quorumlibet
disputatorum, non in signis and prodigiis, fallacibus (quia etiam contra ista
Verbo Domini cauti redditi sumus) sed i^ praescripto Legis, in Prophetarum
praedictis, in cantibus Psalmorum, in ipsius Pastoris vocibus, in
Evangelistarum praedicationibus, and laboribus; hoc est, in omnibus Canonicis
Sanctorum librorum autoritatibus. Eodem lib. c. 16. ejusdem edit.

Vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi divinarum Scripturarum Canonicis libris
ostendant; quia nec nos propterea dicimus credi oportere, quod in Ecclesia
Christi sumus; aut quia ipsam commendavit Optatus, Ambrosius, vel alii
innumerabiles nostrae communionis Episcopi; aut quia nostrorum Collegarum
Conciliis praedicata est, aut quia per totu orbent tanta mirabilia sanitatum
fiunt, etc. Quaecunque talia in Catholica fiunt, ideo approbantur quia in
Catholica fiunt, non ideo manifestatur Catholica quia haec in ea fiunt. Ipse
Dominus Jesus cum resurrexisset a mortuis, and discipulorum oculis corpus suum
offerret, ne quid tamen fallaciae se pati arbitrarentur, magis eos testimoniis
Legis and Prophetarum, and Psalmorum confirmandos esse ^udicavit. ibid. Non
audiamus, Haec dico, sed haec dicit Dominus. Sunt certe libri Dominici quorum
Autoritati utrique consentimus. Ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam
nostram. Eod. l. c. 2. and 3. (...); etc. (...). Chrysostom. in Act. hom. 33.


Fathers, should be so much used among the Romanists: For thereby they do not
examine but praesuppose the conclusion. First, they would have us grant, That
the Church of Rome is the only true Church on earth, and then examine whether
she speak truth, and whether we did well in separating from her.

But I wonder at Cardinal Perron more then at any man, That he (considering his
vast understanding, -- (...), and large preamble of two leaves, concerning the
benefit and necessity of a good definition) should (Repl. lib. 1. c. 8.) define
the Church to be a society of those whom God has called to salvation, by the
profession of the TRUE FAITH, sincere administration of the Sacraments, and
adherence to lawful Pastors: and yet that he should both use the Romanists
method, and find fault with them that do not, ibid. c. 4. For if the Church be
such a Society; Either every member of that Church is obliged to know, (and
therefore to examine) the true Faith, and sincere administration of the
Sacraments; or he is obliged to make profession of that which he does not know,
and has not examined. Which is far beneath a rational man, much more a
Christian.

And in truth, this I take to be the first particular that should be
considered. For unless men before they dispute, will be persuaded to agree
upon the state of the questions, and in what order they should be handled; they
must needs end their discourse where they should have begun it: as to instance
in the point in hand; Dr Potter p. 81. proves that it is lawful to abstain
from communicating with a Church that imposes the profession of her
corruptions, as a condition of her communion, Because it is lawful to separate
from any other corrupted Society in the like case: as if a Monastery should
reform it self, and reduce into practice ancient good discipline, when others
would not, etc. or if a society of men be universally infected with some
disease, etc. M. Knot in answer alters the case, very ingenuously, to the quite
contrary, c. 5. 31. M. Chillingworth moderates it, to do him a courtesy, c.
5.. 85. In requital whereof, Mr. K. first blames him for it, and then begs the
question; saying, That in the question between the Church of Rome and us there
is a divine command, not to depart whatever she impose. So that till the
questions be stated right, and in due method, that is, till it be examined
whether the Church of Rome have corruptions and impose them, 'twill never
appear, whether she or we be in the schism.

And certes, methinks it is not fair, to beg the question so often as he does,
and tell us that we are no Christians, unless we are infallibly certain that
the Church is infallible; and yet never pretend to prove it so, by any other
motives than those of credibility, which at best are but probable: and to me
they seem not such. I protest, I have often wished heartily they did, having found
so many discouragements for a scholar in late years, that I long since
concluded him a wiseman, who said, He that increases notions, increases
sorrow, and Much study is a weariness to the flesh, Eccles. i. 18. xii. 12.
concluding that the love of learning and truth (which is the most that I
pretend to) would not only be tedious, but sinful, if felicity could be
attained full as well without it: which it might, if it were infallibly
certain, that the Roman Church is infallible. And so while Mr. Knot goes about
to prove that reason overthrows Christian Religion; and tells us that it must
be built only upon the Authority of the Church, and then builds that
Authority only upon reasons, and those very weak ones, and no way able to
support his superstructure, he will let all fall, unless the same faculty be a
pillar under his arm, and a bulrush under ours. And though he make great use of
interjections in exclaiming against Chillingworth and other Protestants in
England, for pulling down, he will never deserve any thanks (in my opinion) of
the Christian world, for this building. Which minds me of the second
particular I intend to speak of, viz.

II. The occasion of printing this book. I confess, though it were translated
several years since, at the urgency of some learned friends, whose judgment
concerning the acutenes of it, I had more reason to trust then mine own: yet I
was very unwilling to publish it, till now that I am convinced of the
seasonablenesse of it, being certified from English Seminaries beyond the seas,
inde Quod nuper-veteres co^migravere coloni; and convinced by relations from
Newcastle, Brecknock, and other places on this side the water, That they are
very busy at such harvest-work here, as Parsons the English Jesuit (in his It
is entitled, A memorial for Reformation; or A Remembrance for them that shall
live, when Catholic Religion shall be restored into England. Wherein are
directions, in so many several chapters, what he thought best to be done, as
well in the Court as Country, with the King and Counsel, as with the rest of
the Nobility, and Commonalty; Clergy as Laity, when this Nation shall be (as he
said he was confident it would be) reduced.

In sum, he would have its Grand-Charter burnt, the manner of holding lands
in fee-simple, fee-tail, frank almain, Kings service, etc. wholly abolished,
the Municipall laws abrogated, and the Inns of Court converted to some other
use: That for Lawyers. Then for Divines: The Colleges in both Universities
should be wholly in the power of six men, who should have all the Lands,
Manors, Lordships, Parsonages, etc. and what ever else belonged to Church or
Cloister, resigned into their hands; allowing to the Bishops, Parsons, and
Vicars, competent stipends and pensions to live upon, according as
Bishops-Suffragans, and Mont seniors have allowance in other Catholic
Countries. These are Parsons own words: That at the beginning no man's
conscience be pressed for matters in Religion: then, That public disputations
between Papists and Protestants, be held in both the Universities. That for
some years it will be more commodious for the public, and more liberty for the
Preachers, to have no appropriation nor obligation to any particular benefice,
but Itinera. -- Mitto caetera. He that would know more of it, may read the book
it self, (for which I heard some Romanists last year commend M. Parsons) or
(because that is rare) he may peruse a book of the same Parsons, entitled, A
Manifestation of the folly and bad spirit of certain in England, calling
themselves Secular Priests: wherein this Memorial is owned by him, and
analyzed, and excused, from fol. 55. to 63. Or, W. Clark ( a Roman Priest) his
answer to the Manifestation, entitled, A Reply unto a certain Libell, lately
set forth by Fa. Parsons: page 74. etc. Or Watsons quodlibets, p. 92, 93, 94.
together with the Reply to a brief Apology, and several other books, which
(fifty years ago) the Priests wrote against the Jesuits, and the Jesuits
against the Priests. Whereby he may (in transitu) perceive, that there be as
many and as great differences between them, as among Protestants.


Memorial written at Sevil 1596) and Contzen the Moguntine Jes. (in the second
book of his Politics, and 18. chap. and Campanella in his Monarchia Hispan.)
appointed them; being told by the London Booksellers. who are the most
competent judges quisque in art sua, (Beacon fired p. 6.) that at least thirty
thousand Popish books have been printed there, within these three last years;
and in a book entitled, The Petition of the six Counties of South Wales, and
the County of Monmouth to the late Parliament, of whole Parishes fallen off to
Popery, since the Ministers have been cast out; and yet many men ask, WHAT NEED
OF A CLERGY? Alas! I cannot but tremble to see how passionately they are in
love with ruin, and pursue nakedness, vengeance, and desolation? [(...) Prove.
xxix. 18.] In a word, knowing turpius ejicitur, etc. that men are with more
ease kept within the Church of England, then reduced to it; and seeing many
daily, who formerly have been the most forward to cry, Venient Romani --
posting out of it, and furious for Roman superstition, falling (as it is the
custom of the giddy vulgar) from one extreme to another: Especially
considering that the zeal of the greatest member of our Pastors (most whereof
might far better be spent in pressing and persuading men to pious
conversations] is altogether laid out in controversies of a less nature and
importance (which, by the way, may be one cause of the spreading of Popery) I
thought this book would now at length prove very seasonable. And if it may
please the Almighty of his goodness, to let it be as successful in stopping
the increase of the Roman Religion in England, at it was in hindering the
persecution of the Protestants in France; I shall not think one minute of the
spare-houres, that I employed in translating it, lost. But if withal, it prove
isntrumental to the abating of any man's heat for ceremonies and externals, or
cause him to spend it (where it ought) in constant devotion to God alone, and
unfeigned Christian charity toward all his brethren, and reuniting the
shattered pieces of groaning Christendom; and so induce any one man to live a
Holy life (which questionless is or should be the main end of all our
preaching, religion, and controversies) I shall really deem it the happiest
time that ever I bestowed.

The chief book that is now extolled by our Romanists is one lately set forth
by Mr Edward Knot, alias Nich. Smith, whose true name is Matthew Wilson, born
at Pegsworth near Morpeth in Northumberland; who was for several years
Professor of Divinity at the English College in Rome; then Vice-Provinciall;
and that he might finish this his last book the better, was made Provincial of
all English Jesuits; all which I am informed by some of his own Contrymen
and Society. The book is entitled* Infidelity unmasked, or the Confutation of
Mr Chillingworth, etc. Wherewith if any wavering Protestant chance to be shaken
in his belief (whereof though the Romanists generally boast much, I see no
danger because I have, aster much enquiry, not heard of two in England that
have had the patience to read it over, It Is so full of monstrous p. 52. 18.
p.337. 75. p. 354. l. 20. p. 495. l. 31. p. 648. l. ult. p. 728. l. ult. etc.
p. 808. l. 20. page 812. lin. 16. But I delight not camerinam movere, since (to
say nothing of Mr. P. du Moulin and other Protestant collections, which I think
not so considerable in this kind) the Romanists have written so much against
one another, in several languages, to this purpose, that my soul often bleedeth
in secret to foresee, That if they proceed thus, The reducing (if not this,
yet) the next age to the good old Christianity (wherein as Epiphan. witnesses
(...) and (...) divided the world into heretical and Orthodox Professors) or
even to moral honesty (while gain shall be counted godliness, and e contra)
will be found a matter of far more difficulty and miracle, than at the first
plantation, as Aphorisms ou Sommaire de la doctrine des Jesuits par lesquels
le vray Christianisme est corrompu 1610. Mercure Jesuit 1631. Mysteria
Jesuitarum. 1633. Theology morale des Jesuits extraict fidellement de leurs
livers Contre la Morale Christienne. which last the Sorbon Doctors published.
They and the Lovain have published several other Common-places or catalogues of
Jesuiticall opinions, showing that they teach a large number of opinions, which
open a wide door to treachery, revenge, covetousness, debauchednesse, etc. And
it is likely the Jesuits who are seldom behind-hand when they are able, have
done as much for them. Mean while, I pray, God preserve Christianity!
tenants and impertinencies) I shall entreat (for his satisfaction) to read
likewise over Mr Chillingworth's book, against which it was writ; and he shall
find Mr Chillingworth's a sufficient answer to it, if he please to compare
Section with Section, from the beginning to the end of each. For he will
perceive, That the most weighty arguments of Mr. Chillingworth (as all the
Answer to the Directions of N. N. that is, Mr Knot, wherein Master Chill. drew
up, and proved, an high charge of Atheism and Socinianisme, against Mr Knot
and his party, and cleared himself; and so many places as it would be tedious
to specify) are passed by as the sick man, in the high way, was by the Jew
without notice taken: And the rest so jejunely handled, and so far from a
complete answer (though it is sufficiently known, That Mr K. being in such high
place, and dividing part of the task among many of his Inferiors, and making
use of those three folio's writ by Mr G. H. against Mr Chill. [which Dr Hammond
mentions in his unanswerable Defense of the Ld Falkland] and other the like
helps had all the humane advantages that could be had) so little touched, that
methinks he may well unchristen his book a little more, and recall that (...),
The confutation of Mr Chillingworths book, reserving only the rest, Infidelity
unmasked. And that in relation to himself.

I shall give Mr K. a large catalogue of his omissions, when he shall think fit
to answer Mr Chillingworths Preface, to the Author of charity maintained; or
(because that would perhaps be too long a trouble) when he shall answer only
the last page of Mr Chillingworths book (which in justice should have been done
19 years since) containing (...) eleven discourses of Dr Potter, which were
never yet ^^^ched; although Mr Chill. concludes his first part in these words;
Now at last, when you are admonished of it, that my Reply may be perfect, I
would entreat you to take them into your consideration: promising the second
part of his Reply, when Mr K. should desire it, but it seems he had enough of
the first, which made him desire to smother the second.

In the interim, I cannot but mind Mr Knot of one containing two pages ('it is
the 96th of the 5th c. of M. Chill.) which he passes over as ordinary
Commentatours do over hard places, saying not a word to it. Which I am minded
of by Monsr Milletiere's Rhetoric, concerning the inconsistency of Protestant
Religion with civil government. And I do the more earnestly beseech him to
answer it, because I see he salls sometimes into the same strain, and because I
bear a great love to the persons of some in the Roman Communion, and have been
many years troubled with an That which one or two, or some few Roman Catholic
Doctors say is lawful, may (in the judgment of Papists) be done, without
mortal sin. [the major is M. Knots, Charity maintained c. 4. sect. 25. as
also Valentia's, Vasquez, Lessius, Enriquez, Sa. Cellot de Hist. l. 8. c. 16.
p. 714.] But not only one, but many Romans Cath. Doctors say, It Is lawful to
murder or depose a Supreme Magistrate, that is guilty of heresy, or suspected
of it. Cavete Principes conclasioneni.
argument, which the learned Dr Jer. Tailor brings p. 50, and 51. of his sermon
on the Gunpowder-Treason (having in my small perusal of Popish writers, met
with many confirmations, both of major and minor proposition; which I shall
produce, when need requires: but I think it does not now, because I must be
short; and the Dr has said enough in that excellent sermon. Which seems to
me to contain a very sufficient answer to a book lately written by a Romanist,
entitled, The Christian Moderatour.

Besides, that I am most credibly informed, by a Person of great quality and
integrity (who saw both the subscriptions and excommunication) That those many
English Recusants, whom he mentions p. 17, and 37. were all excommunicated
for subscribing those three moderate negative propositions, which are there set
down as the Doctrine of the English Romans Catholics, concerning the Popes
power over the Supreme Magistrate.

I was ever a great enemy to rancour in dispute, and am of that Viscounts mind,
who thought, That there ought to be no more bitterness in a treatise of
Controversy then in a Love-letter. And therefore though I never saw Mr
Chillingworth (whom I find commended by Mr Is it not a shame that learned men
should blame this [opinion concerning reason] in Master Chillingworth, Doctor
Hammond, etc. and thereby advance Socinianisme, and ruin Christianity. Saints
rest. Praef. to the 2. part. p. 18. and saepe alibi. -- (...)
(...)

Baxter and other eminent Divines; and commended by his Adversaries for a
devout and rational man) yet I cannot but be moved with pity and grief to
see, how Mr Knot (who bespattereth Casaubon, and several other very learned
men) insulteth over Mr Chillingworth now being dead: who would not come near
him to dispute while he was alive, though Mr Chillingworth at sundry times and
by several ways entreated and solicited, nay pressed and importuned him to
it, before the printing of this solio. (See The Answer to the direction to N.
N. 4. and afterward, as I am told by them that knew him) which he survived
seven years. How after seventeen years studying to lay this Hector in the dust,
Mr Knot sets sorth a book, wherein (to speak first of the manner of his
discourse) the chief thing be does, is to scare his Reader with morm(...)s (
fortiter calumniando Antagonistam, ut aliquid haereat, as his policy was in
Tacitus) chiefly bespattering him (and that almost in every page) with odious
imputations of such opinions, whereof he cannot point us out one in all his
volumne, concerning which he (who best knew his own belief, and is long since
gone to answer for it, good or bad) said, more than once, as in his Answer to
the directions to N. N. 28. Whosoever teaches or holds them LET HIM BE
ANATHEMA! In which volumne, though Mr Knot declaim often against reason, and say,
That to it the mysteries of Christian Religion seem impossible. c. xiii. 27. p.
808. pro 812. yet he thinks it fitting to charge his Adversary with the sayings
not only of St Augustine, B^. Andrews, Hooker, Grotius, Calvin, Beza, and the
like learned men, who yet confessed themselves men; but also of Luther,
Socinus, Crellius, Volkelius, Bonaventure, Halensis, Dionys. Areopagita, and I
know not what other rabble; as if poor Chillingworth were bound to defend all
whosoever, that wrote before him: Whereas all the world knows, That he who
would not believe the Roman Church (whereof he had been a member) upon her own
bare word, would as little believe any particular member of that, or any other
Society upon theirs; and that he disclaimed not her pretended Infallibility
(which was her worst fault, as making all the rest, how damnable soever,
incurable) that he might affix it upon another, or the next man he met; though
never so learned, or pious. And if Mr. K. will think it unjust, That he should
be put to maintain the writings of all Papists, or even of those few, of his
own late Order; his citing so much the opinions of Protestants out of our
Adversary Brerely, is no argument, but of his own unreasonablenesse.

I shall not take notice of half his impertinencies: not how he grants, what Mr
Chill. affirmed, concerning some men's believing contradictions p. 803. lin. 5.
There is no doubt, says he, but that men may believe things, which in
themselves are contradictions. and p. 810. l. 18. It Is needless to be proved,
it being a thing which no man denies. And yet, how in attempting to show, that
Master Chillingworth's reasons do not prove it, he spends from p. 802. to 815.
To take notice of all such peccadilloes would be very tedious to Thee and me.
Only because I have mentioned his citing Brerely so often (and not only Mr K.
but most of the other English Advocates for the Church of Rome are very faulty
therein) give me leave to add a little, in that particular.

Mr Chill. c. 5. 91. answering Mr Knots alleging the confession of Protestants
concerning the Antiquity of some Doctrines in the Church of Rome, sets down
twenty Doctrines of that Church, and entreateh Mr K. to inform him what
confession of Protestants he has for them, viz. Communion in one kind, Lati^e
Service, Indulgences, the Popes power in temporalities over Princes, picturing
the Trinity, worshipping of pictures, and of the B. Virgin, her immaculate
conception, infallibility of the Pope or Church, auricular Confession, etc. And
that as some Protestants confess the Antiquity, but always postnate to
Apostolic, of some Roman points; so there want not Papists, who acknowledge
as freely the novelty of many of them, and the Antiquity of ours. To which, all
that Mr K. answers is p. 867. as follows. 1. Some of these things are not
matters of faith: and some other points are even ridiculous. 2. We deny that
any Cath. approved. Author, acknowledges the novelty of any of our Doctrines,
or the antiquity of yours; except such were ancient heresies. How truly spoken
the first is, the Reader may judge; if he have read the Canons of the Council
of Trent, Luc. Wadding's (...) or History of the Immaculate conception printed
at Lovain 1624. or any few Roman authors: How true the second, if he will
vouchsafe to examine the places I have cited p. 6. or these which follow.

Though there are some Protestants who confess the Antiquity (though not
Primitive, which is the only Antiquity they hold obliging) of some few Roman
Doctrines; so there are not a few Doctors and Writers of their own Communion,
who acknowledge, as liberally, the novelty of very many others: as, 1 that
Transubstantiation was not named, much less made an Article of faith, before
the Laterane Council (Bellarm. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 25.) 2 That for the first
MCC years, the Holy Cup was administered to the Laity: (Lindan. Panopl. l. 4.
part. 2. c. 56. Hunc igitur. Cassander saepe. Albaspinaeus Observe. Sacr. l. 1.
c. 4. And your friend Petavius in his Treatise against Arnault, (de la
frequent. Communion.) says, None but an extreme ignorant, or impudent fellow
can deny it. 3. That they believed the sacrifice of the Eucharist to be but the
IMAGE or COMMEMORATION of our Saviors sacrifice on the Cross: (Lombard. Sent.
l. 4. c. 12. and Aqu. 3. p. qu. 83. art. 1. incorp.) 4. That the Primitive
Christians celebrated not the Eucharist as the Roman Church does now: (Durand.
ration. div. offic. lib. 4. c. 1. Rupertus Abbas Tuit. Divin. Offic. l. 2. c.
21.) [he that reads Justin Martyr in his Apology, largely describing the
custom of the Primitives in his days, may think he speaks of the Protestants
now.] 5. That Divine Service was celebrated for many ages in a tongue
understood by the people: (Nic. de Lyr. in 1. ad Cor. 14. Cassander in Liturg.
c. 28. Alphons. a Castro de justa pun. haeret. l. 3. c. 6.) where, desending
this differing from the Primitive Church, he says, That he who should now
conform to THEM, would be accounted not only an impious man, but an Infidel.
6. That the Fathers exhorted the people to read the Scriptures: (Azor. mor. l.
8. c. 26. part. 1. respondeo.) 7. That they generally condemned the worship of
Images for fear of Idolatry: (Polyd. Virg. de invent. rerum, l. 6. c. 13.) In
which treatise, that learned Italian often ingemiously acknowledges the novelty
of most of their customs in the Church of Rome, except such as came from Jews
or Pagans. As (lib. 5. c. 4.) where he says, 8 God and the Primitive Church
permitted marriage to Priests, and Pope Siricius (who lived at the end of the
fourth century) was the first that forbad it; whose laws to that purpose,
though they came out very thick, were little heeded till the eleventh Age. See
Gloss. decret. did. 84. c. 3. and P. Pius II. in his 130. Epist. against the
Bohemians and Taborites; where he opposes the Modern Church to the Primitive.
9. That MCCCC. years after Christ, many learned Romanists denied the Popes
judgment to be infallible. (Gerson. Almain. Alphonsus. Adrian. PP. apud Bell.
de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 2. Secunda opinio.) 10. Or his authority to be above
that of a general Council: (Camaracensis. Gerson. Almain. Cusan. Panormitan.
Abulensis apud Bell. de Conc. l. 2. c. 14. initio.) 11. That the Mass was not
instituted by Christ and the Apostles (who at the consecration used only the
Lords Prayer) but DC years after them by Gregory I. Platin. in vit. Sixti I.
and Gregor. I. Gregor. Epist. l. 7. c. 63. p. 664. edit. Paris. 1571. And all
the world knows how lately, and through how pleasant a trick, the Gregorian
Missall came in use, in stead of the Ambrosian; because being laid upon S.
Peter's Altar, it was torn in pieces in the night. The story may be read at
large in Durand's Rational. divin. offic. l. 5. c. 2. 5. p. 212. And with what
a deal of violence and difficulty, this Gregorian Missall was brought into
Spain, may be seen in Rod. Ximenes his History of Spain, l. 6. c. 26. Cassand.
Praef. de Ord. Romans 12. That Purgatory was very little, or not at all,
mentioned among the Ancients; a thing unknown to Antiquity; and received into
the Church but lately. Episc. Fisher. Assert. Lutherane consutat. Artic. XVIII.
13. That, after PVRGATORY, came in INDVLGENCES. Idem ibid. Durand. Antoninus
apud Bellarm. and, That the Jubilee was instituted MCCC years after Christ, by
that good man P. Boniface, who (their Historians say) came in like a fox,
reigned like a lion, and died like a dog. See a treatise of Indulgences; writ
by Wesselus, al. Basil Groningensis. and another of the Jubilee by Santarel the
Jesuit. 14. Lastly, (for such citations would be endless, as I might mind
you, who it was that Nicephorus Calisthus says, brought Prayer to Saints into
the public Liturgy, etc. According as M. Knot answers or approves of these, I
will give him more, which I have in readiness.) Alphonsus a Castro in his
Treatise, de justa punit. Haeretic. l. 2. c. 22. speaking of diverse ceremonies,
which the Church of Rome uses in the consecration of Temples, Altars,
Chalices, habits, ornaments, says, NONE of these things were instituted by
Jesus Christ, but in aftertimes, by little and little, instituted by the
Church.

Yet give me leave to add one thing more; That it is clear to me, None of the
Ancient Christians believed the Church of Rome to be a Guide, or Judge of all
Controversies in Christianity: wherein Mr. K. may do very well to satisfy me,
or [as his friends do] blame them, for this reason among many, Because in
Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and others their Catalogues of Heretics, none are
branded for denying this which they all did. And if it had been believed at all
(especially as it is generally now, viz. to be the original of all other
heresies, it had been far more rational to have put in this; and left out
all the rest; then to have dealt with posterity as we see they have. That
Tertullian, Vincentius Lirinensis, and several others should give us rules to
know Heretics by, and forget this, the main and clearest. And, which is
stranger yet, that not only Optatus (l. 5. contra Parmen. mihi p. 130.) after
a long discourse against the Donatist, about the unlawfulness of rebaptization
[Inter licet vestrum and non licet nostrum, nutant and remigant animae
populorum: Well, what must be done in this case? Quaerendi sunt judices. Who
shall they be? Si Christiani -- Si Paganus -- Si Judaeus -- inconveniences on
every side] should conclude, Ergo in terris hac de re nullum poterit reperiri
judicium, de coelo quaerendus est Judex. -- Habemus in Evangelio Testamentum.
And S. August. to the same purpose (in Psalm. xxi. exposition. 2. Tabulae
aperiantur, legantur verba mortui. That, I say, not only Optatus that learned
Bishop, and other Ancients should be so much in those early days mistaken (for
certainly your Church was not then in heaven) but S. Paul also writing a very
long epistle to the Romans, and setting down therein arguments against
several heresies should conclude with quisque suo sensu abundet [if I may
believe your Bible] Romans xiv. 5. and oportet esse haereses; and not mention a
word of any infallible remedy, or Judge at Rome: which news would have been
worth all the rest of the Epistle.

And again, That not only all the Fathers of the first CCC years, should
pass over this opinion of the Roman Churches great Authority in silence (the
believing or disbelieving which alone, with the Romanists now, denominates
every man a Catholic or an Heretic) but that the Historians also of those
days should say nothing of it, if she had any such thing, seems no more
probable to me, then that any learned man hereafter will write the Chronicle of
England, for these twelve years last, and never mention the Lords Fairfax or
Cromwell.

Having said thus much in general concerning the manner of M. Knots disputes,
and his unfitting Topics, wherein he mistaketh Antiquity for Truth, and
citations out of Protestants (often falsified) for infallible conclusions: and
beseeching M. Knot, if he shall vouchsafe an answer to this paper, not to skip
over these two last leaves, but to give me some reason, Why any Christian is
BOUND to believe such positions as are confessedly novell? And if he will say,
that all (which he cannot with modesty; or that any, which he cannot with
truth) of the forenamed Roman Doctors, speak that which is not true; that he
would consider how he puts into my mouth, what to answer to much that he
alleges out of Protestant Doctors against Mr. Chillingworth: I come now to
take a short view of his particular discourses, and begin at his Preface.

Pref. p. 4. and 5. After he has given his Readers some admonitions how to
read his book [I wish that he pretending to answer the whole, had printed M.
Chill's with it, that we might the more readily have compared them] and told
them, that one half of CHARITY MAINTAINED is yet unanswered [he who reads Mr.
Chill's book, or but the last lines of it, sees the reason of that] he
professes, That he will not meddle with Mr. Chill's answer to the direct. to
N. N. (very ingenuously spoken!) but why? because it is confuted by a book
entitled, THE JVDGEMENT OF AN VNIVERSITY-MAN CONCERNING Mr. CHILLINGWORTHS
PAMPHLET: 'twas a pretty little Pamphlet! but whether that Judgment of an
University-man, which I never met with any man whosoever that saw (unless such
to whom I have showed it) be a real answer to any page of Mr. Chill's book,
any more then Chaucers tales are, I desire any unprejudiced man to determine.
Only I must take notice (as I pass) that Mr Knot does very well, to observe
so soon that precept, which Tully gives his Orator (and Ulysses in Ovid,
against Ajax, practices) to skip over the hardest arguments. What it is in an
Orator I Will not say; but I am sure, it is no great sign of a good Disputant.

The next thing he tells us is [. 10. and 11. and so to the end af the
Preface] how the very title of Mr. Chill's book may be consuted out of Mr.
Chill's own words: for which he cites p. 21. mihi lin. 3. from whence M. Knot
concludes, That millions of Protestants err damnably; and that Mr. Chill.
affirms, That the Protestant Religion is no safe way to salvation. I answer:
I confide, (to use Mr. Knots words) that every indifferent Reader will find
this to be clearly false: For first, he speaks no more of Protestants than
Papists, but equally of both. Secondly, he says not categorically they do
err, but it is to be feared they (both Protestants and Papists) do. Thirdly,
he says not absolutely neither, but on supposition, IF any Protestant or
Papist be held in any error by any sin of their will, then such error is as
the cause of it, sinful and damnable. And this none that I know, unless
himself, will or can deny. It being a truth sufficiently manifest; and asserted
by his great Masters, P. Lombard, and T. Aquinas, and the greatest stream of
Schole-men and Casuists. And to tell Mr. Knot my mind freely, I am clearly of
Mr. Chill's opinion, viz. That Protestant Religion is a safe way to salvation,
and yet that many Protestants go to hell: That there are millions of
Protestants, who think, not to be a Papist, is enough not to be damned: and
millions of Papists who think not to be a Protestant, is enough to oblige
Almighty God, and merit heaven. And I take both parties to be extreme
blameworthy for deeming so; and Mr. Knot must give me leave to wonder, if any
rational man shall blame me for saying so, without giving his reasons.

Now we come to Mr Knots very large Introduction, where 2. p. 38. he lays
down this proposition to be proved, Christian Religion is absolutely and
infallibly true. And so he spends you above fifteen sheets in pretending to
prove it, and the Necessity of Grace; and the first of these by the last. And
if Mr Chill. neither denied the necessity of Grace, nor the infallibility of
Christian Religion, I desire the Reader to consider whether he have not fifteen
sheets together of impertinencies. And that Mr Chill. denied neither of these,
will clearly enough appear to any that are not willing to be deceived, if they
can spare leisure to read over Mr Chillingworth's pamphlet (as Mr Knots friend
calls it) or but consult those very passages from which Mr K. takes the
occasion of these long discourses, and which he cites out of Master
Chillingworths sixth Chapter; where his 3d begins thus, I do HEARTILY
acknowledge, and believe the Articles of our Faith to be in themselves Truths,
as certain and INFALLIBLE as the very common principles of GEOMETRY and
MATHEMATICS. But as if Mr K. (notwithstanding the Metaphysics he boasts so
much of) knew not the difference between certitudo objecti and subjecti, he
seeks advantage from what follows immediately, viz. But That there is
required of us a knowledge of them, and an adherence to them, of SENSE or
SCIENCE; That such a certainty is required of us UNDER PAIN OF DAMNATION: So
that NO man CAN HOPE to be in a state of salvation but he that finds in himself
such a degree of faith, such a strength of adherence; This I have already
demonstrated to be a great error, and of dangerous and pernicious consequence.
And because I am more and more confirmed in my persuasion, I will here confirm
it with reasons, etc. p. 311. From which passage whether any just advantage can
be taken, (especially for a digression of so many sheets) let every
unpassionate Reader judge.

Chap. 1. 2. p. 38. He lays down this proposition to be proved, Christian
faith is absolutely and infallibly true: by Christian faith he explains (two
lines after his proposition.) himself to mean, the true Religion. Now 1. This
is the same vein of Sophistry which I noted even now, and runs through the
whole book, when he speaks of infallibility. The question being not at all de
certitudine objecti but subjecti; not whether divine truths be absolutely
infallible, (this none doubts, who admits a God, in the true notion) but
whether we are infallibly certain, That these or those positions are Divine
truths. 2. Master Chill. tells us in the ninth of his Conclusion, that the end
of his book was to confirm the truth of the divine and infallible Religion of
Jesus Christ. 3. Mr K. takes notice of it, and cites that very passage, and
such others. [c. 1. 39. p. 66.] So that to make a great noise against Mr Chill.
and to endeavor to prove against him, what he believes and grants (nay what
he knows, and confesses he grants; as Mr K. does here, and often elsewhere) is
such a piece of Jesuitical industry and civility, as Protestants never learnt.
4. He tells us, that in the proof of this proposition, he maintains the cause
of All Christians, and of all men and mankind. It Is a comfort to meet with such
a charitable person. But if he have all Christians, nay all men, all mankind,
of his persuasion (and says so himself) who are his adversaries? If all men,
all mankind be for the infallibility of all faith, then sure Mr Chill. is so
too (for though I never saw or knew him, otherwise then by his printed book, I
ever took him for a man; and I believe Mr K. who has reason to know him better
then I, has found him so:) And if all be not of Master Knots mind, then
nothing can be concluded hence, but that he was in a passion, when he wrote
this book: and so may be the better excused for declaming against reason. But
5. Had Mr K. read Sextus Empericus, and been acquainted with the Pyrrhonians,
he might have found many (and they no fools, but famous Philosophers) who were
not for his absolute infallibility.

And I wish Mr. Knot may never be one of them. I hope be is, and will continue,
a Christian. Only give me leave to tell him, That if nothing else could be
said for the truth of our Christian Religion, but what is in his Infidelity
unmasked, and Vanninus his Amphitheatrum, heu! actum esset de Palladio. Since
(not to trouble you with transcribing his positions, which I cited page 14.)
having told us, That it is necessary that supernatural knowledge should be
most certain and infallible; and, That a man is as happy without any belief of
Christian Religion, as without one that is infallible, he says, p. 52. That
it is impossible Christian Religion can retain the highest degree of
probability, if it have no greater perfection then it receives from the sole
probable arguments of credibility. And then (throughout the whole book) he has
not one argument which pretends to reach higher than to a probability (I wish
any of them would reach so high) for the infallibility of the Church or living
Judge (upon which he endeavors to build all the rest) unless you will grant
(which indeed he contendeth hard for) Conclusionem non semper sequi deteriorem
partem, That the conclusion may sometimes be stronger than the premises. And
indeed it concerns him, to desire it should be granted: for the premises which
he brings, cannot possibly be any just foundation of his confident
conclusions.

But let us come to his proofs: p. 2.. 2. he goes about to prove, Christian
faith is infallible, and exempt from all possibility of error, or falsehood.
His end is, as I said before, that he may prove the Roman Faith and Church
infallible: His medium is this, FAITH is the gift of God, and the prime verity
cannot inspire a falsehood. This I confess is an argument to prove the
infallibility of the Church, which I never met or heard of before. And I doubt
it will prove more then he would have it, viz. That Protestants (since they
have faith, as Mr. Knot in Cha. Ma. par. 1. c. 1.. 3, 4. grants they have
[unlesse he will say, a man may be saved without it, contrary to Hebr. xi. 6.] and
Dr. Smith, Bishop of Calcedon, says expressly in print, Protestantibus
credentibus, etc. they neither want FAITH, nor a CHVRCH, nor SALVATION) are
infallible, as well as Romane-Catholicks. And then Roman Catholics cannot be
infallible, unless infallible men may contradictions another.

By the word says in this argument, Mr. Knot means either the object of
faith, or the act of says. If he mean the object of faith (the word of God
revealed in the Gospel) he abuses himself, and us; for no Christian ever
denied it. If he mean the act of faith (as he must, if he say any thing against
his Adversary, or to the purpose) then by this discourse not only the Pope,
but every Bishop, every Priest, nay, Thou and I, and every Christian man and
woman in the world, who has infused says, and that gift of God, are as
infallible as the Church of Rome. And yet on this sandy argument Mr. Knot at
the first entrance, lays the foundation of all his Book; and chooses rather
to build the infallibility of Christian Religion hereon, than (with his
companions) upon the infallibility of the Church.

In reading Mr. Knot's book I stood amazed, to hear him say so often, that he
had already proved the infallibility of his Church; and searching from Chapter
to Chapter, I found no other argument, beside what I mentioned p. 10.
concerning the infallibility of faith (to which I conceive I have said enough)
but the notes of credibility, p. 428. viz. Miracles, sanctity, sufferings,
victory over enemies, conversion of Nations, [wealthy, he might have said.]

Concerning which I come now to speak somewhat briefly. 1. For Miracles; Christ
and the Apostles bid us to take heed of them; and so we have the evidence of
their true miracles then, to keep us from all false ones now; and we are bid to
examine the miracles by the doctrine, not the doctrine by the miracles. And the
Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. c. 2. hom. 6. and ad Coloss. c. 2. in Matt. hom. 49.
Gregor. in Evang. hom. 29. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 8. and de vera religione
c. 25. Justin. qu. and resp. Orthod. qu. 5. Tertull. advers. Marc. l. 3. c. 3.
Opus imperf. in Matthew. hom. 49. Theodor. in Deuteronomy. qu. 12. August. de unitat.
Eccl. c. 16. de civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
Fathers confess as much, That miracles are not now necessary, nor profitable*
nor marks of the true Religion. August. in Joan. tract. 13. Hieron. in Epist.
ad Gal. c. 3. Tertull. de praescr. c. 44.
That the Ancient heretics pretended to miracles, as much or more then the
Orthodox. And we know that the Baron. Annal. tom. 2. an. 139. sect. 4. Sueton.
in vita Vesp. c. 7. Tacit. hist. l. 4. annal. l. 2. Plutarch. in vit. Fu.
Camilli. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 8.
Heathens talked much of theirs; and that many Bellarm. de Eccl. milit. l. 4.
c, 15. Card. Cajetan. apud Catharinum Annot. l. 4. p. 273. and 274. Stella in
Luc. xi. Ferus in Matthew. praef. l. 2. Gregor. I. in Evang. hom. 29. Lyra in
Dan. 14. Biel in Can. Missae lect. 49. Baron. Annal, anno 1027. Acosta de temp.
noviss. l. 2. c. 19. and l. 3. c. 3. Salmeron de falsis signis, disp. 3.
Roman Doctors acknowledge all this.

But it is strange, (is the Church of Rome have any miracles,) and be (as she
pretends) desirous of our salvation, and not afraid to convert us; that she
should never show them among Protestants, where they may abide the touch;
unless our presence be a charm, and disable her Priests from doing wonders:
Very strange, that most of her miracles should be done in secret; (when
otherwise, they are often so notorious cheats, that the Magistrate takes notice
of them, and punishes them) whereas Christ and the Apostles did theirs in the
face of the Sun, and before all Israel; before enemies as well as friends;
before heretics and infidels as well as Orthodox, that they might do good. And
that where she does show them (as in France, Italy, and Spain) they should not,
if they be true, convince the Atheists* who more abound in those, than in any
other Countries. Marsennus told us long since comm. in Genesis that there were in
his days fifty thousand Atheists in that one city of Paris. Colerus [l. de
immort. anim.] tells what store there be in Italy. And for the Spaniards; I
need but mind the Reader of their converting the Indies, by depopulating them,
and barbarously slaying millions: auferre, trucidare, Imperium, [Religionem]
vocant, as Galgac. in Tacit. vita Agric. c. 20. insomuch that the poor Natives
thought Christians the most cruel and wicked people in the world, and called
them Guacci, that is, beasts that live upon prey; and Viracochie, that is, the
scum of the sea; and pointing at a piece of gold, were wont to say, Behold the
Christians God. Such were the sanctified lives of those that boasted of
converting Nations! Concerning which, see a book entitled, Spanish cruelties,
written by Barthol. de las Cafas, a Bishop, and Dominican Friar, and translated
into French, Italian, etc. printed in Latin at Frankfurt, with pictures, Also
Benzo's historia novi orbis, and other Relations of the Indies. Which minds
me of the 2d Note,

2. Sanctity of life. This argument varieth with the climate; and in most
places proves rather against Romanists, than for them. It Is not long, since
Clemangis, Espencaeus, Alvarez, Petrarch, Pelagius, Dantes, Baronius, and the
Cardinals delegated by P. Paul III. and many of the Roman Doctors complained,
That all the miseries and civil wars in Christendom, came from the ill lives
of their Monastical and Clergymen; since Bellarmine sent great numbers of
Popes to hell together; and are they now come to be the only Saints on earth?
It Is confessed, That discipline (wherein even those Heretics, whom Mr. Knot
calls Infidels, by the confession of their most dreadful Adversaries, go
beyond Romanists) dangers, and such externals, make great alterations on some
men's lives. And in England there cannot be many monstrous wicked men of that
Religion (yet some there are) because not many men, in comparison with
Protestants. But what kind of people the plurality of them be in other Nations,
all the world knows. And Salmeron [in epist. Pauli. de falsis signis Eccl.
disp. 3.] Costerus [Enchirid. controvers. c. 2. p. 101.] a Costa [de tempor.
noviss. l. 2. c. 20.] are so ingenuous, as to confess expressly, That a life
apparently good and honest, is not proper to any one Sect, but common to JEWS,
TURKS, and HERETICS. And Card. Perron confesses it tacitly; while in his
letter to his Uncle, he mentions not the good lives of any Catholics. And S.
Chrysostom. [in Matthew. iii. hom. 4.] is as plain and large to my purpose, as any
of them. It is too plain, that arguing from the pretended holiness of men's
lives, to the goodness of their cause, or opinion, is a Paralogisme, which
has advanced Arianisme, Pelagianisme, and other heresies of old,
Mahumetanisme, Familisme, and Anabaptisme of late: And unless God of His
infinite Mercy prevent, may ruin Christendom now. His other Notes are so far
from arguments, that I am a little ashamed to say any thing to them.

The 3d is SUFFERINGS. And do not Protestants suffer more in most other parts
of Christendom, by the State, or the Inquisition, (where some, as our worthy
Confessor Mr Moll, have been and are kept in a close prison or dungeon for
above twenty years merely for Religion) or by both? So that those arguments
which their Christian Moderatour brings, supposing them rational in
themselves, cannot be such coming from a Romanist, unless, Quod tibi fieri non
vis, alteri nefeceris, be an unreasonable Law; and not Nature's. Nay, do not
the Socinians, Anabaptists, Arians, Atheists, suffer too; and burn rather then
turn? witness Servetus, John of Leiden, Hacket, Vanninus, Fontanier, Ket,
Leggat, Theophile, Gentilis, and many others.

4. Victory over all sorts of enemies. This makes more for Turcism then Popery,
for the Alcaron, then the Conc. of Trent.

5. CONVERSION OF INFIDELS. I would fain know what he means by Infidels (for he
cannot but know, that thousands have been converted by Protestants) whether all
of every nation? or how many converts are required to make up this note? and
whether so many, in every age? It Is certain, that multitudes of Infidels have
been converted to Mahumetanisme; and more Christians of late years to Judaisme
and Turcisme, then Turks or Jews to Christianity or Popery. And to see what
manner, of Christians the Romanists make in both the Indies, you need read no
other books then their own letters, their own Bishop, de las Casas book, or
Benzo's, cited p. 30. To turn a rich fruitful land into a desolate
wilderness, is in the new Roman language conversion. In a word, who ever
shall please to examine these notes (which are Mr Knot's last argument, and
other men's first, chief, and ordinary, for the infallibility of the Church) or
any other that he or his Society can bring shall find that they offend against
those properties, which Bellarmine, Salmeron, and other Roman Controvertists
require in all Notes; as That they should be verae, manifestae, propriae, non
communes, inseparabiles, etc. It being the most undoubted note of a
distinguishing Note, Alteri non quadrare.

Indeed his marks seem to me so weak arguments, that I cannot find how any man
can be convinced by them, unless through the Authority of the propounder: so
that if a man yields upon them, it must be out of civility, or fear of
gainsaying. But when men are resolved upon a Conclusion, impertinencies are
easily fancied to be as strong demonstrations, as any in Euclide. The
Pythagorians being bred up in positions concerning numbers, fancied them the
principles even of Natural bodies. Every rack in the clouds is a Regiment in a
young soldiers eye, and the least scratch in the wall a babie in the child's:
all chymnes sound their Whittington. I wish the best of Mr Knots arguments were
as concluding as the worst of Monsr Drelincourts 100 against Transubstantiation.

I heartily wish (as I said before) for an infallible Judge, and shall come
with as much prejudice against my own persuasion (for as yet I see no hope of
any in this world) to hear Mr Knots argument, as he can desire, in any Reader.
But I would be loath to run in a circle, and mistake a wish that some person
were infallible for a proof that he is. And therefore, if Mr K. shall think
this paper deserves any answer, besides an (...) (which I ever expected in this
Controversy) I shall beseech him, that before he tell us again that he has
proved the Church of Rome infallible, He would be pleased to resolve these
following questions: which I think must necessarily precede the examination of
that, which he in most leaves takes for granted.

I. Whether there be any infallible Judge on earth? II. Whether any Church be
that Judge? and not rather some one of those ten things which Mr. Chill.
names, and brings Scripture for, chap. 3.. 8? III. Whether the Roman Church
be that Church? IV. If it be, in what capacity? whether the Infallibility be 1.
in the head (the Pope) as the Jesuits generally, and many Canonists affirm; or
2. in the body of the Church as Panormitanus, Occam, Waldensis, Antoninus,
Clemangis, Cusanus and others hold, and give their reasons. And then whether in
the whole body diffusive, or in the collective in a Council? And if a Council
be infallible, then whether it be so only with the Popes confirmation, or
without it? And which way soever they say, I enquire further V. How we shall
certainly know who must be members of it, 1. Clergy and Laics, or 2. only
Clergy? And if so, whether 1. only Bishops (as commonly they say) or 2.
Presbyters too and Deacons, or Chorepiscopi at least? for we find all these
usually subscribing. VI. Or (let the Council be as they would have it) how
shall I be sure they are infallible? For 1. Are they so absolutely infallible,
as that they cannot determine falsely in rebus fidei, do what they will? Or 2.
Are they infallible only if they use all those good means, which God has
given them, to find truth; that is, if they read, study, dispute, search
records, pray, and lay aside all passions, private ends, and interests? VII.
How shall I know when they determine aright? what is required to a Synodicall
Constitution? Must all concur in the Vote, or will the major part serve the
turn? VIII. What makes a Council General? Must all the Bishops in the
Christian world be called? IX. And when they are called must they all come,
else is it no General Council? X. Who must call the General Council, the Pope,
or Christian Kings and Emperors? and how shall I be assured which of them
must? XI. How far are their determinations infallible? whether in matters of
fact as well as faith? And XII. If in matters of faith only: then whether in
fundamentals only (as many Catholics said of old, and Dr Holden the Sorbonist
at present) or in superstructures too, as others believe? And then XIII. How
shall I infallibly know which points are fundamental, which not? XIV. But admit
all this were determined, and our infallible Judge were a General Council with
the Pope, yet in a time of schism when there be two or three Popes at once [as
there were Clement III, and Greg. VII. Gelasius II, and Greg. VIII. Celestin
II, and Honorius II. Anacletus II, and Innocent II. Victor IV, and Alex. III.
Clement VII, and Urbane VI. Eugenius IV, and Felix V. Gautier the Jesuit will
help you to a larger catalogue] and these warring one against another; as when
there were two triple-crowns, one at Rome, the other at Avignon; the Italians
for the first, the French for the latter: the Court and the Cardinals, bulls
and indulgences at both places. And thus were there says John le Maire, de la
difference enter les Schisms, and les Conciles. 3. part.
many Popes at once, one against another, for 40 years together: so that the
learned Clergymen alive knew not which was St Peter's true successor: and
thus says reason may there be again. Then I ask, how I shall know which is the
infallible judge? And if Mr. K. give us in answer that general rule which he
sets down p. 369. When de facto any Pope defines some truth to be a matter of
faith, we are sure even by his doing so that he is true Pope. Then I Will reply,
(to omit the circle he runs in) that there may be not only two but twenty true
Popes together, for twenty men may define twenty several positions at the same
time, and all true: and yet all these men may be foulely mistaken another time;
and if so, I desire to know whether all these will be true Popes? Or by what
rule a Romanist may tell when a truth is defined and when not? since Sixtus V.
defined one Bible to be true Anno 1590. and Clemens VIII another, two years
after; and each of them prohibited and condemned all but his own: and these two
Bibles contain many contradictions each to other [See Dr James of the
contrariety of the vulgar Latin Bibles] and certainly contradictory
propositions cannot both be Gospel. And if not, then either one of these two
was not such really (whence inconveniences enough will follow) or they were
both true Popes; and so both their definitions true: and so no true Papist has
any true Bible. XV. But suppose there be no schism, and all agreed on the
Pope, and a General Council met; How shall I be sure that he who is reputed
Pope, is so indeed? seeing (by their own principles) Simonie makes him none;
[See the Bull of P. Julius II. super Simoniaca Papae electione. Si contigerit,
etc. and Specul. in tit. de dispens. juxta. verse. 2. and Majolus de
irregularitate l. 5. c. 47. p. 433.] and that he was not Simoniacal, it is
impossible for me to know. The election of Sixrus V. was notoriously
Simoniacal; For Cardinal d' Este whom he bribed and promised to obey, and
defend against an opposite faction, etc. Sent all these obligations subscribed
by Sixth. V. his own hand to Philip then King of Spain. Who in the year MDLXXXIX
sent to Rome to bid the Cardinals, who had been elected before Sixth. V. came to
the Sea, to come to a Council at Sevil in Spain, where the original writing was
produced, and the crime was evidently proved. And if so, all the Cardinals
which were made by this Sixtus were in reality no Cardinals, and then all the
Popes which have been made by those Cardinals since, [as Montaltus (Sixtus his
Nephew) Urban VII. Gregory XIV. Innocent. IX. Clement. VIII. and Innocent. X.
that now is,] have been really no Popes. See a book entitled Supplicatio ad
Imperatorem, Reges, etc. written at Rome by one that calls himself NOVUS HOMO,
and dedicated to K. James Anno MDCXII. But testimony enough of such doings may
be seen in the letters of Card. d' Ossat, and the transactions of Card. de
Joyeuse set down by Card. Pervon. Heul seeds Apostolica (orbis olim gloria)
nunc, proh dolor! efficeris officina Simonis. Damian. epist. ad Firminum.
Baronius T. 11. 1033. XVI. But admit the Pope were certainly known to be such,
and that neither he nor any of his predecessors came in by Simony; yet how
shall I know whether those Bishops, who (with him) make up a Council, are
Bishops indeed? For if they be no Bishops, then it is no Council. And that they
are true Bishops, it is for ever impossible for any Papist certainly to know.
For if he that did ordain them did not intend it, when he gave Orders, (and
whether he did or no, God only knows) then, by their own principles, they are
no Bishops; and by consequence no Council. XVII. But further how shall I know
that the Pope and Bishops so met (at Trent for example) are Christians? For if
not, then sure they are no legitimate Council, or Church representative: And
that they are Christians, it is impossible for any Catholic to know, with any
infallible certainty. For if they be not baptized, then I am sure with them
they are no Christians; and if the Priest that baptized them, did not intend to
do it, then (by the Canon of the Trent Council) they are not baptized. Now what
the Priest intended, when he administered that Sacrament, it is impossible that
any (save God who knows the heart) should certainly know (without immediate
revelation, which they pretend not to) and consequently, it is impossible that
any of them should certainly know, That ever there was a Pope, or a Bishop, or
a Priest since our Saviors days: nay impossible that They should know whether
there he now one Christian in their Church, and therefore much less that there
is or has been a lawful Council. XVIII. But admit all these doubts were
clearly solved, and a Council (in their own sense lawful) sitting and
determining matters in Controversy; yet how shall we know certainly (with that
absolute certainty Mr Knot speaks of) that these are their determinations?
(specially since the Greek Church above two hundred years since accused the
Roman for foisting a Canon into the Nicene Councels in behalf of the Popes
being Head of the Universal Church, which could never be found in the
authentic copies, though the African Bishops sent to Constantinople,
Alexandria, and Antioch to search for them. Codex. Can. Eccles. Afr. Justel. p.
39, 40.) We were not in the Council, nor ever saw any of the men that made the
Canons, we must rely on the honesty of the Amanuensis, or of those other
persons that conveigh them to us, and those are (certainly) not infallible: and
we know there are such things as Indices expurgatorii, foysting in, and
blotting out of Manuscripts. XIX. But admit all this cleared, yet (when I have
indeed the genuine Canons, and am sure of it) how shall I be assured of the
true meaning of them? for Mr K. tells us, that we cannot, without His Churches
determination, know what faith or repentance (or any word else in the
Scripture) means; though I suppose the Apostles intended as well as he or I
to be understood; and though he tell us That the Scriptures are as perfect a
rule as a writing can be. I am fallible, and may mistake; and in his opinion so
may any man but the Pope, or a Council. This is no vain supposition, for we
know that Vega and Soto (two famous and learned men in the Council of Trent)
write and defend contradictory opinions, yet each thinks the Canon of the
Council to determine on his side. Now of necessity one of them must mistake the
doctrine of the Council (unless you will say the Council determined
contradictions, and then the Council is not infallible it self) and if either
of them mistook the Council, then it was not an infallible guide to him. Now if
learned men, who were members of the Council, (such as disputed much in it)
could not infallibly know the meaning of it, how can I who am neither? XX.
Lastly, (not to trouble M. Knot with any more queries then are necessary) what
necessity of an infallible Judge at all? The Christian world had no such Judge
sor CCCXXIV years (for the Nicene Council was the first General) and if They
understood Scripture, and were saved then, when they had no such thing, why may
not We now? And if they were not saved, the Church of Rome must blot out many
hundreds and thousands of Saints and Martyrs out of her Martyrology.

Till these twenty questions be insallibly resolved, it seems to me impossible
that any man should have any infallible knowledge of the Church of Romes
Infallibility. And I am the more confirmed in the necessity of a plain
resolution to this last querie, because (though M. Knot be sometimes hot and
positive, in grounding all Christian Religion upon the infallibility of the
Church) I find (beside what I said p. 22.) Christ and the Apostles intimating
the contrary, Joh. v. 39. Act. iv. 19. xviii. 11. 2 Thessalonians. v. 21. 1. Joh. iv.
1. Rev. ii. 2. But to pass by such places of Scripture (because I know that
they who make Belgic. Expurgat. page 12.
profession of devising shifts, will find euasions for them) and to omit the
positions of many Roman Doctors of less note, who are as high for the
non-necessity of an infallible guide, as any Protestant can wish; I shall only
hint at Lactantius his large Chapter to this purpose, lib. 2. de orig. error.
c. 7. beginning thus, Quare oportet in ea re in qua vitae ratio versatur, sibi
quemque confidere, suoque judicio, ac propriis sensibus niti ad investigandam
and perpendendam veritatem; quam credentem alienis erroribus decipi, tanquam
ipsum rationis expertem. Dedit omnibus Deus pro virili portione sapientiam,
etc. and rather insist upon a couple of most eminent Cardinals, Baronius and
Lugo. Both these give their opinions very plainly on our side, and (which I
value more) their reasons and examples. The former has spent to our purpose a
whole Appendix, which he prefixed before the second tome of his Annals, printed
at Rome, MDLXXXVIII. where (appealing to every particular Protestant's
judgment, concerning the truth of his cause, and not once mentioning the
infallibility of the Church) he goes on thus, Ingens sane vis humanae insidet
rationi, etc. Great is the power of humane reason if it be left unsettered and
free in all things. And therefore our Ancestors placing great confidence in the
force of truth, where they contended with obstinate heretics, when they
declined and despised all judgment of the Church, were so indulgent as not to
refuse to try the judgment even of Infidels, and expect their determination.
Such men being Judges, the Jews* [Joseph. Antiq. l. 13. c. 6.] had the victory
over the Samaritans. And an heathen Philosopher being by consent chosen for an
Arbitrator, to whose judgment they were to stand, Origin [dialog.] overcame
five most wicked heretics. And Archelaus [Epiphan. haeres. 66.] a Bishop in
Mesopotamia, did consute Manes, a most desperate Archheretick, before certain
Heathens who were by consent chosen Judges, etc. The latter (though a Jesuit
and a Spaniard) plainly asserteth this non-necessity: tom. de virtut. fidei
dis. 1.. 12. n. 247. etc. And making it good by four instances: 1. THE BELIEF
OF THE INFALLIBILITY IT SELF: which must be received from some other motive
than it self, or its own testimony; and consequently (says he) all other
doctrines of Christianity may be believed upon the same inducements; and not
merely upon the infallibility of the Church. 2. CHILDREN, or OLD PEOPLE; who
are newly converted to the faith, do not believe the Infallibility, before
they embrace other Articles: for they believe Articles in order as they are
propounded, and this is commonly one of the last. 3. RUSTICKS AND COMMON
PEOPLE, at this day in Spain, Italy, and other Catholic Countries: who
commonly resolve their faith no further than their Parish Priest, or some other
learned, or holy man at the most. 4. He asserteth number. 252. That IN THE LAW OF
NATURE, most believed only upon the Authority of their Parents, without any
Church-propounding. And also after the law was written most believed Moses and
the Prophets, before their prophecies were received and propounded by the
Church for the sanctity of their lives, etc. And this discourse wa^ written by
special order from the late Pope Urban, and dedicated to the present Pope
Innocent X.

And now, my patient Reader, to draw to a conclusion as my spare-leaves do (for
I have unawares detained thee, very much longer then I intended, when I first
set pen to paper for this Preface; which was after the following English
Apology was fully printed; and that is one reason of its immethodicalness.) If
I have writ any thing impertinent!, I hope that my brother THE UNIVERSITY-MAN
(Mr. Knots friend) will help to excuse me: if any thing that savoureth of
passion (which I shall be very sorry for, as soon as it shall be discovered to
me) that Mr. Knot will be my Advocate (each of them being commonly conceived
sufficiently guilty of one or both of these faults) and hereafter I may do as
much for them.

And further to encourage Mr K. to do somewhat for me; I do here assure him,
That if he shall vouchsase punctually to answer these xx questions (which seem
to me very necessary to be plainly determined, before he can assure any man of
the Infallibility of the Roman Church, on which foundation he lays so huge a
structure) and withal to refute that one argument which I mentioned page 18.
out of Dr. Jer. Tailors nervous discourse: and then* prove that the Church of
Rome is infallible by any one infallible argument (for he has told us that
nothing less can do it) I will be his Proselyte.

Until which time (...) unless (which I think far the more probable, and
therefore shall daily pray for it) Mr. Knot will be so ingenuous as S.
Augustine was, to retract his errors in his later days, and come over to the
good Old, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, leaving Roman superstructures. For
I begin to despair (with that Milevitan Bishop) of ever seeing, while I am upon
earth, any infallible, living Judge in matters of says; and to believe, I
must, (as the Jews speak) expect the coming of Elias for that purpose: having
long observed, by Mr. Knot's seven books in this Controversy, that

Cause patrocinio non bona pejor erit.

To the Preface p. 8. l. 29. add, That there were Christians in Britain,
before Augustine the Monk came over is plain out of Eusebius, Theodoret,
Arnobius, Tertullian, Gildas, Bromton: and I suppose no man that is not a mere
stranger to Antiquity will deny. That those Christians had no dependence upon
Rome will appear to any who reads the ancient Histories of Rome or England.
Platina says that Antherus the 20th Pope sat eleven years, and made only one
Bishop. In a word, from the death of St Peter till the entrance of Marcellus
(which was CCC and old years) there were not two hundred Bishops made in all
by all the Popes of Rome. One in a year was a rare matter. He says not a
syllable of the erecting any Archbishopric, or Patriarchate all that time:
Not a word of foreign Bishops traveling or sending to Rome to beg Privileges
and Confirmations, or to take an oath of fidelity and obedience. But to come
closer home and to the purpose; The story of the seven British Bishops, and
many other very learned men (but especially the Monks of Bangor) is very
remarkable; and may be read at large in the history of Bid, set forth by our
learned Mr Whelock from p. 110. to 119. wh^re it is said, that these Monks of
Bangor were divided into seven parts (see also Bromton's Chronicle p. 780.) the
least whereof consisted of three hundred; and That they told Augustine plainly
that they would not relinquish their ancient customs, without the consent and
leave of their Countrymen. And when Augustine had made a long speech to
persuade them to be subject to the Pope of Rome, Dinooth their Abbot answered
him briefly in these words. Bid ispis, etc. [ Sr H. Spelmans Councels p. 108.]
Be it known unto you and without doubt that we are all and every one of us
obedient and subjects to the Church of God and Pope of Rome, and to every godly
Christian: to love every one in his degree with perfect charity, and to help
every one of them by word and deed to be the children of God. And other
obedience then this I do not know due to him whom you call the Pope, or that he
has right to challenge or to require to be the Father of Fathers. This
obedience we are ready to give and to pay to him and to every Christian
continually. Besides we are under the government of the Bishop of Kaerleon upon
Vske, who is to oversee us under God, to make us keep the spiritual way. Would
you know what became of these Monks hereupon? Episcopi Abbates and Doctores
contra morem Ecclesiae [Romanae] viventes a Rege Ethelfrido vastante gentem
Britonum ad nihilum redacti sunt, cum tribus millibus Monachorum monasterii de
Bangor; qui in campum bellatorum adducti sunt ut Regi adversa imprecarent. Hi
omnes, ut fertur, de labor manuum suarum vivebant, etc. Thus far Gervasius
printed by Mr Be, p. 1632. [See the sixteen immunities p. 1386.] And Sr H.
Spelman cites out of the ancient Annals of Gisburn these words p. 26. Till the
time of K. Hen. 1. the Bishops of S. David's were there consecrated by their own
Welsh Suffragans, WITHOUT MAKING ANY PROFESSION OF SUBJECTION TO ANY OTHER
CHURCH. Not to insist upon the translating the Pall into little Britain; he
that would read more to this purpose may peruse RR. Armach his discourses of
the Religion anciently professed by the Irish and British, chap. 8, 9, 10. and
de primordiis Eccles. Britan. the eight first chapters.

ERRATA.
In the Preface p. 6. l. 3. which by consequence over p. 7. l. 17.
indispensable. p. 9. l. 14. be in schism or heresy. p. 10. l. 20. (...). p.
14. l. 34. entreat him (for p. 16. l. 35. Cellot de Hierarchia. p. 17. l. 9.
the Christian Moderatour mentions. p. 18. l. 15. Beza, Luther. ibid. l. 17.
dele Luther. p. 31. l. 30. dele John of Leiden. p. 32. l. 30. chymes.

In the Apology p. 22. l. 27. not to S. Paul. p. 26. l. 11. unbeseeming at the
least. p. 62. l. 23. dele not. p. 40. l. 13. nature, among unintellectual
beings. p. 73. l. 13. Rimmon. In. p. 83. l. 5, and 7, ate p 87. l. 3. in a
slight. ibid. l. 24. alone? p. 88. l. 28. his conscience.

To the most virtuous Lady, MARY de LANOU, wife to the Marshall of THEMINIS.
MADAM;
HAving a design to justify in this Book, That it is not permitted to a
conscience which is satisfied in the knowledge of our Religion, to continue in
the profession of the Roman; and desiring to confirm that by example, which I
think I have proved by reason; I have not found any more illustrious than that
which you have been pleased to give in the sight of heaven and earth, in
quitting the Roman Communion (which is so sweet, so pompous and advantageous
in worldly respects) to cast your self into the lap of the true Church; as low
and desolate as it appears in carnal eyes. This brave and gallant action
highly befitting your Name and Blood, has demonstrated, more evidently than
any words of mine are able, That the souls of those who believe as we do,
cannot enjoy the peace of God, nor assurance of his grace, nor hope of his
glory, in the communion which You have quitted. For these things are all that
you find among us worth speaking of; all other advantages do far more abound
among them; nothing but these can you look or hope for 'midst us, who are
destitute of all the rest. But You have judged, that this rich pearl of the
Gospel is alone worth far more then all other commodities beside; and so have
rather chosen to hazard the rest, to assure your self of this, than to endure
for assuring the rest to run any the least danger in the world of missing this
jewel. MADAM, It is the Almighty who has inspired into You, so holy and so
wise a resolution, and has given You strength to put it in execution at so
unfavourable a time: Whereat the Angels in heaven rejoice, whereat the Church
on earth praises Him. Amidst so many evils which she suffers, and more which
she foreseeth, it is matter to Her of great comfort, that in an age so full of
ill examples, she can find some souls of your quality and merit, that have
courage to disdain reproach, and can rank themselves under the Cross of their
Savior. Even they who approve not your change, admire your virtue, and cannot
deny, but that it is a rare and singular generositie, which causes you to
prefer the contentment of your conscience, before all other considerations.
But besides the joy that your conversion has brought to those of the Church,
and the admiration that it affects them with who are out of it, I hope that
your example will be to the great edification of all; strengthening the one in
the Communion wherein they live, and drawing in the other. Which (MADAM) is the
cause of my mentioning this to you in my entrance: most humbly beseeching you
to take it in good part, and to suffer your name to shine in the front of this
small book; to give weight and light to its discourse, and to invite all such
as shall read it to imitate You, in preferring the grace of Heaven, before the
interests of earth; and the solid hopes of Eternity, before the petty joys of
these few moments which we pass here below. Which favor if I may (as I hope I
shall) obtain from your goodness; I shall earnestly pray our Lord, that he
would communicate to You more and more of his dear Son JESUS (the only
happiness of our souls) and crown that obedience, which you have rendered to
Him by confessing His Gospel here, with the blessings of this and a better
world; remaining inviolably,

MADAM, Your most humble and obedient servant, DAILLE*

The Editions of such Authors as are cited in this Apology of Monsr. DAILLE,
and in another English Tract of his, entitled, The use of the Fathers in
controversies between Papists and Protestants.
AMbrose, printed at Basil, Anno 1555. in five tomes. Athanasius, at Paris,
1627. by M. Sonnius, etc. Augustine, at Paris 1531. by Chevall. Baronius, at
Antwerp, 1612. Plantin. Basil at Paris with Sonnius, etc. 1618. Bertram the
Priest in Orthodoxographis, at Basil 1555. Bibliotheca Patrum, at Paris, 1624.
Breviarium Romanum, at Paris, 1612. Canus de locis Theolog. at Lovain, 1569. by
Servat. Sass. Cassander, at Paris, by Hier. Drouart. Casaubons exercitations
against Baronius, at London. Cathar. annot. on Cajet. at Lions, 1542. by Matthew.
Bont. Clemens Alexandrinus, at Florence, 1550. Councels general, Greek and
Lat. at Rome, 1608. Cyprian, at Paris, by Claud. Chapel. Directory for the
Inquisitors at Rome, 1587. by Georg. Ferr. Epiphanius, at Paris, 1622. Fulbert.
Carnot. at Paris, 1608. by Tho. Blaise. Gregory Nyssens Orations, at Paris,
1638. by Morel. Hierom, at Paris, 1579. by Nivelle. Hilary, at Paris, 1510. by
Ascensius. Ireneus, 1570. by John Preux, and John Petit. Justin, at Paris,
1615. by Morel. Origin, at Paris, 1536. by Nic. Pen. Origin against Celsus, at
Augsbourg, 1605. F. Paolo his Apolog. at Venise, 1606. Pererius upon the epist.
to the Romans at Ingolst. 1603. by Sartor. Pontificale Romanum, at Rome, 1611.
Salmeron, at Coloiu, 1614. by Antony Hier. etc. Scaliger upon Eusebius. Chronic.
at Leiden, 1606. by Basson. Tertullian at Paris, 1616. Theophilus Antioch. at
the end of Justin. 1615. by Morel.
AN APOLOGY for the Reformed Churches, Against those who accuse them of having
made a schism in Christendom.
CHAP. I. The Occasion and importance of this Treatise.
AMong all those actions and persuasions of us (Protestants) that are ill taken
by our Adversaries, there is scarce any that is worse resented, or for which we
are more bitterly and generally reproached, then our Separation from the Sea of
Rome, and the Churches of her Communion. For they charge us of having by this
means rent asunder the bowels of Jesus Christ, and miserably torn in pieces
that holy Body, which He formed of His own blood. An horrible crime
(questionless) and such an one as comes but little (if at all) behind the
impiety of those outrageous murderers, who nailed our Savior to the cross,
pierced his side, and hands, and feet, with their abominable spear and nails.
And whereas other parts of our doctrine offend only our enemios, this has the
ill luck to displease some of our friends: For such I take them to be who
approve our belief, and yet blame us for being out of the Church of Rome. It
therefore does behove us infinitely (for the common rectifying and enlightening
of both parties) to examine this accusation, and to show, if it be possible,
the injustice and nullitie of it: to the end, that they who approve our belief
may join themselves to our Communion, seeing the weakness of those reasons,
which have hitherto kept them on a side in which they acknowledge some errors;
and that they who entirely reject our persuasion may hereafter consider the
grounds whereon we go, without any more troubling themselves to throw upon us
this invidious but vain reproach. This is the subject, which I purpose to treat
on in this paper; most humbly beseeching those who shall vouchsafe to read it,
to bring with them a mind free from passion, which turning its eyes from the
Persons, may regard nothing at present but the worth and weight of the subject
in hand.

CHAP. II. The necessity of an union of Believers.
IN the first place, we confess that Christians are obliged both by the will
of their Master, and by their own welfare and salvation, to continue united one
to another, and all together to make up but one body. And as this union is
their sovereign happiness, and the necessary effect of charity, without which
they cannot be Christians; so the breach of it, and division is the greatest of
their infelicities, and the most grievous of their crimes. And they who either
procure it or foment it, shall never be able to avoid that curse, which our
Savior does often denounce, of not inheriting the kingdom of heaven; into
which place none is received without this charity, which such men want. For as
the being and perfection of a natural body consists in the union of its parts;
which dissolving and falling asunder, the whole does presently lose not its
form and beauty only, but likewise its force and life: so is it in all humane
Societies, which are called Bodies only by similitude. Their being and their
excellence depends upon the union of the members whereof they are composed. We
see Kingdoms and States flourish while the Subjects are united and knit
together with the lovely bond of concord, but straight crumble to nothing when
dissension separates them each from other. And among all the evils that afflict
them there is none so pernicious as division, which strikes at the very
foundation of their being, and poisons the original of their life and
strength. So that to kindle sedition and sow faction by breaking the peace of
Subjects, is questionless the highest crime that any man can commit against a
State.

So then, the Church being the heavenly Kingdom and everlasting State of
Christ Jesus, the most admirable of all the Societies that ever have been
either seen or sancied in the Universe; We must needs conclude, That by
proportion their crime who trouble and disturb it (so far especially as to
rend away from the Body any of its parts) is the blackest of all crimes
whatsoever.

Thus far we all agree. Nor are any ready to speak ought further in behalf of
union or against division, which we are not ready to sign and consent unto;
desiring still, if possible, to outbid any for unity.

CHAP. III. That it is sometimes lawful to separate from a Company of men
professing Christianity.
BUt though union be a very great good, and division an extreme mischief, it
follows not thence* That it is not sometimes permitted us to separate in some
sort, from some Societies, who make profession of serving God. Indeed how can
it but be so, in a schole that is full of precepts and examples to that
purpose? in a schole wherein we are commanded to reject a man that is an
heretic, after the first and second admonition? Tit. iii. 10. to exclude them
out of our houses, and to esteem them not fit to be greeted, who bring us any
other doctrine then that of Jesus Christ? 2 John x. to abhor the Apostles,
nay even Angels, and to avoid them as cursed and excommunicated persons, if
they should take the boldness to preach ought else but that Gospel which is
already delivered? Gal. i. 8, 9. To depart straight out of Babylon, and not to
be kept in there, lest we partake at once of her sins and plagues? Revel.
xviii. 4. In a schole, where those of Ephesus are commended for having hated
the Nicolaitans, and those of Pergamus blamed for having tolerated their
doctrine? Rev. ii. 6, 15. In a schole where, even at the beginning, the
children of the Church had continually so much care to separate from the
communion of heretics, as Samosatenians, Arians, and others?

Who sees not, that according to this discipline, it is sometimes not lawful
only, but even necessary to separate from some Societies that make profession
of Christianity? and that in this case we must blame not generally and simply
all that make a separation, but those only who make it either lightly and
without reason, or unjustly and without necessity. The matter seems
sufficiently clear. For since the conservation of such things as are united is
the end of union, It Is evident that we are not to entertain any union but only
with them, who may help forward that design, and so far only as they may
help it forward.

If therefore there be any, who under color of the blessed name of Christ
subvert His doctrine, annihilate His authority and our salvation* it is so far
from being our duty to unite our selves to them, that on the contrary we are
obliged to part from them; because to unite with them were in effect to
disunite from Christ and from His body, and in stead of coming to salvation to
fall into eternal ruin. If in a State, a City or Province should oblige those
that live within it, to perform actions that are contrary to the Majesty and
service of the Sovereign, the loyal inhabitants may thereupon separate
themselves, and even oppose and resist the rebels with all their power, if
occasion be offered. For it is a law generally engraven by nature in all parts
of the Universe (even in insensible creatures) That every thing seeks after the
company of that which is like it, and with equal violence avoids to be near (or
have any thing to do with) that which is contrary to it.

So then, both the discipline of Jesus Christ, and the laws of Civil
societies, and even those of nature her self, permit us to avoid the communion
of such as under any pretense, name, or color whatsoever, go about to destroy
and ruin Christianity. What, did I say that they permit us? nay they command
it so expressly, that we cannot refrain from such separations without offending
God, scandalizing our neighbors, and destroying our selves. And though this be
a truth received among all Christians, yet there is no Society or company of
them, wherein it is more strictly and more severely practiced, then among those
against whom we now dispute. For who knows not with what rigor Rome has
continually rejected the Communion of those who dissent from her? In the
infancy of Christianity she anathematized the Churches of Asia for a matter of
nothing, viz. because they celebrated Easter otherwise then she: and in these
later days how has she persecuted with fire and sword all those that would
venture never so little to oppose her power and greatness? How many ages have
passed over her head since she broke with the Eastern, Northern, and Southern
Churches, with which notwithstanding she boasts much of her having so great
conformity of belief and service? So nice is she and delicate in this point,
that we have seen not long ago the chiefest of her Monks, the most exquisite of
her Religious Orders, fly off and separate from the State of Venice, and
renounce there her Churches and Altars (where all the Articles of her faith
were daily published, where all her devotions and services were continually
celebrated) only upon pretense, That this wise Commonwealth would not endure,
that Pope Paul the fifth should bereave her of the power she had, to make and
execute laws for the government of her subjects. So that if separation simply
be a crime, who sees not that our Adversaries are faulty too, and consequently
are not to be admitted to bring in the accusation against us?

CHAP. IV. That our Separation from Rome was not made rashly, willingly, or
unnecessarily.
Object. BUt they will say, that They had reason to do so, and that We have none.

Ans. So then, now we come to the business, viz. To examine the causes of our
separation, before sentence be given against it. Let us, I beseech you, leave
the odious words of division and schism, and apply them to none but such to
whom we shall find they appertain. For if we have not had any important cause
of our separation from the Church of Rome; if she have not required any thing
of us which destroys our faith, offends our consciences, and overthrows the
service which we believe due to God; If the differences between us have been
small, and such as we might safely have yielded unto; Then I Will grant, That men
may call our Ancestors Schismatics, may condemn their separation to be rash
and unjust, and may impute to them all the sad disasters and scandals, that
have attended that action. B^t if they were urged to believe, and pressed to
do* a thousand things contrary to their faith and to their conscience; if only
for not doing them they were declared Heretics, enemies to J. Christ and his
Church; if they were deemed unworthy even of the honors, or possessions, yea
even of that life it self which is enjoyed in this world; who does not see,
That they deserve, the pity of men in stead of their hate, and That their
withdrawing themselves from people, who have Treated them in this manner, was
just, lawful, and necessary, according to all the laws of heaven and earth?
Now it is very apparent, that they were forced to make this separation for
reasons which they in their consciences judged to be very great and important.
For excepting the motives of conscience, all other considerations evidently
obliged them to the contrary. In separating from the Church of Rome they plucked
upon themselves all the disfavours of the world; they incurred the indignation
of their Magistrates, the hatred of their Countrymen; they exposed themselves
to the loss of their goods, their honors, their friends, their very country,
nay all that is sweet, near, or dear unto them in this life; and to the
suffering of poverty, ignominy, banishment, tortures and all imaginable
punishments. Who can believe, that men who had the use of sense and reason (as
well as their neighbors) should ever choose (with cheerfulness, where there
is no necessity) to embrace such a side? And though, they had been so blind, as
not to have foreseen that such would be the event of their design (which yet
is not a jot probable) how should We come to have so little experience as not
to discern the danger? We, who follow their steps, and have seen the whole
world in a conspiracy for to reduce them with all possible force and artifice
from this separation, and to reunite us to Rome. One must needs think then,
that both our Ancestors and We were carried on to this motion, so apparently
contrary to our own good and welfare, by some very strong reason, that forced
us as it were against our wills to slight what ever is naturally desirable,
and in stead of enjoying that to suffer what we are wont to dread; which
certainly can be no less then a strange fantasticalnesse and a silly
opinionative humor, which should make us take a delight in running counter to
others, as some (without any appearance of reason) are pleased to imagine. I
heartily wish it were in our power, to accommodate our selves in this
particular with a good conscience to the customs and Services of our
Countrymen; whose friendship We know very well how much we ought to value, and
how highly to prize the good favor of those Princes whom God has set over us:
especially rather then to displease them needlessly, in a matter of such high
importance, and which they affect with so much passion, according to the great
and singular devotion which they bear toward those things that they esteem
divine. We behold likewise (and grieve to behold) the disorders that this
diversity in Christianity breeds; and the extreme scandal that it gives to
Infidels, and such as are weak in faith. And what ever others say, We are not
(thanks be to God) such enemies to His glory and the salvation of mankind, as
not be as sensible of these doleful emergencies, as of ought that most
concerns our temporal good, and private interests.

CHAP. V. Reasons of our Separation from Rome founded upon the diversity of
our Beliefs.
Object. BUt you will say, If it be thus, how can you possibly pass over these
considerations your selves, which you pretend to think so important? why do you
not follow them whither they would lead you? Seeing you desire the favor of
Princes, the love of your Countrymen, a peaceable and settled condition;
seeing you would gladly promote the glory of God and the edification of men,
and do really abhor the scandal of this disunion, why are ye not again
reconciled to the Roman Church? she opens her arms wide unto you, and is not
so stiff and rigorous as you seem to apprehend her, but for to gain you is
willing to yield to some Accommodation, and in favor of you to mitigate some
of those things that offend you most. What, I pray, is there so strange in her
doctrine, or in her service, that should cause you to forsake her communion, to
avoid the ancient Churches, and Religion of our Fathers, to renounce the
ordinary public assemblies of Christian people, to sever from all the rest of
the world, and to suffer all sorts of extremities? Our Church adores the same
JESUS CHRIST, whom you profess to be the Prince and Author of your Religion.
She confesses the unity of His person, and the verity of His two natures. She
believes Him to be God eternal, of the same substance with the Father and with
the Holy Ghost, and likewise man made in time, of the flesh of the blessed
Virgin, like to us in all things, sin only excepted, truly Immanuel, as the
ancient Prophesies foretold. She acknowledges the truth, benefit, and necessity
of his sufferings, and preaches (even as you) That His blood expiated the
crimes of mankind; That the freedom and salvation of the world is the fruit of
His death. She exalts His glory, and believes That He sits at the right hand
of God in heaven; and, That He shall come in the last day to judge the world;
and she hopes after the renovation of this world, for a blessed immortality
(through his grace) in one to come. She gives to her children baptism, which
Christ did institute, and refreshes them with His Eucharist, and recommends to
them piety toward Him, and charity toward men. She reverenceth the Gospels, and
the Epistles of the Apostles as books divinely inspired. And if there be any
other Article in the discipline of our Lord, she receives and embraces it as
well as you, and curses the names and memory of those, who have gone about to
overthrow or shake them, whether in former or latter ages.

Ans. The truth is, We neither can nor will deny, that the Church of Rome does
at this day believe all these holy truths; We thank our gracious Lord, that she
has preserved them through so many ages, midst so many disorders. But we would
to God, That she had been as careful of not adding as of not diminishing; That
she had foisted in nothing of her own, but permitted us to content our selves
with that, which sufficed the Primitive Christians to bring them to salvation.
For had she kept within those bounds, neither our Fathers nor We had ever had
any cause of withdrawing from her Communion. We had then sworn to her opinions,
and performed her service without any scruple, finding abundantly in this brief
but full and admirably complete rule of wisdom, enough to replenish our faith,
and season our manners, understandings, and wills with all perfections
necessary for attaining to that Sovereign Happiness, which both you and We
naturally desire. But who knows not, That to the aforesaid divine Articles
(clearly expressed in the Holy Scriptures, authentically preached and founded
by the Apostles, uniformly believed and confessed by Christians of all places
and ages) Rome has added diverse others, which she presses equally with them,
forcing all those of her communion to receive them with the same faith as they
do those aforesaid; thundering out horrible anathemaes against all them that
doubt of them, and using for the ruin of such all the power and credit that
she has, whether in the Church, or in the world? For besides J. Christ (whom
she acknowledges with us to be the Mediator of mankind, the High Priest and
chief Sovereign of the Church) she would have us hold the Saints departed to
be our Mediators, and her Priests our Sacrificers, and her Pope to be the Head
and Husband of the Church. Besides the sacrifice of the Cross, she forces
upon us that of the Altar. Besides the blood of Christ, she commands us to
expect our cleansing from the sufferings of Martyrs, and from the virtue of a
certain fire which she has kindled under ground. Besides the water of
Baptism, and the refection of the Eucharist, she presses us to receive
unction with oils, and the mysteries of her private Confessions. Besides the
Great God, whom she adores and prays to as we do, she commands us to adore
the holy Sacrament, to invocate Angels and beatified Spirits. Besides that
service of the Gospel wherein she agrees with us, she imposes upon us diverse
ceremonies, abstaining from meats, distinction of times, veneration of images.
Besides the H. Scriptures which are divinely inspired, which she confesses
with us, she would have us receive with the same faith and respect all the
traditions which she approves of. Besides the repose and rest in the Kingdom
of heaven, which she with us promises to the faithful, she will have us to
believe another in Limbo, a prison for children that die without baptism. And
besides the torments of hell, which she with us threatens to the wicked, she
denounces to the faithful another like it in purgatoric.

These (and several others like to these) are the positions which she adds
to the true and fundamental Articles of the good Old Christianity; and which
are the points that divorce us from her Communion. For every one knows, how
carefully she has established them in her Councels, how daily she recommendeth
them in her Schools and pulpits, how rigourously she exacteth them in
confession; having long since pronounced, and often since (daily still)
proclaiming and repeating, That she esteems them Heretics, Enemies of Christ,
and worse then Infidels, that reject these opinions or any of these. And (which
is more offensive yet) not content to teach them by the voice of her Doctors,
she imprints them in the hearts of her people through continual observation
and use; so that among them of her communion, the practice of these additionall
Articles makes more then a full half of what they esteem Christianity. For the
greatest part of their service consists in invocation of Angels and Saints, in
adoring the Sacrament, in worshipping images, in offering up the Sacrifice of
the Altar, or in partaking of it, in making Confessions, and exercising other
ceremonies. But as for us, all the world knows that we have quite another
opinion of these matters. We content our selves with the intercession,
sacrifice, and monarchy of J. Christ, and can join to Him neither Saints, nor
Priests, nor the Pope in any of those three qualities, which the Scripture of
the New Testament attributes to none but Him alone. We deem His blood
sufficient for the purgation of our souls, having never learnt that either S.
Paul, or any other Saint was crucified for us; nor, That after this life the
Saints shall enter into any other place, but only one of repose and rest.
After Baptism and the Lords Supper we desire no other Sacraments; not having
heard in His Word, that he has obliged us necessarily to go to the ear of any
Priest to receive his absolution, or to the hand of any Bishop to have his
chrisme. We dare not adore the bread which we break, nor the cup which we
bless; because all confess, That it is not permitted us to adore any but God
only. We can neither invocate creatures, since we have in the Scripture
neither commandment nor example for it; nor prostrate our selves before images,
since we have express commands therein against it. We scruple at making any
thing an Article of our Faith, which we have not heard in the Word of God; be
he an Apostle or an Angel that evangelizeth. So that since we find nothing in
the Scripture of abstinence from meats, distinction of times, and other Roman
ceremonies, nor of the Limbus of infants, or purgatory; we cannot yet be
persuaded that it is necessary for us to believe them.

CHAP. VI. That our Separation arises not from particular matters of fact or
private opinion, but from such things as are believed generally by all the
Roman Church, and so that it is not like to the schism of the Donatists.
I Might yet allege many other differences: but this little may suffice, to
let you see, what are the main reasons which oblige us to separate from Rome.
Whence it appears, how unjust a comparison it is (that I say not impertinent
and silly) which some make of our Separation to that of the Donatists. For they
pretended not to find any thing in the doctrine of the Catholic Church from
whence they separated, which was contrary to their belief. Both the one and the
other taught the same faith, read the same books, exercised the same services.
The Donatist entering with the Catholics found nothing either in their belief
or discipline, which he had not seen and learned in his own. But as for us,
it is impossible that we should enter into the Communion of the Church of Rome,
without swearing to many doctrines which we formerly never learned in the
schole of the Scriptures; without receiving Sacraments which are utterly
unknown to us; without bowing our knees before images which is absolutely
forbidden; without adoring a thing for God whose Deity we know not; without
acknowledging him to be the Head and Husband of the Church whom we know to be
but a mortal man; without subjecting those consciences to an humane, which are
taught and wont to submit unto none but a divine Authority. And as for that
which the Donatists allege, That Felix the Ordainer of Cecilian Bishop of
Carthage did in former times deliver up the Holy Scriptures to the Pagans,
during the persecution, though it had been true (as indeed it was not; the
Catholics having clearly justified their innocence in this point by many
irrefragable testimonies) supposing, I say, it had been true, that he had
committed this fault, who sees not, that this is not a cause in nature like to
those for which we make our separation? For this was a matter of fact and not a
doctrine, a fact of one man, that is of Felix alone, and not of the whole body
of the African Church; So that it should have given the Donatists no occasion
or cause of separating from Cecilian, much less any just cause of breaking
communion with all Africa. For suppose that Felix the Ordainer of Cecilian had
committed this fault, yet it is clear, That he did not teach or think that it
was lawful for him to deliver the H. Scriptures up to Infidels; but on the
contrary, by denying that he committed it, and standing upon his defense as he
did, he confessed plainly by consequence, that it was a fault. The Donatists
then might have continued in that communion without any way staining either
their Creed or their manners, without being forced either to do or believe any
thing against their consciences. But for all that, supposing (which yet is
manifestly false) that Cecilian had defended, and preached publicly in his
pulpit, That it was permitted Christians in times of persecution, to deliver up
the books of HOLY WRIT to the enemies of the Church; and supposing again (which
it is not fit now to examine) that this error were pernicious, and inconsistent
with a true faith, I cannot discern how the Donatists had any just cause of
avoiding the communion of the successors of Cecilian or other Bishops of
Africa, who unanimously held, taught, and preached that to commit such a fault
was a weakness unbefitting the soul of a Christian, and made all such submit
to the rigours of Ecclesiastical discipline whom they found guilty of it. This
crime (or what ever you will imagine it) was only Felix's, or perhaps
Cecilians; but not any man's else: The whole Church had no share in it: so that
it was an intolerable piece of injustice, a strange pride, and mad
fantasticalnes, to abhor a whole Church for the errors of offenses of one
particular man. I would to God the case between the Roman Church and us had
been the like! That we had seen nothing deplorable but only the faults of her
Pastors, and the disorders of her manners! or That such of her doctrines which
we cannot receive, had been the thoughts of some particular men only! Had
there been nothing else we should have lived still together. Our Fathers would
never have separated from Her Communion; or if some strange passion, which we
dream not of, had precipitated them into a rupture and schism like that of the
Donatists; We do in our Consciences protest, that we would have been afraid to
follow their error, and that we would have lost no time of uniting our selves
with them, from whom we had been so imprudently separated. For we cannot but
confess, That it is a piece of very high injustice to impute the faults of men
to their profession, and to accuse their Religion of those extravagancies which
they commit, especially if against it. In such a case we should questionless
practice the doctrine of our Savior, speaking of them who sit in Moses chair;
Matt. xxiii. 3. All those things which they bid you observe, those observe and
do; but do not after their works. The Church wherein they live is not guilty of
their error, especially when it highly (and often out of the mouths of those
very men) condemns the faults and disorders of their lives. The Church may
say to such fugitives, The faults of my children are no fit reason to induce
you to abhor Me. Live in my communion you may, and not be obliged to
communicate with their wicked deeds. Those very men who are thus wicked should
drive you from the vice, in stead of bringing you to it: for, if you mark it,
They carry preservatives in their mouths against the poisons of their manners.
But, alas! 'Twas not this that drove us from the Church of Rome. 'Twas not the
fall of one Felix, nor the weakness of some Cecilians, 'twas not the
covetousness of her Prelates, the licenciousnesse of her Monks, the
filthiness of her Court, the excess and abuse of her Sovereigne Pontifes. For
though she suffered these disorders with too much indulgence, yet she neither
does command them, nor openly approve of them. Though she very gently tolerate
such as were debauched or vicious, yet she did not force any to be so. No man
was for entering into her communion constrained to be a slave to any of those
vices which bore sway in the midst of her. No, a man might have lived within
it, and yet addicted himself to honesty and goodness: And as yet corruption
had not gained so far, as that ill manners were authorized by public laws.
But on the contrary during the worst of times, though her voice was weak and
languishing, yet she made some noise against the impiety of the age. And
oftentimes those very men that gave ill example in their lives preached against
it and decryed it horribly in the pulpit. That which has pulled us from her
communion is her doctrine, and not her actions; that which she commands, and
not that which she suffers; that which she requires of us all, and not that
which she tolerates in some others; the articles of her faith, and not the
faults of her life. For the adoration of the Eucharist, invocation of Saints,
veneration of images, and those other articles which we rehearsed before, are
not such things as she only tolerates as bad, or excuses as doubtful; but
beliefs which she commends as true, and observations which she commands as
useful and necessary to salvation. Nor does she only practice them in the
house and privately, but likewise preach them in the Temple, as perpetual
parts of her Faith. So that if we continue in her communion, we must needs make
profession of believing them, that is, make our selves guilty of an horrible
hypocrisy, confessing with our mouth what we do not believe with our heart.
Now if these were only the opinions of some one of her Doctors, if it were
only some one Divine that were to be blamed, and the rest of their. Church
disavowed these things; we should not for such a matter make any scruple of
communicating with Her; acknowledging ingenuously, That it is an unreasonable
thing to impute the opinions (and so the faults) of a few particular men to a
whole entire body. Since we see it often happens, that they who live in the
Communion of a Church, are neither in whole nor in part of the same belief with
that Church. Thus formerly among the Jews, The sect of the Sadducees had their
doctrines apart, and the Pharisees had likewise theirs. And for a man's being a
Jew, he was not at all obliged to embrace or hold precisely the opinions either
of the one, or of the other sect. And at this very day in the Church of Rome
(whence we departed) the order of the Dominicans has some opinions proper to
themselves, and the Franciscans have others, and so likewise the Jesuits
others, peculiar to their respective Orders. If therefore there were in the
midst of Her, only some one society of men that held affirmatively those
things which we cannot believe, and others lived at liberty either to receive
or reject them, In this case I confess, that it were very difficult to excuse
our Separation, since the Communion with that body whence we have departed does
not oblige us precisely to any points contrary to our consciences, But who
knows not that those Articles which we cannot receive, are public not private
Doctrines, common to the whole Church of Rome, and not peculiar to the Pope and
his party? established authentickly in her General Councels, by the suffrages
of the Deputies of all the Churches in the world that live in her Communion?
Articles, to the belief and observation, whereof, she obliges all sorts of
persons whatsoever, Clergy and Laity, Monks and Seculars, Men and Women, little
and great? anathematizing all as Heretics, who teach or believe otherwise; and
besides the thunderbolts of the Church (excommunications) making use of fire
and sword and what else they can against them, where ever she has power.

Thus it appears, that our cause is no whit like that of the Donatists, our
Separation arising from public and universal Doctrines of the Church of Rome,
whereas Theirs had no foundation or reason, but only a pretended act of one
particular man, neither confessed nor proved.

The African Church (whose communion they fled from) presented them nothing in
her Creeds and Service, which was contrary to their faith; whereas Rome (whence
we are departed) will constrain us to think and do several things, that
directly overthrow the doctrines, which we in our souls and consciences believe.

CHAP. VII. That there are two sorts of Errors; the one overthrowing the
foundation of faith, and obliging men to separate, and the other not. That the
opinions of the Church of Rome which we reject are of the first sort, and those
of the Lutherans of the second.
Object. BUt you will say, Is it lawful then to separate from a Church, because
it preaches publicly and generally some Doctrine, which is contrary to our
belief? Is it possible that our Sovereign Lord, who would have us to bear with
the ill manners and actions of men, for the good that peace and unity brings to
a Community, should permit us to separate from them for false opinions? Suppose
that Rome have added somewhat to those things which Christ and his Apostles
laid down; Yet what need had your Fathers to depart from her so far? This
Spirit of concord you speak of, which obliged them (as you grant) to suffer the
faults in their neighbors lives; how chance it did not make them bear with
some in their faith?

Ans. Because there is in this respect an extreme difference between faults in
doctrine and in life; the first drawing after them a consequence far
differing from that of the latter, because that the Church propounds unto us
not Her life but Her doctrine, to be the rule of our faith and manners. Yet
(which we Protestants confess) all errors in doctrine do not give a man a
just and sufficient cause to make a division from those that hold them. For the
Apostle commands us, to receive him that is weak in the faith, Romans xiv. 1. and
not to trouble him with disputes, and to afford him our selves for an example,
in bearing gently with those who are not of our mind in every thing. Let us all
who are perfect, says he, be of the same mind; and if any of you think
otherwise, God shall reveal even this unto him. Phil. iii. 15. It Is evident,
that this weakness in faith and this diversity in opinon, whereof S. Paul
speaks, are errors; but such as he would have us bear with. Yet since he
elsewhere pronounces anathema against those, that preach any other Gospel then
that which he preached, we must of necessity conclude, that there are two
sorts of errors in religion: the one such, as a man may bear with without
dividing from them who hold them; and the other such, for which he is bound to
avoid their communion: and this difference depends upon the nature of errors
themselves. For as the truths which we are to believe are not all of equal
importance, some being esteemed fundamental and so absolutely requisite, that
a man cannot come to the kingdom of heaven if he be ignorant of them; others
being profitable, yet not so necessary but that a man may without the knowledge
of them serve God and enjoy salvation: so it is with errors, Some are
pernicious and no way consistent with a true piety; others are less hurtful
and do not necessarily draw in men to perdition. S. Paul does clearly enough
discover to us this distinction, 1 Cor. iii. 13, 15. where, after he had said,
That none could lay any other foundation but that which he had laid, to wit,
Jesus Christ, he adds, That they who builded upon this foundation wood, hay,
stubble, should have loss in their work, when it comes to be tried;
nevertheless they should be saved, yet so as by fire; that is to say, with
difficulty, their person only, or that wherein their chief good consisted,
escaping a burning. An evident sign that there be errors, which do not
deprive the Authors thereof of salvation, much less exclude such from
happiness as believe them after Them, and take them up (when they are dead or
gone) merely upon their trust and credit. And to conclude, who does not see
plainly, That there be errors which utterly overthrow the foundations of
Christianity, engaging us unavoidably in such things as are inconsistent with
salvation? and that there be others which do not so?

As for example, if one should think that he were bound to worship the Sun.
(For seeing the Sun is a creature, and those who worship creatures have no
portion in the kingdom of heaven) It Is evident that he who has such an
opinion cannot attain eternal happiness. And it is so with all other errors
which overthrow any of the first, necessary, and fundamental articles of
Christian religion. But the error of those, who believed of old, That the
Church shall continue a thousand years (or some long time) with J. Christ upon
earth after the resurrection, is no way repugnant to piety toward God, or
charity toward our Neighbor, nor does it directly overthrow any of the
foundations of the Gospel; Though it be in my opinion contrary to diverse
passages of S. Paul and scarce consonant to the nature of Christ's Kingdom.

A man would scarce believe how necessary it is, to mark this difference among
the errors of men in matters of religion, for preventing that vain
scrupulositie and importunate pensiveness, which many melancholy spirits are
troubled with, who condemn all errors alike, and thunder out one and the same
anathema against what ever differs (though never so little) from their
apprehensions: yet for keeping them from falling on the other side, into the
indifferency of profane persons, who conform to any thing, and swallow a camel
as well as a gnat. Indeed the true pious person will endeavor to keep himself
from all error; and will purge his neighbor too, as well as himself, so far
as he is able. For any deviation from truth though it may be a light and small
error, yet it is an error (that is to say an ignorance, and contradiction to
the truth) and by consequence an evil. But a man must be very diligent and
circumspect in observing this distinction among errors, and acknowledge that
one is much more dangerous then another, and he should more or less abhor
them all, according as he shall judge them to be more or less dangerous. If
they be of the first rank, viz. those which overthrow the foundations of
Christianity, he will bestirre himself with all possible prudence and
dexterity, according to his vocation and gifts, to free his neighbor from
them; and if he cannot gain upon him, he will yet be sure to save and deliver
his own soul from the communion of such as hold them. This was the practice of
the Faithful in reference to Paulus Samosatensis Bishop of Antioch, and Arius
a Priest of Alexandria, who held that Jesus Christ was a mere creature,
throwing down Christianity from top to bottom by this abominable doctrine.
But if the error be of a second sort, not pernicious nor inconsistent with the
principles of our faith, we should do well (if we could handsomely) to free our
brethren from it: (for it were to be wished that we might be entirely exempt
from error) but if we cannot get out, we must not therefore straight sever
from them, but gently and quietly bear with what we cannot alter; yet so, that
we prejudice not any man's salvation, much less our own. For, as in civil
society, we keep not company with such persons as we discover to be guilty of
infidelity or enormous vices, because friendship or familiarity with such
people slurrieth the honor and reputation of those, that make any show or
profession of virtue; but we do with a deal of sweetness and ingenuitie, bear
with the faults and frailties of such as are not miscreants at the bottom,
though notwithstanding their conversation be not altogether free from humane
frailties: So are we to do in Religion, to avoid communicating with those,
whose error overthrows the foundations of piety; but charitably to teach
those, who retaining the principles cannot free themselves entirely from all
persuasions contrary to truth.

The Ancients must pardon me, if I venture to take notice that they were
sometimes too scrupulous, and (if I may so speak) too curious and strait-laced
in this particular; rejecting oftentimes innocent opinions with very tragical
terms, and handling such persons as gainsayed them, with as much rigor as if
they had overthrown the whole Gospel of Christ. It Is a wonder to see, how some
of them did in a manner sport, with changing errors into heresies, and all
faults into crimes. Philastrius, Bishop of Brixium (who lived in the time of S.
Ambrose) was among others very hot; for he lib. de Haeres. cap. 4. Bibl. P P.
part 1. p. 22. cap. 39. reckoned among heresies the opinion of those, who
attributed the Epistle to the Hebrews to Clement, or to Barnabas, and to S.
Paul; and of those who thought the CL. Psalms in the Psalter were not all
composed by David; and of those who thought the stars were fastened to the
orbs of heaven. But none were ever so ready to excommunicate, as those very
men; who keep such a complaining of our quitting their communion upon too
slight causes. To say nothing here of the lightnings and excommunications of
Victor against Asia, of Stephen against Africa, and diverse other Popes, as well
one against another, as against strangers, for reasons most an end of very
small concernment: Let any man read only the last Council held at Trent; he
shall soon see how liberal they were of Anathema's. They were not there
content, as thunder does from Heaven, to strike the cedars and the tops of the
mountains: scarce was there any herb in their adversaries fields (though never
so low and small) that escaped their thunderbolts. They who doubted, whether
marriage was a Sacrament, or whether the Church can dispense with the degrees
established in Leviticus, or whether a Bishop be above a Presbyter, or whether
the reasons that moved Rome to deprive the Laity of the cup were of sufficient
validity to that purpose, (things as every one may see of none, or at least
very little importance to piety) were excommunicated, anathematized, as well
as they that denied the divinity of our Savior, or the truth of the last
resurrection. And for my part I understand not how it agrees* with the
mildness and gentle behavior, which the Doctrine of Christ does strictly
recommend unto us, to have such an inhumane severitie as to be able to bear
with nothing, to spare no opinion; but to make so high a market of the
pretended thunderbolts, as to let them fly indifferently, against the less
errors as well as against the greatest crimes. Well, this I am sure of, If we
would imitate Their examples, and justify our proceedings by the maxims of
theirs, we might end this question in three words. For if he that thinks
marriage is not a Sacrament is an anathema to him that holds it is, I pray,
What should they who believe that the Eucharist is not bread but the Creator
of heaven and earth, be deemed by those that hold the contrary? And if to think
that a Presbyter was originally the same with a Bishop, give the Church of Rome
sufficient cause to curse my communion, how much more does her elevating (as
she does) the Pope above the Church, and above all the Kings in Christendom,
give me just cause to run away from her?

But it is now time we should (by Gods assistance) clear our own innocence, of
those crimes which our side is accused of. We confess, That Christian charity
is not so active and hot as their zeal: Charity often bears with what it does
not approve of, and rejects nothing, but what it cannot suffer, without
hazarding the salvation of our neighbors and our own souls. It Is so far from
excommunicating (as the Council of Trent does) Christians for small errors,
that I think it would easily bear with in faithful persons that opinion of
the Greeks (for which they are so roughly anathematized) touching the
procession of the Holy Ghost. For though I grant it is an error to believe,
that the H. Ghost proceeded not from the Father and Son, but from the Father
only by the Son, yet if you observe it is hard (if not impossible) to
understand what prejudice this error brings to piety and holy life.

The difference that is between us and such of our brethren as are called
Lutherans is of the same nature. I confess, it is as impossible for us to
believe, as to conceive their Position, concerning the body of our Savior
being really present in the bread of the Eucharist. But yet it is possible (and
I think according to the laws of charity, necessary) to bear with that in their
doctrine which we cannot believe. For this opinion, in the terms and sense
wherein They hold it, has no venom in it that I see. It abolisheth not the
Sacrament, it destroys not the sign whereof it consists, it adoreth it not,
it neither divides nor mutilates it, it makes it not an expiatory sacrifice for
our sins, it leaves it both the nature and the virtue of a Sacrament, and
does not take any thing, (formally, directly, and immediately) from Christ,
either of his substance or his properties: only it would have even the
humanity of Christ present in the Eucharist (that we may receive the virtue of
his death, and communicate of his body and blood, (as S. Paul speaks) 1 Cor. x.
in such a manner as they confess incomprehensible. Which hypothesis (whiles it
goes no further) engages us not in any thing that is contrary either to piety
or charity, either to the honor of God or the good of men: And so it may and
ought to be tolerated. And this has been continually our judgment, and so
declared by the French churches in the national Synod held at Charenton in the
year MDCXXXI. by an express act, wherein they receive such as are called
Lutherans into their Communion, unto their Holy Table, notwithstanding this
opinion, and some few others of less importance, wherein They and We differ.

Oh what a gentleness was this, excellently becoming Christians! worthy to be
imitated by all believers in the world, and consecrated with commendation to
the memory of all succeeding ages! a plain, illustrious, irrefragable
testimony, of the innocence, of our Churches in this particular! For had we
been animated with a spirit of presumption, untractablenesse and despite (as
some fondly imagine) how could we thus gently bear with those which are at
difference with us? and in whose communion there are some who either blinded
with passion, or deceived with calumny, have a very ill opinion of us, and do
outragiously defame us.

This example, one would think, might show any man clearly, That it is not want
of charity, but some other very urgent cause, which moved us to separate from
the Church of Rome. For had the differences between us and them been like those
between us and the Lutherans, what likelihood is there, but that we should have
been as ready to join hands with them as with these? why should we be willing
to offend our Countrymen, and bear with strangers? separate from those that
have in their hands, our honors, our goods, our lives; and inviolably keep in
with such as we have nothing to do with, but only as they are Christians? what
likelihood is there that we should not in this point have that complacence for
our Princes and natural Magistrates, which we have for such as in reference to
civil Society concern us not? Certainly men must needs say, we are either very
furious and senseless creatures (which censure I think many wise people will
not cast upon us) or that it is some great and weighty reason that made us
separate from the Church of Rome. And this is indeed the chief point of the
question. For if the doctrines whereupon we separated were of the same nature
with those, that we differ with the Lutherans about; if they were tolerable,
and such as we could bear with, without violating our consciences; I confess
that our separation was, if not rash, (as being not grounded upon a sufficient
cause) yet unjust at the least: no separation in any matter being just if it be
not necessary. But we may truly affirm, (and confidently call heaven and earth
to witness) that it is not possible to accommodate our selves to those things
which the Romanists require of us, without forcing our thoughts, violating the
peace of our consciences, and overthrowing the foundations of Christianity,
which we firmly believe. For we are at contestation, not concerning matters
that are small and of little importance, but concerning the head of the Church,
concerning the foundation of faith, concerning the causes of salvation, the
service of God, the object to which that service should be given, the state
both of our consciences in this world, and of our souls in the world to come.

CHAP. VIII. That the adoration of the Eucharist, as it is practiced by the
Church of Rome, does (as we believe) overthrow the foundation of piety and
salvation.
MY intention is not to examine all the particulars of the differences between
us, one by one; to know the weight and importance of each in particular. That
would cause me to be more large then I intend to be on this subject, and would
be more tedious to the Reader then necessary for the end I proposed. We may
with less ado justify our selves. For if among all those points wherein we
differ there be but one, which overthrows the foundations of Christianity;
That is enough to prove the necessity of our separation, whether the rest be
light or weighty: No man being bound to gratify those who are in any communion
so far, as to join with them to the prejudice of his own salvation. Leaving
therefore at present all other Articles, to the belief whereof Rome would
oblige us, I shall only consider this one, viz. the adoration of the Host (as
they call it) which is in my opinion a very important one; and I hope, I shall
show briefly and clearly, that it is not possible to receive it, without
overthrowing the foundation of our piety here, and eternal happiness
hereafter. It Is a Doctrine held by all Believers from the beginning of the
world to this present, that the Sovereign and highest kind of honor and
service, which is ordinarily called adoration, is due to none but God alone,
who created the heaven and the earth, and redeemed us through J. Christ. This
is the foundation of all the doctrine and discipline of Gods people of old; the
first and principal Article of the divine Law, which God pronounced from
heaven with the voice of thunder, and which he wrote for them with his own
finger, upon the tables of stone given to Moses. Thou shall not have, says he,
any other God before my face. I can not well here (if I would) set down all the
places wherein His holy Prophets repeat this commandment and comment on it.
It Is likewise the great and chief foundation of the Gospel. This is life
eternal, says our Lord, to know thee the only true God, and him whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. Joh. xvii. 3. For this knowledge of God and of Christ
comprehends likewise the service which is due to them. The same God who taught
us this truth, declares in an infinite company of places, That He can hold
them for no other then Enemies and Rebels, that break this His commandment,
then for such who have broke His covenant, and renounced His communion;
protesting, That He will punish them very severely both in this world, and in
the next; that He is jealous of His glory, and will not by any means suffer it
to be given to anothor. And to make us the better to conceive the horriblenesse
of this crime, He represents it to us under the image of the most base and
abominable transgressions that are committed in the life of man: comparing it
to whoredom, adultery, and all the most foul and infamous symptoms and
denominations of weakness: so that He uses sometimes, upon this subject,
terms and expressions that a man can scarce read or pronounce without
blushing, desiring certainly thereby to show how hateful this fault is, and
unbefitting any Believer. The truth is, Since our Great God has done us the
favor, to call us by His infinite goodness to His Communion, and to enter
with us into so close a Covenant, that to express it to us, he tells us that
He is our Husband, and that we are His Spouse; it is sufficiently evident, that
they who render to any other the honor and service which is due to God, commit
the same fault, which a woman that is married does, when she abandons that to
another, which is due to none but her own husband. So that as adultery is the
greatest fault that can be committed against the bond of wedlock; so may we be
assured, that no man can more grievously infringe his covenant with God, then
by devolving that service which belongs to him, upon any creature whatsoever.
And as adultery does dissolve marriage; so the crime of those who serve
creatures dissolves the Covenant with God. Which may the better be understood
by another comparison. God is our King and Sovereign, and we are His subjects.
Just therefore as a subject cannot more hainously offend his King, nor more
openly renounce his subjection, and that allegiance which he owes him, then by
giving to some other besides him the name, glory, honor, and service of his
Sovereign; so it is not possible that we should offend God more mortally, then
in attributing to any other but His Majesty the name of our God and Lord, which
appertains to Him alone, and so the honor and service agreeable to these
names. This was the main crime of the Gentiles, who thus broke Gods Covenant,
and pulled upon themselves most dreadful wrath and curses in this world, and
eternal death in the next. S. Paul teaches us Romans i. 25. That this rendering
to the creature a service due to the Creator, was the source and fountain
whence all the mischiefs issued forth upon them. And 1 Cor. vi. 10. he says
plainly, That idolaters (that is to say, Such as render to any creature the
service due to God) shall never inherit the Kingdom of heaven. And conformably
to this, S. John Rev. xxi. 8. protests, That their portion shall be in the
lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. For of all the
truths that are taught in the Old and New Testaments, there is not any one,
which is so clearly and so often expressed as this very thing; not any one,
which has been less contested by heretics, or more universally and
affirmatively forbidden by the Church; which has ever constantly broke off from
those that under any pretense whatsoever will render to the creature the
service due to God. Even Rome her self (of whom we complain) disagrees with us
but very little, if at all, in this point. For though she render great honors
to diverse creatures, yet she ever acknowledged, That there is a kind of
religious service which cannot without sacrilege be given to any thing but God
alone: this she commonly terms the adoration of latria, to distinguish it
from other honors and services, which she believes may without sin be given to
that which is not God. If therefore there be any Article in all the Christian
faith, which should be called fundamental, it is this. If there be any, which
we should preserve inviolably with the price of all that is dear unto us, it
is this. Nevertheless, this very Article does the Church of Rome oblige us to
violate, if we will communicate in her services. For she does most expressly
command all such as be of her communion, to render that sovereign and highest
kind of service, which she calls latria, (and confesses to be due to none
but God) unto a thing which we believe to be a creature, and not God himself.
She would have us to take for our great God, for the Creator of Heaven and
earth, for the Redeemer of mankind, this sacrament, which is indeed holy and
precious; but which yet our sense, our reason, and our faith grounded on the H.
Scriptures, finds to be but bread. She would have us give to this subject all
the praise of the creation and redemption of the universe; to invest it with
all the glory that is due to our Sovereign and highest Lord; and hereupon
prostrate our selves most humbly (our bodies and souls) before those altars,
whereon this is laid; and in those streets where we meet it; that we should
celebrate the day which she has consecrated to the honor of the Eucharist,
under the name of the feast of our great God; and should pronounce anathema
maran-atha against all them who approve not this doctrine, and this practice.
Here I shall venture to address my self to any the most passionate among our
Adversaries, and take them for my Judges in this cause, for my Counselors in
this difficulty.

You, Sirs, command me to adore the Sacrament of the Eucharist, with the
adoration of latria. Now I cannot, I must not conceal from you, That I believe
this Sacrament in its substance to be an inanimate creature; having not yet
been able to resist the Authority of my sense, of my reason, and of the H.
Scriptures, which tell me that it is nothing but bread. My belief being thus,
what should I do? Shall I adore that which I know to be but a creature? Why,
you cannot but see how God forbids the adoration of a creature, under peril of
eternal damation. Your Authority pulls me on one side, and Gods on the other.
In my judgment, He forbids the very same thing that you desire. Whither shall
I turn me in this condition.

I doubt not but hereupon they will soon drive me from their Altars, and forbid me
to make use of that, the Divinity whereof I neither can nor will acknowledge.
For they oblige not men to adore their Host, but because of a belief they have,
that it is truly Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever. Did they not believe it so
to be, they would not adore it, they would not bring it to others to be adored.
So that since I have not that belief, methinks they should not judge it fitting
for me to adore it: and if I should adore it, they would impute this action to
nothing but an extreme pusillanimitie, and baseness of spirit, which for fear
of men can cause me to do a thing, that I my self esteem unlawful and
unpleasing to God.

And let them not here allege, That I am deceived in the opinion that I have
of the substance of the Eucharist. For the question is not, whether the
Eucharist be bread or not, (this should be disputed apart) but whether he who
believes that it is bread in substance, can adore it, without making himself
guilty of Sacrilege, and giving a creature that honor which is due to the
Creator. For if one should grant, That he cannot (which we now are coming to
demonstrate from the premises very evidently) I have gained the point that I
intended to prove: it being clear, that this supposes We have had reason to
separate from Rome, seeing we believe that the Eucharist is bread in substance;
it being impossible for us to yield to that worship, which she desires we
should give it, unless we give to a creature that, which we are bound to give
only to the Creator. Whence all the odious question concerning schism is
ended.

For we call that schism, which is a separation made without necessity. So
that when my conscience forbids me under pain of Gods wrath, and my own
damnation, to obey that which you command me in this particular, it is evident,
that it is not fancy, pleasure, or faction, but a pure necessity that
constrains me to separate from you. If you cannot tax this my opinion, much
less can you condemn my separation. Accuse me if you please of stupidity, For
not being able to conceive, how a body that is in heaven can be at the same
time in a thousand places on earth; how all the quantity of a complete man can
be brought within one single point; how a thing, that my sense and reason
knows to be bread, and the H. Scripture calls oftentimes bread, can not be
bread at all for all this; but the very Creator of the world. Blame as much as
you please the dullness of my spirit, that cannot comprehend a whit of these
pretended mysteries. But once presuppose my belief to be true, and then you
cannot show me wherein I do amiss in separating from you. At this time it is
sufficient, that I have shown, that our separation is not contrary to charity,
which obliges no man to embrace that, in favor or love of his neighbor,
which he believes disagreeable to Gods will, and pernicious to his own soul.

CHAP. IX. That the opinion of the Lutherans which we bear withal, does not
bring with it the adoration of the Eucharist, either de jure, or de facto.
BUt because this business seems to me of very great importance, I am well
content for the clearing of it to examine, yet more particularly, all that can
be said in favor of this adoration of the Eucharist, to render it unto us more
tolerable then as yet it does appear.

Object. First then, some men may object, That we should not so grievously
abhor it, seeing that the very Lutherans, with whom we promised that we would
live in communion, hold opinions about the Sacrament of the Eucharist, that
seem to come very near this. For they believe (as every one knows) that the
body of Jesus Christ, is really present in the consecrated bread; which being
once presupposed, it seems to follow, That we must adore the Sacrament. Seeing
then we believe this opinion (which seems the principle and foundation of
adoration of the Sacrament) tolerable; a man may think that we should not so
fiercely reject the conclusion thence ensueing.

Ans. This consideration is but a vain and false color, which does no way
conclude that which it pretends. For there are very great and evident
differences between the doctrine of such of our brethren as are termed
Lutherans, and that of Romanists about this point. At this time I shall only
take notice of so much as concerns our present purpose. Truly what ever their
opinion be in other things, it is clear that they do not practice among
themselves, nor enjoin any others who join with them (nor otherwise approve)
this adoration, and this sovereign latria of the Eucharist, whereof we now
speak. So that my conscience (which cannot yield for the reasons above
rehearsed to this latria and adoration) finds nothing in their Communion,
which wracketh it or offends it in this regard. But for the Church of Rome,
it is clean otherwise there. Because she practices this service very
scrupulously, and causes it to be observed by all such as are in her
communion, with all circumspection imaginable; as being in her opinion one of
the most principal devotions in Christian Religion; and is so rigorous in it
that where she does absolutely bear rule, she constrains all those whose
hearts she cannot bend, to bow at least their bodies before the Host, as often as
they meet it; whence it appears, that it is a very great Paralogisme and
abuse, to argue from the opinion of Luther to that of the Pope in this point,
there being a manifest difference between the one and the other. The first
leaving my conscience at liberty, without requiring of it any service toward
the Sacrament contrary to my belief: and contrariwise, the second forcing me
extreme violently, to adore that which I firmly believe to be but a mere
creature.

And to that which they say concerning the opinion of the Lutherans about the
H. Sacrament of the Eucharist, That it follows thence necessarily, That we must
adore it; I answer.

1. That it is false. For because they think, that our Lord Jesus is really
present in the Sacrament, it does not thence follow that they believe, That the
Sacrament is really Jesus Christ. On the contrary, they hold with us, That the
Sacrament is true bread in the substance, the consecration changing nothing in
its nature, but only causing that flesh of Christ, signified by the bread, to
be there present, and to be exhibited to them who communicate. Or suppose that
it were as they hold, it follows not thence, that we must adore the Sacrament.
For because God is essentially present in all creatures, will you conclude,
That we must therefore adore all creatures? Who sees not, that if a man should
under pretense of this adore any one, he would be straight by all Christians
held an idolater? The Holy Spirit dwells in the bodies of the faithful, which
have the honor to be His temple, 1 Cor. vi. 19. as S. Paul witnesses. Is this
to say that a man must or may adore the bodies of Believers? The Host of the
Church of Rome is in the Pix, and in the mouth, and then in the stomach of them
who receive it in communicating. Will they allow that because of this a man
should adore the Pix, and the mouth, and the stomach where it enters? They
would certainly hiss at a man that should conclude, that we must adore these
things because the host is there present.

Since it appears by these inductions, that those things, wherein is any
subject worthy of adoration, ought not thereupon to be adored; it is clear, not
only that a man may hold the real presence of our Lord's body in the
Sacrament, without being obliged to adore the Sacrament, but also ex abundanti,
That if a man be precisely of another opinion, he is obliged not to adore it;
whence it follows, that the belief of the Lutherans, which does only affirm
the real presence of our Lords body in the Eucharist, is so far from
inferring the adoration, that on the quite contrary it infers, That we must
not adore it.

2. But then in the second place, I say, That though, according to the laws of
discourse, it should follow lawfully and necessarily from the opinion of the
Lutherans, that we must adore the Sacrament; yet it is enough to keep me from
abhorring their communion, To see that they hold not this adoration to be the
consequence of that opinion, but on the contrary reject it, as well as I. For a
man may hold the principle, who does not at all believe the conclusion.
Possibly he never thinks of it, or if he does think on it, he does not perceive
it to be a consequence from those premises. It Is at this day generally received
in our schools for a good consequence, That if the soul of man come from the
substance of the Father into the body of the Son, it may die and is mortal:
for (say we) if it depend upon the matter in its original, it depends likewise
on it in its being. So that when the matter (that is the body) comes to die,
the soul must likewise necessarily be extinguished, seeing the subsistence of
the one depends upon the subsistence of the other. Will you hereupon say, that
none ever held the principle of this discourse, viz. that the soul is traduced,
and passes from the substance of the Father to the Son, who did not likewise
hold the conclusion, viz. that the soul is mortal. With what face dare you
venture to assert it; since Tertullian and many other Authors of very great
esteem were of that opinion, and S. Augustine did rather approve it then
condemn it? since I say, they did openly believe the first of these positions,
and expressly deny the second. So S. Hilary, according to the true consequences
of that opinion which he held concerning the impassible nature of Christ's body,
seems to me to have been obliged to deny the truth and realitie of our
redemption. And yet who dare impute so grievous an impiety to such a Saint? I
should never have done, should I resolve to set down here all the examples that
may be alleged to this purpose. These two suffice to show that whoever
maintains an ill opinion, is not therefore to be held guilty of the
consequences of it.

S^ppose then it were true, (as it is not) That from the belief of the
Lutherans concerning the Eucharist, it would follow, That we must adore the
Sacrament; Since they own not this consequence, nay on the contrary strongly
reject it, It would be an extreme injustice to ascribe it to them. And as it
would have been a want of charity in the primitive Christians, to have avoided
the Communion of Tertullian or S. Hilary, upon protence, that from their
opinions, touching the original of the soul of man and the nature of the body
of Christ, there followed many propositions which are impious and contrary to
our faith, since they rejected and abhorred them: so would it be in my mind a
great oversight now, to separate from the Lutherans upon this pretended
consequence from their opinion concerning the holy Sacrament, if it could be
deduced thence (as it cannot.) Since they themselves protest, that they will
not acknowledge it.

But as for them of Rome, it is quite otherwise. For the adoration of the
Eucharist is a consequence of their doctrine concerning this point both de jure
and de facto, that is, it plainly follows from it, and they expressly profess
and practice it.

1. De jure; it follows from it: For if the subject which we call the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, be in its substance not bread (as we believe) but the body of
Christ (as they hold) it is evident that men both may and ought to adore it,
seeing that the body of Christ is a subject adorable. And then it follows from
it

2. De facto; they practice it. For who knows not, that there is not any one
Article in all the Roman religion, which is professed more publicly, pressed
more severely, exercised more devoutly, then this of adoring the Host?

Since then they hold this article both de jure, according to the plain
consequences of their belief in the point of the Eucharist: and de facto, in
their confessions, and practices; and That the Lutherans on the contrary hold
them not, neither in one manner nor the other, neither in thesi, nor hypothesi;
It Is clear, That our bearing with the latter, without separating from them for
the diversity that is between them and us about the point of the Eucharist;
does no way infer that we should do as much with the former.

CHAP. X. That the dignity and excellency of the Eucharist, does not hinder it
from being a grievous and deadly offense to adore it, if it be bread in
substance as we believe.
Object. BUt you will say, That you esteem it a rude comparison to liken the
adoration, which the Church of Rome gives the Eucharist, to the services that
the profane Pagans or debauched Israelites gave to mere creatures. For they
adored idols, whereas the Eucharist is a divine Sacrament. So that it seems an
abuse of the Scripture to scare us with those threats and curses that it
denounces against such kind of people; seeing the object which they served was
so different from that which Rome will have us to adore. We confess we perform
this action, but it is to one of the Institutions of our Master, and for you to
equal that and compare it with an idol, It Is very unbeseeming.

Answ. Thanks, be to God, we have a clean other opinion of the Eucharist. We
hold it (as it is indeed) a very holy Sacrament of the body and blood of our
Lord, to be one of the most precious instruments of his grace, which being
lawfully and rightly celebrated, communicates to us all the treasures of
heaven, the flesh and blood of Christ, the pardon of our sins, the peace of
our consciences, the sanctification of our souls, and the right to a blessed
immortality. Far be it from us to give it the profane and infamous name of
an idol. We will not say, that it is simply and only bread: and if any of us
do chance to speak so, in saying that it is bread, he means in regard of the
substance of the thing, not in regard of its virtue or dignity; in regard of
which we believe that it is quite another thing from bread. We should take the
word in the same sense that Gregory Nyssen does on the like subject, who
speaking of the water in Baptism [Orat. in Bapt. Christ. p. 803. tom. 2.
(...).] says, That it is nothing else but water, he means in its nature. For
in the grace, it is another thing beside water, and both the Scriptures teach it
to be so, and all Christians believe it, and this holy Doctor particularly
witnesses it in diverse places. [Id. ibid. p. 801. c. 4. and orat. Catech. c.
33.] We therefore do willingly give to the Sacrament all those advantages and
respects that justly belong to it, and not to any idol.

But if this be a creature, as we believe it to be, the excellence and dignity
thereof (as great as you set it forth) will not at all excuse their crime who
adore it. For the Lord forbids us to adore, not base or vain things only, as
onions, and the Cats of the Egyptians, and the idols of the Pagans, which have
not any subsistence in nature, or any where else except in their false
imaginations; but he forbids us generally and absolutely, to adore any creature
what ever it be; whether it creep upon the ground, or shine in heaven; whether
it swim in the water, or fly in the air; animate or inanimate; visible or
invisible; corporeal or spiritual; profane or sacred; comprehending under the
same condemnation all those, who worship any creature what ever it be, as
guilty of the same crime, and subject to the same punishment.

And de facto, the thing is very evident; for this adoration which we give to
God, being an acknowledgement of his Sovereignty, and a duty like to the love
which a woman owes to her lawful husband, Who does not perceive, that it is a
manifest crime to give it to any other but to him, and that the differences of
the subjects to which men give it are no way considerable in this particular;
seeing (though they may differ in other things) they are all one in this, That
they are not God Almighty, to whom alone we are to give that kind of homage?
The dignity of Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, and the affinity he had with the
late King of France of Glorious memory (being his Nephew) did not excuse them
who gave him the name and honor of King, and did not keep their fault from
being a true Rebellion, and a crime of Treason, against the Supreme Governor.
And the honor which Joseph had in the house of Potiphar, being his dear and
best beloved servant, did not at all justify the love his Mistress bore him.
Who ever she be that yields to another man the affection she ow's to none but
to her husband, renders her self manifestly guilty of adultery. It Is not
needful to know who it is that she loves: It Is enough for her condemnation
that it is not her husband. If then the thing to which you render the adoration
of latria, be any thing but the Great God, Creator of the universe, you are
extremely blameable for it. It matters not a whit what else the nature or the
dignity thereof be. What ever it is, its not being God (to whom alone you owe
such a service) is enough for your condemnation and conviction of having
committed Treason against the Majesty of your Sovereign, of having violated
the promise of sacred wedlock, which he has vouchsafed to contract with you.
You are evidently a rebel, and a faithless spouse, and will never be able to
avoid the infamy and the punishments due to this crime, unless you wash your
fault with tears of a real and sad repentance.

If it were otherwise, a man might quit (or at least excuse) them that adored
the Sun, the eye of the world, the most beautiful and express image of the
Creator that can be beheld in all nature, His punctual and admirable servant,
which bears so clearly upon it self the marks of his power and wisdom. A man
might then defend the service that the Israelites gave to the brazen serpent,
offering thereto incense; since it was not an Idol which they served, but a
precious memorial of the bounty of God, an instrument of his goodness, and in
some sense a Sacrament of his grace. A man might then maintain the action of
the Collyridians, who adored the Blessed Virgin; since the object of their
service was not a Pagan Idol, but the most Holy and most excellent of all
women, the Mother of our Common Lord, the pavilion wherein he vouchsafed to
lodge his glory, the sacred vessel where he did so spread abroad his graces. A
man might justify the Sovereign service that the Arians gave to their Christ:
for though they made him a creature, yet they supposed him the most noble and
most excellent of all the creation, and the instrument that the Eternal Father
made use of, for the creation first, and then the redemption of the world.

But the honor of these things, and the dignity they have in coming so near
our Lord and great Master, hinders not those who adore them from being
condemned as worshippers of the creature. For who knows not, that God in the
Scriptures, Job xxxi. 26, 27, 28. Deuteronomy. iiii. 19. and xvii. 2, 3. puts those
who worship the Sun and Moon and Stars in the rank of the most noted
Idolaters? and strictly forbids His people to imitate them? And who knows not,
that the good King Ezechiah did so extremely abhor the service of the brazen
serpent, that to abolish the use of it, he was not afraid to break the sacred
monument of the great miracles of God, calling it by way of loathing, 2 Kings
xxiii. 5, 11. Nehustan, that is, a vain and unprofitable piece of brass. And
then for the Collyridians, the respect which we give to the Blessed Virgin,
whom those superstitious women took for the object of their folly, hindered not
the Church then from calling it [Epiph. Haer. 79. p. 1058. and 1061. (...).] an
heresy, or a sect of such as made idols, and to allege against them all the
precepts and examples which the Scripture gives us for the adoration of the
one sole God. The dignity that the Arians attributed to their imaginary Christ,
hindered not the most holy Doctors of the Primitive Church [Athanas. Orat. 1.
contra Ari. tom. 1. p. 297. B. and 314. A. and orat. 3. p. 385. C. and orat. 4.
p. 468. Cyril. in Joh. l. 9. c. 41. p. 471. A. and Thesaur. l. 2. c. 1. p. 30.
C. and l. 12. c. 4. etc.] from accusing them of Idolatry, and calling them
Idolaters; because as excellent as they imagined that Christ whom they believed
on, they thought him but a creature, and by consequence could not render to him
the service due to the Deity, without manifestly adoring a creature.

The vanity of this pretense does yet more plainly appear, in that the most
excellent servants of God have refused that adoration which sometimes has been
yielded to them. For even as Joseph was seized with a just horror, seeing the
ungodly lust of his Mistress; and opposed her design, who would have given
him that which she owed only to her husband; and not being able by his grave
and wise Remonstrances to quench her base heat, he fled away from her,
esteeming it a blemish to him to be in such unchaste hands; showing
sufficiently, that he held this attempt of hers to be a great abomination.
Semblably, the faithful servants of God have often very rudely thrust away
them, who would have given Them that service, which is due only to their
Master; and have taken such honor in very great indignation. S. John in a
transportation of Spirit, being twice cast at the feet of an Angel (who
discovered to him the secrets of heaven) intending to adore him, was twice
taken up. That Sacred Minister of God would by no means consent, that S. John
should render unto him that honor; Take heed, says he, Revel. xix. 10. and
xxii. 8, 9. that thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren
which bear witness to Jesus, Adore God. In the same sort did S. Peter the
Apostle of our Lord take up Cornelius the Centurion, when he was at his feet,
adoring him. Stand up, said he, Act. x. 26. I also am a man. In like manner S.
Paul and S. Barnabas, seeing that the Lycaonians would offer them those
sacrifices, which they were wont to offer to their Gods, took such a
displesure, that they rent their garments; crying out, Act. xiiii. 13, 14, 15.
Sirs, Why do ye thus? We also are men, subject to the same passions with you.
And we need not doubt, but that the sun, moon, and stars, and other
inanimate creatures would reject those services, which are given them by the
Pagans, with the like indignation, were their nature capable of it. [Et si
indignari potest, acerbius indignatur contra falso honorantem quam contra
contumeliosum says S. Augustine T. 8. fol. 216. in Psalm. 93. praef.] Could the
Sun be angry, he would chafe less to see himself ill used, then falsely
honored by mankind. And let them not here object, That Gods people have
sometime worshipped Angels; It being clear out of the Scripture, and
acknowledged by all Christians, That at such times either the Angel adored was
the Son of God, who under the Old Testament appeared sometimes to the Fathers
in shape of an Angel; or if it was a creature, That the adoration given to him
by the people of God, was an honor far below that which we give to God, and
that which the Romanists commonly call the adoration of latria. Otherwise they
should openly have broken the first and principal article of the Law, which so
severely forbids giving the other service (adoration) to any but to God alone.

As for those passages of the Bible, which tell us, in the Old vulgar Latin
translation Psalm. xcix. ( Lat. xcviii.) 5. That the Ark of the Ancient Covenant
might be adored, or in effect that it was so. Either we must say (as our
Authors do) that the People of God were wont to prostrate themselves before
the Ark (the service of God being in those days to be made particularly
toward that place where the Ark was) or That this adoration of the Ark was a
kind of honor less then that of latria, which is due to none but God; or we
may have recourse to the subtility of S. Augustine, who in several places
understands by the footstool of God, the humanity of J. Christ, personally
united to the Godhead, and by consequent truly and properly adorable; and in
conclusion, we may rather admit any interpretation, then overthrow the
foundation of piety and religion, by granting that the highest worship is to be
given to any but the Highest God. For, as for that relative and mediate
adoration, which some of the Divines of the Church of Rome talk of upon this
occasion, 'twill do us no good, and that for three reasons.

1. Because this distinction of absolute and relative service, mediate and
immediate (as they speak) is an invention of their own brain and not able to
satisfy conscience. For though the honor which we give to Ambassadors, or to
other representations, are referred indeed to the persons whom they represent;
whence it comes to pass that a Prince is honored in his Vicegerents, and God
in his Ministers, and in his Sacraments; yet nevertheless the honor which we
give to one, differs far from that which we give to the rest. This is evident
in civil conversation. For what King would suffer subjects to give the name of
King or Sovereign to his Ministers and Officers, under color that they
represent his Majesty, and exercise his Authority every one in their charge.
The respect which we give them redounds indeed to their Master, I confess it,
but it is clean another kind of honor then that which we render Him. It Is just
so in the Sacraments of Religion. For example, the reverence wherewith we
receive Holy Baptism, redoundeth doubtless to the glory of J. Christ, who
instituted it, and of the H. Ghost whose efficacy it represents. Now if a
Christian should hereupon, pretending this, affirm, That a man might lawfully
adore baptism with the same adoration that is due to J. Christ or to the H.
Ghost, Would not he be ridiculous even to our Adversaries?

But we need not further examine this distinction in this place. For Secondly,
if you look to the bottom of it, Rome does not make use of it in this dispute,
she would have us render to the Eucharist an adoration not mediate, but
immediate; not relative but absolute; and which terminateth in the same
subject, which is there present under the species of bread and wine; thinking
that it is really and personally the Son of God. So that though the use of
this distinction might excuse the service given to a creature, yet it will
never serve to justify that which They would have us give to the Roman
Sacrament, which they pretend is personally the Creato^r.

Finally, though others might with some reason use the distinction, yet it is
clear, That it is of no use to us, who esteem it vain and without any
foundation, who hold all them really guilty of Creature-worship, and heirs to
all the curses which God threatens against it, who (under any pretense
whatsoever) render to any creature that Sovereign kind of homage and service,
which is due to none but the Creator; whether they terminate their adoration
in the object it self which they adore, or whether they let it pass to some
other whereto it has reference. As men hold that Woman in all reason guilty of
adultery, who shall cause any but her lawful husband to share of her love and
marriage bed; though she may plead for her self, That the design in committing
such an act, or the cause whereby she was moved, or the manner of her
proceeding was this or that, The business is no way capable of being justified.

Thus I hope, it appears clear enough, that if the Eucharist be truly bread
(as we believe it) neither the dignity of its use in religion, nor the
reference that it has to the body and blood of Christ Jesus, will save us,
either from the crime of having adored a creature, or from the punishments and
curses that such a deed deserves; if believing as we do, we should dare to
give that service and reverence to it, which the Roman Church commands us.

CHAP. XI. That the opinion which those of the Roman Church have touching the
Eucharist, excuses not such as adore it.
Object. BUt you will say, That she believes the Sacrament which she adoreth is
not a creature but Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory; a subject really to be
adored, because he is God Eternal, of the same essence with the Father. So
that if it be supposed an error, 'twill not amount to be criminal, or a
mortal sin, because the subject which the Church of Rome adoreth deserves,
as all Christians confess, to be adored, if it be really (what she thinks it
to be) Jesus Christ.

Answ. But who is there that does not see, if he observe, First, That this
consideration is false and vain in it self; and Secondly, that though it were
true, yet it were nothing to the purpose?

First, it is false. And it is plain that the Romanists themselves think this
excuse a trifle, since determining (though very rashly) that the Eucharist was
in all ages adored by Christians, they say, That no man can doubt, but that, if
the Eucharist were bread, all the Church for M D. years were idolatrous. And
so that as many of our Ancestors as adored the Sacrament were all damned,
adoring bread in stead of the Creator. Joh. Fisher Roff. lib. 1. contra
Oecolamp. cap. 2. fol. 3. b. And their argument were good, but that it is built
on a false supposall, viz. That the Church for the first fifteen hundred years
adored the Eucharist. For if the estimate of a religious worship be to be taken
from the opinion that those which use it have of it, ye shall scarce find any,
which either can be called justly an adoration of the creature, or condemned in
conclusion, as forbidden by our Lord. The Pagans will by this means preserve
themselves from that crime, which S. Paul charge them with, of having adored
the Creature, Romans i. 25. and served them which by nature are no Gods, Gal. iv.
8. For they will plead, That they believed that Jupiter (to whom they gave
sovereign adoration) was the great God, creator and preserver of the world,
the Father of Gods and men, as their Poets ordinarily term him. And no man can
deny, but that a person of such a quality deserves adoration: and so,
according to these principles, no man should accuse them of idolatry, for
giving adoration to a subject which they thought deserved it. And if the
Israelites believed, that the golden calf was really the God which brought them
out of Egypt, Exodus xxxii. (as the most part of the Roman Divines seem to
hold) they might with the same color and shift excuse themselves, for that
worship which they did to it in the wilderness, and say that they took it for
their Lord. They might have affirmed, That it was their ignorance to take their
molten image for a God, but not idolatry to adore it, having once imposed upon
it that name. The Collyridians that adored the B. Virgin, as we said even now,
would have been able by this means to defend themselves against S. Epiphanius
(who taxes them expressly of idolatry) if they did but think, as Card.
Baronius supposes, that the B. Virgin was really a Deity, and that she had
nothing humane in her. For they would have said, suppose it were an error to
think the Blessed Virgin a Goddess; yet the service which We render her, who
are of this opinion, cannot be so ill interpreted, as to be Idolatry; seeing
that such a service is due to that nature which they attribute to Her. S.
Augustine in his preface to his Sermons on the xciii. Psalm, p. 216. I. Tom.
8. speaks of certain heretics that honored the Sun, and said, That it was J.
Christ. Such may in the same manner excuse the service that they rendered to
this great luminarie; and say, that they rendered it not to a creature, but that
they believed the subject to which they rendered it was J. Christ. Yet
nevertheless we see, that the Spirit of God calls continually the services
rendered by Pagans to Jupiter, and by the Israelites to the golden calf,
Idolatries, and those who rendered them adorers of creatures and idolaters. And
Epiphanius following that style, calls the Collyridians (as we observed even
now) a sect of such as made idols, and their opinion an heresy. And S.
Augustine blames the honor, that some whom he speaks of gave to the Sun;
he esteeming it a contempt cast upon the Creator. And in truth who sees not,
that this error we now speak of, is but a vain pretense, and such as can no
ways excuse them that render divine services to creatures? For if it were not,
there would be no sin, no crime so abominable, but it might be committed and
excused without error. Rebels having shaken off the yoke of their lawful
King, and submitted to a Tyrant, and adhered to his Conspiracy, might say, They
thought this was the true Governor of the Nation, and consequently pretend,
That they who called them Rebels and Traitors, did them a deal of wrong. And
so we may say the same. I confess, That ignorance excuses, where it is
against a man's will; when the subject which we misconceive is so concealed,
that whatsoever desire we have, or pains we take to find out the truth, it is
not possible for us to discover it: As if one should suppose a Subject so like
his Prince, that it is impossible to distinguish one from the other; in this
case such would be excusable as should give him the honor and service due to
their true Sovereign. But where the ignorance of the object proceeds not
from the obscurity and difficulty of the thing, but from the malice or
negligence of the man, it is so far from excusing the fault, that it
aggravateth it extremely. Such was the error of those who during the holy
League, took the Cardinal of Bourbon for the true King of France: merely their
passion and not any obscurity that was in the thing, made them ignorant of
that which was as clear as any thing in the world, viz. That Henry the Great
was the lawful King of the Realm. So that this error, according to all laws
divine and humane, hindered not their crime from being great, deserving the
name and punishment of a true rebellion. Such, very such, and indeed less
tolerable is the error of those who take a creature for the Creator, and
consequently adore it, as if it were really He.

For what, I beseech you, did the Pagans see in their Jupiter, or the
Israelites in their golden calf that obliged them to believe one or the other to
be the Sovereign God, who made the heavens, and preserves mankind by his
providence. Nay on the contrary, what did they meet with in those objects, that
did not in a high and evident manner declare, That they were nothing less then
that great Divinity, whereof these mad men gave them only the name and the
service? And what cause can the superstitious Collyridians allege, why they
should be ignorant of that, which reason and the H. Scriptures witness so
clearly, viz. That the holy Virgin is a woman and not a Goddess? or Those that
honored the Sun, why they esteemed, J. Christ to be truly the Sun? Take
them out of their passion, and they had nothing either in the nature of the
thing, or in H. Scripture, that could bring them into so ridiculous an error.
The ignorance of all these things then was visibly affected and voluntary, bred
from their vice only, and not from any obscurity of the things which they
were ignorant of: whence it follows, that it is so far from being able to
excuse or diminish the impiety of such services; that contrariwise it is one of
their crimes, for which God will enter into judgment with them, and will ask
them hereafter, why they were ignorant of that, which was so clearly and
graciously made manifest.

Now to apply what has been said to our present purpose. If the Sacrament of
the Eucharist be truly bread in substance (as we firmly believe it to be, upon
the credit of our sense, of our reason, and of the word of God) I say, That the
contrary opinion, which those of the Church of Rome hold, thinking it to be not
bread, but the Lord of the world; does not at all hinder that service, which
they render to it in the consequence of their belief, from being truly the
adoration of a creature, and deserving that name and rank which the H.
Scriptures give ordinarily to such services. I confess, that while our Lord
was upon earth, presupposing that at His being in Judea, some person had
resembled Him much in vi^age, and coming to one of the Apostles had been
mistaken for Him, and so one had adored this man in stead of our Savior; In
such a case, this mistake might have excused the action; and there would have
been a deal of rigor in making that pass for a criminal service, as
adoration of the creature. And if the Host (as they call it) were really to be
adored, as they believe it is, I confess, that he, who should adore one not
consecrated, (or consecrated without intention) set before him upon the Altar,
could not justly be condemned for having adored it: because it was not his
passion or not heeding, that caused this mistake; but the likeness and extreme
uniformitie that was between the one and the other, they being not
distinguishable one from another by any apparent mark. But suppose that the
Eucharist be not J. Christ really; the error then of them, who take it to be
Christ, comes all from passion, and not from any thing that is without them.
For in your conscience, what similitude can you discern between these two
things, that should make us take them one for the other? or what is there that
does not oblige us most firmly to believe, that the one is not the other? The
one is a round thing, without sense and motion, and altogether uniform; the
other has a humane body, organized, and furnished with sense and other
ornaments, even as ours. The one is bread, which we have seen kneaded, and
made: the other a divine substance formed of the flesh of a Virgin, above MDC
years ago. One is broken in our hands, and bruised between our teeth, and
consumed in our stomachs, the other is of an immortal nature, glorious, and
impassible. I omit other differences.

But if I had nothing else but the doctrine of the Apostles, and the belief of
all Christians, That our Lord is in heaven, whence he shall come at the last
day; and the forewarning that he gave us Himself, to beware of being surprised,
by them that say, Lo here is Christ, or there, He is in the desert, or secret
closet, Matthew. xxiv. 26. Is not this enough to render all error inexcusable in
this particular? For what will they be able to answer our Lord against such
clear marks, and such express forewarnings; when He shall demand of them a
reason of this great mistake? To men I wonder not that they allege, This is my
body; but to the Great God, who sees the secrets of the hearts (and in so
glorious and clear a light) I am confident they will never dare to bring for
themselves so weak a defense. For since they have heard S. Paul say often, that
the Church is the body of Christ, without believing thereupon that the Church
is transubstantiated; or not a creature but God, because it is called the body
of Christ, 1 Cor. xii. 27. Ephesians. i. 23. And if the honor that the Church has
to be called the body of Christ, does not keep man from believing that it were
impiety (and not Religion) to give to the Church the adoration of latria; how
will that hold good which they say, That they think themselves necessarily
obliged to adore the Eucharist, because it is called the body of Christ? If
such phrases of speech be enough to ground that service upon, which they give
to the Eucharist, they must then also adore the rock, whence Moses brought
water in the wilderness; since S. Paul says, That that was Christ: And the
body of the faithful; 1 Cor. x. 4. 1 Cor. vi. 15. since he says, That they
are the members of Christ: and those heretics taxed by S. Augustine would be
excusable for having adored the sun; since the Scripture sometimes gives that
name to the Blessed Jesus. If they will confess that these phrases of speech did
not excuse that abuse, they must likewise confess that the words of our
Savior, This is my body, do not suffice to authorize that service which they
give to the Eucharist.

All this they grant sufficiently, when their great Doctors confess, That
they do not build their opinion upon those words: and grant, they see no reason
why they should not take the words in that sense, which we Protestants take
them in. [Cajet. in 3. Thom. q. 75. art. 1.] From the sole Authority of the
Church (that is to say, in their language, of the Pope and his Council) they
deduce their transubstantiation. This Authority is the only foundation of the
adoration of the Host, which they can no way collect but from the will of the
Roman Church. So it appears, That laying aside the passion of Rome, there is
nothing in heaven, or in earth, or in the sense of men, or in the Scriptures of
God, which should (I will not say oblige) but any way allure them to be
ignorant, that the Eucharist is bread. So that all ignorance that they can
pretend, is purely affected and voluntary; and so not able to excuse the
service, which they render to the Host.

To which add, that it excuses them so much the less, Because the question
here is concerning the highest adoration, the most holy and singular act in all
religion, which by consequence a man should give to none but to Him, whom he
knows most assuredly to be God, and the Savior of our souls. Nor is it enough,
to have an opinion or suspicion of this. It must be certain. For it is just as
the conjugall bed, to which a woman must receive none, but whom she knows very
certainly to be her husband. If she have any apparent doubt, that it is not he
in realitie, and if notwithstanding this she receive him, she thereby forfeits
her troth. And here I cannot but commend a saying I read (in Apothegm. Anachor.
Egypt. lib. 15. cap. 70. Bibl. Patrum tom. 9. p. 286.) of an old Egyptian
Monk; who, when one appeared to him in the resemblance of Christ, was so far
from adoring what he saw, that he would neither view it, nor hearken to it: but
shutting his eyes, said, I shall see Christ in heaven; It Is enough for me to
hope and believe, while I am upon earth. But how? Was he not afraid, that this
refusal would offend his Lord, in case this had been He indeed, as the light,
speech, shape, and other circumstances obliged him to believe? Not a a jot. For
he was assured, that his Lord saw that this refusal proceeded, not from any
want of respect toward Him, but from a just and rational fear of giving
(through mistake) that to another, which belonged to Him only, and which he
earnestly desired to preserve inviolably for Him. A quality, which is so far
from offending our Lord, that it must needs be very pleasing to Him. And in the
same place (c. 71.) an Anchoret is mentioned, who, when the Devils asked him,
whether he would see Christ; answered, Be you, and he whom you would show me,
anathema. For my part I give heed to ^^y Jesus, who said, If any say unto you,
here is Christ or there, believe him not. And to this purpose is that, which
the Egyptian Anchorets (c. 69.) are reported often to have said; If a true Angel
appear to thee, be not very ready to entertain him; but humble thy self,
saying, I am not worthy to see an Angel while I live in sin. So that though
we had some reason to think Christ were present; yet 'twere good to refrain,
and not adore him, when we are not in all points assured that it is He: because
this were evidently to profane the act of adoration; which must by no means be
given to any rashly, and at adventure. Now our adversaries find nothing in all
this matter, which does not show clearly, that the Eucharist is really not the
Lord of the world, but bread. And therefore there is far less reason, that
the adoration which they give to the Host, should be excused by that opinion,
which they pretend to have of it.

II. But then secondly, Though the opinion of the Roman Church concerning the
Eucharist should (as we have proved it does not) justify, or at least excuse
that adoration which they give it; yet it is clear, That to allege that
opinion of theirs here as an excuse, were nothing to the purpose. For the
question is not concerning the Romanists, who profess that they believe that
the Eucharist is really and personally the Son of God; but concerning us, who
are so far from believing it, that we have not the least suspicion of it;
being (God be thanked) fully persuaded, that the Sacrament is truly bread. And
why should we not believe it so? since our senses witness, our reason shows,
the Scriptures teach, that it is bread; which are the three fountains of all
our knowledge; and we cannot be sure of any thing, but from one of them. Having
therefore this belief of the Eucharist, how can we adore it, without rendering
our selves guilty of violating all those precepts, wherein God has forbidden
us to adore the creatures, and incurring all those deaths and curses, which he
has denounced against the breach of such precepts?

I meddle not with other men's consciences, nor will I take upon me to judge
their actions. Almighty God will do that one day. And I think I have said
enough to show them, that It Is their duty in the mean while, to consider it
seriously. I speak of my self. Since my soul is persuaded, that the Eucharist
is a creature, I cannot adore it without offending the laws of God, and
overthrowing the foundations of my own salvation. And though my persuasion were
false, yet since I believe it (and that upon so many, and so certain, divine
and humane assurances) Though the Sacrament were (as it is not) really the Lord
of glory; yet it is clear, That if I shall adore it believing as aforesaid;
such my service will be false and unlawful, addressed not to God, (who is the
sole true and lawful object) but to a creature, which my imagination shall
through mistake have substituted in His place. Hereupon the Ancient Church has
constantly accused the Arians of adoring the creature, and continually called
the service, which they gave to Christ, idolatry and adoration of the creature:
and with very good reason. For though the Lord Jesus is the true God, eternal,
the Creator of the world, and Redeemer of the Church, and of the same
substance with the Father; and though the adoration which is given to Him by
them, who believe Him to be such, be a lawful worship, not condemned, but
approved and expressly commanded in the Scripture: yet they, who by a
detestable error hold Him to be but a mere creature, and think that the Father
made Him of nothing (either before or after the Creation of the world) as well
as the heaven and the earth; if they give Him the same adoration, which is due
to the Father, they do evidently bestow on a creature, that which belongs to
the Creator only. For they address this service not to the true Jesus,
coeternall and coessentiall with the Father, but to a phantasme of a creature
forged in their own brain: hereby rendering themselves guilty of a crime, so
often condemned and detested by the Lord in the Scriptures.

Seeing then that the truth of the word of God, and the Authority of the
Ancient Church forbids us to adore that which we believe to be but a creature,
under peril of incurring the curses denounced by the laws of God against those,
who rob Him of His glory and give it to another; We must conclude that neither
the opinion of the Church of Rome, nor any other consideration, can exempt us
from the anathemaes of Heaven, if we adore (as our Adversaries do) the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, firmly believing it to be bread in substance, and
not (as they pretend) our B. Savior really and personally.

CHAP. XII. The error of those, who think they may give to the Host of the
Church of Rome that reverence which she commands, without adoring.
Object. BUt perhaps some will grant, That we cannot lawfully adore the
Eucharist, while we are of this mind; but will say, That we may give that
worship to the Sacrament which the Church of Rome commands without adoring it.
For they will say, Since you acknowledge that the Eucharist is a Sacrament
instituted by our Lord, can you not kneel at receiving it, and address your
adoration and service, not to the Sacrament, which you esteem to be a creature,
but to J. Christ the author of it, whom you believe to be the Creator of the
Universe, as he is indeed? If one of you should be be baptized at years of
discretion, think you that he might not receive that Sacrament on his knees,
without being blamed for adoring the water? Nay would it not be his duty to put
himself into this respectfull posture rather then any other, to show the
reverence which he bears to our Lord, and to the seal of the new Covenant and
adoption.

And when your Pastors are consecrated by imposition of hands, do they not
receive it on their knees? Yet none thinks that they do therefore adore those
who lay hands on them, or the sign which is used to that end. And then why do
you make such scruple of bowing your knees, and bending your bodies in
receiving the Eucharist, a Sacrament no less precious then Baptism,
instituted by the same Lord, and for the same end: one to regenerate us, the
other to nourish us* one to help us into the Church, the other to help us to
persevere? Why are you afraid in this particular, rather then in any other, of
the crime and the punishment that attends adoration of the Eucharist?

Answ. But though this objection have some luster in it, and dazleth many
persons, persuading them to accommodate themselves outwardly to the Church of
Rome, retaining in their heart the same opinion which we hold concerning the
Eucharist; yet nothing can be more weak or vain. Thanks be to God, we are not
so ill taught as to scruple receiving the Sacrament on our knees. Our Brethren
of England never receive it otherwise: and when we communicate with them, we do
very easily and readily conform our selves to their order. And it is held among
us a matter of such indifferency, that though we receive the Holy Supper
standing, yet we do not exclude them from the number of Brethren, who receive
it sitting or kneeling. And if the Church of Rome had required no other thing
of us, then only to receive the H. Communion on our knees, I confess we
should have had no just cause in this particular of separating from it, since
we might with a good conscience perform what they demand. But, alas! how stupid
must we be, if we believe that she requires no more of us in this Article? how
hypocritical, if we pretend to believe it when we do not? For all the world
knows that the Romanists require us to believe that thing, which we see on
their Altars, and between the hands of their Priests, to be really and in truth
the eternal Son of God; and That it has, under the species which our senses
see and touch, no other substance but His; and consequently commands us to
adore it, to bow our selves before it, to give thereto all the humiliation of
our bodies, and of our souls, terminating on it the act of our veneration, as
on its true object. She deeply and plainly excommunicates all such, as doubt
either of the truth of the first of these two Articles, or of the holiness of
the second. Observe the Decrees and Canons of Her Councels, Council. Trident.
Sess. 13. the confessions of Her Faith, the sermons of Her Ministers, the
devotions of Her People, and the universal practice of all them, who adhere to
Her communion; and you shall find these two points written, graven, and
imprinted all manner of ways, in such legible characters, that you shall
scarce find any point of the Apostles Creed, which she confesses more clearly,
or which she presses more severely.

You Will say, I am willing to honor the Sacrament but not adore it: No, says
She, you must adore it. And lest you should pretend to hide, under that
equivocall word, any veneration less then the highest (like that which we may
render to the creature, without offending the Creator) You must render it, she
says, the worship or service of latria, which is due to the true God; Well,
you will say, but I will address this service of latria which she requires of me
to Jesus Christ, who is in heaven; and not to the Sacrament of his body, which
is upon the earth: No, says she, I do not intend it so. I would have you in
the veneration which you make in communicating, to render the service of latria
to the most holy Sacrament. Nullus itaque dubitandi locus relinquitur, quin
omnes Christi fideles pro more in Catholica Ecclesia semper recepto, latriae
cultum, qui vero Deo debetur, huic Sanctissimo Sacramento in veneratione
exhibeant. ibid. c. 5. See, with what a deal of care she has expressed her
sense, and excluded all others, without leaving them the least place? For if
she had said that the faithful should adore J. Christ in the Sacrament,
supposing the rest of her doctrine had left us in doubt of her meaning, we
might yet have interpreted this expression, as it is used in the books of some
of her Doctors, viz. That in receiving the Eucharist, we should adore the
Lord, with whom we communicate by the Eucharist, and so we might have pretended
that she does not oblige us to adore any creature. But she expressly to exclude
all such exposition, uses quite another expression, saying, That the service
of latria should be given to the Sacrament. So that now there is no reason to
doubt of her meaning. For what I pray you is it that she calls the Holy
Sacrament? Is it Jesus Christ residing in heaven? Who is so ignorant, as not to
know whether it be He or no? Is it not precisely that which the Priest blesses
upon the Altar? that which he puts into the mouth of the Communicants? that
which they must swallow down into the stomach? Yes; that is the very thing, to
which she would have you address your adoration, the bending of your knees,
and the humiliation of your body, and in a word all the parts of that inward
veneration, wherewith you communicate. If this be not it, which you regard;
when you bend your knee to any thing else, She anathematizeth you; she holds
you for an heretic and a rebel, one that deserves the anger of God and
eternal fire. And that you may know, that she has regard, not to the
holiness of the action which you celebrate, but to the honor of the subject
which is proposed to you; she would have you prostrate your self before it: not
only at the time of Communion, but likewise out of it; in the very streets,
and public passages, and in all places where you meet it. An evident sign
that Her intention is precisely such, as Her self explaineth it to be, viz.
That you hold this for your true God, and finally render it all the honors due
to the Sovereign Deity. If then you esteem this subject to be truly a
Creature, is not this an open mocking of God and men, and a miserable deceiving
of your self; To tell us, That you can do that which the Roman Church
requires, without adoring that at all, which you believe to be but a bare
creature? For as for that which you said concerning baptism, I confess that
being at years of discretion, you may receive it upon your knees: But, if the
Church to whom you come for it, should command you to believe, that which you
see in form of water to be really and in substance (not water, but) the true
God, Creator of heaven and earth; and consequently command you to render
adoration to it, and the service of latria, and to that purpose to fall upon
your knees; I say, That in such a case, you cannot obey such a commandment,
without violating your conscience, and treading under foot the Law of God, and
rendering your self really guilty of adoration of a creature. The same I say
concerning the Ministers, which receive imposition of hands, and the Believers,
who receive the Eucharist upon their knees. For if one should teach or command
either the one or the other to believe, That the Pastor, who imposes hands on
them, or the portion of the Eucharist which they receive, is truly and in
substance the great God who created the world, and by consequence expressly
enjoin men to adore, either the one or the other of these two subjects; who
doubts but that this were openly to deny our faith, and to renounce our
profession, when we fall upon our knees before these things, after such a
commandment? But men neither teach nor command any such thing among us. God
forbid they should! We believe and preach, That our Ministers are men and mere
creatures; so that no man can take the kneeling, which is before them, who give
imposition of hands, for an adoration addressed to them; all the profession of
our Churches, and nature of the things themselves directly contradicting it. In
like manner the Church of England believes and teaches publicly, That the
Eucharist is bread in substance, and that to adore it were grievously to offend
God: So that the kneeling, which is in their communion, cannot be taken for an
adoration of ought else but Jesus Christ who is in heaven, and not of bread
which is upon the earth. Did the Church of Rome believe and likewise teach,
that the Eucharist were bread in substance, and not a subject fit to be adored,
we think, that then we might bow the knee in her Communion without wounding our
consciences. But while she teaches that which she now believes, while she
exacteth of us this kneeling as a true adoration of the Sacrament; who is so
blind as not to see that we cannot obey her, without making our selves
(according to the judgment of our own consciences) guilty of adoreing a mere
creature, since we believe the Sacrament so to be?

CHAP. XIII. That he, who believes the Eucharist to be bread in substance,
cannot give it the reverence which is practiced in the Church of Rome, withoul
evident falsehood, hypocrisy, and perfidiousnesse.
Object. FOr to say (Though the intention of the Church of Rome be, that we
should address this kneeling and adoration, whereof that is the mark, to the
Sacrament there present) That we may nevertheless use it otherwise, and
address it to J. Christ sitting in heaven at the right hand of His Father,
lifting up our hearts, raising our affections and thoughts to Him; and by this
means kneel with our Adversaries, without adoring (as they do) that which we
believe to be but a creature.

Answ. This is a false and dangerous excuse of the flesh, which (might it take
place) would open a large and dangerous gate to impiety and hypocrisy, and
ruin the foundations of all religion. And for the better understanding of it,
I must begin with it a little higher.

God being the Creator and Redeemer of whole man, that is to say, both of his
soul and of his body, would have him (which is but reasonable) serve Him
entirely, using both the one and the other of these two parts to that end.
Glorify God in your body and in your spirit, both which are Gods, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. vi. 20. And as in offices which concern our neighbors, he
commands us sincerity, willing us to love them inwardly, and to edify and
help them outwardly; so does He command that in piety, which regards Himself,
we should jointly make use of our hearts and bodies. And as He abominates that
man, who loving his neighbor in his heart, should abuse him with his tongue,
or hurt him with his hand; or contrariwise should give him an alms with his
hand, and hate him in his heart: So will He not approve of that man, who
pretends to reverence Him in the secret of his soul; and yet with his tongue
blasphemeth His name: nor him who blessing Him with his mouth, shall curse Him
with his heart. 'Twill stand one man in no stead to plead for himself, That his
soul did his duty, but the body failed of his; nor another to excuse the
defaults of the soul by the service of the body. So that in effect, these
excuses will be but a mere mockery. The union of the mind and the body being so
near, that when the mind is disposed as it should, the body cannot but perform
its devoir: and he that abusing God or his neighbor with his tongue, would
have us believe that notwithstanding all that, he loves them sincerely in his
heart; is a bold liar deserving to be punished, not only for his blasphemy or
wrong, but likewise for his impudence.

According to these undoubted Maxims we are bound, not only to receive in our
hearts the truths, which God has revealed in Religion; but likewise outwardly
to profess them: And we are all bound not only not to disbelieve with our
hearts the errors and impieties, which are contrary to the truth of God; but
likewise not to confess them outwardly in any kind. For if it be enough to
retain in the heart the knowledge and love of truth, and it be permitted to
deny it outwardly sometimes; S. Peter had not fell in denying his Master: for
no man can doubt but that his heart within, knew well enough what his tongue
disavowed without. And so, to deny our Lord before men, would be no sin; and
confession with the mouth would be of no use: which all are things evidently
false. For that action of S. Peter is grievously blamed in the Gospel, and his
tears (if we had no other proof) show us sufficiently, that he thought he did
extremely offend God. And our Lord, Matthew. x. 33. protests expressly, that
He will deny him before His Father in heaven (that is to say, that at the
great day of judgment, He will not own him for His; nor put him in the number
of His blessed children) who will deny him before men. And lastly, S. Paul,
Romans x. 9, 10. teaches us, That with the heart men believe unto
righteousness, and with the tongue they make confession unto salvation, and to
be saved he does not only require, That you should believe the Lord in your
heart, but likewise that you should confess him with your mouth. The same
reasons do necessarily induce us to believe, That it is not enough to banish
from our hearts the belief of impiety, and such errors as are contrary to the
foundations of true Religion; unless we also banish the confession of them
from our mouths. For to confess an error which overthrows the
fundamentalls of Religion, is clearly to deny our Religion. Since then we are
forbidden under pain of an eternal curse, to confess with our mouth the
errors which we detest with our hearts; It Is clear, that if we believe the
adoration of the Host of the Church of Rome, to be an error contrary to the
foundations of piety, as we do indeed: That we cannot confess it, without
violating the commandment of J. Christ, and pulling upon our souls eternal
ruin and damnation. For, where is the Christian who firmly believing that the
Sacrament is a creature, and being asked if he should give it the adoration of
latria, will not dread to answer, Yes? and whose conscience will not feel a
thousand remorses, if any passion cause his tongue to say so? And how can we
say that the Sacrament is to be adored, or confess it more clearly, then by
prostrating our selves before the Host of the Church of Rome, and giving it in
the presence of men the same outward veneration, which is the mark and
substance of that which we give to Him.

Object. But you will perhaps deny, That with your mouth you ever said, that a man
ought to adore it.

Answ. I answer, First, in this age wherein we live, it is very hard (if not
impossible) to adhere to the communion of Rome, without making this confession
with the mouth and hand, and by the speech and subscription; such is the
extreme rigor wherewith she requires it of every one of her Communicants.

But to pass by confession of the tongue. It Is enough for my present purpose,
that you are upon your knees before the Host. For in so doing, you have
confessed not with your tongue indeed, but (which is all one) with all your
body. Your action has confessed in public, what your heart has rejected and
abhorred in private. For to confess in these matters, is to declare by some
outward sign what you believe, or on the contrary what you do not believe;
witnessing it either by words of the mouth, or by writing of the hand, or by
any other intelligible sign. Now secondly, this in civil conversation would
be esteemed a mere illusion and mockery, to pretend that a man does not own or
confess a thing, though he declare as much by some evident sign, under
pretense that he does it without speaking: as if a man that did homage to
another, should pretend, that he did not acknowledge him for his Sovereign,
under color of his not expressing in words that he did.

The actions by which men do ordinarily declare such things, are signs not
only equivalent to words, but much more precise and significative; so that to
use them, is to declare a thing more expressly and openly, then if a man should
speak it in words. Now to kneel before the Host of the Church of Rome, to
uncover the head, and prostrate the body to the earth, at the sound of a little
bell, or to go in procession after it on the day of its Feast; or to deck a
man's lodging with hangings against it pass by, and other actions like to
these, are the plain and ordinary signs, whereby men acknowledge the Host to
have a Sovereign Divinity, and pay (as it were) so many homages to it; as
appears by the will of them, who command it in the Church of Rome, and by the
common intention of those, who practice it continually.

So that every one who falls on his knees before the Host of the Church of
Rome, or who goes in procession when it is made in honor thereof, on the day
of that Feast; or who goes out of his lodging to honor its pomp; Declares
and witnesses, that he holds it for his Sovereign God (and not for a
creature) as clearly and expressly, as if he pronounced and affirmed it in so
many words.

CHAP. XIV. That every man who exercises the ceremonies and services, which
the Church of Rome renders to the Host, declares thereby that he adoreth it,
and takes it for his true and eternal God.
Object. ANd let not any such man reply, That though in the use of the Church
of Rome these actions have such a signification; nevertheless he uses them
(as to his own particular) in a quite other sense; nor let him pretend, that in
practicing them, he intends them not to express that which they commonly
serve to signify.

Answ. This answer is not only vain and ridiculous, but very dangerous; and
the consequence of it is destructive not only to Religion, but also to civil
Society. For signs instituted by men to signify things, whether in nature or
in Religion, should be interpreted by the public and common custom of those
who use them; and not by secret and particular intentions, this or that way. I
confess that in themselves and in their own nature, they signify, for the
most part, no more one thing then another: and that such among them, as have
any natural reference to the things which they signify, are not so necessary;
but that a man may at the beginning make them signify otherwise. But when once
the will of men (which is the Mistress of such institutions) has limited and
appointed them to some certain signification, and public use has confirmed
it; it is afterward (I conceive) an intolerable boldness to go about to use
them in another sense; and he that shall do so, will be esteemed either a sot
or a liar by every reasonable person. For example, Such words as we ordinarily
use to express the thoughts of our understandings, have not, in their own
nature, any virtue or strength to signify this thing rather then that. The
word Father, of it self may as well signify a stone, or water, or fire, as
that which it does signify; and each of these words might as well signify
that which Father does, as that which now they signify. It Is clear, That it
is the will of man, and not their own nature, that gave them the sense and
signification, which now they have in our language. But since the public use
of our Nation has limited and appropriated them to those things which they
signify, who does not see, That it is not possible for any particular man to
use them hereafter in any other sense; to use the word Father to signify a
stone; or fire to signify a Father? It Is just so with actions, which either by
the will, institution, or custom of men are used either in Religion, or civil
Society to signify any thing; as for example, Homage to signify the
superiority of him to whom it is rendered: The giving a ring and a kiss in some
nations, to signify the taking of a woman to wife: in the days of old among
the Israelites, to let one pierce the ear with an awl, to signify that one
was willing to be servant to him, from whom he endured it: and among the
Romanists, to be adored by Cardinals in the conclave, does signify that the
man so adored is acknowledged to be Pope: and the kneeling before the Host,
that one adoreth it, and acknowledges it for his God. I confess that these
signs and others like them, originally and of their own nature, signify no
more these things then others; and that of themselves they may be applied to
other significations. But since they are applied and consecrated to these by
public use, it is an unparallelled folly for any man, to pretend to use them in
another sense. As if one should say in English, That he believes the Pope of
Rome to be the Head and Monarch of the Church of Christ; He must needs signify
the same thing, that these words do usually sound in the common notion and
custom of them in our Language: So that if he do not believe so, he cannot in
so speaking exempt himself from being held either a fool or a knave. So he who
falls on his knees before the Host, or who solemnizeth the feast of it, or
assisteth at it, or trimmeth his lodging in honor of it; He, I say, does
likewise signify, in another kind of true language, yet nevertheless as
express as the former, that he holds the Host for a God, for the true
Creator and Redeemer of the world; and if he be of a contrary persuasion, he
must necessarily grant, That he is either out of his senses, or a notorious
liar; abusing the actions of his body, to signify the contrary thoughts of his
heart. And as the former would be laughed at by any judicious man, if, to
excuse his expression, he should allege, that by Pope of Rome, he meant not
what those words signify in the common use of men, but some other things; as
for example, J. Christ our Lord: so the latter would be as ridiculous, who
should tell us, That he uses kneeling before the Host, and other ceremonies,
not to let men know that he adoreth it (which is the thing that these actions
signify in the common use of men) but to signify that he adoreth our Lord,
who sits on high in heaven. If such excuses might take place, if any one
might be suffered to use the signs of things to a clean other sense, then that
wherein they are taken in the common and ordinary use of men; all societies
public and private, religious and civil, would straight be plunged into an
horrible confusion. We should not hereafter have any credit, or assurance among
men. For as for words, every man might abuse them to signify what pleases
him; the religion and great care that should be taken of oaths, contracts,
promises (a thing so absolutely necessary for the subsistence of mankind) would
quite fall to the ground. A woman may think that a man has promised to be her
husband, because he has sworn that he will take her for his spouse; but the
perfidious dissembling fellow will excuse himself, saying, That by the word
spouse, he meant a concubine, and not a lawful wife, which is that which the
word commonly signifies. A Judge in France may believe that a guilty person is
innocent, because a witness assures him (upon his oath) that he did not tuer,
that is, kill such a man; for whom he is accused. And according to this rule,
the witness shall quit himself from perjury, by alleging, That he meant by
tuer not to kill (as it signifies in French,) but to keep alive, to defend and
preserve (as it signifies in Latin) by an impudence like that of the French
prisoner, who being asked, whether he ever passed the straight of the sea,
swore that he never did; meaning by the word straight, not that between Dover
and Calis, whereof the question was asked him, but that of Gibraltar, of which
none of the standers-by thought a whit. Briefly, all the language of men (that
admirable organ of their discourse by which they discover the thoughts of their
hearts to each other so usefully) would by this means become a mere ginne, a
trick to cosen and delude. No man would be able by this means, to understand
his neighbors meaning, any more then if the ancient confusion of Babel were
again in the world; every one would become a stranger and barbarian to his
companion. And then for actions which signify any thing, If particular men
might be suffered to wrest them to another sense and meaning then that, whereto
the public has appointed them, the same disorder would take place. A subject
after he has done homage to the enemy of his natural Lord, to exempt himself
from the punishment due to this undutifulnesse, might allege, That he meant by
this act, not to acknowledge the Tyrant for his Sovereign, (which is the
common signification of that action) but only to salute him, as we do another
man. And the servant of old time in Israel might have denied the service, which
he promised to his Master by the sign of his ear pierced, (an ordinary thing
in that nation) excusing himself, that he meant the clean contrary by that act,
viz. to renounce his Masters service, and not to oblige himself to it for the
future. The Soldier in war might wear the enemies colors, and pretend that
he had not for all this renounced his captain. But this abuse will be more
dangerous in religion, by how much that should be kept more holy and inviolable
among men. For if a man may be permitted to practice actions, whicd are
instituted to another sense, and that he may never intend them to that end for
which they are commonly used; there will be nothing certain in Religion. For as
you will presume to prostrate your self before the Host of the Church of Rome,
and think you may not thereupon be accused of adoring it; so another will as
well prostrate himself before images, and offer to them wax-candles, without
being taxed of having worshipped them. Another may wear a Turbant, and enter
into the Mosques of the Turks, and there perform their devotions, without being
guilty of Mahumetanisme. For (he will say) It Is to Jesus Christ that I perform
these services, and not to the God of Mahomet. And another among the
inhabitants of China may prostrate himself without scruple before their idols,
pleading that he addresseth this adoration not to the Pagode there present (as
the idolaters do) but to God the Father, or to Jesus Christ. And if they be
permitted to wrest actions thus from their true sense and meaning, why not
words likewise? For these are signs of the same nature, both the one and the
other are instituted by men, and to the same end; saving that the nature of the
words has oftentimes less reference to their signification, then the nature
of an action, or a ceremony: so that a man should make less scruple of
abusing it. According to this account, a Protestant might swear boldly, that he
believes, A man should adore the Host: for he will say, that by the word Host,
he means J. Christ fastened to the Cross, and not the Sacrament, which they
call so at Rome. A Christian might answer without infidelity, That he is a
Muselman, or a Jew, or a Pagan, according as it stands most for his
advantage, and may take his oath on it, if need be. For (he 'l say) I take
these words in a sense different from that wherein they are ordinarily used; I
mean that I am a Muselman that is, a Believer (as the word in Arabic
signifies) of J. Christ, and not of Mahomet; a Jew spiritual, not a carnal
one; a Pagan by extraction or birth, and not by religion. For why may it not be
as lawful to wrest words? if it be lawful to use kneeling before the Host of
the Roman Church, to signify any thing else besides adoration of the
Sacrament. Do you not perceive that there is the same reason? Since in the use
of the Church of Rome it signifies, as clearly, properly, and universally, this
adoration, as the words of Muselman, of Jew, of Pagan, signify the men of
these three sects in our common language? It will soon appear how dangerous a
thing this liberty is, if permitted among men. But is it permitted? God
forbid. The laws both of God and men censure them as cheaters, treacherous,
faithless persons, who offer to practice it; and punish them as the worst
Malefactors. As for men, who knows not that their tribunals are for the most
part set up to maintain faithfulness and honesty in words, and other
declarative signs of our intentions? If one after he have given his promise to
a Maid, That he will take her for his spouse, should refusing to marry her be
brought before a Justice, and there be so impudent as to plead, that he meant
only to take her for his concubine; who questioneth but that such a man would
be taken, not only for a treacherous person and a perjured, but likewise for a
mocker; and that he should be punished, notwithstanding his excuse? And the
subject, who shall leave his Sovereigns colors, and shall do homage to his
enemy, and wear his marks and badges; shall he be quitted for saying, That his
heart was loyal all this while, and that he did these things with another
intention? Shall he not nevertheless be held for a Rebel and (which is more)
for a mocker, and a man that has a heart and a heart, as the Scriptures speak;
and one, whom error and passion has transported into the contrary party,
against his Liege-Lord? And if he fall into the hands of the Princes Officers,
will these ridiculous excuses possibly preserve him from infamy, and that
punishment which shameless and rebellious subjects deserve, or will he not
rather fare the worse for them? Now if the justice of man, in stead of
accepting this kind of excuses, is offended and incensed by those, who have the
boldness to allege them, how can we hope that the justice of God (which is
infinitely more pure and more holy) shall take such for payment, when question
is made concerning Truth, and His Service? I cannot believe that there is any
man so brutish as to imagine, that after he has expressly pronounced, That we
must adore a creature, he shall be absolved for saying, that by the word
Creature he means the Creator. There is no man that has common sense but
sees, that this would be a pure illusion; and that so dull and gross, as I
cannot think any man should ever dream of making use of it. Those very men who
are partly of our persuasion, and yet think That a man may with a good
conscience prostrate himself before the Host of the Roman Church, will yet
make scruple of pronouncing with their mouths, that they must adore it. Now
the nature and reason of words, and of actions, and ceremonies, is the same (as
we have proved.) Both the one and the other are signs and symboles, instituted
to signify our thoughts.

Since then all Christians agree that in Confessions and declarations of Faith,
which we make either by the mouth or writing, it is not permitted them to use
words in any sense, but that wherein they are taken in common use; we must
conclude, That it is not lawful for us to abuse the ceremonies and actions of
one Religion, to a sense contrary to what they signify in the ordinary
practice of men. Whence it follows, That, even as by the confession of those,
who are our Adversaries in this point, he will sin grievously, that believing
the Host of the Roman Church to be a creature, shall say with his mouth, That
he must render to it the adoration of latria (in what sense soever he pretend
to take these words;) so is it a very sottish fault, for any to prostrate
themselves before the Host, having the same belief as we have, the same
intention in so doing: Since by so doing, they pronounce as much or more
expressly, then if they had said it with their mouth, That they must adore the
Host. The action which they perform, signifying the same thing, clearly and
expressly, in the common use of men.

CHAP. XV. An answer to the example of Naaman the Syrian, objected by some.
Object. ANd whereas they object the famous example of Naaman the Syrian, who,
after he was converted to the knowledge of the LORD, was wont to bow himself in
the temple of the Idol, and when the King his Master went to perform his
devotions, he accompanied him; and bowed himself, that the King might lean upon
him at his devotions.

Answ. In answer, I shall not mention the many interpretations of this passage,
that seem to draw the words 2 Kings v. 18. to another sense, then what is now
presented. Suppose (which is yet contended for) that Naaman desired leave of
the Lord to enter into Rimmons temple, and bow himself there; That the King
might use him to lean on. Suppose that Elisha did on Gods part grant him thus
much; so That this his bowing was no way contrary to his piety to God, or
charity to his neighbor: all this granted will conclude nothing against what
has hitherto been spoken. For Naaman does not simply entreat the Lord to let
him prostrate himself in the Temple of Rimmon: in no kind. That had been to
entreat a thing clearly and expressly forbidden, which the Prophet would never
have granted. But he requests leave, to yield the King that service, which he
had done formerly, viz. to wait upon Him, and let Him lean upon him (as it is
the custom of Princes and great Personages, in state, to lean upon their
servants or Favorites) and, That if his Master should require that service of
him in the Idol-temple, he might give it him without offending God. This action
(if well considered) differs excessively from that we now speak of. For we
treat of such actions, as have reference absolutely and simply to the service
of that object, which men pretend to adore: whereas this is terminated directly
and immediately in the service of an earthly King, and Master. Those actions of
the Romanists signify nothing in common use, but the adoration and divinity
of the objects, to which they are publicly consecrated: this on the contrary,
signifies principally and directly, Only that Naaman acknowledged the King to
whom he gave his service to be his Leige-Lord and Master. And therefore, as
much difference as there is between the adoration of a creature, and the
service of a Master; so much there is there between this action of Naaman, and
those which the Romanists pretend to be permitted them. God no where forbids a
servant to obey his Master, to lend him a hand to move, or a shoulder to lean
on; or to kneel, that a man may be the more commodious and serviceable to him,
therein. Nay on the contrary, He commands us in his H. Word to keep all the
degrees and offices of civil society inviolably, and bids servants
particularly beware of abating ought of what obedience is due to their earthly
Masters, under pretense of giving some to their heavenly. But as for adoration
of the creature, He very rigorously forbids it. Whence it appears, that though
one may lawfully use words and actions that testify the first kind of
submission; yet it follows not, that he may exercise such as signify the
second.

I confess, that Naaman's doing this in the Temple of Rimmon, might (by the
circumstance of place) give some occasion to another interpretation. For this
action which he did for the service of his Prince, being the same, re and
mat^rially (as we speak) with the bowing which Idolaters make in honor to
their God, and both happening to be in the same place and time, where and when
infidels were adoring their Idol; some of the standers-by might think he
addressed it, not to the King leaning on him, but to the image of Rimmon there
present. And this was it that raised the scruple in this great Personage. For
though in his intention this act was only a civil honor to the King, and
though in the custom of the world 'twas so esteemed; yet, because time and
place concurred so unhappily for it, that it might have been otherwise taken;
he doubted, it was not so free from fault as he imagined, and consequently
desired Gods pardon, and leave to perform his service to his King. So it was
this, which the Prophet seems to grant him in those words, Go in peace: and
their opinion, who imagine that Naaman here served an idol, is not built upon
any rational or strong foundation. For since the Prince leaned on him, why
have they not as much reason to think, That he was there in relation to His
service, as to the service of the Idol. Nay, it was probable that this act
terminated in his Master and not in the idol, since neither reason nor the
custom of men would permit him to part Religious acts between God and men. And
this one consideration (if nothing else could be said) were enough to show that
he then minded not the devotion of his soul, but the service of his Master: It
being clear, that though he were a Pagan in religion, this Rimmon whom the
Syrians served (suppose him endued with understanding or sense, as he were an
odd Deity else) would not have allowed a service done to a Prince, to bear a
share in the adoration to him. As suppose a Noble man rendering homage to his
Sovereign lean on one of his servants who is kneeling, can you with any reason
interpret this act of the servant an homage done to the Masters Prince? 'Twere
unreasonable, and impertinent, to say or think so. And for the better
understanding of my meaning, Suppose this servant were a vassal, and held a
farm of that Prince for which he were yearly to do him some homage; would you
believe he had performed that homage, by this very assisting and serving his
Master upon such an occasion? No, surely. It Is evident, that these are acts
(though alike, yet) plainly distinguished; one, whereby he comes to render an
honor that is due; the other, whereby he only bends his knees to assist his
friend. Naaman's case was just the same. The King of Syria gave religious
worship to the idol; but Naaman in holding him up served only his Master; not
the idol, his Master's false and unbeseeming deity.

But beside this Circumstance, diverse others free this act of his from all
sinister interpretation. For 1 Naaman entered into the idol-Temple only when he
was obliged to perform some duty to his Master; he offered no sacrifices; he
performed neither this nor any other homage, or piece of devotion there alone.
Whence it is evident, that what he did otherwhiles in the Temple, was to his
Master and not to the idol. But 2 There is more in it yet: for he did not only
abstain from all false and unlawful acts of worship; but he made moreover an
open public profession, by word and deed, of reverencing and adoring the true
God, who was known in Israel. He protests as much, expressly to the Prophet,
saying, 2 Kings v. 15, 17. I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in
Israel. Thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor
sacrifice, unto other Gods but unto the LORD. Who sees not that all the
circumstances of this action were so plain, so far from equivocation, that no
man of any ingenuity could take them in an ill sense, viz. for adoration to the
false God Rimmon?

Therefore as in common discourse, an honest man may use words which signify
diverse things (as in all languages there are very many such) provided, he use
them only so, as it may plainly appear by the circumstances of his discourse
in what sense he takes them, without any design to deceive his auditors with
the ambiguitie: so it was lawful for Naaman to signify by this act the
respect he bore to his Master, notwithstanding the ambiguity which the place
and time seemed to cast upon it; since all the circumstances of this act, and
his life, and words, showed plainly what he intended by it, viz. a plain
serving his Master, no adoring the Idol.

And now who sees not, what a vast difference there is between this act of
Naaman, and those which we dispute against in this place? For 1 the Romanists,
who bow their knees before the Host, declare not what opinion they have of the
object, to which they address that worship, by any other outward profession
unless they say, It Is God. 2 Naaman served the God of Israel openly, and
offered him sacrifices; and highly and plainly protested, that he took not
Rimmon for his God; at the adoration of whom, the service that he owed his
Master, caused him to be sometimes present. But all who communicate with, or
continue in the Church of Rome, make public profession of her doctrine; they
renounce not (in word, or deed) the adoration of that, to which they prostrate
themselves. Who then, unless he can divine, will interpret their bowing and
adoration otherwise, then as a testimony they give of the DEITY of that object,
wherein they terminate it?

Furthermore, when they bend their knees before the Host, or deck up their
houses against it come, or pass by them in the street; these actions cannot be
taken but for a profession of their adoring this, and taking it for a real
deity. For such in the common and ordinary use of men have no other
interpretation then this: whereas Naaman's act (as we have proved) was properly
a duty, which he owed to his Master, and a token of that service, which he was
to render to him. But as for the men we speak of, we see no Master they have to
lean upon them, nor to enter into their houses when they thus deck them; We see
nothing in their Temples, or at their Processions, whereto we can imagine they
terminate these actions, but only the Host. And therefore in all reason, they
cannot be taken for ought but testimonies of that honor, which they bear to
it, and of the Deity which they acknowledge to be in it.

Thus it appears, that Naamans act does not a jot excuse theirs, but rather
evidently condemn it. For since he was so scrupulous of the deed (though so
many ways qualified, and free from the suspicion of idolatry) that he dared
not venture on it, without Gods express leave, what think you would he have
done, if he had been in the Romanists case? with what horror would he have
refused and detested it, since here is nothing but naked and plain
demonstrations of honor and service to a creature. All that may hence be
concluded, is in appearance to favor those, who serve Kings, to assist them at
the ceremonies of the Religion of their Master; if so be their service obliges
them to render any service to their persons; so that the action which they
exercise be one of the functions of their charge, and that elsewhere they make
a clear and open profession of fearing the Lord only, and that they
acknowledge not that for God, which is adored in such devotions. Yet I know not
whether the difference that is between the Old and New Testament will permit us
to extend the consequence of this example thus far; God having formerly in
the time of the Churches infancy permitted in his children diverse things, which
he forbids them now under the light of the Gospel; where our charity should be
so exquisite, that we should rather endure all sorts of mischiefs then give the
least cause of scandal to our Neighbors: and I believe, it were more safe to
renounce those Dignities, which oblige us to any appearances contrary to our
Religion, then to cause any to stumble by our enjoying and exercising them.

CHAP. XVI. That to think it is lawful for a man to exercise the ceremonies of
a Religion, which he believes not, does by consequence diminish the glory of,
and cast a blur on, the Martyrs.
BUt to this one example, which they without any reason bring out of the Old
Testament, we may justly oppose the belief and perpetual practice of the
Saints under the first and second Covenant; who have not more abhorred
confessing with the mouth errors contrary to piety, then they have detested
practicing (amongst those who teach them) any of those actions that have
reference to such errors. Holding as well those to be Apostates and deserters
of the Faith, who defiled themselves with some false and unlawful service, as
those who expressly and publicly professed error. For example, Had not the
three Hebrew children in Babylon, Dan. iii. been of this persuasion, why should
they have been willing to have incurred the indignation of the King their
Protector, and to have been deprived not only of all their goods and honors,
but likewise cast into a hot fiery furnace, there to endure a very grievous and
horrible death; rather then to prostrate themselves at his commandment before
the golden image, which he caused his people to adore? Had it not been easy
for them, to have kept themselves from all this mischief, by doing that which
the King commanded, but in another sense; and with an intention different from
that, wherein he required it? viz. by referring and addressing their adoration
(whereof bowing or prostration was the mark) not to the golden image before
them, but to God the Creator? But this illusion and catch was so far from
prevailing with them, that they never once thought of it; but with a brave
generositie, befitting that piety whereof they made profession, they answered
boldly, at the first word, that they would not prostrate themselves before the
statue; thinking (which was very true) That since that action which was
required of them, signified (in the custom of that people) an acknowledgement
of a Godhead in the inanimate creature, they could not practice it without
idolatry, or damnable hypocrisy; and consequently without rendering themselves
guilty of a very enormous sin against God, and an irreparable scandal against
their neighbors. The same may I say, of all the excellent and famous
Personages, that have from the first dawning of Christianity to this hour,
with so much courage and glory sealed the truth with their blood. For if a man
might be permitted to counterfeit in this manner, and without deserving
punishment to exercise impious services and superstitious adorations, (provided
that in the secret of his heart, he refer and give those very services to God
the Creator, which other men give to the creature) why should those holy and
blessed Witnesses of God have exposed themselves to such troubles and
sufferings? Why should they continually have made such scruple of casting two
or three grains of incense into the Censer, in presence of their Sovereign
Prince who commanded them? Why might they not have done this, with an intention
of rendering this service either to God, or to the Prince there present (that he
might smell the sweet odor) and not to the idol, as others intend and perform
it? If this petty quirk of Logic might have made the action commendable (or at
least tolerable, and excusable) what an incredible stupidity was it in those
great men, not to have used it? Who perceives not that after the rate of our
new Sophisters, all the Christian courage of those holy Personages, was but a
piece of silliness; all their constancy a sottish and childish
opinionativenesse and wilfulness? For who would not judge them either
infinitely simple, as not knowing or not thinking on so easy a subtilty; or
extremely imprudent, if knowing it they would not have used it at such a time;
since for want of using it, they miserably lost both their goods, and lives,
and all that was dear and precious to them upon earth? But if the Romanists be
in the right, the Martyrs, beside suffering, should have had a deal of crime
and sinfulness in their fault: For to lose a man's life needlessly, and to spill
ones own blood in a bravery, is an enormous offense against God; who forbids us
to violate or take away our neighbors life, much more our own; and detesting
those who procure another man's death, cannot but extremly abominate them, who
are the cause of their own destruction. But God forbid, that in stead of
setting forth the praises and the glory, which all Christians have ever given
to these holy Martyrs, we should be so ungrateful and malicious, as to
reproach their memory (by accusing them either of imprudence or injustice)
merely to gratify such, as having not courage enough to confess openly what
they believe privately in their hearts, would (in stead of condemning their own
weakness) tax all those of rashness, who are not so fearful as they. Let us
rather acknowledge, that these Saints (whose names have ever been precious and
blessed in the Church) have well and rightly judged, thinking that none can
with less then such a resolution, perform the duty of a good and faithful
Christian, nor otherwise avoid the infamy and punishments which they deserve,
who desert so holy a discipline.

CHAP. XVII. That this dissembling is condemned by our Lord in the Scriptures.
FOr in truth, God will not be put off with such quaint devices, which are but
mere pretenses, and colors, wherewith flesh and blood endeavor to smooth over
their fearfulness. He deals with us bona fide, plainly and in earnest, and
will not own them, who go not the same pace, that is to say, who deal not
roundly and plainly with him. As for such sly people as would halt with Him,
and walk awry between Him and the world, and varnish over their looseness with
false and artificial excuses, He surprizeth them in their pretended
subtilties: leaving them with those, whose marks and badges they have accepted
of, contrary to the judgment of their own consciences.

There was doubtless among the Israelites of old, during the corruptions that
Ahaz and Jezabel brought into Religion, great store of persons, who overcome
with their tyrannical threats, did bow their knees to Baal sore against their
wills; and in their hearts detested those idols, which through fear they were
driven to adore: some who comforted themselves with a vain imagination, that
they might bow indeed to the Idol with their bodies, but keep their souls for
God, and so inwardly addressing to Him all their veneration, they should not
deserve either the name or punishment of idolaters. Notwithstanding, the Lord
not regarding this excuse, excludes them from the number of His servants;
counting none for His, but only such as had not bowed their knees to Baal. I
have left me, says he, Romans xi. 4. 1. Kings xix. 18. seven thousand in Israel,
to wit, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which
has not kissed him. And then who would not take the rest, who did fall before
the images of Baal, or did kiss them, or salute them, if not for idolaters or
hypocrites, yet for such, in a word, as God rejected from his communion?

Long time before this, while the Israelites were yet in the wilderness, where
they cast a golden calf, we cannot imagine they were so brutish, as to believe,
That that image which they then cast, was truly and really the God which
brought them out of the land of Egypt, before it was in the world. All the
circumstances of the fact induce us to say, That they took it only for a
visible symbol of the Divinity, which should be to them in stead of Moses, who
they thought was lost: so that they should have addressed to God the honors,
which they gave to that image. But because such services were now become the
ordinary mark of idolatry, over all the land of Egypt, where they lived; God
without having regard to that, which they might have said was in their
intentions, handles them and punishes them, (Exodus xxxii.) as being truly and
indeed idolaters: for so they are called by S. Paul, where he records their
fault, 1 Cor. x. 7. And that divine Apostle in the same place, is so far from
permitting us, under any pretense whatsoever, to do any of those actions,
whereby superstitious men use to testify their devotion to that which they
serve (as prostration before the subject which they adore) that he forbids the
Corinthians (1 Cor. x. 19, 20, 21.) to eat the flesh of those living creatures,
which they knew to have been sacrificed to idols; and this under peril of
rendering themselves in so doing, partakers of devils, and of their Altars, and
of depriving themselves of the Table of the Lord, and of his Communion. Was it,
because the Christians who eat of such meats, had in so doing an intention to
honor Demons or Idols? In no wise. They eat simply of it, for the refection of
their bodies, as they would have eaten of other meats, if they had been at
hand. Yet because the idolaters esteemed them sacred, and sanctified by the
altars of their false Divinities; and because eating at their feasts was an
action, which in the common use signified, that one had them in esteem and
veneration; or at least, that one did not think, That the service which they
used was impure and unlawful, the H. Apostle would not suffer Believers to eat
as idolaters did. But you will say, I do it not to be sanctified thereby; I
will in this repast, address my thoughts, praises, and blessings, not (as the
infidels do) to Idols upon altars, whereon they lay their viands; but to God,
our only true Creator and Preserver. No, says the Apostle; I would not have
you be partakers of Devils. I know well enough, that an Idol is nothing; I know
well too, that you take it to be what it is. But what ever your opinion be
concerning it, you cannot exercise those actions, which are the ordinary
symboles of honor that idolaters render thereto, without defiling and rendering
you unworthy of the Cup and Table of the Lord. And it is observable, That
entering upon this business, he uses this preface, Finally, my dearly beloved,
flee from idolatry^ 1 Cor. x. 14. clearly intimating thereby, that he held all
them guilty of idolatry, who with any heart or mind whatsoever, exercised any
of those actions, which in the common use of idolaters, signified the honor
which they bore to that which they served. And therefore, what can become of
such people, unless they prevent the day of the Lord by a serious repentance;
since there is no sin against which the Scripture threatens a more horrible
damnation, then against this of idolatry? But lest they should sooth up
themselves with an opinion that they are not idolaters; it denounces against
them elsewhere the same judgment: but gives them a name which agrees to them
so properly, as they will not know how to disavow it, Rev. xxi. 8. As for the
fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, their part shall be
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. I
would fain have these people seriously consider, what these fearful be, that
are here thrown into hel-dungeon, with the worst and most abominable
malefactors. For if the word signify not precisely those, who (lest they
should displease the world) do outwardly conform themselves to services and
ceremonies, which in their heart they acknowledge to be a pernicious error; I
know not what other sense this passage can bear. The H. Ghost means not
those, who in this world are called fearful. For He is not used to put valor
and warlike force, among the qualities that be necessary for inheriting the
Kingdom of heaven: nor does He mean those who follow error, and serve
creatures with a full heart, believing and approving inwardly, what they do
outwardly. For He is not wont to call them fearful; They are rather such as He
calls a little after, idolaters. Nor does he mean hypocrites, who under an
open profession of virtue, hide a filthy and infamous life: though to call them
so, were as bad as to call them fearful. The name of liars, which follows
soon after, agrees to them a great deal better. Nor is there any likelihood,
that by fearful he means profane, or Atheists, or open sinners, and
malefactors. For who ever heard them set out by this name? And then who can be
meant by these cursed fearful persons, which are here ranked in the forefront
of all, that shall be inheritours of hell fire; but those, who overcome with
some carnal fear, do not confess outwardly that holy truth which they believe
inwardly; or those who confess outwardly some error, which inwardly they
misbelieve and detest? Thus was it in the Martyrs of Christ not imprudence, but
a very excellent piece of wisdom, That they chose rather to suffer the most
cruel deaths and punishments, than through fear to conceal that opinion, which
they had concerning piety and error. It was in them not a cruelty, but an act
of sweetness in their loving devout souls, rather to undergo death, then to
perform any of the actions of Pagan superstition; since they had no other way
to avoid those punishments, which are threatened to fearful men. And on the
contrary, it will be sound, That there are none more sottish, nor more cruel
to themselves, then those pretended Politicians, who to preserve (as they say)
the peace of the world, and to exempt themselves from temporal punishments,
that sometimes betide open Believers, accommodate themselves to the services of
one, and avoid the freedom and communion of the other. For as it is prudence
for a man, to lose a small benefit, to preserve a far greater; and that is
truly and indeed to love a man's self, when he suffers a little sorrow (as a cut
of a razour, or a Chirurgions lancet) to keep himself from death: so it is the
highest degree of imprudence, for a man to loose his Sovereign good, to
preserve one that is incomparably less; the worst of cruelties, to suffer a
man's self to perish eternally, rather then suffer a short and slight
inconvenience.

CHAP. XVIII. That this dissembling, grievously offends God, and scandalizeth
men.
BUt to the end that no man may accuse the judgment of God of too much rigor
against fearful people, Let us briefly consider the greatness and the weight
of their fault. First, they are evidently guilty of a grievous and inexcusable
lie. For by their action they make profession of believing that, which they do
not believe in realitie. As for example, he, that through fear prostrateth
himself before the Host of the Church of Rome, declares highly and expressly,
that he takes it for a Deity, deserving adoration: since in common custom
that is the sense of this action. And yet he tells us privately, that his
heart believes, it is not a Deity, but an insensible and inanimate creature.
Who discerns not here a manifest contrariety, between the mind and the body?
between the heart and the tongue? And though all lying be unpleasing to God,
and unbecoming a man of worth and reputation; yet this is the most vilainous
and enormous of any other sort. For if lying be far more blamable in a
serious then in a slight subject, who can describe or imagine how highly
detestable it is in Religion, the most important thing in the world? how
abominable in the most solemn and sacred act of Religion, where the question is
concerning rendering to a Deity that Sovereign service, which we owe him? Is it
not ^pparently a reproach to the Divine Majesty, who has so expressly
protested that He hates nothing upon earth, near so much as a lying soul? and
to the holy Angels, who are spectatours of our actions? and to Men our
neighbors, that are assembled with us? for Us, in the presence of them all, to
say and impudently declare a thing, directly contrary to what we think; to
swear and protest, as it were with the hand lifted up, that we take a thing to
be our Creator and Redeemer, which in reality we esteem to be as far below
the nature of Him, as earth is below heaven. The most desperate knaves will
seldom endure to hear of their having sworn falsely, that the Oxen of another
man belong to them; or they come to do it with a soul full of remorse, and a
face covered with confusion. The reason is, because the Authority of the
Judges, the dignity of the Assembly, the holiness of the Place, the hand which
they lift up, and the tongue which they move, comes into their mind; and
privately chastizeth them for violating the truth. So deeply has Nature
imprinted in all men's hearts the hatred and horror of a lie.

Ye then, who before the face of heaven and earth, before the eyes of God,
Angels, and Men, have sworn against your conscience not a slight business, but
the most important; that concerns not this present and sading life, but that
other which is eternal; who have sworn, not with two or three words let slip
between the teeth, but highly and expressly, with the gesture and motion of all
your person; who have affirmed, and as it were sealed, this lie by the most
authentic act that is in the Religion of your Countrymen; how can you have
the face after such a dreadful perjury to look again up to Heaven? How can
your conscience choose but trouble you and avenge it self, for the horrible
outrage, that you have committed on it, for your having so violently and
wretchedly stifled its thoughts? If after this, it do not prick and torment you
night and day, I know not how you can make appear, that it is alive. For
besides the enormitie of the lie, such faults are infinitely contrary to the
respect which we owe to God, and extremely injurious to His Soveraigntie. For
is it not one of the greatest crimes that a subject can possibly be guilty of
toward his Sovereign, openly to bestow upon another, beside Him, the Name and
Honor, which is due to Him alone. I know the Romanist will say, That his
intention is far from doing it, but It Is enough to make him faulty, either to
have said, or to have done the least thing like it: so holy and sacred is the
Majesty of Sovereigns, that no man may without impiety violate or profane the
respect, that is due to Them, with any intention, under any pretense
whatsoever. Now, to give unto any thing, which you do not believe to have a
Divine nature, the services which are given to such and under this notion, by
those among whom we live; is clearly to testify, that you give to another
besides God, the honor which belongs to him alone. As, to bring in our
example, for You to prostrate your selves before the Host of the Church of
Rome, or to go on Procession after it, on the day of its Feast; is to declare
that you give it the name and adoration of a Deity. I do not affirm that you
really adore it. I presuppose that you know in your heart, that it is but a
creature, and that your heart addresseth all its service to God only. But
because you make this declaration with your body, you witness and make it
appear that you hold this for your God. Do you not in your conscience take it
to be an horrible crime to commit so grievous an offense against our Sovereign
Lord? And here tell not me, I beseech you, that you do not make such a
declaration, in prostrating your self before the Host. For I have sufficiently
shown before, that this is the true clear and precise signification of that
action, and others like it: and he that will interpret them otherwise, must
overthrow the laws and communion of all civil and Religious Societies among
men. And to partake of such actions against our consciences, is not only an
offense against God, but likewise a most cruel outrage and scandal against
our Neighbors.

For first, one cannot abuse a man, or mock him in a serious business, without
deeply violating the holy and respective charity, which we owe to a creature,
that bears the image of our Lord, and has the same nature that we are of.
And I do not see, how one can more apparently mock his neighbors, then by
making show of adoring that which they serve, and approving their devotion as
good and useful to salvation; and yet to believe nothing less, and in our
consciences to hold that to be a mere creature which they adore; and the
honor, which they give it, to be an unlawful service and unpleasing to the
true God. What greater affront can men possibly put upon them, than thus to
abuse and sport with them? questionless did they discern through the mask,
under which we hide our selves, the thoughts of our hearts, and the gullery
that we put upon them, when we present our selves to them in this false visage;
they would extremely abhor us for brazen faced Couseners. Did we disguise our
selves thus for their good, or did not our dissembling do them a mischief,
they would have less reason to complain. But it is quite otherwise. This our
vain dissimulation, and fond conceit is a very great scandal to them; This
masking and disguising our selves is to assassinate and destroy them. For do
you not by exercising the acts and services of Superstition, in their presence,
plainly embolden (or as S. Paul phraseth it, 1 Cor. viii. 10. edify) them in
it? Is not this to recommend the same things to them by your example, and
effectually to preach to them the belief and practice of them? For example,
when you are prostrate before the Host of the church of Rome, does not your
action authorize their belief? do not you thereby warrant them to be more
confident in it? You tell them in a language that is dumb indeed, but yet more
intelligible, clear, and significative, then all the words which you can use
in this subject, That this Host is not at all a creature; That it is the
Creator, and Redeemer of the world; That we should adore it, and give it the
same honor, which is due to the Sovereign Deity. This, and such language as
this, does your action speak to your Neighbors: nor can they otherwise read or
understand, what is the sense and meaning of your heart. Seeing then, that in
your conscience you firmly believe that this Host is but a plain creature; do
you not see, how you persuade them to adore a creature, which is a pernicious
and dangerous error, as I have showed above? You lay before them that which
you esteem mortal poison, and seem to take of it your self, that you may make
them confidently swallow it down; which is the most hurtful and detestable
treachery in the world.

Now if those, who poison the bodies of men, are deservedly reckoned amongst
the most abominable malefactors; consider how great the horror of your crime
is, who plunge not their bodies only, but as much as in you lies, their souls
also, into that, which is in your judgment, a dangerous and deadly poison. And
if he, who offends the least of Believers, never so little, deserves a
rigorous punishment, and one more grievous then to be thrown alive into the
bottom of the sea (as our Lord says expressly, Matt. xviii. 6.) what
thunderbolts and hells shall he be thought worthy of, who casts so enormous a
scandal before all the congregation? And if those, who through error mistake
a creature for a Deity, are nevertheless inexcusable (as we have proved
before) what pardon can you expect, who, knowing well that this is a creature,
cease not to prostrate your selves before it? For the Lord protests that the
servant who knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with more
stripes, than he who does it not because he knew it not; Luke 11. 47. And
common reason teaches us, that it is a very equitable sentence and
determination.

Seeing then, that the fault of those, who outwardly practice the services
which they hold in their consciences to be false and unlawful, is so many
ways contrary both to our piety toward God, and our charity toward men; let
none think it strange, That our Lord condemns them with an eternal curse,
who are so mischievous as to commit it. For should He do otherwise, He would
forget his own nature, and rob Himself of all those properties, wherewith the
H. Scriptures invest Him. He would be no longer the Father of truth, if He left
a lie unpunished. He would not be zealous of His glory, if He did not avenge so
evident an affront. Finally, He would not be the Prince and Protector of
mankind, if He did not condemn those to the greatest punishments, who do so
insolently and cruelly abuse poor men.

And now let every equitable person judge, whether it be possible for Us, in
any manner to prostrate our selves before the Host of the Church of Rome, to
deck our houses against it pass by, and to do other the like actions
instituted to the honor of it, believing (as, thanks be to God, we do) that it
is a plain inanimate creature, and not (as some pretend) our Sovereign Lord and
God. and whether we are not obliged by all the rules of Christ's Doctrine,
rather to suffer most grievous extremities, then to comply with what the Church
of Rome requires of us in this particular. Indeed, if it were lawful to lie
sometimes, and outwardly to witness any thing contrary to what we believe in
our hearts; or to make profession of taking from our Lord the glory due to Him
alone, to give it to a creature; or finally to abuse men, and induce them to be
confirmed in a belief of that, which we esteem pernicious and destructive to
their souls; If, I say, it were at any time lawful for us to do any of these
things, for fear of separating from our countrymen, I confess, that we should
do amiss in refusing to perform the honor, which Rome commands us, to her
Sacrament. But if all Laws divine and humane for the most part command us under
pain of damnation, rather not to fear undergoing all sorts of mischiefs, then
to fall into any one of these faults; it is evident that having the belief which
we have of the Eucharist in the Church of Rome, we cannot perform those
services thereto which they require of us, without incurring the anger of God,
and destruction of our own souls.

So that if there were no other difference between them and us, but this alone,
it were enough to show, that we were not transported out of an humor, or
frowardness, or other small cause; but forced by an extreme and irresistible
necessity to separate our selves from them. Whence it follows, that in this
case our separation was just; That which is necessary, being not to be blamed
as unjust.

CHAP. XIX. That there are many other beliefs in the Church of Rome, which
overthrow the foundations of our faith and salvation, as the Veneration of
images, the Supremacy of the Pope, etc.
BUt besides this Article, there are great store of others, to the profession
and practice whereof they will oblige us against our wills; which are of so
great importance in religion, that we cannot confess them, nor observe them
any more, then that of Transubstantiation, without violating our consciences,
and exposing our souls to an evident danger of offending God, and losing that
portion in his grace and glory, which we desire and hope for.

For example, Believing (as we do) That there is nothing divine in images; and,
That we are very severely forbidden by our Lord to prostrate our selves before
them, under pain of moving Him to jealousy, and stirring up His indignation
against us and our posterity: How, and with what conscience can we bow our
bodies before those in the Church of Rome, offer to them waxcandles, dress
them, and carry them in procession, and go in pilgrimage to places, where they
are consecrated, and perform such other acts, as she demands of us in her
Communion, to testify that adoration which she thinks due to them in
Religion? In times past, when a report was spread among the Donatists, That one
Paul, and one Macarius, both Catholics, would come into those parts, and set
an image upon the altar, where the Eucharist was to be celebrated; the
Christians were much astonished, saying one to another, That to eat there, was
to eat of a thing sacrificed to an idol. And Optatus, who records it, says,
( lib. 3, page 356. E.) that if this rumor was true, they had good reason to
say so. If the holy Fathers permitted the Donatists to abhor the Churches of
the Catholics, to avoid communicating with them in the Eucharist, as an
unclean and profane meat; in case they could find any image upon the altar,
where they consecrated it: How can they be excused, who communicate at the
Altars of Rome, partake of her Devotions, frequent her Churches, where we know
(not by an uncertain rumor, but by the report of our eyes and other senses)
that every one is full of images, where we see them daily consecrated anew, and
the people crowding to prostrate themselves before them? Believing (as we do)
that Christ is the sole Head of the Catholic Church, with what conscience can
we give that title, and this dignity to the Pope of Rome; and kiss his feet,
and render him all other honors, which Rome is wont to give him in relation
thereto? Believing (as we do) that the truth of the heavenly doctrine is the
only foundation of our faith, with what conscience can we depend upon the
Authority of Pope or Councels, submitting to them even the books of H.
Scripture, which are divinely inspired? Believing (as we do) that the sacrifice
offered by Christ upon the Cross, has perfectly expiated our sins; with
what conscience can we swear, That there is a necessity and efficacy in the
sacrifice of the Roman Altar? Believing (as we do) that invocation by prayers
makes part of the service of God; and not having learnt in the schole of the
Scriptures, to pray to any but Him; how and with what conscience can we
address to so many several creatures, those prayers and invocations, which
Rome commands us to address to them? And particularly how can we invocate
Dominicus a Monk, Ignatius Loyola, Charles Borromeus late Bishop of Millain,
and others like them, who we know hated and persecuted that holy Faith, whereof
we (by the grace of God) make open profession? By the considerations already
represented about the point of the Eucharist, it is easy to see that these
articles and diverse others (which for brevity sake I omit) overthrow the
foundations of Faith and Piety: so that it is not lawful for us to comply with
those which hold them.

CHAP. XX. A conclusion of this Treatise. That They, who are of our persuasion,
are obliged to forsake the communion of Rome; and, They who are not, are to
prove and try their own faith, before they condemn our separation from them.
THus, I think, I have sufficiently justified our Separation from the Church of
Rome. Whence it appears, how lamentable the condition of them is, who having
the same opinion, which we have concerning her doctrine and services, do not
depart from her Communion, but accuse us for so doing. For who does not see,
that it is a necessary prudence, and not a vain superstition, to avoid that
which men judge to be pestilentiall and mortal? and that on the other side, it
is an unexecusable carelessness, to do and exercise continually, what men
acknowledge to be contrary to the glory of God, the edification of their
neighbors, and the salvation of their selves? If I may be permitted to
address my self in this particular to those, who are in so dangerous an
error, I shall conjure them by their piety to God, by their charity to men,
by the care which they should have continually of their own and others souls,
to think seriously of joining themselves hereafter, to those whose belief they
hold, and quitting the communion of those whose Faith they disapprove. And let
them not slatter themselves to think, that the Church of Rome retains the
Apostles Creed, and the sum of Christian doctrine, since it is evident, That
one at least of those errors which they add thereto are mortal. For as those
good and wholesome meats which a man eats at his refreshment, hinder him not
from dying, if by and by he swallow some poison; semblably, true and wholesome
doctrine does not preserve those which believe it, if together with it they
entertain some pernicious and damnable error in other particulars. Evil has
this advantage above good, that it spreads much farther, and is far more
active. For neither truth nor virtue can save a man, unless they be pure and
sincere, without the intermixture of any ill and dangerous habit; whereas
error and vice damn a man, be they mingled with never so many truths and
virtues. For as a man though he be chaste and modest, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of heaven, if he be covetous, or a slanderer of his neighbor: so
shall he not be exempted from hell torments, for believing some principal
truths of the Gospel; if it be found, that after all he has adored creatures,
or made profession of adoring them.

But as for you, Sirs, who continue sincerely in the Church of Rome, verily
believing all that she teaches you, I shall beseech you, That if you do reject
our belief, you would be pleased at least not to condemn our separation,
imputing that to us for a crime, which inevitable necessity has forced us to
do. God knows with what a deal of constraint we are come thus far; how
troublesome a thing it has seemed to us, to renounce the duties and services
which we owe to them, to whom we bear so much respect and love, our Princes,
our Fathers, our Friends, our Countrymen. But what shall we do, when we find
our selves surprised with necessity? Ye see that our consciences torment us;
that they represent to us heaven and the eternity thereof, hell and its
punishments, and (which is more yet) the will of God, our Sovereign Father.
This is not a toy, nor can we please our selves in it. You have seen that our
belief does necessarily bring along with it all these considerations. Shall we
prefer yours before them? Shall we violate the motions of our conscience?
Shall we disturb the peace thereof; and overthrow that which we beleieve to be
the law of our Sovereign God, to please you? Shall we venture willingly and
knowingly, to provoke His anger, to avoid yours? Shall we fear less to offend
Him, then to displease you? You your selves (I know very well) will condemn
such a loosnesse, and in stead of approving it, will extremely abhor it. For
ye know, and teach as well as we, both by word and example, that we owe all to
God, who looks upon the religion of our consciences. Be pleased then to bear
with us, if we prefer what we believe to be the interest of His glory, before
your desires and our own; And in other things (where your contentment will not
overthrow His service) we shall freely acknowledge, that we owe you our whole
utmost, and are ready to testify it by actions, and therein to do your
absolute pleasures, though it be with the loss of what we count most precious
on earth; our blood, our life it self. Only suffer us to reserve our
consciences to our selves, or rather to Him, whole and entire; over which no
man can reign without affronting our God. And if you think that the judgment,
we make concerning these matters, is an error; be pleased to take the pains
heartily to show us it. We shall willingly examine your proofs, we shall bring
pliant minds, and as full of prejudice in your behalf as you can wish: as
persons that have all the interests in the world to persuade us, to desire to
live in your communion, if it may be with the peace of our consciences. We
honor as well as you the H. Scriptures, given and preserved to the Church by
the Providence of God, to be the laws and fountains of his Faith. Let us (we
pray) see you prove from thence the Articles, which you press so strongly, or
at least the principles, whence they may be clearly and lawfully deduced. If
you show them us, and after such a manifestation we continue scrupulous; we
then neither can nor will deny, but that you will have just and good cause to
esteem us Schismatics: But if you cannot, or do not, me thinks you should have
no reason to refuse what we request, viz. To bear with our separation, and not
hereafter to give it the odious name of schism, which agrees only to such
separations, as are made by a pure and voluntary opinionativenesse, grounded
only upon the peevishness, ambition, envy, hatred, animositie, or the like
passion of such, as depart from the Communion of a Church, without a true and
necessary reason.

THE END.

