A true Copy of the Lord STRANGE His Warrant, for putting in execution the
Illegal Commission of Array in LANCASHIRE.
To all and every the High Constables in the Hundred of Amounderves.
WHereas his Majesty by his Proclamation dated at York the 12 day of this
month of August, has declared; that an Army of Horse and foot is in a That
is a lie.
Rebellious manner raised in the South parts of this Kingdom by The
Commis^i^ners of Array may apply that to themselves.
il-affected persons who are now Traitorously and Rebelliously marching in
Battle Array against his Majesty, contrary to their duty and allegiance, and
that he intends upon Monday next, being the 22. of this instant August, to
set up his Standard Royal: and whereas his Majesty by his Commission under his
highness great Seal, has authorized and appointed me Lieutenant General of
this and other Counties, to raise forces of Horse and foot Soldiers, to
attend his Majesty, for the defense of his Majesty and the true Here let the
world judge whether Papists will defend the true Protestant Religion, and
whether base and begga^ly Caviliers that have nothing to loose, but hope to
raise themselves by ruins) will maintain the Subjects liberty and property;
and whether Delinquents (that are great incendiaries) would maintain the being
of Parliaments, that dare not look the Parliament in the face.
Protestant Religion, their Liberties, Properties, and the very being of
Parliaments; These are to require and command you, that you summon and warn
all Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Freeholders, within your several
divisions, chargeable with Arms, and all such as are of abillity to provide
and maintain Arms, and are well affected to his Majesty's Service If they be
not Popish Recusants, they may thank the Pope for it, who has given
dispensations to take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, that they might do
the more hurt with less suspcion.
(Popish Recusants always excepted) that they be at Preston upon Tuesday next,
being the 23 of this instant August, by 10. of the clock of the fore-noone,
where I intend if it please God to be there, further to acquaint them with the
particulars of his Majesty's Commands, and to confer and advise with them of
the best and speediest way to advance and further his Majesty's Service in this
behalf, which I doubt not, but I hope and believe all good Subjects will not.
all good Subjects will readily and willingly perform, and that they will in
the mean time consider and take into their thoughts, what aid or assistance
they or their neighbors, tenants and friends can and will by their means
yield to his Majesty in this needful occasion, and will prepare to have the
same in readiness: fail not as you tender his Majesty's Service, and will
answer the contrary at your perils.

Given under my hand and Seal, at my Manor of Lathum this 17. of August, Anno
Dom. 1642. James Strange.

At LONDON Printed, Anno Dommini, 1642.


