The Seamens CASE with respest to their Service in the Navy, wherein diverse
Hardships which they undergo are truly stated, and humbly presented to His
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament. By John Dennis, Philo Patriae.
The First GRIEVANCE is QUERIES.
THE Nature and Effect of those Queries are, That every Man set on Shore sick,
and not returning to his proper Ship or some other in one Month, or immediately
after discharged from sick Quarters, thereby forfeits his Wages.
That the same is a Grievance which ought to be removed. See Address to the
Admiralty, Sect. 1. To which shall add, 1. That many have been set on Shore in
a deplorable Condition, and either died in the Boats; or in the Strees, or as
soon as received into Quarters, others set on Shore where there have not been
any Person appointed to take care of them. 2. Many have been Impressed from sick
Quarters before recovered, and hurried on board other Ships, and there soon
after died; which Practice has not a little increased the Mortality of the
Seamen, and by this means their Widows, Families, and Relations have not only
lost their Providers, but also their Wages, as well in the Ships from which
they were set sick on Shore, as those wherein they died; not knowing what Ships
they were Impressed into. 3. Many have lived to return in such Ships whereinto
they were Impressed, but not being able to prove they were Impressed, by reason of
the Death or Removal of the Officer that Impressed them, notwithstanding their
continuance in the Service their Wages have been denied. 4. Those that were set
sick a-Shoar, have for the most part been rendered incapable to return to their
proper Ships, being deprived of (or not allowed) the Conduct-Money appointed
them; and instead thereof have been forced to sell or pawn, not only their
Clothes, (that is such as had any) but also their Wages for their Subsistence
before they were recovered or fit to travel. 5. The Seamen having justly and
with great difficulty earned their Wages, and the Nation granted suitable Funds
for the Payment thereof. How consistant it is with the Constitution of this
Government, the inviolable Laws of the Realm, the credit of His Majesty's
Service, or the Encouragement of Seamen, shall humbly submit to the
Consideration of the Partons of our Country.


The Second GRIEVANCE is RR's.
And those RR's, have of late been strenuously observed, if not improved to the
Seaman's Prejudice. The Nature or Effect of those RR's as now practiced, is,
That the Persons who by accident or otherwise, do leave or are left by their
proper Ships, are by those RR's noted to be Run, and forfeit all the Wages due
to them, not only in the Ships they leave, but in all former Ships as far as
the same is unpaid, notwithstanding Tickets long before delivered them for
their former service; by what new Laws or Orders this is practiced I cannot
say, but am well assured it is contrary to the former Practice and Rules of the
Navy.
See Reasons to redress this, Sect. 2. in the Address to the Admiralty. To
which shall further add, 1. That such Wages (had not Money been wanting) would
have been paid long before it became forfeited. 2. Those Tickets and the Wages
due by the same, have been assigned and transferred to others long before such
forfeiture; and as such Debts cannot be released by the Party without consent
of the Assignee, so I humbly conceive they cannot be forfeited, even in Cases
of Felony or Treason; the Right in Equity being in the Assignee and not in the
Party. 3. That many have deserted the Nation, and either entered into foreign
Service, or turned Pirates: And it may reasonably be feared, that those and
other Hardships as they have endured, have not been the least Inducements to it.


The Third GRIEVANCE is,
The deferring or non-payment of the Wages of such as are dead or absent,
notwithstanding others have attended with sufficient Power to receive the same,
and no color of Objection, and those to whom it is due ready to perish for
want: to such there is several 100000 l. now due and in Arrears, which should
have been long since paid.
As I have no reason to take up any time in asserting the Justice of their
Case, so presume I can assign no greater Motive for their speedy Payment, than
the poor and distressed condition in which they yet remain, with their loud and
clamorous Cries, which have sounded through the whole Nation: and shall only
add this, That their Moneys being so long since earned, and the Ships for that
time also long since paid, many of them have fallen into the Hands of Impatient
Creditors, and by them thrown into Prison, to their utter Ruin. And whereas in
my Address to the Admiralty; 'twas hinted that some Seamen lost 10 or 12 s. per
l. by their Tickets: I have since been well assured that many of those that
belonged to the Ships laid up at Plymouth, had not above 6 or 7 s. per l. for
their Tickets.

The Fourth GRIEVANCE is, Intricacy of Payment, viz.
Some Ships that have three or four Years Pay due, have been paid only ten or
twelve Months, the latter time, and the former left unpaid upon account of
their Companies being turned over into other Ships.
2dly. Some Ships paid for the whole time, yet many People left unpaid.
As Reasons to redress this shall humbly offer, 1. That such Men as are thus
turned over, do seldom exceed one fourth part of the Ship's Company, and not of
those remain in such later Ships till they are paid off, and few or none of
those but have their Wives and Relations ready to attend the Payment of the
proper Ships, who have often taken expensive Journeys for the same; but to
their great Disappointment have been denied their Wages. 2. Such later Ships
have been paid, and the Wages for the former not paid at that time. 3. The
Paying of the Wages of some Persons, and leaving others to a Recall when a
general Pay is intended, as it is not just so the Consequences thereof have
tended to the ruin of many.


The Fifth GRIEVANCE is,
Turning Men over from Ship to Ship, lending them, and bearing them by List,
that they know not in what Ship, nor by what means they may obtain their Wages.
That this is a Grievance and Hardship is in it self evident, but that it
should also be laden with the loss of their Wages, seems very unreasonable.

The Sixth GRIEVANCE is the Alteration of Officers Qualities.
By this their Wages have been retrenched, some from 3 l. to 36 s. others from
36 to 23 s. etc.
As Reasons why this ought not to be practiced, shall offer, 1. That ever
person officiating in any Office or Employment, and so rated in the Ships Book,
ought to have the Wages allowed by His Majesty for the same. 2. It Is a great
Discouragement to able and ingenious Seamen to do the Duty, and bear the
Burden of such Imploys, and see some Servant or ignorant Favorite receive the
Wages. 3. Such Persons especially where Tickets are made out have the Testimony
of the proper Officers, that they have served (as, and ought to have the Wages
due to Persons) in such Stations; and in case there be more Officers born than
the rate of the Ships will admit, the Captain and Officers so rating of them,
ought to sustain the Loss and indemnify His Majesty; it being entirely in their
Breasts to prevent the same.


The Seventh GRIEVANCE is,
Non-payment of Powers or Letters of Attorney made to Officers; that is, if any
Officer's Father, Brother, Relation, or any other Friend has served in the
Navy, and has made a Letter of Attorney to such Officer to receive the Wages,
he is denied payment of the same.
As for this Order, how good soever the design might be in making the same, to
prevent such Frauds as might happen by the irregular bearing, or rateing of
Seamen for the Officers advantage; yet being unlimited; as well for Time as
Circumstance, proves to several a Hardship and Grievance.

As Reasons to mitigate the same, shall offer, 1. That many of those Powers or
Letters of Attorney were made long before this Order; and it is hard to be
punished for breaking a Law before made. 2. That many of those Persons serving
were Servants to the said Officers, and whom they might then entertain as such;
according to the constant Practice of the Navy. 3. Others have supplied, or
actually paid and satisfied the Parties serving, and the Wages due, belongs in
right to such Officers, and not to the Parties. 4. The said Order cannot
accomplish the end for which designed, by reason such Officers who will be so
unjust as to abuse His Majesty's Service, Wages, as well as tho the same were
made to themselves.


The Eighth (tho not a positive) GRIEVANCE.
Yet as Matter worthy Consideration, I shall hint something touching the
smallness of the able Seamen's Pay, and would not omit the Gunners, Boatswains,
and Carpenters herein.
As for the able Seamen's Pay, it is 24 s. per Month, the Deduction from the
Registered Seamen's 1 s. and from those that are not Registered 1 s. 6 d. per
Month, so that their Pay is but 22 s. and 6 d. The Warrant-Officers
beforementioned, have Pay according to the respective Rates they are in.
If Encouragement be a proper Means to excite to Valor and Diligence in the
performance of Duty, as is the received Opinion of this Government, evidenced
by doubling the Commission, (and some of the Warrant) Officers Pay, with other
Encouragements.

And unless the Common Seamen and Warrant-Officers abovementioned, are by some
other Motive so diligent or valourous that they need no such Encouragement, or
their Service or Trust so small that they deserve none: It is worthy of
Consideration whether they ought not to have an addition to their Pay;
especially considering the dearness of Provision, now beyond what it has been
in times past.

The Ninth GRIEVANCE is,
The Difficulty of obtaining His Majesty's gracious Bounty allowed the Widows
and Children of such as are slain in His Majesty's Service, and the Moneys due
for the Clothes of such as die; which Clothes is generally sold at the Mast;
such Seamen's Families and Relations being at a distance, and not knowing where
to find the proper Officers to sign such Certificates as required for the
Payment of such Bounty and Cloath-Money: it has been long delayed, and
oftentimes entirely lost.
As this Case is plain, so the Redress for time to come is easy, there needing
only an Article to the proper Officers Instruction, that immediately after any
such accidents happen, they sign Certificates of the same, and return such
Certificates with their Books to the Office.

And for the time past, that such Certificates for Bounty be dispensed with,
and Credit given to the Ship's Books which are in the Office, and signed by the
proper Signing Officers. And for Clothes to the Slop-Books delivered into the
same Office.

The Tenth GRIEVANCE is,
The Non-payment of the Registered Seamen, (not to insist on the 40 s. per
Annum hitherto unpaid) I shall only mention the Case of the Widows, Friends,
and Relations of such as have died in the Service, with respect to their Wages.
1. Such as die on Voyages to Holland, France, the Narrow-Seas, etc. their Wages
are refused be paid according to the Act, it being alleged that such are not
Foreign Voyages. 2. Such as have been bound out on Foreign Voyages, and died
before the Ships departure from England, their Wages is also refused. 3. Such
as have been on Foreign Voyages so accounted, and in such Voyages have
contracted Sickness, whereof they have died immediately after the Ships Return
to England, their Wages is also refused, as not intended by the said Act to be
paid. 4. Such as have gone out in one Ship, and served a considerable time in
her, and afterward turned over into another, and there in a few Months died;
the Widows of such are paid for the Ships only wherein they died, and not for
the former. 5. Such Commission and Warrant-Officers as are Registered who die
on Foreign Voyages, their Wages is refused, as not intended to be paid by the
said Act.

How far this is coherent to the intent of the said Act, and whether those
Circumstances have prevented the Act from having its desired effect; I shall
not pretend to determine: but it has doubtless more than a little obstructed
the same.

For the Redress whereof, shall only allege the Nations Promise by the
established Law, the Peoples Distress, the Justice and Merit of their Cause,
and the further and future Encouragement for the Seamen to Register themselves
for His Majesty's Service; the which Redress, or some other suitable Remedy
that may engage Seamen to their proper Duty for the Nations Defense, I dare not
doubt but will be found, if it be taken into the Consideration of this
Judicious and August Assembly, the Great Council of the Nation; and that
without the great Expense, and irregular Compulsion lately used in Impressing,
or any-wise infringing Magna Charta, or any other established Law of this Realm.

The Eleventh GRIEVANCE is,
The Government and Discipline used in the Navy; but there being already good
and wholesome Laws provided, both for suppressing Vice, and encouraging Virtue,
I have little to say, only that the Epidemical abounding of Vice and Debauchery
through the whole Fleet, too evidently demonstrates the Neglect, if not the
Contempt of the said Laws: And it would be well if the Practice and Examples of
the Superiour-Officers did not so much contribute to the same; and whether this
(with a sordid and slavish Punishment, ( viz. Whipping and Pickling,) much used
of late, and that on frivolous Occasions) do not tend to the dastardizing of
the Spirits of our English Seamen, and the animating and emboldening our
Enemies, and consequently to the Nations Prejudice, 'twill do well to consider;
and if found to be so, to redress the same.
To redress this, there is an absolute necessity of the strict observance of
those Instructions given by the Lord High Admiral of England, or Lords
Commissioners for executing that Office, and that as well by the Superior
Officers as the meanest Seamen; for whilst the Superior Officers are guilty of
Vice and Debauchery, it cannot be hoped the same should be duly corrected, or
effectually suppressed in the Common Seamen.

The Twelfth GRIEVANCE is,
The fraudulent Dealing of many that pretend to solicit Business, and receive
Wages in the Navy, by which the Seamen are also prejudiced; but the Particulars
hereof being too long to insert herein, shall at present omit the same.

The ADDRESS presented to the Lords of the Admiralty in Feb. School/9.
Sect. 1.
My Lords,
BEing employed by diverse Seamen, their Wives, Widows, and others to receive
their Wages, meeting with many unexpected Objections to the Payment of the
same, am obliged to address your Lordships, as well for those I serve, as
others under the like Circumstances; whose Cases in some Particulars shall
humbly lay before your Lordships, and pray Relief therein.

1. Objection. Is Querying those that are set Sick on Shore.

As for such Queries, however His Majesty's Service, and the Nations Safety
might require it in time of War (to keep Mariners to their Duty;) an honorable
Peace being now concluded, although by the strict Rules of the Navy, such Wages
may be denied; yet there are several Motives and Reasons for the taking off
those Queries.

1. The Indigency, Poverty and Misery of those distressed Seamen, and their
Families, were there no other Reason, seems no small Motive to it; especially
considering it is the Labourer's Hire, and his Families Bread. 2. There were no
such Queries until the Year 1690, before which time every Man put on Shore
sick, was thereby discharged from the Service, and his Wages duly paid. 3. The
great Sickness which at, and since that time happened in the Fleet, was, and is
the Foundation of those Queries; the which indeed, considering also the great
Mortality that has likewise attended His Majesty's Service, should rather be
Motives for the removing of them. 4. Many of the Persons that have been put on
Shore sick, being ignorant of those new Rules of the Navy believed themselves
discharged as formerly. 5. Many of them have been set on Shore sick several
times, and returned to such Ships, as ordered, but continuing weak and
indisposed, have at last repaired to their own Homes for Recovery. 6. Others
having been long Voyages and sick on Board for many Months (seeing the Major
part of their Associates buried;) to such, after they were set sick on Shore,
the thoughts of returning on Board have been dreadful, and deemed the only
means to hasten their ends; which accordingly happened to many that did return.
7. It could not be expected that those that have contracted Indispositions and
Distempers, by unwholsom Provision, or malignant Air, should (after a Months
Refreshment in sick Quarters, or laboring 6 or 12 Months under their Maladies
in an Hospital) be fit to return, or capable of doing His Majesty Service; but
the contrary is evident by the Multitude that died soon after their return on
Board, and others that were again set sick on Shore.
Lastly, Such having faithfully served His Majesty to the imparing of their
Healths, and hazard of their Lives; it seems not only just, but also for His
Majesty's Interest, and the Credit of his Service to grant them the Wages so
hardly earned.

I hope what has been said, with such other Motives, as in Wisdom, Justice and
Charity, Your Lordships find in your own Breasts, may prevail for the taking
off all Queries.

But whatever Your Lordships shall please to direct as to the Queries in
general, the Circumstances of some are such, that a speedy and general Order
seems absolutely necessary to remove the same.

1. All those that have been set on Shore sick since the Peace concluded. 2.
Such as after Recovery entered on Board any of His Majesty's Ships. 3. Such as
died in sick Quarters, Hospitals, or Hospital-Ships. 4. Such as have been
wounded or hurt, and received Pensions, or Smart-Money for the same. 5. Such as
continued Six Months or upwards in sick Quarters or Hospitals, or have been
discharged thence incurable. 6. Such as the Captains have discharged by Ticket,
Sick, Lame, Blind, Infirm, or otherwise unfit for His Majesty's Service, they
alone being proper Judges of the same.
It may be objected, That Application being made with good Proof of the last
mentioned Circumstances, such Queries may be removed.

May it please your Lordships to consider,

The great Inconveniences that attend such particular Orders, which creates
Tumult and Clamor at both Offices, gives advantage to many that solicit to
exact great part of the Wages for their Assistance, puts the Poor to great
Fatigue and Expense in Attendance, but principally the loss of the opportunity
of the Ships Payment; which may and have caused many to stay 2 or 3 Years for
their Money, or sell it for half the value.

And indeed many of those Queries might be prevented in making up the Pay-Books
of each Ships, and of every Person under the Circumstances aforesaid, notice
might be taken on the said Books; the sick Accounts being in the same Office.

I shall say no more touching Queries, only that every DS should be so
accounted, seems contrary to the first intent of the same; which as I humbly
conceive, were for Commanders to put on such as did not return, and not on
those whom they see cause to discharge.

Sect. II.
Another Objection is, Persons being made Run; some of whose Circumstances may
also claim your Lordships Consideration.

1. Such as never designed to desert the Service, but being returned from long
Voyages, and the Ships to which they belong being either in Port or Dock, have
adventured to stray from them, either to see their Friends in parts adjacent,
or provide themselves Apparel, but meeting with other Ships Companies have been
Impressed, and served in such Ships till discharged: Such therefore not deserting
the Service, should not be punished as Deserters, but their RR's taken off, and
their Wages paid.

2. Those that have served in His Majesty's Ships, and have been turned over
from one Ship to another, and after having served some time in the later, their
Tickets for the former have been delivered them, which Tickets by the Parties
being set Sick on Shore, or leaving that, or some other succeeding Ship,
perhaps a Third or Fourth, and two or three Years after such Tickets delivered,
those Tickets have been Q'd or Run, and the Wages thereby forfeited; with many
other Circumstances of the like nature too tedious to insert.

As Motives to take off the same I shall humbly offer, 1. Such as have Tickets
delivered them, seems in the Eye of Justice to have a good Title to their
Wages. 2. Those Tickets are and have been esteemed as the King's Bonds or Bills
of Exchange, and formerly paid at sight. 3. Many well affected People for
promoting His Majesty's Service and Interest, and in Charity to their
distressed Neighbors, have supplied them to the Value of their Tickets, 4. The
Querying such Tickets has unspeakably reduced the Credit of the Navy, with
respect to Wages; insomuch that Tickets formerly sold at 2 s. 6 d. per Pound
loss, have of late beed sold at 7 s. and some at 10 or 12 s. 5. The Miseries
and distressed Condition of Seamens Families, whose Husbands and Relations are
serving His Majesty and the Nation, at Sea, being ready to perish for want of
Credit during their absence; and those who formerly relieved them, suffering
great loss and damage by those Q's and RR's, are wholly discouraged from
continuing the same: The Poor therefore must inevitably perish, unless relieved
by the Alms of the Parish, whose burdens already are almost intolerable, the
charge of the Poor being now three times more than before the War, and the
major part of those that receive are the Wives, Widows, and Families of such as
have served His Majesty during the late War: Much more might be said for the
taking off those RR's, yet shall only add, that it is not inconsistent with
Justice, but very agreeable to the Laws of God, Charity; Mercy, and Pity, and
would not a little contribute to His Majesty's Interest, the Glory of the
Nation, a more cheerful Contribution to Taxes, the Honor of your Lordships,
the Relief of the Poor, and Prevention of those clamorous Tumults that attend
this Honorable Board.


If what has been said may not prevail for the taking off those RR's for time
past, my humble Request is, That the like may be prevented for the future,
which seems easy, just and reasonable, for those Tickets may be kept by the
Commanders, or in the Office; until the Party have such a Right as not to
forfeit the same, by serving such reasonable time as your Lordships shall
direct, and those Tickets when delivered to the Parties, or any other by their
Power, to be good and valid to such Persons as have a Title to the same, which
would reduce those exorbitant Losses, and give good credit to Tickets as
formerly; and whatever other Punishment shall be judged meet to be inflicted on
the Deserted, besides forfeiture of Wages due in the Ship he leaves; the same
may be corporal and not forfeitue of former Pay, by this the Transgressors
will receive their Reward; by the other their Families must perish unless
relieved, and those that supply them on the Credit of such Tickets be great
Sufferers; and indeed the delivering of such Tickets whilst they are liable to
be forfeited, do but empower the Party to impose on, and defraud the Innocent.

I purposed something touching the Pay, but fearing I have already transgressed
by Prolixity; for which with whatever else may render me obmoxious to your
Lordships Censure, I humbly beg your Pardon: the design hereof being for the
relief of the Poor, and free from all thought of Reflection; shall therefore
only add, that the People were never better served, His Majesty's Affairs
dispatched, and Frauds prevented, than by the Clerks attending the Pay, when
they had liberty to receive Wages. And subscribe, with all Dutiful Respects,

Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, John Dennis.


