THE DEVILS DELVSIONS OR A faithful relation of John Palmer and Elizabeth
Knott two notorious Witches lately condemned at the Sessions of Oyer and
Terminer in St. Albans.

Together with the Confession of the aforesaid John Palmer and Elizabeth-Knott,
executed July 16.

Also their accusations of several Witches in Hitchen, Norton, and other
places in the County of Hartford.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Williams Stationer at St. Albans, Anno Dom. 1649.

A Letter sent from S. Albans to a friend in the Country concerning the Trial,
condemning and execution of J. Palmer and Elizabeth Knott, two notorious
Witches.
SIR,
ACcording to your earnest desire, I have taken the best care I could to
satisfy you, concerning the Witches lately tried, condemned, and executed at
St. Albans: It had been very difficult to convince me of that which I find
true, concerning the wiles of that old Serpent the Devil, for the supporting of
his dark dominions, which appears in the subtle trade he drives for the
enlarging of his territories; by strengthening of himself upon the weakness of
his subjects, relapsed men and women.

I shall the more clearly give you to understand what you desire concerning
these two, by name, John Palmer and Elizabeth Knott of Norton, within the
Liberty of St. Albans, if you please to pardon the method whereunto I shall
reduce the several kinds of Witches.

First I find that man at his best estate was created with excellent beauty of
knowledge in his mind, which his own unhappy mutability together with the
Devils suggestion, has folded up in darkness and obscurity; whereupon being
impatient to be coop't up within the narrow scantling of his own
intellectualls, I see him very busy with the Devil; and rather then keep his
station, he will make trial what the Devil can do for his advancement in
knowledge: I find those that dealt with curious arts in Acts 19. 19. fitly
comprehended under this kind: I know not whether to reduce Marsh of Dunstable,
whom Palmer confesses to be the head of the whole College of Witches, that
he knows in the world: This Palmer has been a Witch these 60 years, (by his
own confession) long enough to know and give in the total sum of all the
Conjuring conclave, and the society of Witches in England. This Marsh has so
long gratified the Country people with his Conjurations, that time and
ignorance styles him a good Witch, or a white Witch; I suppose you easily grant
that the Devil is never blacker, and more to be abhorred then when he
transforms himself into an Angel of Light. Sr. I easily believe that if Marsh
was brought to his trial, he might confess as much of his brother Lilly, as
Palmer has of him, that impudent Prognosticator, and bold Balaam.

This I conceive to be one occasion to the god of this world, in tempting and
deluding those who are led captive by him, namely an inordinate desire to know
more then his maker has thought fit for him to know.

Secondly I find an other occasion whereupon the Devil offers his service so
officiously, which is envy, who seeing a predominancy in the irascible faculty,
he is never behindhand in the proffering his service for the attempting what
ever he temp^ them to* I find Manasses the King, by the piously learned to be
reckoned under this kind, concerning whom it is said, 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. That he
used enchantments, and de^^^t with a familiar spirit, and not long after we
find that he made Jerusalem to run down with blood from one end to another, as
an effect of his envious disposition: Yet verse. 12, 13. The father of mercies
was entreated of him, upon his humiliation and repentance.

By the plain confession of Palmer it may certainly be guessed that the Devil
took advantage of him i^ this breach, and brought him into ^ upon this ground;
in as much as he was (as he said)of a fretfull and revengfull nature, and not
being (...) himself to aveng himself of his adversaries he (...) joined
himself to the Devil, and wrought (...) in the eyes of the Lord: upon his (...)
with the Devil, he received a (...) side, which gave suck to two familiars
(...) form of a dog* which he called George, and the other in the likeness of
a woman called Jezabell, when the Devil first made this mark he drew his blood
and caused him to write his mark upon the ground with his own hand therewith;
his trading in this horrid and abominable practice of Witchcraft was (as he
confessed) betwixt the space of 50 and 60 years, the hurt which from time to
time he had done was very much* and this I account his prime pranck that he
notoriously seduced Elizabeth Knott his kinswoman, to consort with him in his
villainy who has assented to him more especially in the death of one Goodwife
Pearls of Norton, whom Palmer said he would do nothing to occasion her death
unless this Elizabeth Knott would assent: whereupon they presently agreed to
frame the picture of the woman ( Pearls) in clay, which was forthwith laid upon
the fire, and duly raked up in the embers; while it was consuming and mouldring
away the woman lay in miserable torments, when it was quite consumed the woman
immediately dyed: and this he confessed to be done by him, and his kinswoman
out of revenge which he ought her, for hanging a lock upon his door, for the
not paying of his rent: At another time to satisfy his revengfull humor he
killd an horse of Mr. Cleavers by sending his familiar: and this Elizabeth
Knott bewitched a Cow of John Lamans* by sending an evil spirit unto her, which
was in the likeness of a Catt, but had no hand in the death of any thing, save
the death of Goodwife Pearls. The familiar which she entertained came to her
about three weeks before the said Cow was bewitched at twelve of the Clock in
the night, and the familiar promised her, that she should have her desire in
any thing she would desire, except money: and the reason why she bewitched the
Cow of William Laman was, because she demanded money which was due to her, from
the said Lamans wife, and it was denied her. We understand also from this
Elizabeth Knott that when she was cast upon the water her familiar sucked upon
her breast, but after she came out of the water she never saw it any more.

It would be tedious to reckon up the multifarious exploits of this old Witch
Palmer* for Knott his kinswoman was but a novice, in comparison of him, and as
I conceive had made no direct Covenant with the Devil, as Palmer had.

A little before his execution he confessed to Sampson Clark, the Keeper of the
Prison, that falling out with a young man, he transformed himself into a Toad,
and lying in the way where the young man came, he kick't it, immediately Palmer
complained of a sore shinne, whereupon he bewitched the young man for many
years to his great woe and torment.

That you may further understand what society he had on your side the
Country, with such as were inbond to the Devil, I shall signify to you what
he confessed before his execution: In Hitchin, he reckons two, Mary By-chance
and Widow Palmer: In Norton John Salmon senior. Joseph Salmon, and Judeth his
wife. John Lamen senior and Mary his wife, John Lamen junior. Mary the daughter
of John Lamen senior Joan Lamen the daughter of the aforesaid John Lamen: and
the wife of one Mayes in Weston. And at the place of execution he confessed two
more, Sarah Smith and Anne Smith servants, the one to Mr. Beamont, the other to
Mr. Reynolds.

There is a third ground whereupon the Devil takes advantage by his delusions
to beguile men and women, and that is by a diligent observation of their
concupiscible faculty, whereby they are inordinate in their desires after money
and gain, which the God of this world is very free to promise, but as one of
his slaves confessed, she never wanted, (that is) any misery or affliction,
after she had contracted with him.

I am in have but rest, yours* B. Mi(...).

FINIS.

