THE DEVIL, AND the Parliament: OR, THE PARLIAMENT and the Devil.

A Contestation between them for the precedencie.

Hold, hold, good Parliament, Pluto thy friend,
Deserts thee now, it is Vain for to contend.
May. 18 London Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE DEVIL and the PARLIAMENT, OR, The Parliament and the Devil.
the Devil singing. I Will aid no more, for I have done,
The worst that Hell could think upon.
Therefore good parliament now begone,
Or you will come to perdition.
For all your legends and your lies;
Your plots, and your conspiracies,
Your murders and your cruelties,
Your errors, and impieties.
Now topsey turvey, ring the knell,
Come Parliament with me to hell.
There thee and I will ever dwell;
Thus Rebels, must I pay you well.
HO, ho, ho, are you angry Mr. Parliament, because I will no longer assist you,
I that created you am forbidden by him that created me to act in you any
longer, you know what an helper I have been unto you this seven years, by me
you first took up Arms against your gracious King, by me deluded the people
with a vain hope of Reformation, when your intentions even from the beginning,
were for the ruin of the King, Church and Kingdom, by me you entered into
Covenant with Death, and hell by; me you have practiced al manner of cruelties
and oppression, and by me it was that you were prevalent against your
Sovereign; he that threw me down from Heaven for conspiring against him,
permitted me to be the Patron, and Protector, of your Rebellion, and by my
means it was that you had the impious boldness, to imprison your Sovereign
Lord King CHARLES, in the Isle of Wight, by me it was, that you Cashierd your
Covenant and so became at enmity with the Scots, but not by me, but the
Almighty it is, that you are now falling from all your greatness, why should
you blame me then, as I deserted you; the world can witness I have served
faithfully, and been as true a Devil to your trust as Harry Martin, or the
Traitor Say. What ho Belphegor, thou have ever been a willing friend to fly
abroad with any, Messenger, sent by the Parliament to cease upon the persons of
all those Wrote for the King, whose Pens did stab Rebellion to the heart, who
still are constant to their Principles, and dare call Rebels, Rebels, thou
often have accompanied the State spies, those hounds that hunt the Souls of
Royalists such as my faithful, and my dearest sons the Sanguine Lewis, and
the pale face Leechman, two Rogues, whose like Slavonia ne er bred; fly thou
my pretty Devil, and call hither, my fellow Vilaine Mr. Parliament.


Belphegor. I go Sir.


Devil. I mean to call a Parliament in Hell, but I shall not need to hunt
about my teritories to summon Members, from each corporation, the upper House
and lower House at Westminster shall be lawmakers for me, I have found that
they in policy, exceed me far, yea Aeacus Minos and Rhad a man thus, and all
his powers of Hell, that are beside.


Belphegor. Great Sir, I have performed my Embasie, but Mr. Parliament is so
imploid, he says, he cannot see your Divellship.


Devil. His cannot is his will not; am I grown fearful to him, are we not
still all of one house, one counsel, he cannot stand two days if I forsake
him, I hope he I not turn honest now at last, and so deceive my expectation,
no Devil, no Parliament, is a sure maxim, or is it so, that he himself
deludes and hopes to rule without my suffrage, poor fool thou have experience
that without me, thou can not frame a Declaration, for to amuze the peoples
minds, that so while they are all astonished, thou may with more facility be
wicked; thou can not plunder any man of his goods because he is faithful to
his God, and King, and turn his Wife and Children out a begging, except I go
before thee, and prepare thy way, nor can thou murder a Burleigh, Tomkins or
a Challenour, a reverend Bishop, or a glorious Statesman, except I enter and
possess thy breast, egging thee on to purchase thine own ruin; thy King had
nere been made a prisoner, or the slave Hammond been his dogged lailer, but
that I sat in counsel with the Agitators, who ruled the roast at Windsor;
tell me Belphegor what was his excuse?


Belphegor. He told me Sir, that he was very busy in plotting how to keep his
head on's sholuders how still to keep his name up with the people which he was
almost in despair to do, for that the vulgar, now did he deadly hate him and
discovered all his plots, and Stratagems, and ready were each day for to devour
him alleging he had forfeited his being. and broke all Laws, both Morrall
and Devine; he also was raging most furiously, for that by letters he hadgiven
to know that all Welshmen were in arms against him conducted by one Butler,
Poyer and Powell, that Barwick and Corlila, were ceased one, by Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, and Sir Thomas Glemham and that his brother Iocker had deserted him,
and is on his March with thirty thousand men, with an intention for to whip him
soundly because he has not kept his Covenant; that all the Kingdoms of the
earth were banding, and vowed to work his ruin but he commanded me, for to
remember his dear love unto you, which I perceive was only seemingly, for to
himself he mutterd that his distrust of God and trusting you had been his
ruin.


Devil. Is he so soon reclaimd, I Will soon alter his temper; What ho
Attophilax, thou art the strongest Devil hell affords, have thou to
Westminster, there shall thou find my brother Parliament, with his Committees
and his Clerks about him, Hunscot, and Lewis, Leechman, and all the Rogues,
together in one knot, tell him I needs must speak with him, and consult about
those affairs nearly concern us both, if he refuse to come force him along,
thou know.


Arotphilaz. I fly Sir.


Devil. Prithee Belphegor, tell me, thou flyest about the earth on all
occasions, what is the news amongst mortals.


Belphegor. With swift Vellocity, proper to spirits, and aeriall forms, I do
intrude into all companies, sometimes I am amongst Judges when they sit upon
the bench, I hear from them, that are male content, sorry but dare not show it
(being overaw'd by your brother Parliament) while they must sit and pass their
doom on man, and hang up those for Traitors love the King, only because
Traitors, will have it so, J am sometimes amongst Churchmen, or if you will the
Synod, who do confess themselves dam'nd Hypocrites, a Convocation called by
Rebels, to back their most usurped temporal swords, with that is spiritual,
who sell Religion for four shillings a day; frame Directories, Articles, and
Catechismes, to fool the people into new opinions, who have reformed no error,
but have broacht; more then the Ephesian Counsel, who pulled the Bishops out
othe' Saddle, that they might mount on horseback, and have cried down
Plurality of Livings, that they might get by the hand; I am sometimes amongst
the rural swains, who mutter as they thrash, that all is naught and that the
slaves at Westminster have undone them, have sheared them nearer then their
sheep, yet will not bestow so much tar upon them, as will preserve their
buttocks from the flies, J have been --

Artophilax, with Mr. Parliament on his back.
Devil. O my deate friend, what is the reason now that thee and I are thus
estranged, we that have been so mightily familiar and have done no hing without
joint consent, who mutually ought to affect each other, and both triumph, as
ruiners of Nations, without our amity no mischiefs current, why art thou now
averse.


Mr. Parliament. I tell thee brother, I am now aspotent, and can without thee
be as devilish, as when thy self were most my friend, I now am my
Crafts-master, and know how, to be as envious bloody, and barbarous, as thou
thy selfe-canst possibly invent, I can out-doe thee Lucifer my master, and had
not the strong arm of Fate, Crushed me too hard now at my height of fortunes, I
had been called Apollyon, and not thee.


Devil. How foolishly thou arguest, God or the Devil must have power over al
men, have I raised thee unto this height of glory, while for the sins of
England, God has suffered me to call thee, as a Parliament, and to thee have I
given all my power, taught thee to lie, dissemble, and to cheat a Nation of
their Birthright; the known Law, have I persuaded the deluded vulgar, to
hearken to thy poisonous Rhetoric and to believe thou meanest for to Reform,
and building on that weak foundation, to bring their Plate, Covne, and all
their treasure, and throw it at thy feet; have I infused contentious spirits
into them, which stird them up to Faction, and Rebellion, that so the father
has destroyed his child, and children hand to hand have slain their fathers,
so that the ground has been watered with Blood, as with rain while thou have
lain at home and taken thine ease, fed high to strengthen lust, and filled thy
baggs brim full with gold, extorted from the wretched blinded people, have I
constrained the Blew Capt swads of Scotland, to join with thee in a most
bloody League, a Covenant which I my self compiled, and put to it my best
invention, who aided thee in all thy base attempts, and have I no more thanks
for all my pain, yet do thy worst, I needs must have thy soul that is my
own, by contract, and 'twas for that that all this while I aided thee.


Mr. Parliament. I do acknowledge thee my only Patron all my Thankesgiving
days, for several Victeries, were wholly set apart to sing thy Praises, no
Indian ever worshipped thy black Diety, with such obsequious hearty adoration as
I have done this seven years; all those days I ordained for humiliation,
were kept at such times when thy power forsook me, and that I found thou did
not fight in Person, joining with my part-takers against the King, and to
conclude all Honors, Victories, all the vast Treasure and the numerous
mischiefs, that I got, or have performed this 7 years have been wholly by
thee, but now I find thy power is limited, and that the Almighty has taken
away thy strength, so that my enemies increase upon me, and all men seek to
work my fall from East, from West, the gellid No, and South, inevitable
mischiefs come against me, wherefore I would feign divest my self, and would
esteem it a chief happiness, if I could to resign my usurped power, as to
escape with my life, and with my money, this I have hope to do; and therefore I
have Voted for a King, and that the Government of the English Nation, by King,
Lords, and Commons as of old, and could I also but escape thy clurches.


Devil. O thou most wretched fool, it is as impossible for thee toscape the
everliving force of Stygian fire, as it is for me once more to visit heaven and
thy body is for dogs, thy soul for hell, God will no longer let the English
Nation be slave to thy Command, their ancient Discipline must be restored,
and they yet once more happy, each of you take a limb my masters Devils, I Will
bear the rest my self ho, ho, ho, answer me Belphegor* Artophilax answer him.


Artop; Sing aloud English Nation,
your blessed Ref^rmation;

Bell: let all be content:
Devil, to the Devil is sent:

FINIS.

