D^s Edoardus Dering in Comitatu Kancij pro Comitatu praedicto Ao Dni ^
Surenden-Dering miles et Baronettus, et miles ad Parliamentum. 1640.



A DISCOURSE of PROPER SACRIFICE, IN WAY OF ANSWER to A. B. C. JESVITE, another
Anonymus of Rome: Whereunto the reason of the now Publication, and many
observable passages relating to these times are prefixed by way of Preface: by
Sr. EDWARD DERING KNIGHT and BARONET.

Augustine. de Doctrina Christiana. Cum audierit Sacrificium, non excedit
cogitatione illud quod fieri de victimis pecorum, terrenisque fructibus solet.
Ea demum est miserabilis animae servitus: signa pro rebus accipere --

Bellarmin. de Miss. lib. 1. cap. 17. Apostoli (Domino inspirante) non
utebantur nominibus Sacerdotii, Sacrificii, Templi, Altaris.

Plaut. in Poenul. -- Semper Sacruficas, nec unquam Litas.
CAMBRIDGE, Printed for FRANCIS EGLESFIELD, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Marigold in Pauls-churchyard. 1644.

ALMAE MATRI CANTABRIGIAE VOTA SVA: Suus Alumnus EDOARDUS DERING de Morinis.
QVin haud possum non ambire: equidem and haec Ambitio pium filium decet, qua
se erga Matrem optimam, officii adhuc debiti, and beneficii olim recepti,
memorem testetur. Itaque salve Academia inter inclytas celeberrima: inter
orthodoxas purissima: inter omnes optima. Qui^ quid bonarum literarum h^usi,
uberibus debetur tuis: quod non ulterius and penitius hausi, illud ingeni^li
mei debetur stricto ^ngiporto. Tu interim omnigenae scientiae non exantlandus
Oceanus: Tibi literaturae Antistites tributarios suos fontes acceptos debent:
and in justum homagium solvunt. Post hos Antesignanos, ordine meo (hoc est,
infimo) agnoscas (oro) alumnum tuum, ad tuam lucem facem meam accensurum, --
Hinc lucem and pocula sacra: (...) Academicum.
and tuis poculis sacris utpote irrigatum.

Nec me tibi debeo unicum, quippe Magna parens nobis, totam familiam stirpemque
Deringanam successivis aetatibus ab olim atque etiamnum enutriisti. Seniorem
filium meum nuper Sidniensem, modo Emmanuelensem, in Maternitatis vestrae
tutelam genui, sed apud Batavos jam Lugdunensem tutius elocavi. Ego almum lac
Magdalenensis hausi, sed pro captu meo, non pro ^oto atque ubere Matris. Pater
meus e collegio Christi; Avus Petrensis; Proavus Clarensis fuere. Vnum adhuc
(pro-tritavum) Penbrochianum narravit mihi patruus meus Georgius Dering
vobiscum apud Jesuanos socius. Caeteri omnes vel Cantabrigienses erant, aut
Musas non salutarant. Sed quorsum haec? nempe ut vester, vestrum favorem quasi
haereditario adire poterim qui novo merito non valeo.

Inter jam undique tot clades, and fragores cruentissimi civilis belli Deus O.
M. sospitet Cantabrigias. Nec unquam, quod hodie de Athenis Atticis, dicatur de
Anglicis: Scilicet inter 70. per totam Graeciam dialectos, omnium pessimam esse
Athenarum: Sime^n Cabisilas in epis^ola ad Martin. Crusium.
(...). Interim, lamentis vix ejulare possum, quam penitus mihi animus ingemit,
de aetate hac nimis ferrea, qua insula florentissima, pessum itura, (...)
peritura est: and territae Musae Athenas suas nesciturae sunt: Quippe flagrante
diutius bello, aut morituras, aut abituras vereor.

Sed gentem suam sat acriter eventilatam, tandem quasi postliminio sub alarm
tutela iterum est recepturus Deus noster, Deus misericordiarum. Et tunc
unusquisque novatorum nuperus ductor (sub cujus regimine calamitates nostrae
enatae sunt) (...) factus sibi ipsi despicatui erit. Ostensurus quid sit (...)
atque pati. Interea tamen si Reverentia Academica, si dignitas, salus, and
quies vestra ad incitas reductae fuerint, ut Parnassiacae laurus proximam
brontiam perferre non poterint, (...) tamen: quia fidenter dico non deerit tibi
aliquis and in illa tempestate Lysander, qui regni Angliaci alterum oculum
eruendum negabit: ergo (...).

Frigidis hisce notationibus, Te patronam tantam invocare, non est verecundiae
nostrae: Non defendas ut protectrix, sat erit si indulgeas condonatrix. Quippe
Academicam majestatem decebunt Hermogenis (...), aut Longini (...).
Grandiloquentia, and sublime dicendi genus quod poterit (...)* Sed oration
nostra ( Dion* Long. ^. 3.
sic^t illa Timaei) (...), atque (...).

Accipe tamen ( Alma) observantiam meam, non qua debitum solvam, sed qua Tu (
Matter) accipiendo nova officia (...) merearis de

Alumnorum tuorum
Surendena Deringorum
PREFACE.
Reader,
. 1. THe date of Midsummer 1640. was birthday to the manuscript whereof the
Press is now delivered 1644. Shortly after the issue of it from my hand, my
Country having put upon me the honor of their trust unto this Parliament,
time was then no more mine own, nor any rest of mind or body since. I have
unhappily traveled; but now at last being returned into the Parliament
quarters, and by their clemency suffered to draw breath here, where (unto me)
it is the sweetest air in the land, I find both liberty and leisure: and have
therefore yielded to their loving importunity, who wish a publication of that,
which is not dressed forth with such industry as I would have used, if at first
I had intended so public exposure.

. 2. Upon my present re-perusall of it, some alterations in some expressions I
would willingly make, not varying the sense and scope between the priest and
me: but he has a copy, and this must therefore be verbatim, lest he take
advantage to quarrel at circumstances, who will not (it seems) reply to the
substance.

. 3. The occasion of this discourse was thus: From the illuding fallacies of
Romish superstition, God with mercy was working the deliverance of a friend and
neighbor of mine, who by a divine blessing upon my weak endeavors was in time
won home from the shadows and the darkness of Roman idolatry, into the
bright sunshine of the Gospel of Christ: and with him his eldest son, a
sober, hopeful young man was converted also. Before this work was effected, my
friend with caution and good discretion, did desire to hear a conference
between one whom then he highly trusted and my self, to which end he brought
unto my house two strangers, indeed stout champions for Babel. But God by the
inward motions of his spirit did gently (yet powerfully) out-work all their
art. The Jesuit still pretended great confidence, and did undertake upon two
several points in controversy (1. Proper Sacrifice. 2. Papal Supremacy) to
maintain the Romish assertion; wherein he promised to confine his pen within
three sheets for each point, but borrowing one fortnight and taking six
months, he sent at last six sheets of one, and not one line of the other
Theme. His Argument and my Answer are both subjoyned, word for word.

. 4. But some will intercept me with a question: What? have you been so long in
the Court and in the Camp, now in stead of some great Court* Controversy, to
disclose a stale contest with a Jesuit? Is this a work for these times, whilst
two sides do bloudily strive in the rage and fury of a civil War? Is Church
and State almost gasping, and can a leisure be found for pen-work? I answer:
First, it is indeed the present issue of thunder and tempest, but was begotten
in a quiet serene. Next, it is a part of the present work in hand, for all our
difficulties are created, or enlarged, or both, by the Servitours of Rome: and
then to strike with a pen is as necessary as with the pike. Here is a sad
breach between a good King, and good people, and a sad curse will be upon their
hearts who have contrived, and who do foment it: But the crafty Papist, at this
time, is wise enough to take his own interest into consideration; and who can
show any argument to induce me to think, that a Papist ( qua Papist) can
contribute assistance, but to enlarge this breach, and to mature our ruin? All
the Roman party in the world does look upon this Parliament, and upon
Scotland, as upon such opposites to them, so contradictoriall, so deadly, that
one must fall; both cannot stand and thrive together: The Religion of Rome, and
the Reformation of England, can never hence-forward dwell together in this
Island. And now our woeful experience has discovered, that our wise complying
Clergy have been but foolish builders. They who thought to tie all together
have failed of their project; and (poor inconsiderate men) with pains and care
have made the breach far wider.

. 5. These men will (as formerly) murmr at my honest endeavors: for many
there are among them who do really distaste that any man's pen should travel
abroad, unless it be one of their own wing. What makes a lay man to step
within their sevenfold (...)? Why should a Gentleman salute the Scholars Muses?
We allow him to be a Master of Art in hawking, hunting, and horsematches: but
from Academick studies, especially from Theological considerations, O away,

-- procul, o procul ite profani:
This was made plain unto me when I went to choose a College and a Tutour for
my eldest son: There wanted not some in the Universitie, kindly, but with a
covert meaning to forewarn me of the charge; more plainly they expressed
themselves, that scholarship is a detriment to elder Brothers. Indeed the Piety
of the times did then work high, and I do confidently believe, that a part of
the mystery then in working was to draw us all into an indisputed blind
obedience: but first into ignorance as the sure way thereto. If (said a
Parish-Minister) the Gentry were ignorant enough, then the Clergy would be
rich enough. Another, Let us get the Laity to Confession, and the Clergy power
will then be great enough. As for soul-feeding (the least part of their care)
my once neighbour-Vicar shall speak for himself, and I hope there are no more
of so reprobate a badnesse: in a dispute upon the allotting of some number of
parishioners which he claimed, it was argued that his Parish Church could not
contain half the souls which he demanded: Why (said the Vicar) what is that to
you? Let them be laid to my parish, let them pay me their tithes, and then let
them go to the devil to Church if they will. This was made known to Archbishop
Laud (whose Curate the Vicar was) but yet the Vicar was thought honest enough,
because he would read the book of sports, and would yield to all that came upon
him in the name of authority:

Pers. Sa^. ^*
O curvae in terris animae and coelestium inanes!
. 6. These things, and many other of the like nature, made me heartily
endeavor to put that fatal Archbishop on toward his trial: which (as the
great affairs give time) will shortly have it is deserved issue: and I doubt not
but as Justice is sacred, so also will the care of his great Judges be. I
forbear to say in how dear esteem I was with many thousands upon that endeavor
of mine: I remember (and I feel some bitterness of mind to remember) how I
lost that esteem. It is true that I ever reputed the common praise of common
people to be but Antonin. (...). lib. 6.. 17.
(...), a certain noise of tongues: yet I have since found more cause to
acknowledge, that God has a hand even in their mouths, and that there is
(sometimes) a (...), somewhat Divine, even in the great unity of popular
concurrences.

. 7. In May, 1642. the public affairs did seem every day to grow into danger:
I began sadly with my self to weigh whither we were going. I saw the Divisions
would shortly draw out into parties. I lay private in a most happy obscurity,
and then by some of my most inward friends did try if I could beg peace and
protection of the Parliament: so unwilling was I to have been opposite to the
great Senate of the land, that I had nothing in my thoughts before a
readmission to their favor, as some special friends can testify: but for an
active concurrent assistance, for entering into real service with either of
them, truth to confess, I did not then like one side or the other so well, as
to join my self with either. A composing third way was my wish, and my prayer.
Thus in my weak understanding, I was bold in frequent argument to oppose either
side whilst I resolved to assist neither. All my care was, not to trespass
against my inward thoughts, and I hope I have in no one action been guilty
thereof. Yet even he that watches the light of reason to be ruled by it, and
is careful to observe and follow the inward dictates of his conscience, shall
to others seem changed, when being constant and the same man, he still
follows one and the same warrantable guide. And therefore, with the good
Emperor, I say, Antonin. (...). lib. 6.. 17.
If once I be convinced that I think or do amiss, (...), rejoycingly I will
change my opinion: for I follow Truth: which whosoever really does, may unto
others seem to change often, and yet be constant still.

. 8. Of la^e I am come into the Parliaments protection; since when my thoughts
have often insisted upon the strangeness of the quarrel between the King and
the two Houses* The Professions, Declarations, and Protests, are on both sides
the same, or so near that reason can hardly find the point in quarrel:
Protestant Religion, Laws, Liberty, Privileges, etc. Why do they differ? Why
are they not agreed? may not a great part of the cause be, that the King
divides from the Parliament? Oh but he had great cause so to do. But what if
one should say, the King had mo^e cause to go away then he has now to stay
away? If it be admitted, that the King went away upon great cause, may it not
be argued, that there is now greater cause to return? perhaps it will be
granted, but withal replied, that his personal danger, will make the advice
of his return a sinful counsel. If I did not love his person well, I durst
not thus express my self. But upon that ground I say, that he may be
personally as safe or safer at Westminster, then at Oxford. That he may have
the same ample splendour of a Court, or greater: That he may have all the same
Officers, or some of them better. I know that at Oxford they say, if the King
come hither his life (which God preserve) is like to be the forfeiture of that
rashness, or else, as Damascen relates that the Mosyni do in Asia, (...), so
these will shut him up and feed him in the Tower. Good men cannot do so: nay
good men can not say so, or think so. No: King-killing never was but among
papists, it was first allowed by a Pope, and has continued with his
successors.

. 9. The first Regicide among Christians allowed, was that of the Emperor
Mauritius. This was severely inveighed against and that publicly by the
Patriarch of Constantinople. But pride and covetousness (the Saints which the
Bishop of Rome then served) taught the crafty murderer Phocas to please the
Pope in both his lusts: for his pride he gives him the title of Universal
Bishop, and feeds his covetousness with rich bribes: so the bloody parricide
is blessed by a holy father. Maurice had before given the oecumenicall title to
John of Constantinople, and now Phocas withdraws it thence, and places it upon
Boniface of Rome. It is observed by Historians that both these Emperors, so
overforward to grace Bishops, with unallowable and Anchristian titles, died
miserably: Wolflus.
quod and mysterio non caret, as one says.

. 10. The last of massacred Kings were the famous Henry's of France. Henry the
third stabbed in the belly by a Jacobin friar, encouraged by the Prior of his
covent, and by Commolet and other Jesuits. In less then 4. years after this,
Peter Barrier of Orleance came to Melun (where our Queens father then was) with
a sharp two-edged knife purposely resolved to have killed the King, as he had
formerly confessed to one Aubrey a priest, and to father Varade then rectour of
the Jesuits: who confirmed him in his purpose, and assured him that if he died
for it he should have a Martyrs crown in heaven for reward. Within four
months after this in the Kings chamber at the Louvre, a young fellow ( John
Chastel) a Novice of the Jesuits, encouraged by them, did aim the stabbe of
his knife into the Kings belly, but (by Gods providence) the King at that
instant stooping down to receive the Lords of Ragny and Montiguy the knife
ran into his upper lip and mouth, and breaking out a tooth missed his life,
the villain had his deserved execution, and the order of Jesuits thereupon
banished out of France.

. 11. But unhappy Henry readmitted them, and founded a College for the
bloud-suckers, and appointed his heart to be buried with them; which relic
they longed for with such impatiency that they would not stay till it was cold,
but sent the devil Ravillack to take out life and all. Ravillack confessed his
intended parricide to father Aubigny of that Order, and showed him the knife
prepared, and at execution he confessed that the book of Mariana the Spanish
Jesuit was the motive to his villainy, only giving this reason of the fact,
because the King did tolerate two religions in France. And thus by two Jesuited
knives, the last of the line of Valois, and the first of Burbon were both
brought to their bloody winding-sheets. But I must not forget to note one
(...), a high pitch of Papal villainy in the story of Henry 3. more then in
that of Henry 4: which is to prove Boniface the second and Sixtus Quintus
(Size-Cinque as the best of Queens called him) both to be of the same race of
bloody Judas: He in selling the life of the Lord Anointed, these in applauding
the deaths of the Anointed of the Lord; for Boniface approves the murder of the
Emperor Maurice, and Pope Sixtus in a solemn Oration extolled the Friar that
massacred the King of France.

12. And now, my sacrificing Jesuit, stand forth and let us occasionally here
try a veny. Good Antagonist, what say you to your bloody brethren of the black
robe? Kings have been murdered before, but where was the doctrine of
King-killing before there were Jesuits? Where may we find the commendatory
Orations for parricides but among Popes, Papists, and Jesuits? King James his
speech in Parl. 1605.
No sect of heretics, no Turk, Jew, or Pagan, no, nor even those of Calicute,
who adore the devil, did ever maintain by the grounds of their religion, that
it was lawful to murder Prince or people, for quarrel of Religion.

. 13. But because you have not made good your undertaking in the second point (
viz. for Papal Supremacy) you see I have courteously argued it for you, by
confessing that 1000. years since (good prescription) Phocas gave your great
Master the Pope that great title of Universal Bishop: you have the story
wherefore he gave it, it was the price of blood: and it is withal a mark of
Antichrist: Will you believe a Pope herein? You do acknowledge Gregory the
great to be as much a Pope as Urban the eighth, and to be as infallible as any:
I will acknowledge with you that he was as good as any Successor of his these
thousand years: dare you be tried by the unerring chair whilst he held it? or
is your faith changed? Mark what he says, answer it if you can. Thus he writes
to the Emperor Mauritius upon occasion that John of Constantinople did use
that title of Universal Bishop: Job. 4. (...) c. 76.
Ipsa Domini nostri Jesu Christi mandata superbi atque pompatici cujusdam
sermonis inventione turbantur: the very commands of our Lord Jesus Christ are
broken by the invention of a certain proud and pompous appellation. Ibid.
Absit a cordi^us Christianorum nomen istud blasphemiae: Far be it from the
hearts of Christians this name of blasphemy. cap. 78.
In hac ejus superbia quid aliud nisi propin qua jam Antichristi esse tempora
designatur? In this pride of his what is there else designed, but that the
times of Antichrist are near at hand? And unto John of Constantinople thus he
expostulates, cap. 81.
Quis (rego) in hoc tam per verso vocabulo, nisi ille ad imitandu^ proponitur,
qui despectis Ang^lorum legionibus, secum socialiter constitutis, ad culmen
conatus est singularitatis erumpere: ut and nulli subesse, and solus omnibus
praeesse videretur? Who (I pray) is made the pattern for imitation in this so
perverse a title, but he, who despising the legions of Angels that were placed
in fellowship with him, strived to break forth into the top of singularity,
that so he might be subject unto none, and might alone be above all. You see
the first pattern for this title, was (as Pope Gregory says) in Lucifer.
Speaking of John the Constantinopolitan unto Anianus the Deacon there. cap. 83.
S^ (says he) (...) Patriarcham nominat -- In iste scelest^ vocabulo
consentire, nihil est aliud quam fidem perdere: He names himself the
Oecumenicall Patriarch -- to consent unto which wicked title, is nothing else
but to destroy the says. Lib. 6. cap. 38.
Superstitiosi and superbi vo^abul^ -- ^lati^ -- quam primus Apostata invenit:
The lifting up of a superstitious and proud title which the first Apostate has
invented. After all these he writes again to the Emperor in these words: Ibid.
cap. 194.
Ego fidenter dico, quia quisquis se Vniversalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari
desiderat, in ^latione sua Antichristum praecurrit: I speak this confidently,
that whosoever calls himself the Universal priest, or desires so to be
called, in his exalting of himself he is a forerunner of Antichrist: do you see
what a cross is set upon the door of the Pope? Here is one has marked him in
the forehead for Antichrist: and one whom you cannot disclaim from.

. 14. This Bishop ( Gregory) dying in the year 603. his successor Sabinian
sat less then a year and an half: he endeavored to burn all the writings of
Gregory, perhaps because by his abnegation of the universalitie, he had (as it
were) precluded the access thereto from his successors; yet B^niface the
third, immediate successor to Sabinian (anno 6^6.) obtained this bloody title
of the bloody tyrant Phocas, and has entailed it even to Urban. And here was
now the beginning of your Papacy. The successors of Boniface ever ascribing to
themselves that which Gregory the first called lib. 4. c 78
per versum vocabulum* cap. 80.
profanum vocabulum, malum superbi^ and confusionis, venenum sermonis,
diabolicam usurpationem, cap. 82.
nefandum ac profanum tumorem, stultum ac profanum vocabulum, temerarium nomen,
nefandum elationis vocabulum, lib. 5. c. 19.
nefandi appellationem nominis, lib. 6. cap. 192.
verbum superbi^, cap. 194.
superbum ac profanum vocabulum, cap. 195.
profanum nomen, stultum nomen, etc. and as before is vouched, nomen
blasphemiae, designatio temporum Antichristi, per versum vocabulum, scelestum
vocabulum, supers^^tiosum and superbum vocabulum, etc. And yet A. B. C. would
have proved this title due by divine right, if the times had not disproved his
arguments before they were made.

. 15. Thus the doctrines and thus the practices: the doctrines of pride among
the papist. They not content to have a Bishop among Bishops as S. Peter was
among the Apostles, where they all were equal, ^yprian de ^n^ a^e Ecclesiae.
Hoc erant unique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio
pr^diti and honoris and potestatis: The rest of the Apostles verily were the
same as was Peter, endued with equal fellowship of honor and of power. This
parity among Bishops will not satisfy the pride of Rome whose Priest swells up
to be universal Bishop of Bishops. And thus (as before is instanced) were the
King-killing practices of that bloody religion for a thousand years, that so
Rome might be (...), twice dyed, to make Her purple fit for the mother of
harlots. The God of Rev. 17. 4, 5
Kings give our King the spirit of wisdom to discern these wolves, and never
to trust them among our sheep.

. 16. It is said at Oxford, that here at London a pretensed slander is raised,
and forged on purpose to draw the King into disaffection among his Commons, by
saying that he is in heart a Papist: it were a devilship of mind to forge such
report on purpose; but for as much as I can observe ^ince I came into these
quarters, the report which lives here is not so much grounded with many upon a
will and a desire of slander, as unhappily fearfully and unwillingly
entertained by many good men, and really doubted and feared by some whose
hearts are in good affection to his Majesty: I know not what to say or wish,
nor how the mistake may be removed. The King may please to think on some course
worthy of the cause: In the mean time: I dare wish that he would make less
value of such men (both lay and Clergy) who by running on the Canterbury pace,
have made our breaches so wide: And take less delight in the specious way of
Cathedral devotions, which have made much distraction by too much pomp, and
are liable to scorn (in many places) by the baseness of some persons
assisting. Concerning these proud fastuous ways of humility, this noisefull
piety, and these merry devotions, I can but repeat the bold and free
expressions of an eminent Papist, which I made use of in my late Declaration,
but the transcriber (for haste) omitted one line, whereby the true author was
defrauded, and the words were left upon me as mine, which made some to ask me,
how my fancy wrought it self into that odd piece of latin in the midst of my
english. They are the words of the learned Knight De vanitate scient. cap. 17.
Henry Cornelius Agrippa, who thus taxes the Church-musicks: ubi (says he)
belluinis strepitibus cantillant: dum hinniunt discantum pueri, mugiunt alii
tenorem, alii latrant contrapunctum, alii boant altum, alii frendent bassum,
faciuntque ut sonorum plurimum quidem audiatur, verborum and orationis
intelligatur nihil: Where they chant it with belluine noises: whilst children
neigh forth the descant, others do lough forth the tenor, others bark the
Countertenour, others roar the Altus, others groan forth the Base: and all do
this, that much of noise is heard, but nothing at all is understood of the
words and of prayer. So that learned Papist Agrippa. And herein what argument
soever can be framed for use of Music in the hymnall part of Service, yet none
can be (for ought I ever heard) for using it in the precatory part of our
devotions: A man may possibly set our praises to a tune, but no man can make
his solemn prayers in a tune, but that he must make them not like prayers:
although I acknowledge that in hymns and Psalms ejaculatory passages, and some
sentences of prayer, are warranted by divine example. Our active Clergy were
of late very fierce in their endeavor for outward splendor, beauty, and
ornament: they were earnest to put our Church into a Psalm. 45. ^3, 14.
clothing of wrought gold, and would have brought her to the King in raiment of
needlework* but were nothing careful to make the Kings Daughter all glorious
within. For at that time exterior form was commendable, but inward devotion by
some not tolerable. More liberty then piety:

Omnia cum liceant, non licet ^sse pium.
. 17. Having said this now, I find my self engaged to make proof by way of some
instances that I slander not those pious times. Let us then look into a few of
those publications which were allowed and licensed by the Bishops: for I must
call the Chaplains imprimatur, the Bishops imperat^r. I may know his Lordships
diet by his Cook. His Chaplain durst no^ dish forth these Roman quelque
chooses, if he had not the right temper of his masters taste:

Namque cocus domini debet habere ^ulam. Martial.

I will not step far back, nor trouble my Reader with the Pandects of all the
impiety of the times. The Era for my computation shall be Ab anno
translationis, from the Archiepiscopacie of Dr Laud, and the period shall be at
the summons of this Parliament: Nor do I intend to gather together all, no nor
the tithe of these infectious pieces: that were a labor for a greater patience
then mine: nor have I seen them all by many. Take these that are here as they
come to hand, for I study no method in so ill a work.

. 18. Sr Anthony Hungerford Knight (father to my I.
truly honored and beloved friend S^ Edward Hungerford, Knight of the Bath)
being a real convert from popery, did write a treatise entitled the advice of
a son to his Mother, and the memorial of a father to his sons, wherein he
piously does render the cause of his conversion, and religiously does woo his
Mother, and direct his children: This treatise was denied publication by Dr
Bray, and his reason assigned, was a distaste of the last lines in the
treatise, which are these,

I was withal persuaded in my conscience, and so rest yet, that this
transcendent power and usurpation of the Roman Bishop in the spiritual and
civil regiment of the world is so far a stranger to the Church of God, as
that it could be no other, but the kingdom of that MAN OF SIN, which
agreeably to the prediction of the holy Ghost, was to be raised in the bosom
of the Church, for the last, the most powerful, the most dangerous delusion of
the Christian world. For which words the whole treatise was shut up in the
dark, a part of that mystery which then wrought very powerfully in this Island.

Dr Featly, a worthy and learned Divine, and one to II.
whom the Church of England for his excellent Labors in public (both in
Polemick and Homiliti^k Divinity) is much indebted: one who lived a man of
noted learning when Mr Bray was under the feruler: yet Mr Bray being now my new
Lords young Chaplain, he thinks good to show his authority with the forfeit of
his discretion, and of truth: and therefore thus (in two or three instances for
several scores) he controlls the Dr. whose books he was not worthy to carry,
unless with purpose to open, and to learn by them.

Clavis Mystica (so the good Dr. calls his 70. Sermons in one volume)
under-went a great deal of Sponge. The whole 58. Sermon (preached in Parise
and) entitled Old and new Idolatry parallelled, as if it were a false ward
against the key, is filed quite away* and for ought I can guess by reading of
it, because he there strongly argues against all kind of Image Worship.

The Sermon is since abroad but was expunged, together with so many passages in
the other Sermons all against Arminianisme and Popery, as that the altering of
them cost the Stationer near thirty pounds, yet by the happiness of this
Parliament many copies of these printed Sermons are recured: whereby the reader
need not wonder to find me to instance him with some passages dashed out, which
in some of the printed copies he may now find.

In the late Archbishops chapel at Lambeth, before the High Commissioners
there, the stout Doctor durst then preach these words:

What are the great foxes but the priests and Jesuits? Sermon 7. page 90.
what are the little foxes but the Demi-pelagian cubbes? which will spoil our
fairest clusters, the Colleges of both Universities, if in time they be not
looked into; as they have done already in our neighbor vine, the Low
Countries. This that then was preached might not in the new* no-grace his time
be repeated, and therefore Mr Bray does blot it out.

The Dr preached that on the house top, publicly Sermon 34. page 485.
in S. Paul's church, which the chaplain would stifle in a corner: and therefore
dasheth out this prayer. I pray God we may never have cause to complain that
the severity of our Laws and Canons should fall upon straying Doves, silly
seduced persons, without any gall at all, whilst the black birds of Antichrist
are let alone. If chaste Lydia be silenced for her indiscreet zeal, let not
Jesebels be suffered to teach and to deceive Gods servants.

The honest labors of Dr Jones in his Commentary III.
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, was altered from the words and sense of the
Author by additions, and by subtractions, to the number of above 500. lines by
Mr Baker, who by his Roman Plagiary did make the books unvendible, having
taken out the life and vigor of the book, and (as it were) picked out the eyes
of it* The old Dr lived to see, and wept to see his issue thus deformed. All
the alterations (which are many) are express to the advantage of our Roman
adversaries. I will give a taste of two or three.

The text calls our Savior (...), a great priest* our English translation an
High priest over the house of Heb. 10. 21. So Heb. 4. 14. (...).
God. Here the Doctor observes that the Holy Ghost thinks it sufficient to
call Christ a great priest: But this ^ill not content the Pope: he must be
Sacerdos maximus. Christ has but the Positive degree, and he must have the
Superlative degree. A Proud prelate, that Antichrist, that exalts him self
above God. The purgatory Doctor wipes out the whole period, lest you should
think the Clergy were without a Sacerdos maximus in this world.

These words are also blotted out, being arguments against transubstantiation,
Heaven must contain the body Heb. 9. 28.
of Christ till all things be fulfilled, ergo, it cannot be on the earth. If
the bread that Christ gave to his Disciples were turned into his body, he must
of necessity have two bodies: the one held in the hand of the other. I do
desire Mr Baker to tell me wherein the Doctor has offended, that his
supercilious pen must dash out these valuable arguments: He dares not say, he
did it because they make against the Idolatrous artolatry of Rome.

Another dispunction tells me plainly that the very height of popery was the
height of some designers, wherefore else should this line be blotted out? Be at
Heb. 12. 14.
peace with a papist, but not with his Popery and Idolatry. Dr Jones said thus,
we have begun in sound and pure Religion, Heb. 3. 14.
let us not end in Popery. It seems my young licencer would end there: and
therefore he cannot let pass this counsel, Let us not end in popery: but
changes it thus, Let us not end in profaneness: and so it is printed: he durst
not (it seems) pass it to the press with a plain wish, not to end in popery.

Mr Ward, another good man and industrious Devine, IIII.
has issued forth an ample volume of Questions, Observations, and Essays upon
the Gospel of S. Matthew. This work has undergone the severity of the same
masters: I had the Catalogue of their adulterated clauses, by the advantage of
my being trusted with the Chair, for what had been ill hindered from the press,
and what had been worse thrust abroad by the press: but I (very lately) parted
with those notes to a worthy member of the House, and most of my other notes
are* rotted in their damp lodging whilst I was away, and some of them
otherwise lost.

Mr Birkbeck wrote a learned laborious piece called V.
the Protestants evidence, but Dr Haywood rejected it back from publication,
because Mr Birckbeck took occasion to commend Wicliff, a man who considering
the age he lived in did deserve (I may justly say) as well as Martin Luther or
Mr Calvin: though for my part I do reverence Calvin equal with any the best of
the ancient Fathers, and do think he has according to the quantity of his
writings as little vain, and less erratick, then any one among them.

This above may serve for instance, how sedulous VI.
our ill guides were to hinder the publication of good doctrines. If I should
collect together all the passages of ill doctrines which with the same care
they have issued forth, more then all the money I have now would not buy paper
to write them down in: But some you shall have. And first I will begin with one
who labors himself out of breath and sense to prove the very point which in my
subsequent treatise I have disapproved. Like a friendly adversary I will lend
some arrows to my Jesuit, taken out of Dr Pocklingtons quiver, and yet touch
none of the passages recanted by Dr Bray. 11. April 1641.

He voucheth a passage in Iren^us and so proceeds: Lib. 4. cap. 34. Altar
Christ. page 9*
Deus nos vult offerre munus ad Altar frequenter sine intermissione. And this
(he says) was not an alleg^ricall and improper Altar -- but a true proper
Christian Altar, both name and thing -- So that we have an earthly Altar here
on earth -- a material Altar, of wood, stone, silver, or gold -- And miserable
was their case for whom the Priest made no offering at Gods visible Altar. Thus
he more bold and false then my Jesuit: and in Popery as absolutely gross; for
yield as he does, that proper Altars are necessary in the Church of Christ, and
proper Sacrifice will come in whether you will or no. But the base intent of a
delusion appears in this: He makes Irenaeus a foundation to his fraud, by
cutting off Irenaeus before he has spoken out. The words by Pocklington
vouched are there: Deus nos vult offerre munus ad Altar frequenter sine
intermissione: God wills that we should offer gifts at the Altar frequently,
without intermission: This may in some sense be drawn over to serve him and the
Jesuit: But take the very next words in the same line of Irenaeus, and the
sense is clear with us against them both: Est ergo Altar in coelis, etc. our
Altar then is in heaven, etc. Now Pocklington, where is your visible,
material, earthly Altar in Irenaeus?

He is as bold and false to say, that The holiness of page 27.
the blessed Eucharist, was on the holiness of Altars, and could not else
where be consecrated.

There has been and yet remains a great controversy, whether S. Peter ever
were at Rome; but this bold Roman can tell you (I think) what chamber he lay
in there, the first night he came: I would he had told us, what night or (with
probable evidence) what year he came thither: but believe him upon his credit,
his words are S. Peter's first lodging there was in page 39.
the Lady Claudias house. We poor ignorant and despised Laity must be kept
far off from the mysteries of our Religion wherein we are to be saved: The
celebration of the holy Supper must be in one place, we in another: He tells us
that Pope Boniface the second page 116.
did no more then his duty, in dividing the people from the Clergy when the
Sacrament was celebrated: a good argument for Rails: nor must we see what the
Priest does: for he says, that none of all the holy offices, belonging page 85.
only to priests, were performed in the body of the Church, where every one
might be present, and see what was done.

When he has argued for his material Altar: when he has pleaded the
partition of it from the rest of the Church, he then would have it reverenced,
and if the piety of those times had gone on, he would have plainly expounded
with what kind of Reverence. He tells us of the honor and reverence which of
right belongs unto page 175.
the Altar, in regard of the presence of our Savior, whose chair of state it
is upon earth. Where (page 108.) Christ is most truly and really present in the
blessed Sacrament: an offensive expression, and unsuitable to our Church: I
would he had expounded what he meant by in the Sacrament: and how much Christ
is in the sacramental wine of the Eucharist, more then he is in the
sacramental water of Baptism.

These and some other I observe not recanted among the 24. points by Dr Bray;
who being under the protection of the titular great Grace durst give
attestation to this pestilent Author with a Perlegi -- and nihil reperio sanae
Doctrinae contrarium, quo minus summa cum utilitate imprimatur.

But Pocklington then bragged of the piety of the VII.
times, and the holy endeavors of the Governors of the page* 92.
Church. The same song which Peter Heylin did sing a page* 105.
year before him. He very highly sets forth and commends the piety of the times
as if he would fell them. He tells us there is a good work now in hand. Anno
1636. Coal from Altar.
And in his Coal from the Altar he affirms that we have a Sacrifice, and an
Altar, and a Sacrament of the Altar. I believe he will be ashamed to explain
now what he shamed not to affirm then. I think the times were impious, if it
were but for this, that Heylin and Pocklington by license from Bray and Baker
should dare to slight and cast disregard upon pious, reverend, and admirable
Bishop Jewel and Calvin: one of them does it in his Altar, page 89. and the
other in his Coal,. 15. but though they slight a good man, yet I can in one of
them find the great commendations of Cardinal page 34, 35.
Borromaeus (a man of violent superstition) who is highly applauded by
Pocklington, the reason whereof I take to be, because his devotion, and the
piety of those times, were growing into kindred together.

Heylin (more a courtier then divine) would have the direction of the King in
sacred matters to be a law: Coal p. 41.
Nay then let us ransom our spiritual liberty by subjecting rather our
temporal condition to his Arbitrary power. But the King desires it not.

In his Antidotum (rather toxicum) he says, that the Altar is a lively
representation of the Cross of Christ: page 86. n. 2.
The papist do not say so much, unless when they mean the Altar with the whole
Mass appertaining.

I cannot part with Dr Heylin until he (as kind as Dr Pocklington) do lend my
Jesuit if not an argument, yet his vote and consent for Idolatry. He is alive,
and may hear what I say. I will thank him if he will let me know a good meaning
of these lines:. 2. Not an improper Altar and improper Sacrifice, as you idly
page 26. n. ^*
dream of: for Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars being Relatives must needs
infer, that our priesthood is improper also: and that is very true, for you
are but an unproper priest, good Heylin: prove your self more if you can. viz.
Heylins Coa^ and Antidotum, And ^ocklington^ Altar and Sabbath.
These two pieces of the same leaven with those two of Pocklington were
attested by Dr Baker, one Cum utilitate imprimatur, and the other in quo nihil
reperio sanae Doctrinae contrarium. I wonder we have not the recantation of
Baker as well as Bray: for of the two I ever held Dr Bray the more moderate
man: and these of Heylin are as pestilentiall as those of Pocklington.

Both these Authors by the title of moderate Protestants VIII.
are vouc^ against me by a Carmelite Friar, an old Anonymus of Rome, to
maintain proper material Altars: who brought with him a Sermon preached at
Cambridge, by Sparrow, printed 1637. and throwing it down unto me on the table;
There (says he) is as much as we can say for Confession, but you will not come
to the practice of it: licensed by Mr Baker: where I find that he pleads for
plenary Confession of all sins, using and admitting the distinction of sins
mortal* and sins venial. He finds fault with that opinion page 10.
which holds the priests power barely declarative: he page 15.
would fain have us to auricular confession, his words are, Confession in
private, in the ear, is out of use; male aboletur page 18.
says a devout Bishop, it is almost quite lost, the more the pity.

The dangerous devotions of the Popish Bishop IX.
Francis Sales, are englished by one John Yakesley, and (which I wonder at)
licensed by Dr Haywood, where for confession the penitent is thus directed:
Thou must page* 33.
seek out the best Confessor that can be found: it seems some have a better
art or greater power in absolution then others. For invocation of Saints I find
this precept: page 71.
Implore the assistance of the holy Saints. For transubstantiation thus: The
venerable Sacrament of the Eucharist, page 219.
contains really and verily the flesh and blood of our Savior. It were fit
the Dr. did explain the word contains. The whole book is a whole series of
Popery, and yet the licenser could say, Non reperio aliquid sanae doctrinae
contrarium, and publica cum utilitate imprimatur.

Archbishop Laud in his Star Chamber speech X.
1637. takes the words which H^ (his Scoutmaster) had found passable the year
before, and tells us, there is no danger at all in the Altar, name and thing:
what can fix a proper Altar, if these words cannot? And if a proper Altar, he
must then have a proper Sacrifice, as will be manifested anon. Here is the
Altar now, but where is the Sacrifice? Stay a while, we dare not speak out yet,
but we will show it you, one very near: What is the meaning of this where he
tells the Lords of that Court, that the altar is the greatest place of Gods
residence upon earth? what is then the heart of a sanctified Christian? and
then he inferres, that the Altar is the throne where his body (the body of
Christ) is usually present. My Jesuit will say no more of his Altar.

O. M. was wont to be attributed unto God-almighty: rarely given to some
heathen Emperors, and yet the Chancellor of Oxford was flattered with it by
letters from that Universitie, dated 28. May 1635. and to bring it the more
smoothly to him, they have conjoined the King with the Bishop: Circumspicere
nobis jubes, si quid effectum velimus ab Optimis Maximisque in terra Rege and
Te. It is said of our blessed Savior, that God gave him not the spirit by
measure: But the Luke 3. 34.
Oxonian complements grow up close to this: How near to blasphemy do these
adorers creep, who in their prodigal flattery do say that He (even Dr. Laud)
is Divini Spiritus effusissime plenus, most overflowingly full of the holy
Ghost. I omit the superlative adulation to him, in the style of Rome,
Sanctissime. But there is another letter to him about a week after this
Parliament began, wherein (methinks) their Rhetoric is more profane.
Venerandissimus ille, quo rectior non stat regula, quo prior est corrigenda
Religio: He the most reverend, then whom the rule it self (that is or should be
the holy word of God,) stands not more straight: then whom religion it self
must be first reformed. Again, he is equally conjoined with the Church: The
words are, without the Church, without Thee, Salvation (or for modesty sake let
it be Safety) we cannot hope for, Comfort we will not have: Sine Ecclesia, sine
Te, Salutem sperare non possumus, Solatium nolumus. How would it have become
this great Patriarch, upon these horrid adorings, to have checked them as the
Angel did S. John with (...). See thou do it not: Revel. 19. 20. and 22. 9.
I am your fellow servants.

I should bring the desperate extravagancies of Bishop Mountague and Bishop
Manwaring, to wait upon the Metropolitan, but they are elder then my septennary
examination, which is confined between 1633, and 1640.

I am willing to wade no further: But I shall wrong many if I touch no more:
yet I hold it fit only to touch them, and so to leave them upon the question.

First then I ask of Dr Lawrence, who in his Sermon 1637. pressing with too
much learning and too little argument the several partitions in a Church, the
several postures, and the several degrees of sanctity in several places,
makes a voucher out of Sands relat: page 173. (I find it page 238.) saying, The
very Grecians themselves have their tables enclosed with GREAT MYSTERY from the
people at this day: But why is not the Doctor as candid as the Relatour in
expressing the GREAT MYSTERY? would the Doctor have it so, or not so? the
reason given by the Relatour is, That the ARCANA of their ineffable crossings
and convertings may not be prostituted and polluted by unsanctified view. I
hope the Doctor would not have the enclosure made for such a Mystery.

Speaking of the B. Sacrament of the Lords supper, he tells us, that Christ, S.
Paul, and the Church of England, all say that his body is there: and that
(says he) truly and substantially, etc. At this word substantially I do stick,
and cannot well make it into an Orthodox sense. I remember the Archbishop
professes to believe the true substantial presence of Christ. This must be
taken with great caution, because the words will bear the sense of our
adversaries, and why delight we to walk upon the edge of a knife? Is it good
Divinity to say, that Christ's body is there? yes it is: but where? in the holy
communion: true, but in what part? in the whole action, or in the symboles, and
elements? Take heed, you will be at Rome before you are aware. How then shall I
take the Doctors substantially? and the Bishops substantial presence? They
make mysteries or rather riddles: and why should they press my faith with such
expressions, as without a deal of interpretation are unsound? I can find no
substantial presence but by Faith, and so (by Faith) I receive the very Deity
of Christ, and of God the Father. So then Christ's body is there, and Christ's
body is not there; in different acceptations. The substance of his natural
body is not there at all: but a real communication of the substance of Christ
both body and soul is there solemnly signed and sealed unto us. This my Faith
discerns, and the not discerning of this, makes the wicked guilty of eating and
drinking unworthily. In this participation of Christ by a living faith, in this
spiritual way of communicating, I can admit of all your adventerous
expressions, taking them san^ modo: but with what honesty do you put us off the
ignorant Laity, in your Sermons, upon such desperate precipices. Your selves do
know the brink before you come at it, and so take up, and make a fixed stand to
save your selves: but in recompense of many Ignorants, who by this ill conduct
topple down into the abyss of error, may not Justice one day thrust you also
into an abyss, as being the woeful offense and stumbling block whereat they
fell? Beside I can more easily avoid Bellarmine, Cardinal Alan, Stapleton,
Suarez (I know them a great way off by their skins) then I can in sheeps
clothing, Bishop Laud, Bishop Mountague, Dr Heylin, Dr Lawrence, etc.

But the Archbishop (as before) asserted a true substantial presence, he
unjustly voucheth reverend Calvin for it, yet honestly he does put Calvin's
words in the margin: where I find Substantialis Communicatio. Calvin was in the
right, a true, real, and substantial Communion, not an aerie phantasme without
a truth of participation. Neque enim fallax est Deus qui figmentis inanibus
Calvin: Instit l^^. ^. cap. 17.
nos lactet. So he has, participes substantiae ejus facti; made partners or
partakers of his substance. Great difference (in my understanding) between the
Bishops Substantial Presence, and Calvin's Substantial Communion: as between a
true Presence of body, and a true Communion of his body. We can and do with
excellent 1. Cor. 11. 24.
Calvin say, Realiter, hoc est vere, nobis in Coena datur Christi corpus: The
body of Christ is really, that is truly, given to us in the Supper. And
Christus vere exhibetur fid^libus: Christ is truly given unto the faithful.
But we cannot say with Dr. Lawrence, that his body is there; nor can we with
Bishop Laud falsify good Calvin by Helat. Confess. p. 293.
obtruding upon him, that he affirms, the true and real body of Christ (not
only to be received in the Eucharist, Upon 1. Cor. 11. 24.
but) to be there. When as Calvin teaches, Christum in coelo manentem a nobis
recipi: that we here receive Christ, who remains in heaven. Therefore he bids
us to leave unto Christ the true nature of his flesh. Sine ut in coelesti sua
gloria maneat, and illuc aspira, ut inde se tibi communicet: Be content that
Christ remain in his celestial glory, and aspire thou thither, that from
thence he may communicate himself unto thee. So that, for ought I see, Calvin
saw no true real body of Christ in the Sacrament, though he did see, and all
faithful do feel, a true real Communion of his body in that holy celebration.
Is it all one to have Communion with the body of Christ really and truly, and
to have his body in the Eucharist really and truly? If it may be qualified and
excused into a sound sense, yet it can never be construed into a safe sense.
And therefore when you will use any dark, doubtful, dangerous term, let it not
be a trouble to you to explain and expound it, lest some poor soul misuse the
knife which carelessely you threw about.

In a word, the body of Christ is there, and the body of Christ is not there:
it is there by spiritual communion; it is not there in any other construction:
for representation, and commemoration (though real) are still spiritual ways
of his being there. Much of this Mystery is cleared by this expression: Christ
is represented and really offered unto all the Receivers, but Christ is really
exhibited only to the true believers. And thus much occasionally upon the
adventerous expressions of Dr. Lawrence.

There is a sermon forth by one Mr. Wats, licensed XII.
by Mr. Baker, 1637. I would gladly learn of the Author whether he will in
plain English abide by it, That king David did constantly observe all
Canonical hours. He voucheth that of the Royal Psalmist, At midnight will I
rise to give thanks unto thee. And Psalm. 119. 62.
then inferres, Mark here that he praised not God lying, but used to rise to do
it: At other hours, the Saints may sing aloud upon their beds -- but when a
Canonical hour comes (of which midnight was one) David will rise to his
devotion. -- The morning watch was another Canonical hour. And this David was
so careful to observe, Psalm. 149. 5
that he ofttimes waked before it.

In the next place I ask of Richard Tedder, upon his XIII.
visitation sermon preached before, and dedicated unto Bishop Wren, How far
he would have this allowed. It is (says he) the Consecration that makes our
Churches holy, and makes God esteem them so. -- They receive by page 8.
their consecration a spiritual power, whereby they are made fit for divine
service. And being consecrated, there is no danger in ascribing a holiness
unto them. Now the reason why this sanctity is thus pleaded for, is to be read
about a leaf forwarder, where he delivers, that the page 10.
Priest has no way to maintain his own honor but by keeping up the honor of
the Temple: for if there be no reverence to the Temple, there will be no
reverence to the Priest. Does not this man preach himself, and not Christ Jesus?

To shut out any light that may be useful in Gods page 17.
house, is with the Jews to make it a den: as they would do, that would shut
out the Ceremonies out of the Church: for, take away Ceremonies out of the
Church, and take away the light that is in it. Surely this is spoken in
Ceremony, by way of complement to his Bishop, that great Thesmophilist: Have we
no other candle in our candlestick but ceremony?

There are two Treatises, and a Sermon set forth XIV.
by John Swan, I will (at this time) only look into the first: Profano-mastix
licensed by Dr. Wykes: and printed 1639. wherein I read a distinguishment of
our Sacrifices from the Jewish, but none at all from the Popish. The words do
serve for Rome as well as if Alan, Stapleton, Cotton, Parsons, or any other
English Jesuit, or Priest, had put them together. If a sacrifice and an
Appendix, page 6.
Altar, then also a Priest to officiate, both in and at the same: but with a
difference still from both Sacrifices and Priests of Old. For as they were
bloody sacrifices and looked at Christ to come: so this is an unbloudy one, and
looks at Christ already come: and as their Priests were according to the
order of Aaron: so are our Priests according to that Order which Christ himself
is, a Priest for ever: to wit, according to the order of Melchisedec. What
Protestant Writer did ever admit the term of unbloudy Sacrifice? as well for
the word sake, as because it is the known distinctive expression, whereby the
Papist have and do excuse and palliate their corporal presence. Englishmen
have been scoffed at enough for apish imitation of foreign fashions, but will
our Divines be dangerous imitatours in the dresses of our Religion? We have
above the distinction of Mortal and Venial sins, and here is one admits
the distinction of bloody and unbloudy Sacrifices. The Pope was to be suddenly
entertained here, or else these Nuntio's had not appeared for harbingers. I
will look no further in Mr. Swan, for I hasten.

Whether by way of Sermon or of a Treatise, a text XV.
(Heb. 7. 8.) is laid down by one who writes himself Jo. Carter, Diacon.
wherein he pleads with great endeavor for the Divinity of his Tithes:
perhaps he would lay his parishioners salvation upon it: as I have heard one in
a pulpit to do, when he would have had me to think that yet he preached Christ.

Give me leave here in a word to say, that many of our ministers, lately grown
mad for Priestship, Sacrifice and Altar, did for support of their greatness in
power, pride, and profit, write and preach with non-concludent arguments for
divinity of two points, which they never came near the proof of. One was the
Divinity of Episcopacie, the other the Divinity of Tithes. But God in his
justice has suffered them to betray themselves, and justly to sink in their
asspiring to a wrong power, pride, and profit. Here is one (Mr. Carter) who
angry at the interpretation by much his betters, who would have the (...) given
by Abraham to Melchisedec, to be the Tith of all the spoils: or as others
translate it, Decima^ de praecipuis; he comes to this language, which if not
profane, yet is neither reverend, modest, nor civil. He (that is, He that will
confess Abraham to have paid no other tithes then (...), Heb. 7. 4.) delivers
to the world, Abraham to Godward, to have been piteously penurious* That of his
dues to Religion he was a niggardly Micher: That he was an Abraham
clunchfisted, (this is carterly language) and all that this way went he thought
it only wast: that the good child Judas, that he did, he did learn of his
Father Abraham, Quorsum perditio haec? Is not this profane, to put reprobate
Judas (though in Scommate) as a good child under the father of the faithful?
but animus in patinis, his mind was upon covetousness, not upon conscience.

There is a piece of Poetic prose, written as he styleth XVI.
himself by J. H. Esquire. The Title is (...), or Dod^na's grove, printed 1640.
and then I doubt not but licensed. The book has wit and salt enough, but the
Author would seem a malignant unto the Parliament, if some man had the
moralizing of his fable. I will only instance in a copy of the commendatory
verses before his stage of trees. They are directed to the common Reader
without naming the author whose wicked Muse it is. I like not the rude impiety
of these four lines;

Sometimes the Father differs from the Son,
As does the Gospel from the Alcharon.
Or Loyola from Calvin; which two brands
In strange combustions hurl fair Europes lands.
If Protestants be his judges they must conclude the author a Papist, though
not a Jesuit. The two first are fitter for a Turk then for M. Howels book. The
two later cast equal blame upon Ignatius Loyola, the father of the Jesuits,
and upon reverend Calvin.

There is a book put out Anno 1640. I cannot say, XVII.
nor do I think, it was unlicensed, though both the licenser and the author
(whose name is Lupton) are both ashamed to have their names published
therewith. It is entitled The lives of the Primitive Fathers. Among whom he is
careful to give Saintship, where few Protestants do profess it, as S.
Damascen, S. Nicephorus; and that sullen Archbishop S. Anselm, who had --
Pelidis stomachum -- flectere nescii. I wish that in his Catalogue he had put
S. Philo Judaeus, and S. Josephus, which he might as well have done, as to have
begun his Primitive Fathers with these two, who were no Christians. And to
conclude with men of yesterday, Schoolmen instead of Fathers, and calender them
in for Primitive Fathers also. Such as Peter Lombard, in the time of our King
Stephan. Alexander Hales, at the middle of Hen. 3. Bonaventure, at the latter
end of Hen. 3. and Aquinas (with whom he concludes) under whose picture there
he is styled S. Thomas Aquinas.

There is another Anonymus has put forth the XVIII.
Lives of all the Roman Emperors in a little English book printed by Nich. and
John Oaks 1636. I must needs transcribe his villainous Encomium of that factious
conventicle at Trent, which has proved the (yet) irreconcilable rupture and
distraction of Christendom. Speaking of the Emperor Ferdinand, brother to
Charles the 5. he says: In the time of his Imperial page 375.
government, the Council of Trent was held, which was so commodious and
profitable to the general good of the world, that it may serve for a certain
rule both of government of states, and a norm of good life. Must these things
pass in our Protestant Church? Was there any (...), over-seer, in the Land
then? Surely all our Bishops were blind seers, in suffering the flock to be
poisoned plainly, desperately, and publicly, Cum privilegio.

One Anthony Stafford gent. (Anno 1635.) issued XIX.
forth a strange superstitious complement to the virgin Mary: entitled by him,
The Femall Glory; where I like not this poetry,

Great Queen of Queens, cause all our joy,
Whose cheerful look our sadness does destroy.
Page 310. He tells us that the Assumption of our Lady, by many of ^he Fathers,
all of the Romish Church, and some of the reformed, is held for an undoubted
truth. It would trouble Mr. Stafford to prove this, or to prove her as he is
pleased to language his panegyric, Mother of our Creator: and in his verses,
Gods widow. These are unhallowed devotions.

The Latin translation of the Bible by Tremellius and XX.
Beza was reprinted 1640. by Robert Young stationer, who had one William
Warrenner to correct the press. With this Bible there is printed an Index
Biblicus, full of scandal and of danger. As these instances do fully evidence:
Doctrina Apostolica scripta and non scripta firmiter tenenda. Eucharistia sub
altera tantum, nimirum panis specie, data a Christo, ab Apostolis. In
Eucharistia non remanet substantia panis post consecrationem. Liberum arbitrium
etiam post lapsum in homine mansit. Ordinis sacramentum, etc. 5000 of this
dangerous popish Index were composed and printed by Warenner and Young: which
fraud however acted by mean inconfiderate hands, might have proved as desperate
infection to young Students in Divinity as any one design that was laid. The
rather, because the front-page speaks the publication in plain language to be
Cum privilegio.

These are enough (too many) and I proceed no further. But thus we find that
the Papist shall not need to send their emissaries, their seminary priests,
over, nor their deceiving treatises to poison the Religion of England, our own
men can do it, and pass through commendations to preferment for it.

. 19. By these exorbitancies the frame of our Church is disjoynted: and now,
Aceldama from Jewry, and from Germany is brought over into England: England of
late in her peace the envy of Christendom: but now Spectaculum facti sumus
mundo, and angelis, 1. Cor. 4. 9.
and hominibus. If this active part of the Clergy, these strict Tithers of mint
and cumin, had prevailed, we should in short time have lost the weightier
matters of the Law: if they had gone on to set the clock of this kingdom, it
should have chimed nothing but plain tyranny and popery. For my part, in portu
navigo, I am in the harbor, and (as in my Declaration) I am anchored at the
Parliament: where those public persons will discharge a public trust, and
yield to nothing but what shall make for the public behoof, (...). It Max.
Tyr. d^ffert. 30.
shall not be obtained, if you desire any thing that stands not with the safety
of the whole. And that this Senate might have been more entire, I wish the
worthy Gentlemen at Oxford had stayed on their seats at Westminster: for I have
no satisfaction why they could not hold their places there, as well as many
other, who at several times do without danger vote, I and No, different from
the major party. I do fear that their meeting there (at Oxford) will make the
breach wider, and past all close. If they advise well, yet no man is bound by
it, for they were never elected or trusted thither: If they advise ill (and by
the event they shall be judged) I wish them the reward of evil Councillors
among the Mosyni: where, (...). Damascen.
If any man prove an evil Counselor, they starve him to death. And this they
will deserve if they confer any assistance or advise but to peace. The best
Counsel they can give the King (I am confident) is to persuade his speedy
repair to Whitehall: That kindness would overcome these arms. It is not
impossible to contrive it in a way honorable for his Majesty. This would save
the Kingdom: I do not see any other way how to wade out of above seven years
blood in war:

-- En quo discordia cives Virg. Buc. 1.

Perduxit miseros! --
Saevit amor ferri, and scelerata insania belli. Aeneid. 7.

. 20. The most rich and most populous parts of England (and Kent with them) are
all resolved to save their fortunes with their lives: and their lives with
their swords. Take heed then lest at last the soldiers, like the Janissaries of
the Turk, and the Praetorian Cohorts of the Roman, do give the law both to the
King and the Senate. They may, many of them on each side do, grow to love their
trade too well, by being too long acquainted and too much delighted with the
easy gain of taking what they find:

Convectare juvat praedas, and vivere rapt^. Aeneid. 7. and 9.

Soldiers will learn, and love, to live by rapine.
(...).
But yet unplundered goods that come on Gods name, are far the better. And so
all extortioners will find it at their last audit,

Non habet eventus sordida praedabonos* Ovid.

Wicked advantages will have woeful events.
O Lord look down from Heaven: Visit and relieve this thy sick Nation. Cure the
state: Reform the Church: And save the King, here and hereafter:

Serus in coelum redeat, diuque Horat. lib. 1. Od. 2.

Intersit populo precanti.
Let neither enemy nor flatterer come near unto him. Max. Tyr. dissert. 4.
(...). A Tyrant has no friend: and a King no flatterer. Let him remember King
Antigonus and (with him) say unto his Damascen.
son, the Prince of our hopes, (...); Do thou not know (O son) that our
King-ship is but a glorious servitude? Let him in person return unto his
Parliament, for of his absence I may justly say,

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atrida: Aeneid. 2.
That fox Ulysses of Rome, and the two Atridae, Agamemnon of Spain, and
Menelaus of France, would buy his absence at any rate.

Renew a right understanding (O Lord) between Him and his great Council the
Parliament: put an end to this undoing anger, to this fatal difference, that
thy enemies, and such as have evil will unto the King and Kingdom, may not
please themselves in our utter ruin. But we are so blind that we know not what
we pray, when we pray according to our own understanding, and therefore

Thy will be done.
AMEN.
The Author upon his revisall desires these Alterations.
Page 11. line 6. after substantia: add this, and ideo non solum usus, sed
substantia -- Page 39. line 1. for (...) read (...). Page 47. cap. X. line 12.
inter verbum (...) and (...) add (...) -- Page 81. line 22. and when even.
read and when? even -- Page 97. line 8. his people sacrifices. read his people
(the Jews) sacrifices --
TO A PAPIST.
IF you like not this title, you must help me to a better name for your self. I
received from you on the 27. of April six sheets of paper fair and close
written, to which I am engaged by promise to make answer, and would direct it
to the Author of that pains, if I knew how to salute him. But he and his pains
are namelesse. The Herod. lib. 4.
Atlantes beyond Garamas were a people without use of names: Call your self
somewhat lest I call you Atlantiades, which yet being one of the names of
Mercury, you cannot take in ill part, especially your Religion being very
Mercuriall: For you strive to make Quidlibet ex quolibet, and in spite of the
Latin Proverb, you will make your Mercury ex quolibet ligno. If the Apostle
speak of 1 Cor. 3. 15.
fire, you can thence frame Purgatory. If our Savior charge Peter thrice, Joh.
21. 15.
Pasce oves, you can thence carve the triple-crowned Pope. If he say, Matthew.
26. 25.
Hoc est corpus meum, you can add, it is his natural body. If S. Paul say,
He^. 13. 10.
Habemus Altar, (which is but one, and that a spiritual Altar) So your
brother Anonymus, as in my treatise of his cardinal virtues, page 18. etc
you can like subtle Chemists, dealing with Mercury, extract a hundred, a
thousand, nay a million of Altars, and all of them material Altars. Nay,
though the name of Priest be not once attributed to any minister of the Gospel
throughout the whole New Testament, yet you can prove them such, and properly
so called. In this Treatise, not content to have Sacrifice in a general sense,
you will, with all the Mercury you have, invent some forced arguments for your
Conc. Trid. Ses^. 22. Can. 1.
proper Missall sacrifice; never known and determined to be such for fifteen
hundred years after our Savior.

True it is, that among many Writers in matter of Controversy, some for ill
purposes, some for good and weighty causes, have silenced their names. But in
this late free age for pen and press, few have sent forth so blanck a piece as
not to add two letters either for their own, or for a borrowed name: That at
least, when we cannot name you right, we may yet miscall you to your own
liking; but you subscribe not so much as a letter. What freedom, and what
distance may this be? Your self in person have slept in my house, and yet two
letters (instead of a name) may not come in the bottom of your Treatise. You
will say you fear danger: what, in an A. B. C.? The common practice on your
side does show, that there is no danger in subscribing with letters either true
or false. Witness N. N. the deserving Author of the Triple Cord. S. N.
against Bishop Bilson. A. B. his forged Will for that worthy and Reverend
Bishop of London D. King. F. T. or rather T. F. against Bishop Andrews. C. R.
instead of R. C. against Bishop Moreton. A. C. against the Archbishop. The
whole Alphabet is safe and free.

Nay further, they who have subscribed neither name nor letters have yet
prescribed a Title, that so we might be able to call the Writing by a name
though not the Author, witness your Prudentiall Balance, your Charity
mistaken, etc. But your pleasure is, that your Treatise be (...), and your self
both (...) and (...). Be it so. But may I take boldness with so great a
stranger as to ask, Why you raised our expectations so high by so
procrastinated a delay? Our Christmasse hope was not answered until after
Easter, and then but half of it. Not one sheet for every month in all that
time. Did you not think Mr. Beuin worth your care? or did you imagine that you
had made him so deaf, that he could not be charmed out of your circle? God be
blessed who has enlightened his eyes, and touched his heart beyond your wish.
If it please his goodness, he can also touch your heart: And if it may be for
his glory, so he will. And that it may be, He grant for the merits of our Lord
and Savior JESUS CHRIST. This is heartily prayed for by

Your assured friend,
Surenden-Dering, JUN. 24. 1640.
CHAP. I.
Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 1. YOur Discourse of true and Proper Sacrifice, consisting of a triple
authority from Cyprian, Eusebius, and S. Augustine, I have lately received, but
without title to your pains superscribed, without name subscribed, and without
any convenient and helpful divisions of the same, into which (by way of
Chapters) I am forced to branch both that and mine own papers. Something I must
call you, and because I know not which letters of the Alphabet will fit you
best, I am resolved to give you all, by way of A. B. C. etc. I will follow you
presso pede, not wandering from you, but keeping in full chase, which will be
more evident by my producing all that you have sent, as it was sent, literally.
And thus I begin.

A. B. C.
. 2. FOrasmuch as it was required that I would produce some few clear and
undoubted testimonies of the Fathers of the first 400. years after Christ, or
within the time of the first four general Councels, for proof of two points
of Catholic Doctrine denied by Protestants, to wit, That there is a true and
proper Sacrifice in the Church instituted by Christ, and to continue after his
time: And that S. Peter had the Primacy over the whole Church, with continuance
thereof to his Successors: though this labor may seem superfluous, the thing
being so completely performed already, and by so many, especially in this last
age; yet for satisfaction of a Gentleman, who thinks it is not to be done, and
for discharge of my promise, I have here set down some such places, beginning
with that of The Sacrifice.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 3. Upon request of a friend of mine (but then a disciple of your own) you
came unto me, not as was at first expected and desired, to a fore-designed
conference, but rather like an occasional traveller. Being with me, you made
choice rather to write then to confer with an able scholar whom I should
name. And you demanded on what Theme. I gave you then the same two points which
had troubled your follower ( Mr. Edward Beuin) and which were by him (as being
indeed very material) presented unto me: Concerning Proper Sacrifice, and the
Papal Supremacy.

I confess you took them not in writing, wherefore I cannot so much (as then I
might) blame you, for sending me my questions back in a different state from
that which you received from me. Mine were thus:

I. The Pope by Divine right has a Supremacy of power in matters Spiritual,
which ought to be universally believed and obeyed as of faith.

II. The Romish Mass is a Sacrifice both proper and propitiatory: for the
present and absent, for the quick and the dead.

This is the true state of your Romish tenet, and although you have drawn the
difference into a narrower compass, yet will you not be able to fill the
circle you have made. Concerning the Popes Supremacy, you have respited that
Theme, and in three times the time expected have finished but half your work.
Concerning Sacrifice, leaving out the point of propitiation for the absent, and
for the dead, you say but this;

There is a true and proper Sacrifice in the Church, instituted by Christ, and
to continue after his time. I take the last clause (of Continuance) in the best
sense: and in your question, by you thus stated, I do find two propositions
which you are bound to maintain: First, That Christ did institute a Sacrifice.
Secondly, The Sacrifice by Christ instituted is a Sacrifice proper, or properly
so called. The more completely and the more plentifully these Theams have been
argued by other men, the easier for you, and the stronger for your cause your
work may be.

CHAP. II.
A. B. C.
. 1. THe first shall be S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, famous for his learning,
life, and martyrdom: who writing a long Epistle against the error of such as
did use only water in calice Dominico sanctificando, in sanctifying,
hallowing, or consecrating, the chalice of our Lord, contrary to what Jesus
Christ our Lord and God, Sacrificii hujus author and doctor, says he, the
author or beginner and teacher of this Sacrifice, did do and teach, toward
the end has these words, Si Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus noster, ipse est
summus Cyprian Epist 63.
sacerdos Dei Patris, sacrificium Patri primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui
commemorationem praecepit; utique ille Sacerdos vice Christi vere fungitur, qui
id quod Christus fecit imitatur: and Sacrificium verum and plenum tunc offert
in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre, secundum quod ipsum Christum
videat obtulisse: If Jesus Christ our Lord and God be himself the high Priest
of God the Father, he did offer sacrifice first, and commanded this to be done
in remembrance of him; verily that Priest does truly perform the place (or
execute the office) of Christ (for fungi vice is a word of authority) who does
imitate that which Christ did do: and does then offer a true and full Sacrifice
in the Church to God the Father, if he begin so to offer, according to what he
sees Christ himself to have offered. By which it is clear that our Savior did
then offer a perfect Sacrifice (for why else is his Priesthood so expressly
mentioned?) at that time when he commanded his disciples to do the same in
remembrance of him: and that by that command he gave power not only to his
Apostles, but also to Priests of succeeding* times, to offer a true and full
Sacrifice in imitation of him.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. You have concluded that our Savior did then offer a perfect Sacrifice
when he commanded his disciples to do the same in remembrance of him: you do
not here conclude the question. For, first, you have stated your question, that
Christ did institute a Sacrifice, but you say, He did offer; this is matter of
fact, the other of precept: great difference between his own offering (if he
had done so in that sense you suppose) and instituting that others should
offer. In the next place, the doubt is of a proper Sacrifice, and your
Conclusion is, That our Savior did offer a perfect Sacrifice. Who ever denied
but that our Saviors Sacrifice upon the Cross was both proper and perfect?
and who denies but that some other Sacrifices are perfect also in their kinds,
which nevertheless cannot be called proper? Psalm. 4. 6.
(...), Offer the sacrifice of righteousness: a sacrifice wherewith God is
well pleased; surely therefore a perfect sacrifice, yet not a sacrifice
properly so called: Psalm. 51. 19.
(...) This is another Sacrifice, a broken spirit, and certainly a right
perfect one, Psalm. 51. 17.
for God will not despise it: yet is it but a metaphorical sacrifice. The
Apostle calls alms, Philip. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16
(...), a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God: yet are alms but
Sacrifice improperly so called, you may therefore yield that when you conclude
for perfect Sacrifice, you conclude not the point in question.

Yet I will look back into your premises, and for reverence to that good and
great Pope Cyprian of Carthage peruse what you from him allege.

But before I weigh your arguments let us agree upon the scales to try them by:
you shall be fairly offered: you and I in this Controversy will be shut up
within the same bounds wherewith your learned Cardinal has enwalled this
contention. Which being stated into the very point of difference between us is
thus: Whether our Savior at his last supper did institute an external,
visible, and proper Sacrifice? for the clear understanding whereof, I will out
of your Cardinal borrow these seven Aphorisms;

1. First, we differ not upon the word Sacrifice, you may believe your
Cardinal; Bell. de M^^^. lib. 2. c^^. 1.
Adversarii facile concedunt missam esse Sacrificium (...) and (...), non
quidem quod velint esse Sacrificium proprie dictum, sed improprie and largo
modo: Our Adversaries do easily grant that the The word Mass is h^re and with
Papists frequently taken for the whole act of cel^bration of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.
Mass is a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and of Divine worship, not that thereby
they would allow it to be a Sacrifice properly so called, but improperly and in
a large sense And again, Lib. 1. c. 5.
Fatentur -- Melanchthon -- Kemnitius -- Brentius, and alii, Missam, sive
sacram coenam, multis modis Sacrificium dici posse: They confess that the
Mass or holy Supper may be many w^yes called a Sacrifice.

2. Next, Bellarmine says, That in ^v^ry Sacrifice properly so called there is
an oblation or offering which is both external and visible; De Miss. lib. 1
cap. 2.
Necessario requiritur ad Sacrificium proprie dictum, ut sit oblatio externa:
It is necessarily required unto a Sacrifice properly so called, that there be
an external oblation. And, Nomen and ratio Sacrifici^ proprie non convenit
invisibili oblationi, sed solum visibili and externae: The name and nature of a
Sacrifice properly does not agree unto an invisible oblation, but only to a
visible and external.

3. Thirdly, there must be a change in the thing offered, even such a change as
may be found by our senses; Lib. 1. c. 27
Sensibilis immutatio rei quae ^ffertur -- ad rationem externi Sacrificii
omnino pertinere videtur: A sensible change of the thing which is offered --
does altogether seem to appertain to the nature of an external Sacrifice.

4. Fourthly, This change ^ust be a real destruction of the thing offered;
Lib. 1. ^. 27
Verum and reale sacrificium veram and realem mortem aut destructionem rei
immolatae desiderat: A true and real sacrifice does require a true and real
death or destruction of the thing sacrificed: and this destruction is not only
in the change of the use of a thing offered, but also in the consuming of the
substance offered. In sacrificio -- non solum usus rei Deo offeratur, sed ipsa
etiam substantia consumatur: In sacrifice not only the use of the thing ought
to be offered to God, but also the very substance: and therefore not only the
use but the substance is to be consumed.

5. Fifthly* by the necessary rule of Relatives, if you plead for proper
Sacrifice, you must prove Altars properly so called; Bellar. de cul^ l. ^. c. 4
Sine Altari non potest sacrificari: Without an Altar there can be no
sacrificing. De Miss. lib. 1. c. 14.
Nunquam altar proprie dictum ^rigitur, nisi ad sacrifici^ proprie dicta: An
altar properly so called is never erected, ^a^ unto sacrifices properly so
called.

6. Sixthly, by the same rule you must prove a propriety of Priesthood among
you; Lib. 1. c. 2
Sacrificium and Sacerdotium relativa sunt, ita u^ sacrifici^ proprie dicto,
sacerdotium proprie dictum, and sacrifici^ improprie dicto, sacerdotium
improprie dictum respondea^: Sacrifice and Priesthood are relatives, so that
unto sacrifice properly so called, ^ priesthood properly so called does answer;
and un^o sacrifice improperly so called, a priesthood improperly so called.

7. Seventhly, unless you maintain your Transubstantiation you lose your
sacrifice: for if you only offered bread, Lib. 1. c. 27
Haberet Ecclesia sacrificium i^animum: The Church should have a sacrifice
without a soul: wherefore he fixes this Canon upon his supposed
Transubstantiation; Ibid.
Corpus and sanguis Domini sunt id sacrificium, quod in Missa proprie offertur
and sacrificatur: The body and blood of our Lord are that sacrifice, which in
the Mass properly is offered and sacrificed.

The first of these seven shows how much we yield, the other six how much you
claim: all together show wherein we differ, and consequently what you ought to
prove; which may be thus recapitulated, 1. No proof out of any Father will
conclude for you upon his affirming that in and at the holy Supper of our Lord,
there is a Sacrifice; or upon his saying that the Action and Celebration of the
Eucharist is or may be called a Sacrifice. For, as Bellarmine tells you, we
confess that it may be called multis modis, many ways, a Sacrifice: but all
of them improperly and metaphorically. 2. You are to prove, that Christ did
institute an oblation or offering external and visible. 3. In which offering
may be found a sensible change of the thing offered. 4. Which Change must be
either the very death, or the real destruction of the thing offered. 5. All
which must be upon an Altar properly so called. 6. And by a Sacrificing Priest
properly called a Priest. Lastly, all this is nothing worth unless your bread
be transubstantiated, for the body and blood of our Lord must be that you
offer: otherwise you say you do Sacrifice, inanimum Sacrificium, a dead, a
livelesse Sacrifice, a Sacrifice that has not a soul in it, which is much more
vile (says your Cardinal) then the Jewish Sacrifices were.

Thus have you enough to do: your shoulders (good Atlas) will be too weak for
this weight. And if you fail in any of this, you forfeit your proper Sacrifice.

That the word Sacrifice may not, by the doubtful sense of it, retard our
progress take two passages out of S. Augustine, and as many out of your
greatest Doctors of the School. We profess, with S. Augustine, that De civit.
Dei, lib. 10. cap. 6.
Every good work is a true Sacrifice; Verum Sacrificium est omne opus, quod
agitur ut sancta societate inhaereamus Deo. That the Sacrament is indeed and
properly a Sacrifice we deny, but that it may be so called a Sacrifice, we will
confess with S. Augustine; Epist. 23
Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in se ipso, and tamen in Sacramento, non
solum per omnes paschae solennitates, sed omni die populis immolatur? Nec
utique mentitur qui interrogatus, ^um responderit immolari. Si enim Sacramenta
quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum Sacramenta sunt non haberent, omnino
Sacramenta non essent: ex hac autem similitudine, plerunque etiam ipsarum rerum
nomina accipiunt: Was not (says he) Christ once sacrificed (or offered) in
himself, and yet in the Sacrament, not only upon all paschall solemnities, but
every day is sacrificed (or offered) to the people? Neither yet does he lie
who, being asked, shall answer that sacrificed (or offered) he is. For if the
Sacraments had not a certain similitude of those things whereof they are
Sacraments, they were not Sacraments at all. Now by this similitude they
oftentimes receive names of the things themselves. Therefore thus in another
place says S. Augustine, Ad Simplic. lib. 2. qu. 3.
The phantasme and imaginary illusion which appeared unto Saul, is in the
Scripture called by the name of Samuel: Quia solent imagines, etc. as you shall
hear anon. Thus the death of our Savior being a Sacrifice, and that Sacrifice
by way of Similitude being represented by the Sacrament, in the opinion of S.
Augustine the Sacrament it self is thereupon called a Sacrifice. Answer it when
you can: and by the way tell me what is meant by populis immolatur, is
sacrificed or offered to the people, when as the sacrifice you contend for, is
the offering up of the natural body and soul of Jesus Christ unto God the
Father.

Your Master of the sentences affirms, ^ 1 Did. 12. 7.
Illud quod offertur and consecratur a sacerdote vocari Sacrificium and
oblationem: Wherefore? because it is the true body of Christ? No: quia memoria
est and repraesentatio very sacrificii and sanctae immolationis factae in ara
crucis: That which is offered and consecrated by the priest is called a
Sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memory and representation of the true
Sacrifice and holy offering made upon the Altar of the Cross. I need not wish
for plainer language, yet methinketh your Ang^licall Doctor argues more fully
against you. His question is, Whether in the blessed Sacrament, Christ be
offered up or not? To which he answers; It. 3. qu^ 7^. ar^. 1.
Dupliciratione celebratio hujus Sacramenti dicitur immolatio Christi: primo
quidem; quia sicut dicit Augustinus ad It should have been ad Simplicianum.
Simplicium, solent imagines earum rerum nominibus appellari, quarum imagines
sunt: sicut cum intuentes tabulam aut parietem pictum, dicimus, Ille Cicero
est, and ille Salustius: Celebratio autem huius Sacramenti imago quaedam est
repraesentativa passionis Christi, quae est vera ejus immolatio: and ideo
celebratio hujus Sacramenti dicitur Christi immolati^* -- Alio modo quantum ad
effectum passionis Christi: quia scilicet per hoc sacramentum participes
efficimur Dominicae passionis: The celebration of this Sacrament is by a
twofold reason called the Sacrifice of Christ: First because, as S. Augustine
says unto Simplician, Images use to be called by the names of those things
whereof they are images: even as when beholding a painted picture we say, That
is Cicero, This is Salust: The celebration indeed of this Sacrament is a
certain representative image of the passion of Christ, which is his true
Sacrifice. In another kind (it is called a Sacrifice) in regard of the effect
of our Saviors passion: because indeed by this Sacrament we are made partakers
of the Lords passion. Here wants a third way for your turn, and it may be
strange that so Sainted a Doctor in so vast a sum of all Divinity should
forget your highest mystery of a proper Sacrifice, even there where he is
treating of the Sacrament, and how it may be called a Sacrifice. You may take
his conclusion, which is but this, Hujus Sacramenti celebratio -- convenienter
dicitur Christi immolatio, the celebration of this Sacrament is conveniently
called the Sacrifice of Christ. He does not say it is so really, properly, but
it is conveniently called so, so I go on to your testimony out of S. Cyprian.

. 3. This ancient Father arguing the right celebration of the Lords supper from
the example of our Savior the Author thereof, who only is herein to be
followed, does proceed to these words by you alleged; Si Jesus Christus, etc.
If Jesus Christ our Lord and God, be himself the high priest of God the father,
he did offer Sacrifice first, and commanded this to be done in remembrance of
him: verily that priest does truly perform the place of Christ who does imitate
that which Christ did do: and does then offer a true and fall Sacrifice in the
Church to God the father, if he begin so to offer according to what he sees
Christ himself to have offered. What of this? here are the words Sacrifice and
Priest. I know no quarrel between us upon these words; nor would there be any,
if you did not add your sense of propriety to them both. Cyprian here calls
either our Saviors death upon the cross, or else the remembrance thereof, the
Lords supper (which was instituted to show the Lords death) or both of them a
Sacrifice. ^ 1. Cor. 11. 26.
Be it so. What can be from hence inferred more, then that which in the first
of my seven inferences before was by anticipation prevented? We confess the
name of Sacrifice, Priest, and Altar, to be frequent with the ancient Fathers,
but ever in a borrowed and tropicall sense, never properly. Here the priest is
said to imitate that which Christ did: so the Ministers properly, but Priests
improperly.
Priests and Ministers (call them which you will) in the reformed Church. This
imitation is called a true and full Sacrifice, but not a proper Sacrifice: You
saw before (. 2.) that I showed you perfect sacrifices which were not proper
sacrifices; of which you may also see a whole Chapter in S. Augustine, de vero
perfectoque sacrificio, and yet no word of your Missall sacrifice.

. 4. If you will go no further then these Fathers and Doctors, I will go with
you. Call the sign by the name of the thing signified; call the
representation, as you do the thing resembled; call the picture by the name of
the person, whose it is, who will quarrel? unless for the Consequence being
dangerous, or for fear of scandal. Call the image of your Pope the Pope, your
self well knows, that then you speak improperly, yet who will argue you of
falsehood? When you see the picture of King Charles, if you say this is the
King, who will lay treason to your charge? But think not that a few forced
places, picked and chosen out of the voluminous labors of the holy Fathers,
can make your fancy substantial. When in ancient Churchmen you papists do
find the word Sacrifice, straightway your ears are up, and you flatter your
selves, that the chime strikes the same tune that runs in your head, like the
mad Athenian, who will not be Thrasilau^ in Athen. De ip. nos. l. 12.
persuaded, but that all the ships in the harbor are his.

If one or two Fathers in their zeal to God, and for honor to the precious and
venerable sacrament, should in the extollment of it pass an earnest word,
thereby more deeply to imprint the passion of our Lord into the minds of
Christians, and to raise up our devotion and reverence to this holy and
heavenly Communion (calling it (...), a dreadful, secret, fearful, terrible,
most formidable, unspeakable, venerable, honorable, divine, holy, immaculate,
immortal, celestial, supercelestiall, above the world, life-giving mystery)
yet will you never find any word sentence or sense in them whereby to approve
your proper sacrifice; but thousands of places that cannot well consist with
such a construction: whereof you shall have some after* I have run through
these your allegations.

I have been the more plentiful in this first part, because the grounds here
laid, the authorities here vouched, and the clear truth of our orthodox belief
in point of Sacrifice, being thus presented, these very reasons and authorities
may well serve to answer all or almost all that is remaining: in discussion
whereof I will endeavor brevity.

. 5. Let me return unto your Cyprian; for Cyprian and I will pass to another
chapter. Look in his epistle to nine pious Christians (whom he calls his
fellow-Bishops and Martyrs condemned in chains unto the mines) and there you
shall find that having named unto them an humble and a contrite spirit, he
presently adds, L. 3. Ep. 2^. Pamel. Ep. 77.
Hoc vos sacrificium Deo offertis, hoc sacr^ficium sine intermissione die and
nocte celebratis, hostiae facti deo, and vosmet ipsos sanctas atque immaculatas
victimas exhibentes -- Hoc est quod praecipue Deo placeat: This sacrifice you
offer unto God, th^s sacrifice without intermission day and night you
celebrate; you being made sacrifices to God* and presenting your selves holy
and unspotted offerings. This is that which principally may please God. This is
daily sacrifice with S. Cyprian, to offer up one self; and he concludes, that
this does principally please God. Principally, that is, above all other
Sacrifices in this world. Did not Cyprian here forget your Missal sacrifice?

. 6. Secondly, in this very Epistle by you cited he says, Sanguis Christi non
aqua est utique, sed vinum, the blood of Christ is not water verily, but wine:
Is our Saviors blood wine? very true it is so, and he himself, as Cyprian
there voucheth, vitis vera, a true vine: But this is true in a comfortable
metaphor, not by conversion of substances: for the blood of our Savior is not
really transubstantiated into wine: no man ever thought so. And why then should
you obtrude, that because the sacramental wine is called his blood, it is
therefore, without all figure and metaphor, his very blood by the conversion of
the very substance of wine into the substance of his blood. Nec potest videri
sanguis ejus (quo redempti and vivificati sumus) esse in calice, quando vinum
desit calici quo Christi sanguis ostenditur: neither can his blood (wherewith
we are redeemed and quickened) be seen to be in the Chalice, when wine is not
in the chalice whereby the blood of Christ is shown. From hence I argue, that
S. Cyprian knew not your Transubstantiation. For allowing the Sacramental wine
to be the blood of Christ (and so we confess it) he says, There is no blood
to be seen, when the wine is gone: but with you there is no blood at all,
until the wine be gone. If you say, that indeed the substance of wine is gone,
but the species or accidents of color, etc. are there; I reply, that Cyprian
would no more call those accidents wine, then you do now, had he been either a
Philosopher of your schools, or a Divine of your Religion. But mark the last
words, quo Christi sanguis ostenditur: By the wine Christ his blood is shown.
He says not, that the wine is blood, or turned into blood, but the blood is
shown by the wine: yet the blood with you is seen without wine. Again, Miror
satis unde -- aqua offeratur in Dominico calice, qu^ sola Christi sanguinem non
possit exprimere: I wonder enough from whence water should be offered in the
Lords Chalice, which cannot alone express the blood of Christ. Was the blood
of Christ then to be expressed and signified? it seems S. Cyprian did forget
that the blood it self was there to express and signify it self: Or rather he
was unacquainted with your late faith of Transubstantiation. But you will say,
I am now in another theme, what is this to sacrifice? Yes, as a foundation to a
building. This being gone your work is down; for you say, that you do not
sacrifice bread but the body of Christ made of bread, Bell. de. Miss. l. 1. c.
27.
Corpus Domini ex pane confectum. If then no Transubstantiation, it follows in
your Doctrine by consequence no Sacrifice.

. 7. Lastly, I observe also that Cyprian does call the bread a Sacrifice, and
that before any consecration thereof. He taxing a rich dame for eating the
consecrated bread, which poorer persons (as was customary there) had presented,
and not bringing of her own to be consecrated, has this reprehension: Matrona
locuples and dives -- quae in Dominicum sine sacrificio venis? quae partem de
sacrificio quod pauper obtulit sumis? Are you a rich and wealthy matrone who
come into the Lords house without a sacrifice? who take part of that sacrifice
which some poor body has offered? Here is Sacrifice, and that before
consecration, and that offered by the poor, and expected from a woman.

These places do evidently conclude, that figurative and metaphorical
sacrifices were all that were known unto S. Cyprian, in whom your self cannot
find one passage whereby to evince your proper sacrifice.

. 8. To return, and in a word more to shut you quite from all authority out of
Cyprian, let any man with heed and judgment read this Epistle, written only
against the error of the Aquarians, who ministered the holy Communion in water
only without wine, and he may easily find what Cyprian drives at: and if he be
sensible, he will offer to conclude no more then Cyprian himself did undertake
to prove. This holy Martyr with much earnestness in several places of this
Epistle does press the example of our Savior, as our all-sufficient rule and
guide herein. In this very period, whence you take this passage (which is the
eleventh in this Epistle) he says, Non nisi Christus sequendus -- solus
Christus audiendus -- quid Christus prior fecerit, etc. Wherein? In what point
is this example urged? even in those things (ad ipsum Dominicae passionis, and
nostrae redemptionis Sacramentum pertinentia) which concern the sacrament: so
comes he to your words, that the Priest should imita^e Christ, and if he will
offer a true and full sacrifice, he must offer, how? Secundum quod, according
to that he sees Christ himself to have offered. According to that! How so?
what is secundum quod, but (as before) according to the example of Christ? His
example! what example and wherein does Cyprian here mean? plainly against the
Aquarians; who in the administration of the Cup used water, and therein did not
imitate Christ, by whose example we are taught to celebrate in wine. And this I
will abide by, to be the true, plain, and full scope and sense of this Father
in this your choice alleged place.

CHAP. III.
A. B. C.
HEre I might as well have followed the Edition of Pamelius, which says,
Sacrificium Patri seipsum primus obtulit, He offered himself a sacrifice first,
as that of Erasmus, which leaves out the word seipsum, but only to avoid all
exception, and the rather for that the sense is clearly enough the same without
that word, at least for my purpose; which is to show, that Christ did institute
a proper Sacrifice, which was to continue in his Church.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
Since that you infer nothing out of the differencie of Editions, I have
therefore no cause of answer to this piece. But if you had vouched that of
Pamelius, and argued upon his seipsum, you knew well that I have the much elder
Edition by Erasmus, which is enough to control Pamelius.

CHAP. IIII.
A. B. C.
ANd besides, S. Cyprian in this same Epistle had said the same thing, and in a
manner the same words: for proving his intent by the example of Melchisedec his
Sacrifice, he says thus: Quis magis sacerdos Dei summi quam Dominus noster
Jesus Christus, qui Sacrificium Deo Patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc idem quod
Melchisedec obtulerat, id est, panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and
sanguinem? Who is more the priest of the most high God, then our Lord Jesus
Christ, who did offer a Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same which
Melchisedec had offered, that is, bread and wine, to wit, his body and blood.
Now to offer his body and blood is the same as to offer himself: and in this
place I find no variety of readings; so as here again it is clear, that our
Savior did offer a proper Sacrifice such as Melthisedecs. But lest any man
should think our Saviors bread and wine to be no more then Melchisedecs, ^e
explicateth himself, that our Saviors bread and wine was his body and blood,
and a little after compares them together, calling the sacrifice of
Melehisedec the image and resemblance of the other: and that this resemblance
did consist in bread and wine, imago Sacrificii (says he) in pane and vino
constituta* and that our Savior did perfect and fulfill the same when he
offered bread and wine, which was the night before his passion, when he took
bread and blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples, and the rest, as follows
in the Gospel.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
The place needs no variety of readings: it is plain enough except for your
interpretation wherewith you do obscure it, by inferring more then you have
ground for. You conclude for your advantage, but you want proof for your
Conclusion. You say our Savior did offer a proper sacrifice: Who ever denied
it? You say this Sacrifice was himself: It is confessed. But this, that the
Sacramental bread and wine, being converted into our Saviors body and blood,
was sacrificed (which I see you intend in the last words, He offered bread and
wine) when will you prove it? or rather why do you disprove it? For whilst you
say he offered bread and wine, you do (against your will) conclude, that he did
not as your Priests do, who have nor bread nor wine in your Sacrifice.

But you argue out of Cyprian, who says, that in Genesi per Melchisedec --
Imago sacrificii Christi in pane and vino constituta, etc. The bread and wine
of Melchisedec wherewith he refreshed Abraham, was an image of that bread and
wine, wherewith our Savior refreshes the faithful. Be it so: but you will
say that Cyprian calls here the Sacramental bread and wine Sacrificium
Christi, Christ's sacrifice, that is no news: you have it confessed and allowed
before, that the Eucharist may be said Chap. 2.. 4*
to be sacrificall multis modis, but when will you prove it to be so properly?
This is that which you have undertaken, and is indeed the only question.

Concerning this and the rest of Cyprians authorities here alleged, it must be
remembered (as was said before) that his intendment is to prove that the
Sacrament ought to be celebrated in wine, not in water alone, this is his whole
intention through this Epistle, without dream or thought of your then unknown
and unheard of Transubstantiated presence. Concerning Melchisedec and his
offering, I shall have fuller cause to close with you anon.

CHAP. V.
A. B. C.
WHich point of the time when our Savior did so offer, as also of his offering
of bread and wine as aforesaid in Sacrifice is expressly averred by S.
Cyprian, in the words following, to wit, that the holy Ghost did by Solomon
foreshew a type of our Lords Sacrifice ( Typum Dominici Sacrificii) making
mention of an immolated host (or Sacrifice) and of bread and of wine, and also
of an altar, and of the Apostles. They are all S. Cyprians words, who citing
the place of the 9. of the Proverbs, takes hold of the last words ( Bibite
vinum quod miscui vobis, Drink the wine which I have mingled for you) thus, he
declares the wine to be mingled, that is, he does foretell prophetically that
our Saviors chalice was to be mingled with water and wine, that it may appear
that that was done in the passion of our Lord (that is, at the time, or
beginning of our Saviors passion) which was foretold. Here you see again a
clear proof of our Saviors sacrifice, whereof Solomon's bread and wine was a
type or figure, and likewise of the practice of the Church in offering both
water and wine in the Chalice.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
Every proof of our Saviors Sacrifice shall pass for clear, whether it be
such or not; because whether you do mean his propitiatory and proper Sacrifice
of the Cross, or the Eucharisticall Sacrifice or Commemoration of a sacrifice,
instituted in his last supper, both ways we confess Christ's Sacrifice: what
need you therefore prove that which is not denied? But I epsy another aim in
your last line: you would infer the antiquity of your practice of celebrating
in your mingled wine and water. This is no more incident to your theme, then
water is necessary to the wine. These (...) shall pass by me without trouble;
yet let me ask you what your faith is, in this point? when the substance of
wine is turned into the substance of Christ's blood (as you believe) what then
becomes of the substance of water which you beforehand did mingle with the wine?

CHAP. VI.
A. B. C.
ANd lastly, to conclude with S. Cyprian in this matter, answering an objection
made, or which might be made, out of the practice of some who formerly did
think that water only was to be offered in the Chalice, he rejects that
practice, saying, In Sacrificio quod Christus obtulit non nisi Christus
sequendus est: In the Sacrifice which Christ offered no man is to be followed
but Christ. So as nothing can be more clear then that in his opinion Christ did
institute and offer a true and proper Sacrifice in his last supper: and that of
his own body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine* and that he did
ordain that the Apostles and other priests suceeding them should do the same:
and that the Church did so practice and teach in S. Cyprians time. Nor do I see
what can be said against the authority of his person or work by me cited, or
the edition or reading, or what doubt can be made of the sense or his meaning.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
Your close of every period comes roundly off. You know what you would have,
and you are sure to call for it in every conclusion, though nothing be in the
premises from whence to infer it. I will represent unto you Cyprians argument
and your own. Thus S. Cyprian: In sacrificio quod, etc.

In the Sacrifice which Christ did offer, no man is to be followed but Christ:

Therefore no Sacrifice or celebration of the Lords supper without wine.

Your Argument runs thus: In Sacrificio quod, etc.

In the Sacrifice which Christ did offer no man is to be followed but Christ:

Therefore it is clear, that Christ did institute a true and proper Sacrifice.

Cyprians argument is good, yours is no argument at all.

CHAP. VII.
A. B. C.
THe next is Eusebius Caesariensis in his work de Demonstratione Evangelica,
lib. 1. cap. 10. The title whereof is this, (...); (that is) Why was it not
delivered unto us to offer incense and Sacrifice to God things of the earth as
the ancients, or those of former times (that is, the Jews) did? and discoursing
largely of the reason why they did offer beasts in Sacrifice, he says, That
they were signs or shadows of that great Sacrifice which was to be offered for
expiation of the sins of the whole world, which was Christ, of whom he says
that the proph^ts did foretell, that he was to be led to the slaughter like a
sheep and like an innocent lamb, who being so offered and thereby paying the
ransom due for the sins of the whole world, both Jews and Grecians or
gentiles, With great reason, says he, his words are these, (...). (that is)
With great reason we daily celebrating the remembrance of his body and blood,
and being made worthy of a better Sacrifice, and preistly function, then that
of our ancestors cannot deem it fit to fall back to the former and weak
elements, which were but signs, or shadows, not containing the truth it self,
or the substance. Of which I may say, that almost every word is a pregnant
proof of what I intend, that is, of the truth and property of our Sacrifice,
for first, etc.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. Almost every word a proof! and that a pregnant one also! How dull am I
that cannot find and feel this quickness! In the mean time I observe, that
although the word priestly (priestly function) be like to do you no service
here at all, yet to make a show you have helped that into your English which
you cannot find a fair and full authority for in the Greek: of which anon. The
brief and true sense of Eusebius, here arguing against the Jews, is this; The
celebrating of the remembrance of our Saviors death and passion is a better
Sacrifice and celebration, then that we should fall back to their weak elements
which were but signs and shadows. More I see not here, yet since you offer to
instruct me further, I hearken.

A. B. C.
. 3. For first, here is express mention of the body and blood of our Savior
daily offered in remembrance of him.

Sr. EDWAD DERING.
. 4. Give me leave to say, that this is either wilful fraud, or gross
mistaking. What? express mention? then the words are too plain to be disputed
of. You say that Eusebius does expressly mention the body and blood of our
Savior daily offered in remembrance of him. Quo front? Qua fide? Do not your
own words here before vouched (...), etc. Daily celebrating the remembrance of
his body and blood, confute your fraud? what a crafty Metathesis of words is
this? you chop in the word offer, and shift the place of the rest: and
presently cry out (...), you have found your late Roman faith in old Eusebius.
But your legerdemain is not so fine a conveyance: you are espied; and therefore
place the words as you found them, Daily celebrating the remembrance of his
body and blood: out of which you can never draw any other, but the same faith
which the Primitive Church and our present Church do both conspire in.

A. B. C.
. 5. For the word (...) is a word properly pertaining to the action or function
of sacrificing.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 6. The Grammarians must now be judge who argues aright in Divinity. This word
(...) (say you) does properly appertain to the act of sacrificing. This is
gratis dictum, so let it be gratis auditum: said without proof, heard without
belief. Suidas his (...) will not force (...) properly to signify any more
then to finish, to perform, or to perfect. It is also to celebrate or solemnly
to perform, for that is to celebrate. But never is it to sacrifice, unless the
word following do so rule the sense, as in Plutarch, (...), to celebrate or
perform sacrifice. But in this place it cannot relate to sacrifice, unless you
can make us believe that (...), etc. celebrating or performing the remembrance,
ought rather to be in English sacrificing the remembrance of the body and blood
of Christ. Lib. 2.
Herodian says, (...) He did not perform what he promised. Eutropius speaking
of the younger Scipio, says, that Asdrubal was afraid to deal with him, Lib. 4.
(...), etc. as being a man ready to perform his work. Our Savior says, Luke
13. 32.
(...) I perfect cures this day and to morrow. S. Paul speaking of Moses has,
d (...) to finish the Tabernacle: (thus your Rhemist do translate) he says not
to sacrifice the Tabernacle, nor will these or any other places bear this
propriety of sense which you pretend. Do not mar a good translation with a
bad comment: for you have well translated in this place (...) as again do you
the tenth chapter, (...) celebrating the memory or remembrance.

A. B. C.
. 7. And the article (...), when he says (...), shows the remembrance here
spoken of not to be a bare or empty remembrance, by words only or some slight
action at any man's pleasure, but a solid, substantial, and special
remembrance, that is, by some public and solemn action instituted and ordained
for that purpose; such as was that of our Savior at his last Supper, whereto
it is evident here that Eusebius alludeth.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 8. Your inference here is (in all likelihood) more then was intended by
Eusebius in that so common article (...), yet since a solid, substantial, and
special remembrance, is all that here you conclude for, I am ready for so much
to join and consent with you in this period.

A. B. C.
. 9. Secondly, here is express mention of a proper sacrifice and priesthood,
or priestly function. For though the word proper be not here, yet the words
(...) and (...) do by their own proper signification, signify a proper
Sacrifice and Priesthood.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 10. I see you know the point in difference: and it is enough for me that you
confess the word proper is not in this authority: neither indeed is it in any
other authority that you have brought or can bring. But (say you) the original
Greek does signify a proper sacrifice and Priesthood. Boldly asserted. How
weak was Bellarmine (and all the rest of your Writers) who never knew before
the full force of these words (...) and (...)? Bellarmine will not say that
(...) must signify a proper Sacrifice, though indeed he say thus near it, that
it does properly signify a sacrifice. But if so be that originally this should
be their proper sense; yet you are still to prove, that without a Metaphor such
is their sense in this place; and lastly, that the Sacrifice here meant is as
yours of the Mass. May not this better Sacrifice, here spoken of, be that
(...), the truth of types, our Saviors passion? and what is this then unto
your Missall Sacrifice?

Surely you are too adventurous. Is it necessary to take (...) for a sacrifice
proper? I wonder then that this dispute was ever raised, or being raised
maintained so long. But I have been taught that (...) comes (...), from
mactare, to slay: and so your De Miss. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Cardinal confirms me, Joh. 10. 10
(...) you will not translate this that the Thief comes to sacrifice: your
Rhemist have rendered it, The theif comes not but to steal and kill: Again,
Matthew. 22. 24.
(...), my beeves and fatlings are killed: you translate not sacrificed.
Therefore if you will have your (...) to be a proper sacrifice (as you pretend)
you must make it appear in what part of your Mass this mactatio, this death
(or killing, properly so called) does consist: which I am bold to say is more
then Bellarmine could or you can perform.

. 11. In the next place you would have me to swallow your construction of
(...), and to believe it properly to signify Priesthood. The sense of the
place does not admit your sense, nor has the word any such propriety.

For the place, it is plain that Eusebius does prefer the Christian
Sacrifice, or to speak properly Christ's Sacrifice, or in the words of Eusebius,
(...), etc. The remembrance of Christ's body and blood, (the celebration whereof
he there calls (...)) before all the typical shadows among the Jews. This is
all that Eusebius has or intends here.

For the word (...), you will strangely impone upon the ignorant, when you can
persuade that it signifies proper priesthood. The truth is, that (...) is
generally any manner of service and ministration of holy things. De Miss. lib.
1. c. 15.
Bellarmine does control Kemnitius for saying that (...) is to sacrifice: He
says, indeed, it is sacrum facere, but not sacrificare, to do or perform some
sacred work, but not properly to sacrifice: and then tells you that (...) is in
Dionysius, sacrum ministerium, not sacrificium, a holy ministry or function,
or holy operation, not a sacrifice. Mark how S. Paul uses the word: Romans 15.
16.
(...), which your Rhemist call sanctifying (not sacrificing) the Gospel of
God. Like as your Masses of Basil and S. Chrysostom, where you have (...),
which is no more then holy service or operation (or at the most as there it is
rendered consecration) of this ministerial and unbloudy sacrifice.

Where, when, and with whom it ever was construed or taken for proper
priesthood, I do expect from you who have affirmed it.

A. B. C.
. 12. But besides the very comparison of our Sacrifice and Priesthood, and
preferring them before those of the Jews which were true and proper, shows ours
to be much more true and proper. For if the signs and shadows be true and
proper, much more the truth and substance it self. And this very difference or
comparison which he makes, shows plainly the reality of Christ's presence in
this Sacrifice: for otherwise our bread and wine would be but weak Elements or
shadows as well, or more then those ancient sacrifices of the Jews, whereof yet
he says the contrary, to wit, that theirs were but weak elements and shadows,
and ours the truth it self.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 13. The comparison here instituted by Eusebius, is evident by that attribute
(...) to consist in the meliority or betternesse, not in the propriety of the
several Sacrifices. Although, indeed, the comparison may here hold well in
both kinds. For i^ is most clear by this whole page in Eusebius, that the
Sacrifice here by him preferred before all other, is that of our Savior on the
Cross, not that of your Mass on your Altar. Whereby (says he) all former
prophesies were fullfilled, even by him, who gave himself (...) The great and
precious ransom for the Jews and Gentiles: that expiation for the whole world:
that soul for all souls of men, etc. and a little before this, to stop all
exception, and to destroy all your collection, he plainly tells you what this
better sacrifice and truer Hierurgy is, where he says, that the former things
(which here he calls the former and weak elements*) were now all abolished,
(...) By this better and true holy service: This is the Christ of God. Is not
this plain enough? Why then would you transfer unto your erroneous Mass all
this which by Eusebius is spoken peculiarly, and only of our blessed Savior?
Eusebius (in the mean time) being as ignorant of your popish Mass, and fleshly
presence therein, as he was that you would translate his Greek (...) into your
English Priesthood.

A. B. C.
. 14. Thirdly, this Sacrifice and Preisthood did not cease with Christ, but the
exercise, nay the daily exercise thereof did then continue in Eusebius time,
which was 300 year after Christ.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 15. Are you not ashamed with these poor reasons, so pitifully to beg the
cause in question: you flourish out this piece of Eusebius into three pretended
arguments. This is the last. Thirdly, this Sacrifice and Preisthood did not
cease, etc.

As for Preisthood, it is not once named here, either in the Greek or Latin:
But yet you can in your English turn holy celebration of a remembrance into a
proper Preisthood. This is done with the same fidelity, as another Anonymus
Eremi^^ v. the 4 cardinal virtues of a Carmelite Friar, page 26.
Anonymus of your tribe: who producing that of S. Matthew, (5. 23.) If thou
bring thy gift to the Altar, turns it thus, If thou offer thy host at the
Altar. The Latin in both places both for him and you is munus, which he calls
h^st or Sacrifice, and you call Preisthood, neither truly: nor ever so rendered
by any other man, unless with purpose to deceive. You are not like to want
proofs, who can create authorities for what you say your selves.

. 16. As for the word Sacrifice, it is confessed that Eusebius has it here.
But as before S. Augustine, Tho. Aquinas, etc. do allow a Sacrament to be
called by the name of what is thereby represented, can you think us so unwise
as from hence to grant you your daily* Sacrifice? when your own English does
say, We daily celebrate the remembrance of his body and blood? The difference
between your daily Sacrifice, and Eusebius his daily remembrance is as much as
between your person and your picture.

. 17. You promised us a few strong arguments in this cause, instead of such
(which ought to be quick, open, clear, and convincing) you bring a few weak
inferences stretched by your own fancy, upon a few impertinent vouchers. For
not one of these comes near your Roman sense, of sacrificing up by you the
son of God in his entire flesh both body and soul, as you most desperately
and most grossly do teach, and yet with these you do miserably beg the cause:
nay you brag beforehand as if you had it already. Cap. 2.
It is clear (say you) Cap. 4.
Again it is clear. Cap 5.
Expressly averred -- and a clear proof. Cap. 6.
Nothing can be more clear -- nor do I see what can be said against. Cap. 7.
Almost every word is a pregnant proof of what I intend. These bold assertions,
and many other in the following chapters, may pass for true with them who are
so shallow as to be led by the noise and sound of your braveries, and are not
solid enough to pierce the sense of your authorities.

CHAP. VIII.
A. B. C.
. 1. WHich is further confirmed in the ensuing discourse where he says that
these of ancient times of whom he spoke, wanting better, did make use of those
figures or shadows: but that we having received the truth and substance, (...),
by the greatly misterious dispensation of Christ shall not need theirs. And
then explicating wherein this dispensation he spoke of consists, and how God
did lay the punishment due for our sins upon our Savior, as chains,
reproaches, contumelies and scourges, making him a trophie or spectacle of
execration, he says thus, (...). That is, After all offering unto his father a
wonderful and most excellent Sacrifice for the salvation of us all, and
delivering unto us also a remembranc^ to offer to God by a continual course in
Sacrifice. So as here again he makes express mention of a Sacrifice to be
offered continually, that is, daily or without intermission (for so (...) also
signifies) in remembrance of the Sacrifice which our Savior Christ himself
did offer.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. Must I always watch your translations? Your cause is bad and you would fain
forge evidence to mend it. Eusebius has (...), which you say is A remembrance
by a Sacrifice. This (you know) would make plainly for you. Christ's sacrifice
to be remembered by a daily Sacrifice. That were Romish Doctrine indeed. But
give Eusebius true English for his true Greek, and then it is A continnall
remembrance instead of Sacrifice. And this is plain for us.

(...) is For, instead of, in the room, in the place of another person or
thing. Luc. 1^^. 11.
(...); will he for a fish give him a serpent? Archelaus did reign in Judea
Matt. 2. 22.
(...) in the room of his father Herod. So Christ gave his life Matt. 20. 28.
Mar. 10. 45.
(...) a ransom for many. Thus your daily and continual Sacrifice is reduced
to Eusebius his daily remembrance, in the stead, or in the room of Sacrifice:
so your confirmation from hence has weakened your cause.

A. B. C.
. 3. Which he goes on confirming thus -- (...), etc. that is, Being instructed
by tradition to perform the memory of that Sacrifice upon the table, by the
signs of his body and blood according to the Laws of the new testament, we are
taught by David the prophet to say, Thou have prepared, etc.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 4. How comes this word tradition, out of this Greek? But to the question.
Here is a memory to be performed: and that upon a table: and that by the signs
of his body and blood. You plead well for us: if you had not brought this
place, I had (anon) produced it against you.

A. B. C.
. 5. Thou have prepared a table for me against those that afflict me, thou have
anointed my h^ad with oil, and how excellent is my chalice? which place of the
Psalm Eusebius expounds thus to our purpose, (...), (...): In this is
manifestly signified, the mystical unction, and the venerable or dreadful
Sacrifices of Christ's Table, by which, exercising a most high office of
priesthood, we are taught by the most high priest of all Priests, to offer unto
the God of all, unbloudy, and reasonable, and in that respect most pleasing
Sacrifices throughout the whole course of our life. Thus he: manifestly
teaching what we intend, and proving the same by the testimony of the holy
prophet David. First, he makes mention of our Saviors body and blood upon the
Table, in memory of that great Sacrifice upon the Cross: Then to show that
this is a Sacrifice, he uses the proper words of a Sacrifice, which are (...)
and (...) and to show that the Table he speaks of is an altar he joins it with
the word (...) thus, (...). Then he uses the word (...), which is a most
proper word signifying the exercise of Priesthood in a singular manner: and the
words (...) joined with (...), which is as properly said as can be of offering
a proper Sacrifice. Lastly, he says that the Sacrifice or thing offered is
unbloudy and reasonable, and therefore most pleasing to God, which no man can
understand otherwise then of our Savior offered in Sacrifice in an unbloudy
manner, and so as that he enjoys the free use and exercise of his reason and
rational faculties even then when he is offered.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 6. Eusebius does indeed speak of unbloudy and reasonable sacrifices: but in
your Mass, you offer (as you say) the absolute natural body and soul of Jesus
Christ the eternal son of God. How then? do you sacrifice corpus exsangue; a
bloudlosse body? No, you profess that your Sacrifice is (...), unbloudeed,
that is, no gushing, issuing, or appearing of blood: but you dare not with
Eusebius here say that it is (...), that is, without blood, deprived,
destitute, utterly void of blood, as the word (...) does plainly signify; a
privation or utter absence of blood. If you do, then farewell your doctrine of
Concomitancy in the bread, and of Transubstantiation in the wine. If otherwise
you will hold them; and that whole Christ (body and bones, blood and soul) is
under the species of bread; How then are you of Eusebius faith, who does here
plead for sacrifices without blood, (...)? and to take off all doubt of such
sense as you would impose, within very few lines, he calls these (...),
unbodied sacrifices: So that in Eusebius time the Christian sacrifices had
neither body nor blood, but were void of both. A strange blindness, or a blind
boldness in you, to produce authorities so strong against your own cause.

. 7. Again, you affirm here the reasonable soul of Christ to be in your
Sacrifice, which can never be if you confess with Eusebius (...), a bloudlesse
sacrifice, for when you speak of Rational faculties, I am sure that (...)
where no blood is there is no life: You would pretend proof out of the word
reasonable sacrifice; but you must be put in mind that Eusebius has (...) not
(...), reasonable, not living sacrifices. No man (say you) can understand this
otherwise. Did not S. Paul teach otherwise? or do you think that Eusebius had
not read S. Paul? if he had, why may not Eusebius allude unto that of S. Paul,
where speaking of a Romans 12. 1
living sacrifice, he tells us, it is our reasonable service, (...). So that
Reasonable service in S. Paul, is Reasonable sacrifice in Eusebius.

. 8. Every man does abhor them who are (...), men-eaters, Cannibals. Yet you
think it no impiety to be (...), God-devourers: nor any impossibility to be
(...), Soul-eaters. Forbear, forbear this carnal barbarism of eating our
Saviors body thus Capernaitically: or else show how his body and the free use
and exercise of his reason, and rational faculties, can be between your teeth
without a sensible soul also to feel what you tear with them.

. 9. You make too much of (...) when you construe it, exercising a most high
office of Preisthood. (...) is no more then prospera sacra facere, to perform
holy things happily. So (...) is to work well, or to perform a fair or good
work. In a second sense (...) may be to sacrifice, and then it signifies to
sacrifice well, and that is all. For indeed the word is more general then to
be restrained, among holy actions, only to the particular act of sacrificing;
it signifies the performance of all manner of sacred service. So Lib. 2. sub
Severo.
Herodian has (...), and Lib. 5. s^b Heliogabalo.
(...). Therefore how I may find in this word all that sense of exercising a
most high office of Preisthood, as you have Englished it, and where I may find
that it is a most proper word signifying the exercise of Preisthood in a
singular manner, I pray instruct me by your next. In the mean time I wish you
would force Eusebius to speak no more in English then in his own language. But
(alas) something you must say, and your timber is so crooked that it cannot be
measured by a straight line.

. 10. Lastly, There is one word more in this voucher from Eusebius, which I
must not pass over. Bellarmine (as before alleged) will assist me, if I put
you in mind that Altar and Sacrifice are relatives, proper to proper, and
improper to improper. Insomuch that he fixes this De cultu Sanctorum, l. 3.
cap. 4.
sine Altari non potest sacrificari: No Altar, no Sacrifice. So your Canon law,
De consec. did. 1. c. 11
Sacrificia non nisi super Altar -- offerantur: Let not sacrifice be offered
but upon an Altar. Ledesma, De eucharistia c. 20.
Missa est very and proprii nominis sacrificium, er^o necessario requirit
altar super quod offeratur: The Mass is a Sacrifice of a true and proper
name, therefore it necessarily requires an Altar whereon to be offered. So
Paludanus S^t^, and all of you that I have heard. From hence I observe that a
Table proper and a Sacrifice proper cannot relate, why then did not you avoid
this place of Eusebius, where (...), the sacrifices of Christ's table, do
unavoidably conclude that your author did mean such Sacrifices as were
performable at a Table, which yours are not? for you can never prove that
Sacrifices properly so called were ever celebrated at a Table properly so
called.

CHAP. IX.
A. B. C.
. 1. ALl which he goes proving thus out of other places of Scripture, and
particularly out of Malachias the Prophet where Almighty God rejecting the
sacrifices of Moses, says, that from the rising to the setting of the sun
his name is great among the Gentiles, and that in all places incense is offered
to his name, and a clean sacrifice. And to show that this prophecy is
fulfilled, he says thus, (...), We sacrifice therefore to God a sacrifice of
praise: we offer a sacrifice in which God is (for so signifies (...)) a most
venerable a dreadful and most holy sacrifice: we sacrifice in a new manner,
according to the new Testament a clean sacrifice. All which words do signify a
proper Sacrifice: and that in the singular number, and with a special emphasis
expressed by the articles (...) and (...), more then can be in English: save
only that one word of sacrifice of praise, which a Protestant will detort to a
metaphorical sacrifice. But I shall show by and by out of this man and
afterward out of S. Augustine that they mean by that proper Sacrifice, to wit,
the holy Eucharist, which other Fathers (as well they may) because by it God is
more praised and honored then by all other sacrifices in heaven and earth.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. This place of Malachy is beyond all sense so boastingly produced by most
of your Writers, as if alone it might confute us all: when as the Fathers make
perpetual use of it, to prove our Sacrifices contrary to those of the Jews,
(and contrary to yours also) to be in themselves spiritual: and in the
Circumstance of celebration, tied to no place or places, and that in quality
they are pure and clean, and that in the persons celebrating they are
universal, Mal. 1. 11.
From the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same, my name
shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered
to my name, and a pure offering. This offering or sacrifice here meant, is to
be celebrated (...), in every place: but yours only where an Altar is, and
that prepared with many circumstances, as Ledesma delivers. Yours is tied to a
morning exercise, this free at all times and seasons, as before you alleged
(...), throughout all ones life.

. 3 But to shorten (as much as I can) the trouble which you multiply more by
weak impertinencies then by any strength of proof, let Eusebius who vouched
Malachy expound him. He says that Malachies (...), in every place, is as much
as not at Jerusalem (which was then their sole place for sacrifice) (...),
neither definitively (says he) in this or that place: but yours is defined to
the Altar. This (...), which you call clean sacrifice, and our translation pure
offering, is there by him affirmed to be (...), the incense of prayers, and a
sacrifice not by blood, (...), but by religious works and duties.

Again, in this very place by you alleged, as soon as ever he has repeated the
words out of Malachy, headdeth what you have drawn out, (...), etc. Therefore
we sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise. Thus Eusebius expounds Malachy,
and is not this an improper sacrifice? if it be not, tell me what you mean by
your proper sacrifice, if there be none improper?

. 4. You will say, that being a Protestant I do detort the sense from a real
to a Metaphorical Sacrifice. Is it possible that men should be so mad for
superstition that they will detort this text to a proper sacrifice? and
wilfully will not see, that it is impossible for the Prophet or for Eusebius to
mean so? Are not the very next words in Eusebius (after this by you avouched)
plain words for a spiritual and improper Sacrifice? and does he not conclude
this chapter, and this whole book in a few lines after? wherein, as if he would
crown this text of Malachy with an ample Commentary, he reckons up all these
several sacrifices in a few lines: A broken spirit: an humble and contrite
heart: the sweet smelling fruit of all virtue and divinity: the incense of
prayer: the remembrance of that great sacrifice, according to the mysteries
delivered to us: thanksgivings for our salvation: offerings of religious hymns
and holy prayers: and consecrating our selves to God and Christ in soul and
body, a chaste body, and a refined soul. Thus Eusebius does magnify our
Christian duties, dignifying all with the high title of Sacrifices; yet in all
this not once dreaming of a carnal presence as you do: which if he had
believed, how could he have omitted that which he rather would have gloried in?
nay, how could he have confined himself so short, as to call it but (...), the
memory of that great Sacrifice? if so be Christ himself were bodily present?

. 5. Yet you rave for a proper Sacrifice, and if a Protestant do show with
Eusebius that which cannot be other then a Metaphorical Sacrifice, you will
slander him beforehand with det^rtion of Eusebius. Was Bellarmine a Protestant?
I would he had been (unhappy man! how great pains he took to miss his way? and
with how much learning he unlearned his own salvation!) He your great Achilles,
even upon occasion of this very text of Malachy does affirm, that prayers,
praises, good works, etc. De Miss. lib. 1. c. 10.
are sacrifices improperly so called, which is the same as to say they are
Metaphorical. He says again, De Miss. lib. 1 cap. 2.
Nomen and ratio Sacrificii proprie non convenit invisibili oblationi: The name
and nature of a Sacrifice properly does not belong to an invisible offering.
Now I (poor Protestant) do take prayers and praises to be invisible oblations:
yet you promise here by and by to detort this sacrifice of praise, and to show
that it does mean a proper sacrifice. And when that is done, perhaps you will
show that Christ's Table (before spoken of) is a proper Altar also. But when you
go about it do not endeavor to detort both the sense and words of your
Author, and then prove what you can.

. 6. In the mean time here is a word detorted, if I be not much mistaken: you
construe (...), a sacrifice in which God is. The Latin has no such sense,
though printed within these ten or twelve years at Paris, nor has any other
man (I believe) beside your self ever translated it so. I deny not but that God
is all in all, and in that extent he is in our prayers, praises, Sacraments,
virtually, powerfully, spiritually: but you will have him in your sacrifice
circumscriptive, confined and limited in all and every fragment of your Host.
How else, and in what manner, do you mean that God is in your sacrifice more
then in our Sacrament? The meaning of Eusebius was no more, but that our
Sacrifice is a Divine Sacrifice, and the common English and Latin of (...) is
Divine. Aristotle faith of Poetry, 3. Rhet.
(...), Poetry is a Divine thing: so Suidas, (...), Divinely to determine.

CHAP. X.
A. B. C.
. 1. BUt to show that Eusebius here means a proper Sacrifice, he speaks
presently of an improper Sacrifice, such as David speaks of, a contrite heart*
and he says we offer this also, but he calls this offering of uncense: nor
does he use the word (...), as before; but the word (...) we offer the
prophetical incense, and explicateth himself of Prayer. But to conclude, he
distinguishes them both most perfectly in these ensuing words, (...) that is,
Therefore we do both offer Sacrifice, and incense; one while indeed celebrating
the memory of that great Sacrifice, according to the mysteries by him
delivered, and offering the Eucharist for our salvation to God with devout
hymns and prayers: Another while wholly dedicating our selves, and casting our
selves prostrate, body and soul, to him and to his high Priest the Word. Where
it is evident to any man that understands Greek, that by the particles (...),
and (...), the former part of the sentence, where he speaks of celebrating
the memory of that great sacrifice, and offering the Eucharist, has reference
to the former word (...), which does properly signify sacrificing; and the
latter part of the sentence to the latter word (...), which signifies offering
of incense: which is as much as if he had said, We then offer Sacrifice when we
celebrate the memory of that great Sacrifice, and offer the Eucharist: and we
then offer incense, when we dedicate our selves wholly and prostrate our selves
both body and soul to God. And this will be yet more evident, if we consider
that when he had explained the place of Malachy, of offering a clean Sacrifice
according to the new Testament, he makes as it were an objection to himself,
that a contrite spirit is called a Sacrifice by holy David, as if that might be
thought to be the clean Sacrifice, which he spoke of out of the Prophet
Malachy; and answers it by saying, That we do also offer that kind of
Sacrifice, calling it not by the name of Sacrifice, but incense: and this he
says we offer by holy conversation and prayer; and thereupon immediately
concludes his discourse with this sentence by the now alleged, wherein (as I
said) he does most perfectly distinguish these two kinds of sacrifices, proper
and improper, external and internal; or indeed, to use his own words,
Sacrifice and Incense. So as this may satisfy any reasonable man for as much
as concerns Eusebius.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. (...). Good Bellerophon who wrote this for you, and made you believe it
would help your cause? Surely you have gotten some protestant to write this
paragraph, for this place of Eusebius is quick and pregnant against your bodied
Sacrifice. Belike you foresaw that having produced some pieces of this treatise
in Eusebius (distant enough from what you would prove) in way of answer this
would have been returned to you: and therefore by way of a strange anticipation
you would seem first to own it, though it carry a direct adverse sense to your
Romish carnalty of presence. But the seven Aphorisms out of Bellarmine, and
the formerly vouched sentences of S. Augustine, Lombard, and Aquinas, do turn
aside any impression which you can make upon our faith (though you should argue
much stronger then hitherto) yet this pretensed argument must also have an
answer.

. 3. Eusebius (say you) does most perfectly distinguish these two kinds of
Sacrifices, proper and improper, external and internal. Most perfectly! yet
here is no mention at all of proper, improper, external nor internal: surely
then, this is most imperfectly said by you. But Eusebius (you say) does mention
Sacrifice and incense: so does all the world, multis modis, many ways; we
sacrifice, but never once in your Romish sense. Eusebius does indeed pursue the
text of Malachy, and the prophet speaking of both ( In every place incense and
a clean Sacrifice) the Sacrifice (says Eusebius immediately upon the words of
Malachy) is a Sacrifice of praise: A Sacrifice of a contrite Spirit, of an
humble and broken heart. Will this serve for your proper and external
Sacrifice? we do also (says Eusebius following the same Metaphor) burn
incense, offering the sweet smelling fruit of Theological virtues, and
prayers, etc. What says Eusebius in all this, but absolutely different from
the faith of your Sacrifice? which had he believed, now was his time to have
come forward, and have told the Jews, that in stead of their one altar we have
many altars: In place of their annual Sacrifice, we have daily: In room of
their Paschall lamb, we do Sacrifice the lamb of God, the very Son of God
in his flesh.

In which piece of all this passage in Eusebius do you find your proper
Sacrifice? you have fixed upon these words, Celebrating the memory of that
great Sacrifice. What make these words for you? does not our Church celebrate
the memory of that great sacrifice of our Savior on the cross? You know we
do. If it be a celebration of a memory, how can it be the sacrifice it self? If
it were (as you affirm) the proper Sacrifice it self, how then were it a
celebration of a memory? This is too weak on your side to help your cause: This
is so strong on our side that you can never answer it, until you can prove a
favor and the remembrance of that favor, a conquest and the story of that
conquest, Caesar and Cesars picture, to be all one.

CHAP. XI.
A. B. C.
. 1. YEt I will add one place more out of his 5. book 3. chapter, where
discoursing of the 109. Psalm, and of that place where our Savior is said to
be a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec he says thus, (...). That
is, And the fullfilling of the prophecy is admirable to one that considers
how our Savior Jesus the anointed of God, does to this very day, according to
the rite of Melchisedec perform the office of Preisthood among men by his
ministers. For even as he (that is, Melchisedec) being a Priest of the
Gentiles, is no where found to have used corporal Sacrifices (that is to say
of beasts) but only blessing Abraham with bread and wine, so after the same
manner our Savior and Lord himself indeed first, then the priests coming from
him, over all nations exersicing the spiritual Preisthood according to the
Ecclesiastical laws (or rites of the Church) by bread and wine do obscurely
represent the mysteries of his body Saving blood you should say, (...).
and blood, Melchisedec foreseeing them by the Divine spirit, and using
beforehand the figures of what was to come after. What can be more clear? The
prophecy of David fulfilled by the exercise of Christ's preistly function
offering You offer (as you teach) no bread nor wine.
bread and wine, first by himself in his own person, then by his Priests
succeeding him. And this among all nations, this Preisthood and Sacrifice being
prefigured in the person and sacrifice of Melchisedec: His sacrifice being
bread and wine, and ours the body and blood of our Savior contained under the
accidents of bread and wine, for so does the word (...) signify, which is here
used. It is therefore evident by this, that Christ did at his last supper offer
and institute the proper Sacrifice and Preisthood of the new Testament. Nor can
any man with reason doubt thereof: yet because I see that unwillingnesse to
believe the truth makes men stick at toys many times, I reflect upon two words
which perhaps a man may take hold of to misunderstand Eusebius. The one is
where he says Melchisedec did not use Corporal Sacrifices, the other where he
calls our Saviors Preisthood spiritual. But his meaning is clear, that by
Corporal Sacrifices he understands sacrifices of beasts: such as Aarons
were: which therefore a little before he called (...) according to the property
of the greek word (...). And it is clear that he speaks in this sense, for he
affirms that Melchisedec used bread and wine: from whence may be gathered the
meaning of that other word spiritual preisthood, to wit, that it is clean
another kind from that of Aaron, which was a carnal and bloody preisthood, and
of the same kind with Melchisedecs, which was in some sort spiritual: But our
Saviors is much more spiritual, for his sacrifice was not bare bread and wine
as Melchisedecs was, but his body and blood, which had and has a spiritual
manner of being under the accidents of bread and wine; not using any corporal
sense or faculty, but only those of his soul: as I signified before when I
showed why Eusebius called our sacrifice (...), that is, a reasonable or
intelligent sacrifice: for so ours is indeed. And so though it be a reasonable
or intelligent sacrifice, and spiritual also, for the spiritual manner of
being which our Savior has there; yet it is a true and proper Sacrifice, as I
have made it clearly appear by Eusebius his whole discourse, with whom having
now done --

Sr. EDWAD DERING.
. 2. You have a worse fate then Bellerophon, he but once did carry his own
condemnatory letters, you several times do make your own rods. I could pity
you, if you were not of age, to see what your self do do: And yet as you are I
am sorry for you, not that you bring this (which otherwise I had produced
against you) but because you flatter your own misconceit so far, as to
imagine this authority to stand on your side, which is indeed unanswerably
against you, you find your self pinched, and do strive to pull out the thorns
which your self have stuck in your own sides. You bring in Eusebius saying thus,

. 3. Even as Melchisedec is no where found to have used corporal sacrifices,
but blessed Abraham with bread and wine: so our Savior and all priests by him
exercising (...), a spiritual preisthood, (say you) do by bread and wine
obscurely represent the mysteries of his body and blood. What a strange
encouragement and a strong confirmation is this unto a protestant, that he (...)
finds his adversary slain with a sword of his own unsheathing? what strange
self-flattery and a strong selfabusing is this in you, that when you lie
grovelling and wounded, yet you will brag as if for victory? immediately upon
these words of Eusebius, you make your usual flourishes: what can be more
clear? It is evident: No man can with reason doubt, etc. Examine your self
(man) whether you be not on the protestant side, you plead so well for us.

. 4. You say that Melchisedecs sacrifice was bare bread and wine, yours is more
then so: so is ours; not a bare or empty remembrance, by words only, or some
slight action, but a solid, substantial, and special remembrance. You say,
that Aarons was a carnal and bloody preisthood? why so, because (I trow) he
sacrificed bodies of flesh and blood. But yours (say you) is spiritual, for
the spiritual manner of being which our Savior has there: and so say we.
Take heed you have no blame for this, or rather stand fast unto it, and reap
the joy comfort and credit of yielding to truth which is too strong for you.

. 5. As before I gave Cyprian for Cyprian, so Chap. 2.. 5, 6, and 7.
would I now render you Eusebius for Eusebius. But you having brought nothing
of weight out of him to fortify your own opinion, nay most of that you bring
being clear enough against you; I may spare that care: and the rather because I
have already given you some passages of Eusebius in way of explanation of those
pieces which you have brought: yet you shall not pass without a retort of
somewhat out of him also, though but little.

As first where he says, that unto Jesus Christ the Lib. 1. c. 6.
only Lord, an Altar (...), of bloudlesse and reasonable sacrifices, is
erected according as the new mysteries of the new Testament do require: here he
names sacrifices in the plural number, and all of them (as before observed)
(...), void of blood, whenas, on the other side, you preach that all yours are
but one, and that the very blood of our Saviors natural body is really
therein.

After this he says that God is not to be sought i^ a corner of the world, nor
in the mountains, (...), or in any temples made with hands, or with Sacrifices,
but (...), in a most pure understanding and clean mind, with temperance, and a
life according to virtue, and with right and religious opinions. But you say
with proper Sacrifices, unto which you must necessarily have Temples and Altars
made with hands.

Thirdly, having again mentioned (...), Lib 1. c. 10.
Sacrifices without blood and rational (which are every where of every man
taken for spiritual and improper) he proceeds saying, The oracles of the
Prophets do declare (...), these unbodied, and intellectual sacrifices to be
the sacrifice of praise, invocation, lifting up of our hands, a contrite
spirit: All which being Divinely foretold, are a^ present performed by all the
world as the truth of that prophecy does show -- saying, From the rising of
the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among
the Gentiles: and in every place incense shall be offered to my name and a pure
offering. Therefore we do sacrifice unto God the sacrifice of praise, etc. Thus
Eusebius, and thus he brings in, and thus pursues the text of Malachy,
without once imagining or reflecting upon a Mal. 1. 11.
proper Sacrifice: which had he believed he could as well totidem syllabis in
express words have called it a proper sacrifice, as in that place by you
alleged, he called our Savior (...), the Lord properly so Lib. 5. c. 3.
named.

Lastly, because you find Melchisedec a priest in holy Record, and that he
being a priest brought forth bread and wine, wherewith says Eusebius (as you
also have vouched him) he blessed Abraham, therefore somewhat too rashly you
conclude, that the sacrificed bread and wine, whenas the comparison between
Melchisedec and our Savior holds, as Eusebius gives it, in that neither of
them did celebrate (...), with corporal Sacrifices, but both of them (...),
performing a spiritual holy function: which kind of service Eusebius calls
(as many other Fathers do) (...), Sacrifices rational and intellectual,
without body and without blood: yours are not such. The comparison in Eusebius
holds further also, that as Melchisedec the priest of the most high God did
Genesis 14. 1^. Romans 4.
refresh Abraham the father of the faithful with bread and wine, (...),
blessing him, as Eusebius has it out of the text: so our Savior (...), the
Supreme high priest of all, and God himself, does bless and refresh all his
faithful children (who being in succession of the same faith are spiritually
the Sons of Abraham) with bread and wine consecrated to a most high
mysterious and holy use: wherefore his ministers or priests (call them which
you will) for their office is here (in your last voucher) limited to a
spiritual function, they (I say) in Eusebius words, (...), do by bread and
wine obscurely represent the mysteries of his body and saving blood. Thus far
of the comparison between the two priesthoods of our Savior and Melchisedec:
thus pursued by Eusebius, and no further.

As for that which your Roman Religion would from hence establish, and you
plainly shoot at, it is inconsistant both with the comparison made by Eusebius
and with holy Writ. The comparison being both in holy David, S. Paul, and
Eusebius, made between their Priesthoods, not between their Sacrifices.
Melchisedecs c. 11.. 1.
you say was bare bread and wine, you dare not say your own is so, nay you dare
not say it has any bread or wine therein: you say (but the text is silent)
what Melchisedec did offer: Eusebius says he never used any bodily sacrifice,
(...), which you would wipe away as if he meant of beasts to be sacrificed.
Come back to your Logic, or rather come forward in Divinity, and remember that
bread and corn are and have bodies, unless you will deny S. Paul, saying, Thou
1. Cor. 3. 7.
sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or
of some other grain: But God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to
every seed his own body. But Eusebius does mean that Melchisedec did neither
sacrifice any kind of body, nor any bodily thing, for the English of (...) is
bodily: which he accounted bread and wine to be as well as oil, which in a few
lines before he calls (...), bodily oil, meaning because it has a bodily
substance. And in that respect Eusebius who said that Melchisedec used no kind
of bodily sacrifices, says expressly, that he used no other sacrifices at all
but (as in the place by you alleged) spiritual, for his words are in the same
Chapter, (...), He exercised priesthood to the most high God, neither by
Sacrifices nor by immolations; that is, he then neither sacrificed by mactation
or killing of beasts, for that is (...), nor so much as by offering up any
liquid thing, for that is (...), libare vino, lacte, aut simili liquore: to
sacrifice with wine, milk, or such liquor.

You may find the word often in the Septuagint (...), for which your Doway
Bible has libaments, Lev. 23. 13.
our English much better and more intelligible, the drink offering. So (beside
diverse other places) you may read in Jeremy, where the women answer the
Prophet, that they will pour out their drink offerings to the Jer. 44. 17, 18,
19.
Queen of Heaven, etc. which your Doway books call offering of libaments, the
Septuagint (...), libare libamina, says your Vulgar Latin: that is, to offer
liquid offerings, which were for the most part wine, and these kind of
sacrifices are called liba^ions or drink offerings: as is most clear in the
song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 38.
Where are their gods? their rock in whom they trusted, which did eat the fat
of their sacrifices? (...), and drank the wine of their drink offerings? or as
your darker Translation, and drink the wine of their libament? So that plainly
(...) was on offering only of liquid things, and that chiefly of wine.

Clemens of Alexandria speaking of a Sacerdotall Strom l 6.
officer among the Egyptian ritualls, says that he carried (...), Calicem ad
libandum, the Cup, or Chalice, Achareuses.
for the liquid Sacrifice. Aristophanes has, Haec libo, haec eadem ebi^o:
These I offer, and the same I drink of. The words are (...).

Wherefore laying together these pieces of Eusebius which all follow one
another, you will find that Melchisedec here did neither kill nor offer in
sacrifice any solid nor any fluid substance nor any bodily thing, not so much
as bare bread and wine, he did neither sacrificare, immolari, nor libare:
(...), but exercised a sprituall Priesthood, agreeable to the holy Text, which
says protulit, not obtulit, (...), he brought forth, not he offered, bread and
wine, and that was also to his own inferior Abraham: whom the text says he
blessed, (...), which is all the exercise of Priesthood in this story expressed.

CHAP. XII.
A. B. C.
. 1. -- WIth whom having now done, I come to S. Augustine, with whom I must be
a little the larger because his authority is acknowledged undeniable. This holy
Father and Doctor therefore is so clear in this point, treating it so often,
and upon so many several occasions, that I am content to let the decision of
the controversy rest wholly upon his authority.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. S. Augustine (say you) is acknowledged undeniable, and you will put the
full Decision of this controversy unto his authority. Is S. Augustine
undeniable? How far do you mean? Undeniable with us, with you, or with both?
Do we, or do you Jur are in verba? take faith upon his credit? Augustine was a
great and most pious Father. And if we judge by his undoubted works, the freest
from error and stain of any father among them all. Amicus Plato, etc. Plato is
my friend, etc. So say I of S. Augustine, He is a Father of great authority,
but Truth is a better friend: by truth I mean the word of Truth, the holy
Scripture, and I must also have leave to prize, Multorum atque magnorum
cons^en^es si^^ vinc. lir. cap. 3^.
sententias Magist^^rum, the concurring judgment of many great ones before any
one, even S. Augustine.

We on our side cannot admit his division of the ten commandments, whereby the
two first are joined into one, and the last preposterously is parted into two:
which yet you follow, and do exceed by using most audacious sacrilege, in
cutting off (as you call it) parts of several commandments, but indeed
expunging one entire precept.

You on your side, believing that the Saints do know your wants, and hear your
prayers, cannot admit S. Augustine where thus he says, Ibi sunt Spiritus
defunctorum, Decur^ pro ^ort. c. 13
ubi non vident quaecunque aguntur aut eventunt in ista vit^ hominibus: The
spirits of men departed are there where they do not see those things which are
done, or do happen unto men in this life. Neither you nor we can pass for
undeniable, where S. Augustine does speak of certain secret receptacles and
hidden closures of souls until the general resurrection, which cannot be your
purgatory because he says they rest and sleep, which purgatory does not admit.
In the next place, you offer to put the whole decision of this controversy
unto the single Authority of S. Augustine. Are you so brave? I accept your
challenge: and am resolved to tax you to your word: look you maintain your
offer.

CHAP. XIII.
A. B. C.
. 1. FIrst in his confessions ( lib. 9. cap. 11.) he tells how his mother in
her last sickness coming out of a trance, and telling him and his brother,
they should lay their mother there, bid them lay her body where they pleased,
only she desired that wheresoever they should be, they would remember her at
the altar of our Lord.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. The commemoration of Saints departed is neither against the Doctrine of
our Church, nor is this our theme. As for the bare name of altar it presses us
not, as before I showed.

A. B. C.
. 3. And ( Chap. 12.) he tells how he contained his tears at her burial,
during the time of his prayers. Which he said, whilst the Sacrifice of our
price was offered for her: his words are these, Neque in eis precibus, quas
tibi fundimus cum tibi offeretur pro ea Sacrificium pretii nostri, juxta
Sepulchrum posito cadavere priusquam deponeretur sicut illic fieri solet, nec
in ^is precibus ego flevi: I did not weep in those prayers which I poured forth
to thee when the Sacrifice of our price was offered for her, the body being set
beside the grave before it was buried as the custom is there.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 4. I presume you bring this for three words Sacrificium pretii nostri, The
Sacrifice of our price. If S. Augustine do call the blessed Sacrament a
Sacrifice, you have it acknowledged before to be so multis modis, many In the
digression under the second chap.
ways, and you have S. Augustine before, who gives you good reason why the
Sacrament is so called. To confirm this, you may find in the very next Chapter
to this by you alleged, that S. Augustine there calls Sacramentum pretii
nostri, the Sacrament of our price, which here he names the Sacrifice of our
price. But remember your undertaking, which is not to prove Sacrifice at large,
which never was denied, but Sacrifice properly so called, and so instituted by
Christ our Savior: Chap 1. 2
as your self before have stated it.

A. B. C.
. 5. The chap. 13. which is a long prayer for his mother, speaking to God, how
at her death she did not take care to have her body embalmed, nor to have a
choice monument, nor to be buried in her own country.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 6. You have not day enough to finish your journey, yet you will step out of
the way to see a friend. Your journeys end is at proper Sacrifice* which it
seems you despair to arrive at before you be taken, and therefore you make an
out-leap into prayer for the dead, thereby to stay me in my pursu^t. Good
Hippomenes I will no stay my course to take up the balls you cast: yet for the
present I may step so far, as to tell you that this Long prayer and speaking
to God in this chapter is as all the whole thirteen books of his confessions
are, one entire continued speaking to God. But pardon me, I will not be drawn
again out of my line of Sacrifice.

A. B. C.
. 7. He says thus: Non ista mandavit nobis, s^d tantummodo memoriam sui ad
altar tuum fieri desideravit, cui nullius di^i praetermissione servierat, und^
sciret dispensari victimam Sanctam* qua deletum est chirographum quod erat
contrarium nobis, qud triumphatus est hostis: She gave us not charge of these
things, but only desired she might b^ remembered at thy altar, at which she had
attended without omitting a day, from whence she knew that holy victim^ (or
Sacrifice; for victima is material Sacrifice) to be dispensed (or distributed)
by which was cancelled the handwriting which was against us, by which the
enemy was overcome. Which are the very words of S. Paul (Coloss. 2.) speaking
of Christ upon the Cross. So as here is clear mention not only of an Altar,
but also of a Sacrifice offered for the dead, and a sacrifice daily offered,
and the very same which was offered upon the Cross for the redeeming of the
world.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 8. The Myndians made their gates too big for their city, but your postern is
wider then their gates: your conclusion is ever too full beyond all proportion
of your premises. Some friend had need to help your conclusion after you, as
the Arabian shepherds do their Herodot.
sheeps tayls, for it is too heavy for your own carriage.

Here (you say) is clear mention of an Altar. Be it so: If the bare mention of
an Altar and Sacrifice be an argument for real and proper Sacrifice, you have
the cause. Here (say you) sacrifice is offered for the dead: Quid ad Rhombum?
Shoot at the mark, man. Here is daily sacrifice! Yet you are wide. Here is the
very same which was offered upon the Cross for the redeeming of the world. I,
this is to the purpose indeed. But what if this be not here now? I find here
dispensari victimam, etc. that there is a dispensation or distribution of that
saving Sacrifice of the Cross, which in the same sense, but in other words by
S. Paul is called, The Communion 1 Cor. 10. 16*
of the body and blood of Christ: but this Communion is between Christ and his
members: this dispensation and distribution is to the people: and what may that
be to your dispensing of your sacrifice up to God in heaven? and that in such a
bodily sense as you must prove, or else confess your undertakings vain.

All that Monica required of her sons was, Tantum illud -- memineritis mei,
and tantummodo memoriam -- Cap. 11. and 13.
fieri, etc. A better carver then Polycletus or Pyrgoteles can fashion no more
out of this stuff: so long as tantum and tantummodo are not cut away. And then
for a memory of Saints departed, and a loving commemoration of them, and their
piety and virtue, and a thanksgiving for them, we do not quarrel, nor is it to
the Theme of your adventure.

CHAP. XIIII.
A. B. C.
1. ANother place maybe out of his work against the adversary of the Law and
Prophets, ( l. 1. c. 20.) where speaking of the Church he says, Haec quippe
ecclesia est Israel secundum spiritum, that is, This Church is Israel according
to the spirit: from which is distinguished that Israel according to the flesh
(that is, the Synagogue) which did serve in the shadows of sacrifices, by which
was signified the singular sacrifice which Israel according to the spirit (that
is, the spiritual Israel) does now offer, singular sacrificium quod nunc
offert Israel secundum spiritum. And a little after again, Iste immolat, etc.
This Israel offers to God a sacrifice of praise, not according to the order
of Aaron, but according to the order of Melchisedec -- They kn^w that they have
read what Melchisedec brought forth when he blessed Abraham, and are now
partakers of it: they see such a sacrifice to be now offered to God over the
whole world. And here he explicateth the place of Malachy the Prophet ( c. 1.
v. 11.) of this Sacrifice, and uses the same discourse also elsewhere, De
Civit. Dei, lib. 18. There is nothing of any such discourse.
cap. 19. Here then according to S. Augustine, is a Sacrifice, and that a
singular or special sacrifice, signified by the shadows of the sacrifices of
the Old Law: and this Sacrifice is now offered, that is, in S. Augustines time,
400. years after Christ, and after the Sacrifice of the Cross was passed. A
Sacrifice not according to the order of Aaron (that is, bloody and of beasts)
but according to the order of Melchisedec, and of such things as he offered,
viz. bread and wine. And now, that is, in the time of S. Augustines writing,
they see such a sacrifice offered over all the world, and they are partakers
thereof. All which is so clear as nothing can be more clear.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. All is so clear as nothing can be more clear: Your arguments please your
self, but satisfy no man else. When will you come to the point? Your self have
stated the question, That Christ did institute a sacrifice: Cap. 1.
and that the sacrifice by Christ instituted is a proper sacrifice. Let any
Reader judge whether in this of S. Augustine, or in any other voucher
throughout your whole Treatise, you have one argument or authority that comes
home to the point in controversy.

Here you bring that spiritual Israel does offer a singular sacrifice. If you
had found that spiritual Israel had offered a corporal or bodily sacrifice
(yours is such you say) then you had come something near the question. We are
Israel according to the spirit, and we have a most spiritual and a singular
sacrifice to offer, which S. Augustine (here by you alleged) calls
Sacrificium ^^^dis, a sacrifice of praise. Or if you will ^ake S. Augustine
en^ire, and let one Chapter (as it ought) help to expound another, you shall
easily find that this singular sacrificium is in S. Augustines sense very
singular indeed: Cap. 18.
Vnum verum and singular sacrificium multis est antea sacrificiorum
significatum figuris -- singular and solum verum sacrificium pro nobis Christi
sanguis effusus est: The one, true, and singular sacrifice, is before signified
by many figures of sacrifices -- the singular and only true sacrifice, is
Christ's blood shed for us And thus proceeding by degrees unto that here cited,
he says, Cap. 20*
Ecclesia immolat Deo in corpore Christi sacrificium laudis -- Haec quippe
ecclesia est Israel secundum spiritum, etc The Church does offer to God in the
body of Christ the sacrifice of praise. Take here in corpore Christi, the body
of Christ, either for the Church which is his body mystical, or for the
Sacrament and sacramental bread which is his representative body, still S.
Augustines sacrifice is but Sacrificium laudis, the Sacrifice of praise. For
(says he) this Church which is Israel according to the spirit -- does offer a
singular sacrifice. Wherein? in what kind? what sacrifice does this spiritual
Israel offer? Iste (says he) immolat Deo sacrificium laudis: This (that is,
this Israel) does offer to God the sacrifice of praise, not according to the
order of Aaron, but according to the order of Melchisedec. Who can fashion your
proper sacrifice, your bloody sacrifice out of all this?

As for your last clause concerning Melchisedec, that will never make for you,
until you can turn his protulit, he brought forth, into obtulit, he offered:
And whilst you confess his was bread and wine, but say that yours is neither:
and unless you can find a proportion between one so great as Melchisedec,
deriving down a blessing unto Abraham, and such wretches as your selves, who
impudently and irreligiously affirm, that you offer up a greater then
Melchisedec to God the Father. Beside, that which Melchisedec brought forth was
at the most the Sacrament of a Sacrament; for so S. Augustine calls it,
Epist. 95.
Sacramentum mensae Dominicae.

A. B. C.
. 3. But by the way, I observe herd that which I did before in the testimony of
Eusebius, of a Sacrifice of praise, which by this place is evidently to be
understood of a true and proper, not a Metaphorical sacrifice: for the
sacrifices with which S. Augustine does join it, though differently, saying
that it is like one, but not like the other, are true and proper sacrifices* to
wit* those of Aaron and that of Melchisedec: And this is yet more evident by
the words immediately going before the place here cited, which are these;
Ecclesia ab Aposto^orum temporibus per Episcoporum successiones certissim^^,
usque ad nostra and dernoeps tempora perseverat, and immolat D^^ in corpor^
Christi sacrificium la^dis: that is* The Church from the Apostles times, by
most certain successions of Bishops even to ours and to aftertimes, does
persev^re and sacrifice to God in the body of Christ, a Sacrifice of praise. ^o
here the sacrifice of praise (which he speaks of) is that which the Church does
continue to offer, by offering the body of Christ.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 4. Your last words, offering the body of Christ, are your own: indeed the
coynage of your own brain without shadow or color for any such inference out
of S. Augustine, unto whose Sacrifice of praise I subscribe: not regarding what
you boldly and without ground do affirm: for I do profess my faith as
agreeable to S. Augustines, as it is different from yours.

CHAP. XV.
A. B. C.
. 1. A Third place may be that, De civitate Dei, lib. 17. cap. 17. where he
shows Christ's Priesthood, out of the Psalm 109. thus, Juravit Dominus, etc.
Almighty God swore, and he will not repent himself: by which words he
signifies that that which he adds shall be immutable; Thou art a Priest for
ever according to the order of Melchisedec. Seeing that now there is no where
either Priesthood or Sacrifice according to the order of Aaron, and every where
that is offered under the Priest Christ, which Melchisedec brought forth when
he blessed Abraham; who can doubt of whom this is spoken? By which it is clear,
that the exercise of Christ's Priesthood did and was to continue; and that in
place of Aarons sacrifices, a sacrifice like to Melchisedecs was offered; not
by Christ himself; for he was not then on earth, but sub sacerdote Christo,
under Christ, that is, by Priests under him, and by his authority and
appointment.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. Little to your purpose. That is offered which Melchisedec brought forth
(say you:) but he brought Cap. 11.. 1
not forth the body and blood of Christ, but bare bread and wine: Therefore
your doctrine will never be concluded by the example of Melchisedec.

CHAP. XVI.
A. B. C.
. 1. ANd to make it manifest that this sacrifice which S. Augustine so often
speaks of, is a true, visible, and proper sacrifice, and not an invisible,
spiritual, or metaphorical sacrifice, I will here allege his discourse in
his tenth book, De civit. Dei, cap. 19, and 20. where distinguishing these two
kinds of sacrifice, he says, That as in prayers and praise we direct
signifying words to him to whom we offer the things themselves in our hearts
which we signify; so in sacrificing we are not to offer visible sacrifice to
any, but to him to whom in our hearts we our selves must be the invisible
sacrifice. And chap. 20. having said, that though Christ as God did with his
Father receive sacrifice, yet as man he did rather choose to be a sacrifice,
then to receive sacrifice, lest by that occasion any man might think that
sacrifice might be offered to a creature, he concludes thus, Per hoc and
Sacerdos est ipse offerens, and ipse oblatio, cujus rei sacramentum quotidianum
esse voluit Ecclesiae sacrificium, etc. that is, By this he is both Priest
offering, and also the oblation or thing offered, whereof he would have the
sacrifice of the Church to be a daily Sacrament (or similitude) seeing he is
the head of her the body, and she the body of him the head. She is wont to be
offered by him, as well as he by her. And then he concludes, That all the
ancient sacrifices were signs of this true sacrifice. So as here you see a
visible sacrifice distinguished not only from prayer and praise, both outward
and inward; but also from the invisible sacrifice whereby we are to offer our
selves as a sacrifice in our hearts to God, the outward sacrifice being a sign
of the inward, as words are of our inward thoughts and affections. You see
Christ is the Priest and the sacrifice: that there is a visible sacrifice in
the Church, as a daily sacrament, sign, or memory of that which Christ offered
upon the Cross: that Christ is wont to offer his Church as she does him, that
is, he being there invisibly offers her invisibly, and the offering him
visibly by sacrifice does also offer her self by him: And lastly, you see he
calls this a true sacrifice, adding, To this most high and true sacrifice all
the false sacrifices have given place.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. In the first two lines of this chapter, you promise us out of S. Augustine
proof for a true visible and proper Sacrifice, yet in the close you will
shuffle the cause away invisiblie. For you say, that Christ is wont to offer
his Church as she does him. How is that? you tell us presently. He being there
invisibly offers ^^r invisibly. Thus you promise to prove visible Sacrifice,
yet you conclude for invisible.

The words in S. Augustine are of Christ: Et* Sacerdos De civit. l. 10. c. 20.
est ipse offerens, ipse and oblatio, cujus rei Sacramentum quatid^anum esse
voluit ecclesiae Sacrificium: quae cum ipsiu^ capitis corpus sit, se ipsam per
ipsum dicit offerre. He is the prtest, he the offerer and he the offering, the
daily Sacrament, whereof he willed to be unto the Church a sacrifice: which
(the Church) being the body* of him the head, says that she offers her self
by him; that is* offers her self to God through Christ.

What is here for you or against us? As for your wide inferences whereby you
w^nder both from the question of Christ's institution and from the authorities
themselves which you produce (as I told you before) I intend not to pursue them.

As for your last period where you bring in as from S. Augustine the word true
Sacrifice, which you would have to be understood to be the body of Christ under
the show of bread (as you teach:) If you remember the title of this chapter in
S. Augustine, the Sacrifice by him meant is Christ himself the mediator of God
and men, not your unseen Christ in a wafer. And if you remember the text in S.
Augustine, it is Christ himself in forma servi, in the form of a servant, not
Christ counterfeited by you in the shape of bread* and therefore nothing to
what you are to prove.

CHAP. XVII.
A. B. C.
. 1. A Fifth place may may be lib. 8. De Civit. cup. 27. where he says, that
we do not erect Churches, priesthoods, Sacrifices, etc. to the Martyrs; for
says he, who did at any time hear the priest as he stood at the altar, though
built over the holy body of the Martyr, for the honor and worship of God, say
in the prayers, I offer Sacrifice to thee O Peter; Paul, or Cyprian, seeing it
is offered to God, at their memories (or places of burial?) And whereas there
was a custom in some places to bring meat and drink, and to feast at the
tombs of the Martyrs, he says, Any man knows these not to be the sacrifices
of the Martyrs who knows the one (or only) sacrifice of Christians which is
there offered to God.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. What is in this for the propriety of Sacrifice, or concerning the
institution of our Savior.

CHAP. XVIII.
A. B. C.
. 1. ANd that this sacrifice is the body of Christ, is apparent by this holy
Father, in his 22. book De Civit. cap. 10. which discourse I cannot here omit.
Having therefore said that the Pagans did build Temples, erect altars, appoint
priests and sacrifices to their gods, who were but dead men, he shows that we
do not so to our Martyrs: We (says he) do not build temples to our Martyrs as
to gods, but memories as to dead men, whose souls do live with God (that is,
churches in memory of them) nor do we there raise altars on which to sacrifice
to the Martyrs, but we offer sacrifice uni Deo Martyrum and nostro, to the one
God both of the Martyrs and of us: at which sacrifice they are named in their
place and rank, as men of God, who in confession of him have overcome the
world, but they are not ^nvocated by him that offers the sacrifice: for he
sacrifices to God and not to them. And the Sacrifice it self is the body of
Christ, which is not offered to them, for they are also his body. These are his
very words, so plain for proof of a proper Sacrifice, as (I think) no man can
deny it. But because a man that is unwilling to see this truth may catch at
two little words by the by in this discourse, to wit, that the Martyrs are not
invocated, and that they are the body of Christ, I must explain his meaning;
which is nothing in the former place, but that the priest in offering Sacrifice
does not say, I offer sacrifice to thee Peter, Paul, Cyprian (as he says in
many places) but that they may be prayed unto, is insinuated even here, and
expressed plainly by him in Joh. tract. 84. where speaking of this sacrifice he
says, that we do commemorate the Martyrs or name them, not as we do others who
rest in peace, so as to pray for them, but rather that they may pray for us,
that we may follow their footsteps. His meaning in the latter word is nothing
but by way of allusion from the true body of Christ, to his mystical body, to
them that the sacrifice which is Christ's body, cannot be offered to the
Martyrs: for they are also his body, to wit, his mystical body or members
(as he says truly, and as he said before) of the Church.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. You have brought forth this place of S. Augustine: you have declined it,
and indeed answered it against your self. These two little words which you say
a man may catch at in this discourse are both of them material, the first
against invocation of Saints departed, which being nothing to our theme I pass
by: the other is a plain convincing evidence to prove what was herein the sense
of S. Augustine. His words are, De civit. lib. 22. c. 10
Ipsum Sacrificium corpus est Christi, quod non offertur ipsis, quia hoc sunt
and ipsi: The Sacrifice it self is the body of Christ: This you make much of,
but take the whole period: which body (says S. Augustine) is not offered to
the Martyrs, because even they are this body. So then it is evident that the
body of Christ in this place is (as you find it) his mystical body, that is,
the Church Universal: which being part militant, part triumphant (as the
martyrs are) is honored with the title of Christ's body: Just as S. Paul (to
the faithful at Corinth) 1. Cor. 12. 27.
ye are the body of Christ: and to the Romans, Romans 12. 5
we being many are one body in Christ.

Thus it appears that nothing of this at all belongs to your missall
sacrifice of Christ's natural body under the shape of bread to be offered as
you dream, and as you would prove if you could: but belongs to his mystical
body the Church (as your self do find it) which body (the Church) is not the
Sacrifice that you contend for.

CHAP. XIX.
A. B. C.
. 1. ALL which places though they make the matter of a proper sacrifice
evident, and that therefore I need not say any more thereof, yet not only to
satisfy an indifferent man, but even to convince a refractory, I have thought
good to set down S. Augustines discourse in his 20. book contra Faustum
Manichaeum, where he handles this point largely and particularly, the
heretics discourse requiring it, which I must also set down briefly for the
better understanding of S. Augustines answer, thus;

. 2. Faustus then to show that the Manichees were not Pagans, nor a schism of
the Gentiles, that is, agreeing with them in belief, as he faith was said of
them (though falsely, as S. Augustine answers, for it was said only that
they had some likeness with the Pagans, in regard they made more gods then
one) Faustus, I say, takes occasion for his better clearing to set down a brief
sum of his belief, or rather of his ph^enzie, saying; That the Father
dwells in inaccessible light, the Son on the sun and moon, the holy Ghost
or third* Majesty, as he calls him, dwells or has his seat in the whole
circuit of the air, and that by his force and spiritual profusion the earth
begets patibilem Jesum, passible Jesus, who hangs (as he says) on every
tree* that is, as S. Augustine afterward more largely explicateth, Jesus
according to their belief is in all fruits and herbs which grow out of the
earth, and says Faustus, we bear the same reverence or religion to all things
as you do toward the bread and chalice: his words arr there, Nobis circa
universa and vobis similiter erga panem and calicem par religio est. Then he
shows how far they differ from the Pagans in several things, of which one
is this, That, as he says, the Pagans deem that God is to be worshipped with
altars, temples, images, sacrifices and incense, wherein he professes to go a
very different way from them: for (says he) I think my self, if I be worthy,
the reasonable temple of God; I receive or take Christ for the living image of
the living Majesty, the altar a mind endued with good arts and disciplines; I
place divine honors and sacrifices in only prayers, and those pure and
simple: Honores quoque divines ac sacrificia in solis orationibus and ipsis
puris ac simplicibus pone. And a little after, showing us to differ little from
the Pagans, he says, that we have turned their sacrifices into Agapes, or
feasts wont to be kept at the martyrs combs: their idols into martyrs: that
the Jews our predecessors, in like manner departed but a little from the
Gentiles, leaving only their idols and retaining their temples, their
sacrifices, their altars and priesthoods. And so Faustus concludes both the one
and other, that is, the Catholics and the Jews, to be a schism or near of kin
to the Pagans, and his own profession to be a sect, that is as he accounts
it, very far differing from Paganism. This is the substance of so much of
this heretics discourse as is for our purpose, that is, to give light to so
much of S. Augustine as is needful to be here alleged.

. 3. This holy Father then having confuted all their vain and fabulous belief
of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost* as also that of the earth
bringing forth Jesus; he comes to that of our bread and chalice, saying thus*
Cur autem Faustus arbitretur parem nobis esse religionem circa panem and
calicem nescio, cum Manichaeis vinum gustare non religio sed sacrilegium sit* I
know* not why faustus should think that he and we have the same religion (that
is, belief and reverence, for so religion signifies in this place) of the bread
and cup, seeing with the Manichees it is not religion but sacrilege to cast
wine: and then deriding them for it thus, That they acknowledge their god in
the grape, but not in the vessel, as if by being trodden upon (that is, when
wine is made out of the grape) and included or shut up in the vessel, he did
offend them, he says thus, Noster autem panis and calix non quilibet, quasi
propter Christu^ in spicis and in sarment is ligatum sicut illi desipi^^t, sed
certa consecratione mysticus sit nobis non nascitur* or as another edition has
it, sit nobis corpus Christi, non nascitur: But our bread and chalice not any,
as it were in regard of Christ being bound or tied up in the ears of corn and
branches of the vine as they foolishly imagine, but by certain consecration is
made mystical unto us, does not grow, or is not so by nature; or as the other
reading says, The chalice and bread by consecration mystical, is made the body
of Christ, is not born so, or is not so of it own nature; and then he
infers, that what is not so made, though it be bread and a chalice, it is
alimentum refectionis, non sacramentum religionis; a food of refection, not a
Sacrament of religion* but only that we bless and give thanks to God for all
his gifts, not only spiritual but also corporal. These are the words of S.
Augustine, plain and pregnant for the real presence and change of the bread
and wine into Christ's body, whichsoever of the two readings a man take. For
though the latter be the plainer by reason of the very words Corpus Christi,
the body of Christ; yet because a Protestant will except against it for that
very reason, though we should bring never so good authority for that reading,
as they do in a like case of a place of S. Cyprians, for the authority of
Peter's chair, to take away all exception I will wave it, and follow the former
reading, being the very same in sense, and clear enough. For there it is said,
that by consecration, and consequently not by says, the bread and cup becomes
mystical, that is, it is made something which is not seen, and that the nature
thereof is changed, sit non nascitur, it is made another thing by consecration
then it was by nature; and this consecration is certain, that is, a special
consecration, different, and of greater force and efficacy then the ordinary
blessing and thanksgiving used in other bread and wine; and that which is so
consecrated is a Sacrament of religion, not corporal food: all which does
clearly demonstrate what we teach of Christ's presence in this holy Sacrament.
But the discourse it self makes it yet more evident; for Faustus saying, that
Christ is in every creature growing out of the earth, as we acknowledge him in
our bread and chalice, (whereby it is manifest by his very testimony, that
Catholics did then believe the reality of Christ's presence in this Sacrament
as we do now) S. Augustine first confuting and deriding that vanity of Christ's
presence in all things which Faustus spoke of, acknowledges it of such bread
and wine as is duly consecrated, and explicateth how it comes, to wit, by
consecration, not according to the vain imagination of the Manichees, as if
Christ were tied and bound up in all their meats: Vobis per fabulam vestram,
says he, in escis omnibus Christus ligatus apponitur: Christ by your fable is
set before you tied up in all your meats; and thereupon he denies our belief
to be the same with theirs, and adds, that in so saying he shows himself
more foolish then some, qui nos propter panem and calicem Cererem and Liberum
colere existimant, who in regard of the bread and chalice think that we worship
Ceres (the goddess of corn) and Bacchus (the god of wine;) which is a proof no
less pregnant for the truth and property of our Sacrifice, then that of the
Manichees for the real presence: the practice thereof being such in S.
Augustines time, as that the very Pagans took notice thereof: For sacrifice was
the worship which they gave to their gods: and unless they had known that we
did offer bread and wine in sacrifice, they could have no show of reason to
imagine how we should thereby worship Ceres and Bacchus.

. 4. Now for that Faustus speaks against the altars and sacrifices of the
Pagans, and in commendation of his own spiritual and improper temple, altar,
etc. and his only Sacrifice of prayers; S. Augustine having confuted him, and
showed the falsehood of what he said of his being the temple of God, his mind
the altar, his prayers pure and simple or sincere, he convinces him of
absurdity in acknowledging these things and denying a true sacrifice, asking
this question, Volo mihi dicatis, I would have you tell me from whence you have
the names of these things which you praise in your selves, as temple, altar,
Sacrifice? for if unto the true God these true things (that is, a true and
proper temple, altar and Sacrifice be not due, why are they laudably spoken of
in a true Religion? But if to the true God a true Sacrifice be due (from whence
also they are rightly termed divine honors?) other things which are called
Sacrifices are done after the similitude of a certain true Sacrifice. Lo here
S. Augustine counts it an absurdity in the Manichees to acknowledge these
things metaphorically and deny a true proper Sacrifice. And why may not we say
the same to Protestants? But to go on with S. Augustine, he shows that all
the sacrifices of the Gentiles and Jews had some relation to the true
sacrifice, which is due to the true God only, and wherewith Christ alone did
fill his altar. The sacrifices of the Gentiles were the imitations of false and
deceitful gods, that is to say, of the devils, proudly chalenging from such as
they deceived that honor which was due to God only, the sacrifice being not
to be blamed but the offering of it to the devil. The Jews by their sacrifices
of beasts did by way of prophecy foreshew the future sacrifice which Christ
offered. Wherefore Christians do now celebrate the memory of the same
sacrifice, as being passed by the most holy oblation and participation of the
body and blood of Christ. But the Manicheans not knowing what was to be
condemned in the sacrifices of the Gentiles, nor what to be understood in the
sacrifices of the Jews, nor what to be believed or observed in the Sacrifice of
the Christians, do offer their own vanity in sacrifice to the devils. S.
Augustines Latin words of the latter part of this discourse in which the chief
force consists are these, speaking of Christ's sacrifice of the Cross: Unde
jam Christiani per acti ejusdem Sacrificii memoriam celebrant Sacrosancta
oblatione and participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi. Manichaei vero
nescientes quid da^^nandum sit in Sacrificiis gentium, and quid intelligendum
in Sacrificiis Hebraeorum, and quid tenendum vel observandum in Sacrificio
Christianorum, vanitatem suam sacrum offerunt diabolo. Then which, what can be
more clearly spoken for proof of a true visible and proper sacrifice? for
having in the beginning of this discourse (or rather immediately before he
entered into it) rejected that absurdity of the Manichees in ^^knowledging a
metaphorical sacrifice of prayer, and denying a tr^e or proper sacrifice* he
comes to speak of proper sacrifices; of which he makes four sorts: The first
is that of the Gentiles which he disallows in regard of the persons to whom it
was offered, to wit, the devils. The second is that of the Jews, and their
sacrifices many and several, were figures of the third sort of sacrifice,
which was that which Christ himself offered. The fourth is the sacrifice of the
Christians in the singular number also, as that of Christ himself, which they
offer in remembrance of his sacrifice, and this they do by the oblation and
participation of the body and blood of Christ. Who can now say that the body
and blood of Christ is not truly and properly offered in sacrifice in the
Catholic Church?

. 5. To that which Faustus says of our changing the sacrifices of the Gentiles
into our Agapes, or feasts, and of their idols into our Martyrs, S. Augustine
answers thus, Populus Christianus memori^^ martyr^m, etc. The Christian
people does celebrate the memories of the Martyrs with religious solemnity to
stir themselves ^p to their imitation, to be partakers of their merits, and
helped by their prayers: So that we do not sacrifice to any of the Martyrs
though we build altars for memories of the Martyrs. For what Bishop standing at
the altar in the place where the holy bodies lie did ever say, I offer
sacrifice to thee, O Peter, P^^l, or Cyprian? but what is offered is offered to
God, who crowned the Martyrs though at the memories (o^ places of b^^^^ll) of
the Martyrs, whom he crowned* that the very place putting us in mind, our
affection may increase to wh^^ out charity* both toward them whom we may
imitate, and toward him by whose help we may be able to imitate them. We do
therefore worship the Martyrs with that worship of love and fellowship
wherewith the holy men of God are worshipped in this life, whose hearts we know
to be prepared to suffer in like manner for the truth of the Gospel* But we
worship those (that is, the Martyrs) more devoutly and more securely, after
having overcome all uncertainty, and we praise them with more confidence being
conquerours in that more happy life then those which are yet here fighting. But
with that worship which in Greek is called (...), and in Latin cannot be
expressed in one word, being a certain servitude (or subjection) particularly
due unto Divinity (or Deity) we neither do worship, nor teach that any can be
worshipped but God alone. And seeing that to this worship belongs the
offering of Sacrifice, from whence idolatry is attributed to them who do this
(that is, offer Sacrifice) to idols, we offer no such thing nor command it to
be offered to any, either Martyr, or holy soul or Angel, etc. And a little
after again S. Augustine answers an objection that some make themselves drunk
at those feasts which were called Agapes, condemning the thing, yet so, that he
says, it is a less sin for a man to come drunk from the Martyrs, then
fasting to sacrifice to the Martyrs: and lest any man should mistake him he
explaineth himself thus* Sacrificare martyribus dixi, non dixi sacrificare Deo
in memoriis martyrum, quod frequentissime facimus, illo duntaxat ritu quo sibi
sacrificari novi Testamenti manifestatione praecepit, quod pertinet ad illum
cultum quae (...) dicitur and uni Deo debetur. That is, I said to sacrifice to
the Martyrs, I did not say to sacrifice to God at the memories of the Martyrs
which we do very often; but according to that manner only by which he gave
command that Sacrifice should be offered unto him in the manifestation of the
new Testament, which belongs to that worship which is called (...), and is
due only to God. And he goes on immediately asking a question thus, But what
shall I do, and when shall I be able to demonstrate to that so great blindness
of these Heretics (that is, when shall I be able to make them understand) what
force that has which is sung in the Psalms, The Sacrifice of praise shall
glorify me? and there is the way where I shall show him my Savior? Salutare
meum. The flesh and blood of this Sacrifice before the coming of Christ was
promised by sacrifices of likeness; in the passion of Christ it was delivered
by the truth it self; after the ascension of Christ it is celebrated by the
sacrament of remembrance. The Latin words of the latter part are these, Hujus
Sacrificii caro and sanguis ante adventum Christi per victimas similitudinum
promittebatur; in passione Christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur; post
ascensum Christi per Sacramentum memoriae celebratur.

. 6. This is the discourse of S. Augustine at large, which I could not prevail
with my self to break off sooner, being so clear and full to the present
purpose, and containing so many excellent points besides, as the honor due to
the Saints, the help we have by their prayers, the distinction of that worship
which we give to them from that which we give to God, that worship of (...)
which our Divines according to S. Augustines doctrine do give to God alone,
that this worship of (...) is exercised by sacrifice, so as we cannot be justly
charged with idolatry by Protestants for doing honor to the Saints in their
relics and pictures, seeing we do not offer sacrifice unto them. And for the
point here principally intended which is of a proper Sacrifice there can be
nothing more plain, being so often, so plainly, and so distinctly set down.
Christ himself did not only offer sacrifice but did also institute a certain
form of sacrific^, and gave command that sacrifice should be offered in such a
manner, and when even at that time when he did manifest the new Testament; and
when was that but at his last supper, when giving the Chalice to his Apostles,
he said, hic est sanguis meus novi testamenti, This is my blood of the new
Testament, according to S. Matthew and S. Mark; and according to S. Luke, hic
est calix novum testamentum in meo sanguine, This is the Chalice, the new
Testament in my blood? For when or where else does he manifest or even make any
mention of the new Testament? and that no man may make any manner of doubt but
that he means a true and proper sacrifice throughout all this discourse, and
even then when he spoke of the sacrifice appointed to be offered, and the right
whereby it was to be offered, in the manifestation of the new Testament, he
says there, That it belongs to that worship of (...) which consists in
offering of sacrifice, and which is due to God alone. He calls the Manichees
Heretics for denying it, and complains of their blindesse, that he cannot make
them understand that place of Scripture, Sacrificium laudis honorisicabit me,
the Sacrifice of praise shall glorify me, of this Sacrifice. And how long (may
I say) would it be before we should be able to make Protestants understand the
same? The flesh and blood of this Sacrifice was prefigured and promised by the
ancient sacrifices delivered by Christ himself in his passion, and after his
ascension celebrated by the Sacrament of remembrance; that is, this sacrifice
is a signification, representation, or memory of the sacrifice upon the cross,
according to the place before alleged out of his tenth book de Civit. Dei cap.
20. and according to another place in his Confessions, where he calls the
same thing Sacramentum pretii nostri which he called a little before
Sacrificium pretii nostri: and this is that sacrifice which S. Augustine says
we do very often offer at the memories or altars dedicated to God in memory of
the Martyrs, their bodies lying there buried.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 7. You in the beginning here do pretend to bring enough to convince a
refractory man. Parturiunt montes -- The little substance of this long
discourse is divided into six paragraphs and easily answered.

The first is not discoursive, but only a flourishing bravado, not to be
answered.

The second (being taken out of the four first Chapters) does contain an
impertinency of the erroneous folly of Faustus.

The third (out of the thirteenth Chapter) is a breviate of S. Augustines
answer to that impertinency of Faustus: wherein is nothing to the Theme for
proof of a proper Sacrifice, or of Christ's institution.

The fourth (taken out of 15, 16, 17, and 18 Chapters) does bring in Faustus
again and S. Augustine pursuing him, wherein you cogge in the word proper (a
true and proper Temple Altar and Sacrifice) which seems to run like the
language of S. Augustine, who has it not.

In the fifth you do expatiate far and wide (upon the 21 chapter) and
repeating what was argued by S. Augustine nothing to our theme, but one small
sentence, which amazeth me to hear produced by you, it being absolutely
destructive to your real, visible, and proper Sacrifice. Whereupon I may
justly say to you as S. Augustine there to Faustus, maledicendi cupiditate
Cont. Faust. lib. 20. c. 21.
A. B. C. quid profiteretur oblitus est. The place is famous, full against you,
and shall be repeated anon.

Your sixth and last part of this chapter is another vain flourish: there you
call for victory, proclaiming your cited authorities to be clear and full to
the present purpose -- For proper Sacrifice there can be nothing more plain,
being so often so plainly and so distinctly set down. You would work well if
you had a good Theme to work upon: but your stuff is naught. Sometime that
which is in substance little you dress and trim forth into a pretty show:
sometime that which is clear against you (either to show your art, or for want
of better helps) you take, and then with a colorable flourish of your own, you
strive to win upon the easy belief of others; whenas (for my part) I cannot
obtain so much of my self by all that you produce, as to think that you are so
partial, as not to see that you have proved (in some of your choice
authorities) plain truth against your self. Thus -- Quos perdere vult Jupiter
hos dementat.

As for your other (...), those excellent points (as you call them) they are
neither proved here, nor pertinent to your or mine undertaking.

You help me in the last inference with a most fit reply unto you. We do of
you, as S. Augustine complained of the Manichees, wonder, that we cannot make
you understand that place of Scripture, Sacrificium laudis, etc. The Sacrifice
of praise shall glorify me. Now if you take praise for a proper Sacrifice, you
stand alone; Bellarmine, and all writers else, and common sense against you.
But if praise be a sacrifice improper, and that there never was flesh and blood
in Christian sacrifice, (unless in that of Christ himself on the Cross) How
long, may I say, (in your own language) would it be before we should be able to
make Papists understand the same? The flesh and blood of this sacrifice was
prefigured and promised by the ancient Sacrifices, delivered by Christ himself
in his passion, and after his ascension celebrated by the Sacrament of
remembrance.

CHAP. XX.
A. B. C.
. 1. I Might allege other authorities without number; but these I suppose will
serve the turn, if any will. The places being many, clear, and full; the
authority undoubted both for the persons, and for the works here alleged: nor
can I imagine what objection may be made against them.

Sr. EDWARD DERING.
. 2. The authorities (as above is shown) are some against you, others make
nothing for you in the point controverted, which is propriety of your
Sacrifice, and our Saviors institution for it. So that not one place is (as
you pretend) clear and full.

A. B. C.
. 3. As for the other point of S. Peter's and his Successors authority, I must
desire a little further respite. And this one point may serve for this time.

Sr. EDWAD DERING.
. 4. For proof of this other point you desire a little further respite. If you
had really intended any thing therein, or could perform what you have
undertaken, three sheets of paper require not so much time but that they might
well have come along with this: if not ready then, yet you will not say but
that I might have received them from you before I could dispatch this unto you.
But that point as it is the main essential point of Popery, (with and without
which a man is a Papist, or no Papist) so is it also of that difficulty to be
proved, that you do wisely to decline that which you know you can never make
good.

. 5. In the last place, as before I gave you Cyprian for Cyprian, and Eusebius
for Eusebius, so here also I will return S. Augustine for S. Augustine. And so
much the rather and more plentifully, because you say you are content to let
the decision of the controversy rest wholly upon his authority.

First then answer (if you can) what you last brought Contr. Faustum, l. 20.
cap. 21.
and I shall first object: Hujus Sacrificii caro and sanguis ante adventum
Christi per victimas similitudinum promittebatur: in passione Christi per ipsam
veritatem reddebatur: post ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoriae
celebratur: Before the coming of Christ, the flesh and blood of this sacrifice
was promised by victimes of similitude: in the passion of Christ, it was
delivered by the Truth it self: after the ascension of Christ, it is celebrated
by the Sacrament of Remembrance. I need not do by this, as you by your
imperfect authorities, flourish it out in show for want of strength. It carries
it own quickness with it: It is pregnant and pungent. He does not say that our
celebration is by a proper sacrifice* but by a Sacrament of Remembrance.

Secondly, if S. Augustine had credited your daily Missall Sacrifice of the
very body and blood of Christ, he could not have said, Praeclarissimum atque
optimum De civit. Dei, l. 19. cap. 2^.
Sacrificium nos ipsi sumus, we our selves are the most excellent and the best
sacrifice. For although he say in another place, that Tota redempta civitas is
universale sacrificium, Ibid lib. 10. cap. 6.
the whole city of the redeemed is an universal sacrifice; yet this being but
the body is not of that excellency and acceptance, as is that sacrifice of the
Head, Christ himself: from and by whom she (the Church) in her several members
and in her self entire, has both value and acceptance. Therefore (I say) S.
Augustine could not have called us the best and most excellent sacrifice, if
beside that of our Saviors Passion he had also credited the real bodily
presence and proper sacrifice of the Mass.

Thirdly, if S. Augustine had believed your daily sacrifice continually
renewable, he could not say* unicum Con. advers. Leg. and Proph. lib. 1. c. 18.
sacrificium -- unum -- singular and solum verum sacrificium pro nobis Christi
sanguis effusus est: The only sacrifice, the one, singular and alone true
sacrifice is Christ's blood shed for us.

Fourthly, such as is the altar such the sacrifice, but neither of them proper,
visible, or external in the language of S. Augustine; Ejus est altar cor
nostrum, our heart is his altar: whereupon he proceeds, saying, Ei De civit.
Dei, lib. 10. cap. 4.
dona ejus in nobis, nosque ipsos vovemus, and reddimus ei beneficiorum ejus
solennitatibus festis and diebus statutis dicamus, sacramusque memoriam, ne
volumine temporum ingrata subrepat oblivio. Ei sacrificamus hostiam humilitatis
and laudis, in ara cordis igne fervida charitatis: Unto him we vow and return
our selves, and his own gifts in us. To him upon festival solemnities and
days appointed we do dedicate and consecrate the memory of his benefits, lest
an ungrateful oblivion through the course of time should creep upon us. To him
we sacrifice a sacrifice of humility and praise, in the altar of our heart, by
the fire of fervent charity: Whereby it appears that S. Augustine either did
not believe, or else (in his very Chapter entitled Of sacrifice to God) he did
forget the highest mystery of your Religion: for here is no more material
proper sacrifice, then that fire (here spoken of) is material proper fire.

Fifthly, S. Augustine in his next Chapter says, Illud Lib. 10. c. 5.
quod ab omnibus appellatur sacrificium, signum est very sacrificii: That which
of all men is called Sacrifice, is a sign of a true sacrifice: which follows
well after that which in this very chapter he had said a little above,
Sacrificium visibile invisibilis sacrificii Sacramentum, id est, sacrum signum
est: visible sacrifice is the Sacrament, that is, a holy sign of invisible
sacrifice. If then visible sacrifices (with S. Augustine) are sacraments or
holy signs of invisible sacrifices, surely then they were not, in his
Religion, external and proper sacrifices: for the sign visible, and the thing
signed invisible, are contradistinguished.

Sixthly, a Table cannot be a Relative to a sacrifice proper* but S. Augustine
has, Advers. Judaeos, c. 9
Mensa Dominica ad Christi sacrificium pertinens; the Lords table appertaining
to Christ's sacrifice.

Seventhly, Ibid.
Manibus non efferimus carnem, sed cord and ore offerimus laudem: We do not
with our hands offer flesh, but with heart and mouth we offer praise.

Eighthly, Sacrifice, Priest, and Altar, are relatives, and do meet together
all or none; But the Priesthood of Christ is not on earth: Ibid.
Christi sacerdotium in aeternum per severat in coelo: the Priesthood of Christ
does for ever continue in heaven: Therefore his sacrifice also is there with
him: for where the Priest is, there the sacrifice must also be. And this is
plain by your Greek Liturgies, where they (as S. Augustine here of Christ's
Priesthood) do affirm our Altar to be in heaven, as in that attributed to S.
James, (...) so also in that of Chrysostom: and (...) in that of S. Mark. Lib.
4. c. 35
Irenaeus, Altar in coelis, Our Altar is in heaven. So S. Chrysostom calls
our Savior In epist. ad Hebr. cap. 6. hom. 11.
(...), The Altar above. Epiphanius says of Christ, Advers. Haer. lib. 2. com.
1.
(...), He the sacrifice, he the Priest, he the Altar. Thus Orat. 28.
Nazianzen comforts himself with (...), another Altar in heaven. But I must
proceed with S. Augustine.

Ninthly, that which is after a sort, or in a certain manner, is not to be said
really and properly to be such, but S. Augustine says plainly and expressly
of the Sacrament; Epist. 23.
Secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est: The
Sacrament of Christ's body is after a kind of sort the body of Christ; from
whence by consequence it follows, that your sacrifice is (at the most) but
after a kind of sort a sacrifice, certainly then not a proper sacrifice.

Tenthly, S. Augustine plainly calls the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, In Psalm. 3.
Convivium, in quo corporis and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendavit
and tradidit: A banquet wherein he (our Savior) did unto his disciples commend
and deliver the figure of his body. But you affirm that you do offer the
substance, and so you must say, or by your own principles forfeit your cause:
for with you in your faith it is a consequence undeniable, If no
Transubstantiation, then no proper Sacrifice.

In the eleventh place, in the person of Christ, comforting his disciples upon
the hardness of that speech in S. John, Except ye eat my flesh, etc. he says,
In Psalm. 98
Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem
quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi,
spiritualiter intellectum vivificabit vos: and si necesse est illud visibiliter
celebrari, opertet tamen invisibiliter intelligi: You are not to eat this body
which you see, or drink that blood which they shall spill who will crucify me.
I have commended unto you a certain Sacrament; It being spiritually understood
will quicken you: and though of necessity it must visibly be celebrated, yet it
must be invisibly understood

Twelfthly, he says, Contr. Adimantum, cap. 12.
Non dubitavit Dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis
sui: Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body.

In the last place, S. Augustine in his Treatise of Lib. 3. c. 16
Christian doctrine, where he discourses plentifully of the right
understanding of the holy Scriptures, and what danger it is to take such places
figuratively which are properly spoken (or contrariwise) he gives this Canon of
direction; Si praeceptiva locutio est, aut flagitium aut facinus v^tans, aut
utilitatem aut beneficentiam jubens, non est figurata: si autem flagitium aut
facinus videtur jubere, aut utilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare* figurata est:
that is, If there be a preceptive speech, either forbidding a mischievous deed
or a villainous act, or commanding commodity or a good turn, it is not
figurative: But if it seem to command a heinous deed or villainous act, it is
figurative. This is S. Augustine, and this is undisputable. I would unto this
Proposition have subjoyned an Assumption, such as would have fitted you, and
forced you to a Conclusion on our behalf: but that S. Augustine has already
framed it. S. Augustine has made this inference for us, and has instanced
thus in the next following words: Nisi manducaveritis carnem filii hominis, and
sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in vobis: facinus, vel flagitium
videtur jubere. Figura est ergo pr^cipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum,
and suaviter atque utiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro ejus
crucifixa and vulnerata sit: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son Jo^. 6. 53.
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. He seems (says S.
Augustine) to command a villainous or mischievous act: therefore it is a figure
commanding us to communicate with the passion of our Lord, and sweetly and
profitably to lay up in memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for
us. I could present you more out of this excellent Father, as in his 150.
Treatise upon. S. John: his Epistle to Dardanus, and elsewhere: but these
already will serve to show you, that out of Cyprian, Eusebius, and S. Augustine
you have more to answer, then from them you have objected. And now let a sober
Christian judge whether any of these (especially S. Augustine) be like to
decide the controversy on your side or on ours. And thus have I closed my
answer to your Treatise, which if in some places it may seem thin and barren,
I must have leave to suit it to your objections, which must be answered such as
they were. And therefore I borrow a sentence from a learned Scholar, who said,
Meus adversarius tam jejune de rebus gravissimis plerumque disserit, ut valde
etiam jejunafutura esset responsio.

CHAP. XXI.
Catastrophe.
THus have you what my little leisure and less learning can afford: wherein I
might have shortened my pains, and with one line have answered all: for in all
these six sheets of paper you never come near the proof of what you assumed:
Viz. That Christ Jesus did institute a sacrifice, and that this sacrifice by
him instituted is a sacrifice properly so named. This propriety and this
institution (I say) you have not in any authority by you alleged once touched,
and are therefore far from proof of your cause.

Your mass is the highest act in your Religion: your sacrifice is Brerely
^itur. tract. 3.. 2.
that point wherein consists the very essence of the mass: wherein (says
your Jesuit Caussin) Holy court. part 1. l. 3.. 13.
The life of a Savior is sacrificed; yet for this highest point the very
essence of your mass, the sovereigne act of your faith, devotion and Religion,
you have not one text throughout the whole Law of Christian Religion either
convincing or pregnant, nay you have not one probable deduction whereby to
prove your determined error.

Two places you grasp hard hold by, but both in the old Testament. First that
of Malachy, which you will Mal. 1. 11.
take for your external, visible, and proper sacrifice, contrary to the plain
sense of the place, and contrary to the frequent exposition of the Fathers: who
receive it as of internal, visible, and improper sacrifice, as Eusebius
Demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c* 6, and l. 2* c. and l. 1. c. ult. Justin Martyr Dial.
cum Tryphone. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. Tertull. cont. Marcion. l. 3. c. 22. and l.
4. c. 1. advers. Judeos in ^ine cap. 5. and initio cap. 6. Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 95. and advers. Judaeos Hom. 2. Hieron. in Malach. 1. 11. Augustine.
cont. advers. Leg. and proph. l. 1. c. 20. de civitate Dei* l. 18. c. 35. and
l. 19. c. 23. and contra Judeos c. 9.

The other place is that of Melchisedec where he both a priest and a King does
exercise both dignities. As a priest he blesses Abraham, as a King he feasteth
him and his army, and this is the plain truth of that story, so much and so
impertinently by Papists drawn over to their Missall sacrifice.

CHAP. XXII.
Antistrophe.
. 1. I Was minded to have cast anchor here, and not to have whetted a
disputation sharp already, yet since that in matter of Religion, one side is
never to be blamed though it do proceed Disputationis serram reciprocando (for
truth must not be deserted because her adversaries bark at her) I am therefore
resolved to change my style and to proceed.

Semper ego auditor tantum? nunquamne reponam? Yes the defendants buckler
having warded your blows, let me now take the assailants sword, and be you
respondent another while: wherein I am well content to be concluded within
three sheets of paper, as you promised and did undertake.

You have produced three Fathers, who all have answered themselves: yet
(omitting many other) I think fit to give you three for three. First John
Bishop of the Patriarchall sea of Constantinople, for his eloquence surnamed
Chrysostom. The next Cyrill who held the famous Patriarchate of Alexandria,
whom In Hod^go. cap. 7.
Anastasius saluteth with the title of most clear light of the Fathers.
Thirdly, S. Ambrose of Millan the ghostly father of S. Augustine. And thus I
begin with S. Chrysostom.

First having produced that of Malachy, He clearly Mal. 1. 11. Advers. Jud^^s
Hom. 36.
delivers himself, what this pure offering is: (...) (...). It is not offered
(says he) by fume and smoke, neither by blood (mark it) and ransom, but by
the grace of the spirit. And that our Christian sacrifice is not tied to any
place, (as yours to your altars) he says that every man sitting at his own
home shall worship God. And for the manner he tells you, that our Savior
Christ did bring in (...), a more sublime and spiritual kind of worship. But
of a bodily sacrifice no word.

Secondly, Chrysostom in another place does number Homil. in 95. ps.
up ten several sorts of sacrifices in the Christian Church, yet as if he
were ignorant of all proper external and visible sacrifice, they are all of
them metaphorical and spiritual. The place is full and copious, I must
contract it. The first is imitation of Christ or charity, 2. Martyrdom, 3.
Prayer, 4. Psalms, or Hymns, 5. Righteousness, 6. Alms, 7. Praise, 8.
compunction or contrition of heart, 9. Humility, 10. Preaching. Is it not pity
that you or some body for you was not at this ancient Fathers elbow, to jog
him, and to put him in mind of your Popish sacrifice. But alas your present
Romish faith, or rather folly, was then unborn.

Thirdly, speaking of Christ he says, Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Heb. 9.
(...), He is both sacrifice and priest (as Epiphanius before alleged) whence
I infer, that if the body of Christ be really present in your sacrifice by
conversion of the substance of bread into the substance of his body, then also
(since relatives do always stand and fall together, and that Chrysostom in that
place says, that he is offered (...), by himself) it must follow, that your
priest also (as well as your sacrifice) is Christ really and properly, by the
like conversion or transubstantiation of persons. For Chrysostom and other
Fathers do affirm that Christ is both our sacrifice and our priest: and in all
relatives if you will take one of them properly, you must take the other
properly also. You may believe Cardinal Bellarmine cited before in my sixth
Aphorism, cap. 6.

Fourthly, in the same Homily we do not (says he) Hom. 17. i^ Epist. ad Heb.
cap. 9.
perform another but the same sacrifice, whereupon (as if he had been
adventurous in this expression, which happily might incur a misconstruction)
the immediate words following do seem to retrench that latitude of sense, thus,
(...), or rather (says he) we do perform a remembrance of a sacrifice.

Fifthly, upon these words in S. John, Except ye eat the Hom. 46. in Joan. John
6. 33.
flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, and
(verse. 63.) It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. (...)
All these things are carnal, and which ought to be understood mystically and
spiritually -- for (says he) if any man take them (...), fleshly, he will gain
nothing by them. But you take (say you) the very flesh of Christ, and look to
gain thereby: Therefore S. Chrysostom and you are of two religions.

Sixthly, in the Liturgy ascribed to S. Chrysostom, which on your side is
called S. Chrysostomes mass, after the consecration there is a prayer, (...)
(...). Send down thy holy Spirit upon us, and upon these gifts here placed
before thee: which evidently convinces, that Christ is not bodily present: if
he be, we need not pray for the holy Ghost upon him. And if he be not there,
you must confess (as your Cardinal before) that you have no proper Sacrifice.

Seventhly and lastly, (...) Hom 11. in E^ist. ad Heb. c. ^.
Behold (says he) we have the victime above, we have the priest above, we have
the sacrifice above. Let us offer these sacrifices which may be offered upon
that altar: No longer sheep and oxen, no longer blood and smoke, all these
things are abolished, and in room of these ((...) mark that) is introduced a
rational worship. But what is this rational worship? These things which are
by the soul, which are by the spirit, -- which have no need of a body, which
have no need of Organs, or members of instruments, or places. But your
sacrifice is here below: but your sacrifice has a body, the natural body of
Christ: But your sacrifice (has parts organicas) does contain the flesh and
bones, and other parts and members of the body, as by natural concomitancy
Ledesmade sacram euchar. c. 7.
they are really united to Christ's humane body. But your sacrifice is in
places, as well tied to your altars, as circumscribed within the accidents of
bread and wine, and the ambient place that roundeth them, as by express words
Ledesma grants, where he speaks of that which is contained under the species
of bread. Therefore S. Chrysostom Ibid. cap. 5.
and you are of two religions.

Cyril of Alexandria is the next, who tells you that God in his wisdom did
permit unto his people sacrifices, and did so order them Contr. Julianum l. 9.
(...) That they might in themselves make way for the form of spiritual
worship: which he plentifully shows to be the Christian Sacrifice.

Secondly, Julian having objected unto Cyril, that the Christians had no
sacrifice; Cyril declining and thereby denying all external, visible, or
proper sacrifice, is copious in metaphorical and spiritual sacrifices: which
in way of answer for the Christian Religion, he calls Ibid. lib. 9. and 10.
(...), an intellectual and (I may say) unsubstantiall worship, or a service
void of materials, and (...), reasonable sacrifices: (...), a service or
worship thin or not gross, exact, intellectual, and spiritual: and gives
this reason for his assertion, (...) For (says he) a most immateriall
sacrifice does become, or is fit for God, who is in his nature pure and
immateriall. Now then prove that your sacrifice is immateriall, and then you
and we will shake hands with this learned Father.

S. Hex^r^m* l. 5. c. 19.
Ambrose is the third I promised you, who says, Hoc est verum Christi
sacrificium, p^dicitia corporalis and gratia spiritualis: This is the true
sacrifice of Christ, bodily chastity, and spiritual grace.

Secondly, whereas you teach that yours is idem sacrificium cum P^ssione
Dominica: The same sacrifice with the passion of our Lord* (as Cardinal De
Euch. sacrif l. 2. c. 1^.
Allan and others affirm) saying, Recordatio ac exemplar sic constituitur in
nostro sacrificio, ut tamen sit prorsus unum idemque cum immolatione in cruce:
The Remembrance or copy is so ordained in our sacrifice, that it is
notwithstanding altogether one and the same with the sacrifice on the Cross.
And that Ibid. 552. and Ledesma de Euchar. c. 17.
one and the same substance is in your several hosts, and the same also in
that of the Cross. Now howsoever you would hereby avoid the several varieties
of many several sacrifices, yet can you never decline this, that (even by the
ground of your own positions and principles) you do repeat one and the same
substantial and very sacrifice often. But S. Ambrose will deny you both
variety of Sacrifices, and also your daily repetition of that one and the same
sacrifice once offered upon the Cross: mark what he says upon the words of S.
Paul, (Heb. 7. 27.) Magnitud nem sacrificii ostendit, Si sit Ambros.
quamuis enim illudunum fuerit, semel oblatum, sufficit tamen in sempiternum --
Nec hoc pro populo quotidie offerendum erat, sed tantae sanctitatis and honoris
apud Deum fuit hoc sacrificium, ut semel oblatum in aeternum profuerit populo
Dei: He shows the greatness of this sacrifice, for although it were but one,
once offered, yet it suffices for ever -- Neither was this to be daily offered
for the people, but this sacrifice was of so great sanctity and honor with
God, that it will be profitable for ever to the people of God. De offic. lib.
1. cap. 48.


Thirdly, S. Ambrose did believe but a figure or image of Christ to be now here
on earth, and the truth of his presence to continue only in heaven. Hic umbra,
hic imago, illic veritas: umbra in Lege, imago in Evangelio, veritas in
coelestibus. Ante agnus of^erebatur -- nunc Christus offertur, sed offertur
quasi hom^ -- hic in imagine, ibi in veritate -- Here is the shadow, here the
similitude, there (in heaven) is the truth: The shadow in the Law, the
similitude in the Gospel, the truth in heavenly places: heretofore the lamb
was offered -- now Christ is offered, but is offered as man -- here in
similitude, there (that is, in heaven) in truth.

Fourthly, S. Ambrose shows how he sacrifices, not by actual exhibition of
Christ's body to God, but by recordation and due remembering of our Saviors
Passion. The place is expressly parallel to that of S. Chrysostom In epist.
ad Hebr. 10. 4. published on your side as for Ambr.
touched before. The words are, Nonne per singulos dies offerimus? offerimus
quidem, sed recordationem facientes mortis ejus -- Non aliud sacrificium sicut
pontifex, sed idipsum semper offerimus: magis autem recordationem sacrificii
operamur: Do not we offer every day? we offer indeed, but making remembrance of
his death -- we do not as the Priest, offer another sacrifice, but always the
same: or rather we perform a remembrance of a sacrifice. If then S. Ambrose did
rather perform a remembrance of a sacrifice then a sacrifice indeed, you ought
also to do the like, and no more.

Fifthly and lastly, nothing can be plainer for spiritual and only spiritual
sacrifices then the words of this Father, inviting us (as the Text did lead
him) to draw near unto Christ (look Epist. to the Hebrews, cap. 10. 21. and
22.) Accedamus* -- In quo accedamus? sanctitate, fide, and spirituali cultura
in veraci cord, sine simulatione, in plenitudine fidei, quia nihil est
visibile horum, neque sacerdos, neque sacrificium, neque altar: Let us draw
near (says the Apostle) -- Wherein (says S. Ambrose) shall we draw near? in
holiness, faith, and spiritual worship, in truth of heart, without guile, in
fullness of faith, because none of these things are visible, neither Priest,
nor sacrifice, nor altar. I need not tell you that invisible sacrifice, priest,
and altar, are improper sacrifice, priest, and altar. But these authorities
being clear and convincing in themselves, need not (as yours have) flourishes
longer then themselves. Beside, my three sheets are just filled, and three
authorities are now in your hand. To which I only add this line, That the
faith of a real bodily presence, being so much younger then the times wherein
these Fathers wrote; it may be wondered that so many pieces (out of these and
others) can be found, wherewith to oppose your long since devised error.

CHAP. XXIII.
Epiphonema.
YOu promised me that beyond the Theams then by you undertaken, I should
receive an overplus (an auctuarium as you called it.) Now because I would not
be in debt, I will pay before you lend it. Take therefore this that follows as
a surplusage above weight and measure, (...). The disposal of it is very brief,
and thus;

I will present unto you three authorities out of your own eminent Doctors,
inconsistant (as I think) with your proper Sacrifice of the natural body and
blood of Jesus Christ. And in the last place, three rational syllogisticall
arguments, and so good night.

1. Petrus de Ledesma Professor of Divinity at Salamanca, De* Euch. cap. 7.
having varied his discourse into many scholastic subtilties, concerning the
manner how Christ is in the Sacrament: As first, That all and whole Christ is
there, next that the whole body of Christ, with all the parts and members
thereof, is contained under the shows of bread and wine. And with this body his
reasonable soul by concomitancy, and his deity also by real union with the
body, and the whole Trinity is there, though not properly and in the rigor of
speech; and this body thus there, is there immovable by it self, but moveable
as the sacramental species may be moved. After all which Mataeotechny, his
sixth conclusion is very good Protestantisme. Corpus Christi non est in hoc
sacramento sicut in loco ut alia corpora naturalia, sed modo quodam ineffabili,
quem Theologi Sacramentalem voc^nt, -- The body of Christ is not in this
sacrament as in a place like as other natural bodies are; but by an
unspeakable manner, which Divines do call a Sacramental manner. -- Is all this
stir then to prove our Saviors body to be there in the Sacrament in an
ineffable and sacramental manner? away then with your premises, we grant your
conclusion, and from thence do infer, That if Christ's body be there but
sacramentally, your sacrifice can then be no proper, but a sacramental
sacrifice, that is, sacrum signum sacrificii, a holy sign of a sacrifice,
which we deny not, as in the words of S. Augustine Cap. 20.. 5*
before alleged: Visibile Sacrificium, invisibilis sacrificii sacramentum, id
est, sacrum signum est: Visible sacrifice is the Sacrament, that is, the holy
sign of invisible sacrifice. Now the Sacrament, or holy sign, cannot be
properly the sacrifice and thing signified.

2. Peter Lombard, the famous Master of the sentences, Lib. 4. did. 12.
Quaeritur (says he) si quod gerit Sacerdos PROPRIE dicatur sacrificium vel
immolatio: and, si Christus quotidie immoletur, vel semel tantum immolatus sit:
ad hoc breviter dici potest, illud quod offertur and consecratur a sacerdote,
VOCARI sacrificium and oblationem: quia MEMORIA est, and repraesentatio very
Sacrificii and sanctae immolationis factae in ara crucis. Having discoursed
before of accidents and substances, and of two ways of Lib. ^. did. 9
eating Christ, one sacramental performed both by the good and bad, the other
spiritual only by the good: he comes to these words above, viz. It is a
question whether that which the priest does perform may be PROPERLY called a
sacrifice or immolation: and, whether Christ be daily offered, or be offered
but once only* unto this it may be briefly answered; That which is offered and
consecrated by the Priest, is CALLED a sacrifice and offering: because (mark
his question, his answer, and his reason) it is the MEMORY and representation
of the true sacrifice and holy immolation performed on the Altar of the Cross.
He does not say that it is called a sacrifice, because it properly is so, nor
because the natural body and blood is offered up, but because it is the memory
and representation of the true sacrifice, etc.

3. My third authority that I borrow from your side Decret. part 3. de conser.
did. 2. cap. 48. Hoc est* --
is out of the corpse of your Canon Law, made irrefragable by the unerring bull
of Pope Gregory the 13. where speaking of the sacramental bread which he there
calls heavenly bread, he says, Suo modo VOCATUR corpus Christi, cum revera sit
sacramentum corporis Christi, illius videlicet, quod visibile, palpabile,
mortale in cruce est suspensum: vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis quae
sacerdotis manibus fit Christi Passio, mors, crucifixio, NON REI VERITATE, sed
significante mystery: After it own manner it is CALLED the body of Christ,
when as in truth it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ, that is to say, of
that body which visible, palpable, mortal, was hanged on the Cross: and that
immolation of flesh, which is done by the hands of the Priest, is CALLED the
passion, death, crucifixion of Christ, not in the TRUTH of the thing, but in a
signifying mystery.

The Gloss hereupon is suitably orthodox: Coeleste Ibid.
Sacramentum, quod vere repraesentat Christi carnem, dicitur corpus Christi,
sed IMPROPRIE (mark that word) unde dicitur suo modo, sed non rei veritate, sed
significat^ mysterio, ut sit sensus, vocatur Christi corpus, id est,
significat: that is, The heavenly Sacrament which does truly represent the
flesh of Christ: It is called the body of Christ, but IMPROPERLY: whereupon it
is said, (SUO MODO) after it own manner, yet not in the truth of the thing, but
in the mystery of the thing signified, that the sense is, It is called Heb. 2. ^
the body of Christ, that is, it so signifies. This is so plain, that he that
runs may read it.

CHAP. XXIIII.
TO keep the number by you begun of three, I will now in the last place briefly
salute you with three Syllogismes. Each Major of each Syllogism is Bellarmines.

First, Nomen and ratio sacrificii proprie non convenit invisibili oblationi,
sed so^um visibili and externae. De Missa, lib. 1. c. 2.. Secundo --
Every thing that is properly sacrificed, is a thing properly visible and
external:

But the body of Christ in the Eucharist is neither properly external, nor
properly visible

Therefore the body of Christ in the Eucharist is not properly sacrificed.

Secondly, Sacrificii very and realis ratio consistit in tribus: primum, res
prosana ^it sacra. De Missa, lib. 1. cap. 27.. His igitur --
Whatsoever is by the Priest properly sacrificed, is made a thing sacred of the
same thing before profane:

But the body of Christ is not made a thing sacred of the same thing before
profane:

Therefore the body of Christ is not by the Priest properly sacrificed.

Thirdly, Ad verum sacrificium requiritur, ut id quod offertur Deo in
sacrificium plane destruatur. De Missa, lib. 1. cap. 2.. Octavo -- Sacrificium
-- requirit, ut non solum usus rei Deo offeratur, sed ipsa ^tjam substantia:
and ideo non solum usus, sed substantia consumatur. Ibid. Sensibilis immutatio
rei quae offertur -- ad rationem externi sacrificii omnino pertinere videtur.
De Missa, lib. 1. cap. 27.. In consecratione -- Verum and reale sacrificium,
veram and realem mortem, aut destructionem rei immola^ae desiderat. De Missa,
lib. 1 cap. 27.. Haec sententia --
Every thing that is properly sacrificed, does suffer a real, proper, and
sensible death, destruction, or consumption:

But the body of our Savior in the Eucharist does not suffer any real,
proper, or visible death, destruction or consumption.

Therefore the body of our Savior in the Eucharist is not properly sacrificed.

CHAP. XXV.
THus good A. B. C. (be content with this name or send me a better) you have
enough not only to satisfy Cap. 19.. 1
an indifferent man, but even to convince a refractory. Nor can I see what can
be said against the authorities or Cap. 6. Cap. 20.
works by me cited. Nor can I imagine what objection may be made against them.
Refute them clearly, fairly, and fully, and through all impediments whatever
can arise, I will follow you to Rome.

For, magna est veritas: great is Truth, and pr^v^lebit, it will, it shall
prevail with me. If you cannot make a solid and sure reply, then suffer Truth
to prevail with you, remembering that Christ is Truth. Remember also that this
is one of the most principal points of your Religion: for sacrifice is the
very essence of your Mass. How capital, how deadly then is this error, which
being once admitted does unavoidably lead you from superstition to an
idolatrous adoration.

You promised a friendly conference, which I shall be glad to hear that you
would perform: as well upon this Theme (if this be not here enough) as upon
that other of the Papal Supremacy, wherein I do desire that one of my
acquaintance may be satisfied quietly and privately: But alas, except your
cause were better, you must not come to an equal trial.

By way of farewell (at this time) I will take the language of an eminent
learned Priest, who by command of the Emperor Charles the Great, did write of
that subject with which your proper Sacrifice must stand or fall, that is, of
the bodily presence of Christ in the Mass. Bertram therefore who wrote 800.
years since has these words: Panis ille vinumque FIGURATE Christi corpus and
sanguis exsistit -- est quidem corpus Christi, sed non corporale sed
spirituale: est sanguis Christi, sed non corporalis, sed spiritualis. Nihil
igitur hic corporaliter, sed spiritualiter sentiendum: corpus Christi est sed
non corporaliter, and sanguis Christi est sed non corporaliter: that is, This
bread and wine is FIGURATIVELY the body and blood of Christ -- It is indeed the
body of Christ, but not corporal, but spiritual: It is the blood of Christ,
but not corporal but spiritual. Therefore nothing here is to be understood
bodily but spiritually. It is the body of Christ, but not bodily. It is the
blood of Christ, but not bodily. If your late word and name of
Transubstantiation had then been coined, he who denies the doctrine, would
also in express terms have said, It is the body of Christ, but not
transubstantially.

Away then with your new coined faith of Trent, for I am confident in this,
That a Papist living in that Creed (who does or may know the purer truth of the
Gospel of God) is (to say no more) in a desperate hazard of Salvation.

FINIS.

