A DESCRIPTION OF THE Funeral Solemnities, Performed in the Church of
Nostre-Dame, at PARIS: To Honor the Memory of his Excellency the Lord HENRY de
la Tour D'Avergne VICOUNT TURENNE, Colonel General of the Light Horse, And
Marshal General of the Field and Armies of Lewis the XIV of France.

Wherein are represented the most Remarkable passages of his LIFE.

Done into English out of French, by a Gentleman that sometimes had the Honor
to serve under his Command.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXV.

The Design of the Funeral Representation.
AS Marshal Turenne was no less Pious than Valiant, so it seems not
unreasonable to bring in the Christian and Military Virtues, as Mourners to
assist at his Funeral, those kind of decorations being both Christian and
Military; they are Christian since they are practiceable in the most Sacred
places, and in our most Holy mysteries, whither the faithful are invited to
Celebrate the Memories of great Souls; and they are Military, because they are
representatives of their most Heroic Actions, wherein their Valor and Piety
are equally praised.

The first Object that offers it self to the spectators eye, is a Trophie of
Arms, Colors, Drums, Trumpets, etc. over the Portal of the Quire of our Ladies
Church, under which stands Virtue armed, holding in her hand a Church Banner,
which is the Arms of the House of Avergne, whereon are written these Verses of
the Tenth Book of Virgils Aeneids.

Stat sua Cuique dies;
Breve and irreparabile tempus
Omnibus est vitae,
Sed famam extendere factis
Hoc virtutis opus.
Which is, That there is a peremptory day set to every mortal by the Eternal
Wisdom, beyond which none shall pass, that the time of Man's life is short, and
once over, never to be retrieved, and that it is Virtue alone that can make us
survive Death, by the memory of our good deeds,

On both sides of her, stand two great Skelletons, holding with one hand the
Crown of a Prince, and a Leading-staff; with the other a marble Table, in which
is Graven this Inscription.

Piis and Heroicis Manibus
HENRICI a Turre
Vicecomitis TURENNII
Magistri Equitum
and
Castrorum Praefecti
MOERENS GALLIA
Funus Celebrat publicum.
Adeste Cives
Adeste Milites
Adeste boni Omnes
Et lacrimas Cineri date.
Terrorem hostium
GALLIA;
Heroem
Arts Bellicae;
Salutis publicae assertorem
Regni Ordines
Amisere.
In English, Mourning France pays her last Devoir, in these Funeral Rites, to
the memory of Henry de la Tour Viscount Turenne, Colonel General of all the
Light horse, and Martial General of the Field and Armies of his Majesty.

You Citizens, Soldiers, and all good men that honor his memory, assist at
his Funeral and weep over his Ashes.

France lost in him the terror of her Enemies, Mars has lost a Hero, and all
the Orders of the Kingdom, the assertor of their Peace.

This Funeral was ordered by his Majesty to be publicly performed, Nullum
funus publicum fuit nisi a Senatu decerneretur. Jac. Guth. de Jure manium ^. 2.
c. 1. Addit equos and tela, quibus spoliaverat hostem; Indutosque jubet truncos
hostilibus Armis, ipsos far duces, inimicaque nomina figi. AEn. (...).
and all the Orders of the Kingdom to be there assistant.

It was usual among the Ancients, when a Prince or General of an Army, did not
survive his Victories, that he might receive the Honor of a Triumph, to dress
Trophies about his Tomb, and make them be carried by Officers and Soldiers in
the procession of his Funeral; it was so practiced in the Funeral of Pallas.

The same thing was done for Marshal Turenne, who fell in Battle. For besides
the Escotcheons of his Arms, which were hung upon all the Pillars and Columns
of the Church, there were eighteen Trophies consecrated to his Heroic
Achievements in these last Wars.

They might have represented all the Fights and Battails wherein he has been
personally engaged, since he was but thirteen years of Age, when first he bore
Arms under his Uncle the Prince of Orange, at the siege of Boisleduc, all the
occasions in which he Commanded, all the Cities and Fortified places which he
took: But as his last Actions were as glorious as any others of his Life, and
that many of the Spectators of this Funeral pomp, might have been eyewitnesses
of them, it was thought fit to illustrate these, concluding, that if eighteen
Trophies were but the Achievements of three or four years, it might easily be
judged what were the wonders of a Life so illustrious as his for the space of
threescore and four years.

The Inscriptions of these Trophies were,

I.

Arce Skenkiana expugnata,
The taking of Skinkscons.
II.

Nouiomago, Bomelia, Arnhemio, Buricio, Crepicordio subactis,
The taking of Numigen, Bomen, Arnheim, Burick Creuecoeur.
III.

Tribus oppidis ad Visurgium spectante host Captis.
The taking three Towns upon the Weser, in the face of the Enemy.
IV.

Ob Hermunduros intra fines cohibitos.
Blocking up the Enemy within Franconia.
V.

Ob repressos Hermiones and ad pacem coactos.
For repelling the Brandeburgers, and forcing them to a Peace.
VI.

Marcomannis and Suabis territis.
For having terrified the Misnians and Suabians.
VII.

Ob profligatos Nervios.
For defeating the Borderers upon the Rhine.
VIII.

Hostibus aditu prohibitis.
For keeping the Enemy from entering into Lorraine and Champagne.
IX.

Caesarianis retrocedere Coactis.
For forcing the Imperialists to repass the Rhine.
X.

Treboccis in ordinem redactis.
For obliging those of Strasburg to stand to the Neutrality.
XI.

Direptis spoliis.
For taking the Enemies Baggage.
XII.

Signis Direptis.
He retook the Colors the Enemy had taken.
XIII.

Ob Rhenum, Salam, Maenum, Issalam, Vahalim, pontibus Junctos and superatos.
He passed the Rhine, the Maine, and diverse other Rivers, to come to the Enemy.
XIV.

Ob Accisas quatuor praeliis Germaniae vires.
For gaining the four battles of Zint Zim, Ent-Zim, Mulhausen and Turqueim,
where he routed the chief forces of Germany.
XV.

Ob servatam Alsatiam.
For defending Alsatia, and the Towns of Brisac and Philipsbourg.
XVI.

Duci Invicto.
mo the Invincible Captain.
XVII.

Patri Castrorum.
He was truly a father to the Soldiers.
XVIII.

Victori, Pio, Foelici, and Sapienti.
All these Trophies were counterfeited in Brass, and placed betwixt great
Escotcheons, surmounted with Cornets or Horse Banners, to show that he was
Colonel General of the Light Horse; and surrounded with a great Mantle of
Ermins, such as the Princes, Dukes, and Peers of France give in their Arms.

The Mausoleum or Funeral pile, The Italians call these Mausoles, Catafalque,
but this word not being used but by Painters and Sculptors, was not made use of
in this description; the Greeks and Latins using only the word Mausoleum.
Joseph. hist. Jews.
placed in the middle of the Quire, was a round Tower upon a Mount, betwixt
four great Palm Trees, charged with Arms and Trophies, and Crowned with three
Crowns, a Princes Crown, a Crown of Laurel, and a Crown of Stars, between every
tree were Flower de Luces. Over the Tower the four Virtues upheld an Vrn, after
the manner of the Ancients, shaped like a Tomb, upon which Immortality
trampling upon Death carries the Image or Picture of Marshal Turenne toward
Heaven.

By this is meant the Tower of David, Adricomius interpreter of the Canticles
upon these words.
so famous in Holy Writ, built upon Mount Sion, fronting four ways, the Temple,
the Kings Palace, Sicut Turris David vidi. Collum tuum. Cant. 4
the Arsenal, or Armoric, and the public Schools, and had as many Gates
toward these several Buildings; a thousand Shields hung at the Arches or
Niches, and Windows thereof; this Tower was equally an ornament and safeguard
to the City of Jerusalem.

The Mausolea of Princes have frequently been erected in form of a Tower. The
Tomb of Augustus, and that of Adrian, were made in this shape, the Books of the
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, call the Coenotaphe, or place of Representations,
Castrum Doloris, because they anciently were built like Towers, happily because
Towers are the Emblems of Princes, Cum ceciderint Tueres. Isa. 30.
and Great men in sacred Oracles.

The Name of Turenne, and the Achievement of his House, which are a Field
Azure parseme of Fleurs de Lys Or, a Tower Argent; seem to make this
Application of the Tower of David more happy, and particular to this Subject.

Which likewise makes the four Gates of this Tower, applicable to the four
peculiar Virtues of Marshal Turenne, to his Piety, to his Stedfastness in the
Kings Service, to his Valor, and to his Wisdom, and therefore was written upon
the four frontispieces or faces of the Urn, these four words.

Religioni. Fidei. Fortitudini. Sapientiae.
They thought fit likewise to place these Inscriptions, Adricomius in Theatro
terrae s^nctae. Domus Fortium. Turris Fortitudinis. Sapienta aedi ^cavit. Prove.
9.
after the Ancient model of the Tower of David, which to the East faced the
Temple, to the South the House of the Mighty, from whence perhaps it was called
the Tower of Valor, to the North the Kings Palace, and to the West the House
of Wisdom.

The four Virtues that create a Hero are these, Religion makes him an honest
man, Fidelity a man of Honor, The Author happily meant the 4 Cardinal Virtues,
prudence, fortitude, patience, temperance.
Prudence a man of understanding, and Fortitude a man of courage; He that was
master of these four Virtues, was the vir quadratus of the Ancients.

The four Virtues that bear up the Vrn, are Religion, Ex quatuor literis hujus
nominis. Nescio qua ratione Turrim quadratam conficiunt. Joad. Quir. d'Sallazar
in c. 18. Prove. Turris fortissima nomen domini, ad ipsam currit justus and
exaltabitur.
Fidelity, Valor, and Wisdom. Religion has written upon her Breast the
ineffable Name of God, composed of four Hebrew letters, which the Rabbis
disposed into the form of a Tower, which made the Wise man say, that the Name
of the Lord was a very strong Tower, where a good man should find his refuge,
and whence he ought to take his rise and glory.

This Virtue with one hand bears up the Urn, and in the other carries one of
those kind of filver Towers, which the Primitive Church used for Lamps, of
which for the most part the Sockets in which the Light was set, were made like
Dolphins.

This Tower and these Dolphins, show no less the Character of Marshal Turenne's
Family, than his own singular Piety, since that of the Tower of Avergne, is the
same with that of the Tower of Pin, branches of the third Race of the Ancient
Dolphins.

The Emblem of Fidelity, is a Tower with Keys, there is nothing shows more the
fidelity of Governors, then their care in defending the places committed to
their trust.

The Symbol of Fortitude is a Tower furnished with all sorts of Arms, for its
defense.

Wisdom device, is a Watchtower to discover a great way off, whatever sails
upon the Sea, whose use is to show Vessels the Harbor, and how safely to get
to it, as well as Rocks and Shelves, and how prudently to avoid them.

Upon the Shields that hung upon the Walls were painted the Royal Ensigns
Armorial of France, Navarre, Arragon, Castile, England, Portugal, Sweden,
Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Sicily, Bohemia, Cyprus and Scotland.

The Imperial Coat Armours of Nassaw, Bavaria, Saxony and Austria.

Also the Achievements of Sovereign Families, as of Savoy, the Ancient
Dolphins, Mantua, Lorrain and Hesse, to which the House of Tours of Avergne is
Allied, and from which by matches it descends.

The Representations are placed betwixt the four Gates of the Tower, Equester
ordo suscepit urbique intulit atque in vestibulo domus collocavit. Suet. in
August.
after the manner of former Ages, in which it was usual to expose the Bodies of
Princes and Illustrious persons, at the Gates of their Palaces; Suetonius
says, that the Roman Knights carried the Body of Augustus, and placed it at the
Gate of his Palace.

There were branches of Laurel, Extructosque Thoros obtentu frondis inumbrant.
XI Aencid.
Palm and Cypress, about the Representation; Virgil describing the Funeral of
Pallas, puts branches or bows of trees about the Hearse.

The four Trophies that hung upon the four Palm Trees about the Tower, did
represent Marshal Turenne's Victories in Germany, Italy, Flanders and
Catalonia, which are the four frontiers of France.

The three Crowns that seem to grow upon those trees, Dabo tibi Coronam vitae.
Apoc. 2. In reliquo reposita est mihi corona justitiae. 2 Timothy 4.
and to Crown the Trophies, are the Crowns of our Birth, Life and Death, of
which mention is so often made in the sacred History, and they are applicable
to Marshal Turenne, more properly than to many others, since he was born in
greatness, which is represented by the Crown of a Prince, he lived in the midst
of Combats and Victories, which is shown by the Crown of Laurel, and died in
the bed of Honor, which is signified by the Crown of Stars; giving to
understand that to be a true Hero, it is requisite to be high born, to perform
great and glorious Actions, and to dye with Honor, as Marshal Turenne did.

The Palms were intermixed with Flower de Luces, environed with rays, to show
that Marshal Turenne made the splendour of his Birth, Life and Death, serve to
augment the Glory of France.

Under these Trees stood Honor, Reputation, and Glory, bewailing the fall of
this great Man, but Reputation and Glory were writing his Name and Character
upon great shields or bucklers, to render his Memory eternal; under their feet
these Monsters lay in Chains, viz. Envy, Rashness, Precipitation, Cowardice,
Self-Interest, Impiety, etc.

The Ancients reckoned their years by branches of Palm, because that Tree puts
forth every month a new branch, so that twelve branches of Palm signified a
Year amongst the Egyptians and Jews, it was enough to represent here, the four
ages of Marshal Turenne, by these four Palms; his Infancy, his Youth, his
Manhood, and his Old Age, all which he spent in exercise of Arms, which he
began to wear at the age of thirteen, under the Prince of Orange his Uncle by
the Mother, at the siege of Boisleduc, where he was made Captain of Foot, and
since advanced through all the Military degrees, Tu largus Eoa germina, tu
messes Cilicumque Arabumque superbis merge rogis; ferat ignis opus haeredis,
and alto aggere missuri nitido pia Nubila Caelo, stipentur Cineres. Stat. l. 3
Sylv. in lacrim. Hetrusci.
to the supreme dignity of Marshal General of the Field and Armies of the King,
in which he ended his days.

The Ancients did not only Embalm the Bodies of Great men, to preserve them
from corruption, but also burnt perfumes over their Tombs, which in process of
time became a kind of Sacrifice, the smoke of these perfumes naturally soaring
upwards, made them believe their smell ascended up to Heaven, with which they
fancied their Gods were much pleased. Orpheus a famous ancient Poet, did not
only offer Incense to his fictitious Gods, but likewise to the Memory, the
Judgment, Justice, Death, Victory, and to all the Virtues.

It was believed that the Virtues and great Actions of Marshal Turenne, did
merit perfumes of this nature; and even his Death, which happened as fatal to
France, as it was glorious to himself.

For this very reason upon the Prebends Seats all round the Quire, were placed
several antique faces, born up with brass bases or brackets, couched upon back
marble, out of which did issue Deaths heads of silver, crowned with Laurel,
with bats ears of silver, being the Emblems of Night and Death, upon each of
these antiques stood a vessel of Porphiry fuming; betwixt these antique faces
or fronts were placed Towers of silver, whence flamed sweet odours and
perfumes, because the Ancients used to set little Boxes like Towers upon the
Tombs of their Hero's, every Tower was environed with four Flower des Lys of
Gold, in which, as well as on the antiques, were placed flambois and great wax
lights.

Under these faces were set two and thirty Hieroglyphics upon the Birth, Life,
Glorious Achievements, Virtues, and Death of Turenne, as first,

To show the greatness of his high descent, was painted a Spring rising out of
a high Hill, with this Motto, Oriens ex Alto.
He comes from a high place.


It is necessary your Spring Head be at least as high as the place to which you
would make your water rise. It was one of the advantages Marshal Turenne had
over many others, to be allied to all the Crowned heads in Europe.

II.

A Heliotropion or Sun-flower, growing upon a very high stalk, which it
shadowed with his leaves like rays.

Caelsae stirpis honos.
He is the Honor of his race or stock.
Marshal Turenne was an honor to his House by his glorious Actions.

III.

An Eaglet in an Eirye, clapping his wings, and looking toward a great Eagle
that flies in the air, with this of Virgil, Et pater Excitat.
His father does encourage him.


The great actions of Henry de la Toure, Duke of Bovillon, and Prince of Sedan
his father, did raise his youthful courage to an inclination and propesinty to
warlike exploits, even from his childhood.

IV.

A young Lion following an old one, with this of Virgil, AEmulus in certamina.
He will fight in his company.


He followed his Uncle at 13 years of age, to the siege of Boisleduc.

V.

A squib afire in the air.

Incandescit eundo.
It takes fire as it goes.
So Turenne as he grew in years, so he advanced in Courage, and love to warlike
actions, which he made appear at the siege of Saverne, where he received a
wound with a Musket bullet, being then Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, which to
his dying day bore his Name.

VI.

A Ship in a storm, with this of the third Ode of Horace, Audax omnia perpeti.
Bold to suffer all.


VII.

Never did the fatigue of War shake his resolution, in which he rather took
delight; which is expressed in the seventh Emblem, which was an Elephant
charged with a wooden Tower full of armed men, with this of Virgil, Nec me
labor iste Gravabit.
Nor shall that weight oppress me.


VIII.

A Porcupine.

Omnis mihi vita sub armis.
I pass my life in Arms.
To show the great inclination he always had for his Majesty's service;

IX.

A young Eagle soaring up to the Sun.

Arduus at Solemn.
To express his exactness in observing his Majesty's Orders in all his Marches
and enterprises;

X.

A Sun Dial that has no other motion but that of the Sun, which it exactly
nicks with his shadow.

Observata sequor vestigia.
I punctually follow his motion.
For his Valor in taking of Dunkirk, Furnes, Bergen, Dixmund, Ipres, Ninove,
Oudenard, Comines, and so many other Towns;

XI.

A Granado in the Air.

Et magnas territat Vrbes.
He makes the greatest Cities shake.
XII.

A great Eagle followed by many lesser, with this half Verse of Lucans ninth
Book of Pharsalia, Monstrat tolerare labores.


He trained up to the exercise of Wars the Duke of Bovillon, the Count of
Avergne, the Marshal of Duras, and the Count de l'Orge his Nephews.

For his Piety, and duly praying to God morning and evening;

XIII.

A double Sun-flower hanging with his head toward the Sun, Et sanctum sidus
Adorat.
He adores the great Planet.
Quamvis radice tenetur.


Though he be fast to the Earth by his roots, yet he still looks toward
Heaven, and turns to the Sun.

XIV.

Cannons planted upon a Battery pallisadoed, Coepti fiducia belli.
The assurance of a war begun.


The King in these last Wars looked upon him as one of his chief helps in all
his Enterprises, and entrusted him with the greatest designs of the Campaign.

For his Wisdom, Conduct and Experience, in Military Affairs, arguing a man of
a solid judgment;

XV.

A battering Ram.

Vis in Capite est.
His strength is in his Head.
For his Valor in forcing the Enemies trenches,

XVI.

A flame from a Mine blowing up a Bastion.

Negata tentat iter Via.
He makes way where he finds none.
XVII.

A Watch, with a hand winding it up with a Key, with these words of Ennius,
Cunctando restituit rem.
By staying it, he sets it forward.


To show Marshal Turenne's Address, when he understood the Enemy were in
Alsatia, with intention to invade Lorraine, he feigned a retreat, and passing
with his Army by a place called Lapetit Pierre, he coasted the Mountains of
Vauge, and taking his march through streights, he fell into the Enemies
quarters when they least expected him, and forced them to repass the Rhine at
Strasbourg, where of threescore thousand men they had brought into Alsatia,
scarce twenty thousand got back. Thus the great Fabius defeated Hannibal, of
whom Ennius, Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.

XVIII.

A Lion walking majestically, sweeping with his stern or tail the track of his
footsteps, that it might not appear where he passed, with this of Horace, Et
sapiens and fortis.
Both valiant and wise.


He knew very well how to hide his designs from the Enemy, and always appeared
to them to the best advantage, though he often was weaker than they in number
of men.

XIX.

For his vigor in matter of war, even in his old age,

An old straight tree laden with fruit.

Non Anni domuere.
His years have not abated of his strength.
For the Justness of his soul in his conduct and great actions,

XX.

A Chesrook upon a Chessbord, Nunquam a recto deflectit.
It goes always by direct ways.


For being disinteressed, never looking after self ends,

XXI.

A loadstone drawing Iron to it, without touching upon pieces of Gold that lie
about it.

Non tangitur Auro.
Gold has no power over him.
At his Death he had but five hundred Crowns in money, and very few days
before, he had borrowed a considerable sum of money to cloth part of the Army,
he could never be persuaded to touch great sums, which he might have commanded
in those Campaignes he passed in Germany.

XXII.

For his conversion to the Catholic Religion,

A ship tossed in a storm, a pharus or light house upon the Sea coast, which at
once shows him the shelves and the haven.

Erranti dant clara incendia lucem.
By the help of this light he finds his way.
XXIII.

For the love the Soldiers bore him, being the effect of the great esteem they
had for his merit,

The master Be leading a swarm.

Pro stimulo exemplum est.
His example was a sting.
The King of Bees has no sting like the rest, but enforces obedience by still
going before them and keeping in their company every where.

XXIV.

The morning star going before the Sun.

Ducem hunc nec habere recusat.
He willingly follows such a guide.
The King did Marshal Turenne the honor to be his Scholar, and to learn of him
the Art and Mystery of War.

XXV.

A blood hound following a herd of Dear through Woods, over Mountains, and
Rivers, Per Juga, per Fluvios and Sylvas.
He followed the Enemy through Woods, Mountains and Rivers.


Upon his Death,

XXVI.

A Palm Tree thunderstruck, whose branches are shattered and broken.

Quot fata huic invidere triumphos?
Of how many triumphs do the fates rob him?
When Marshal Turenne was killed, he was upon the point of performing one of the
greatest Actions of his Life; being ready to involve the Enemies Army in a
total ruin.

XXVII.

A Cannon shot overthrowing a Tower, which in the fall crushes a great number
of the Enemy, Et dum Cadit opprimit hostem.
Even in his fall he destroys the foe.


The Enemy were defeated a few days after his Death, by the directions he gave
before he died.

XXVIII.

A Poppy without leaves, the head or crown only remaining, Non omnis moriar.
I shall not all dye.


Though Marshal Turenne be dead, the memory of his Herock Actions can never
dye, which will crown him after his death.

XXIX.

A vast Collossus overthrown, and broken in pieces; with these words of the 7th
of Pharsalia.

Quis fuerit scire licet.
Now may be seen what he was.
XXX.

We might make use of these words of Plinius, speaking of the Collossus Rhodius
when it was thrown down, Et Jacens miraculo est.


The worth of this great Hero never appeared more advantagiously than since his
death.

XXXI.

Eight Stars and the Sun set, Vnius occasu.


The setting of this Planet makes many rise, meaning the eight Marshals of
France, created by the King immediately after Marshal Turennes death.

XXXII.

An Iris or Rainbow dissolving in dew and rain, Desinit in Lacrimas.


The splendour, the merit, and the virtues of this great man, is the cause of
our tears.

This great and pompous representation ends in a great Inscription, which is as
it were a dismissing of the assisting spectators, after the ancient custom of
the Romans, where a Herald was appointed to dismiss the Mourners with these
words, Illicet or Irelicet, that is, you may withdraw

This was a large night piece, wherein was represented a Marble Tomb, carried
by Griphons, leaning upon Globes, which are the Emblems of Immortality, upon
this Tomb Marshal Turenne was painted, lying in his Armor, and leaning upon his
right arm, with a leading staff in his left hand. On both sides of the Tomb,
stood Christian Virtue, and Military virtue weeping, the one over his Helmet,
the other over a Crown of Laurel, two great Squeletons draw a curtain, to show
behind the Tomb a Pyramid, a l'antique upon the top of which was an Vrn, upon
the Pyramid was graven this Inscription: Abi viator,
Et post Impensas
TURENNII
Triumphalibus manibus
LACRIMAS;
LUDOVICI MAGNI
Munificentiam demirare;
In hoc sacro Regni sui
Capitolio,
Parentat Duci Optimo
Inter hostium Manubias;
Vbi Victori Trophoeum statuere
Maluisset.
Augusto Principi
Vitam impende
Quisquis Gloriam Amas;
Qui vivos donis auget Regiis,
Sic mortuos Luget.


In English thus;

Passenger depart, and having shed some tears over Turennes Tomb, admire the
magnificence of Lewis the Great, who commands this last honor to be paid to
the memory of this Great Captain, in the midst of Trophies and spoils taken
from the Enemies; where he had been more willing to have erected triumphal
Arches for him, than a Funeral pile. You that love honor lay down your lives
for so great a Prince, who so plentifully rewards those that serve him, and
causes such honor to be given to the memory of those that dye for him.

FINIS.

