DESIRES Propounded to the Honorable House OF COMMONS FROM Denzill Holles Esquire
Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William
Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General Massey, John Glynne Esquire,
Recorder of London, Walter Long, Esquire Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll,
Esquire Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Who stand Impeached by his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the Army under
his Command.

ALSO Their Demurrer to the CHARGE: AND The VOTES of the House, giving them
leave to go beyond the Seas, and to absent themselves for six Months: And Mr.
Speaker to grant them Passes.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

DESIRES Propounded to the Honorable House OF COMMONS FROM Denzill Holles
Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General Massey, John Glynne
Esquire Recorder of London, Walter Long Esquire Col. Edw. Harley, and Anthony Nicoll,
Esquire Members of the Honorable House of Commons. Who stand Impeached by his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his Command.
June 19. 1647.
DEnzill Hollis Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General
Massey, John Glynne Esquire, Recorder of London, Walter Long Esquire, Col.
Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll Esquire, Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, all of them present in their own persons, presented a paper to the
House of Commons, in answer to the particular Charge or Impeachment in the name
of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his command, against
them, which Answer is a demurre to the said Charge, and Impeachment; which
paper being delivered in by them, the House received it.

July 19. 1647.
Resolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament,

That the Answer of Denzill Holles Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William
Waller, Sir John Maynard Knight, Major General Massey, John Glynne Esquire,
Recorder of London, Walter Long Esquire, Col Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll
Esquire, Members of the Honorable House of Commons, In answer to the
Particular Charge or Impeachment, in the name of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the Army under his command, against them, be read in the House,
(which was read accordingly.)

July 20. 1647.
MR. Green, a Member of the House of Commons, acquainted the Speaker, that he
had a Message to deliver to the House, of desires from Denzill Holles Esquire Sir
Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller,
Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General Massey, John Glynne Esquire Recorder of
London, Walter Long Esquire Col. Edw. Harley, and Anthony Nicoll Esquire Members of the
Honorable House of Commons, impeached by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the Army.

July 20. 1647.
Resolved upon the Question, by the Commons assembled in Parliament,

That the desires of Denzill Holles Esquire Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William
Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard Knights,
Major General Massy, John Glynne, Esquire, Recorder of London, Walter Long,
Esquire, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll, Esquire, Members of the
Honorable House of Commons, Be made to this House.

July 20. 1647
Mr. Green acquainted the House that he was desired, by Denzill Holles
Esquire, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis. Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General Massy, John Glynne
Esquire, Recorder of London, Walter Long Esquire, Col, Edward Harley, and
Anthony Nicholl Esquire, Members of the Honorable House of Commons. To
represent their desires to the House of Commons.

The desires of Denzill Holles Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William
Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy. Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard Knights,
Major General Massy, John Glynne, Esquire, Recorder of London, Walter Long,
Esquire, Col. Edward Harley. and Anthony Nicoll, Esquire, Members of the
Honorable House of Commons, moved in their behalf in the House of Commons on
Tuesday July 20. 1647.

Whereas his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army do declare, that the
proceedings of the House upon particulars and proofs to make good the Charge
will probably take up much time, and the present affairs of the Kingdom in
relation to those great matters proposed by them, do (as they say) require a
speedy consideration and that they propound that those greater and more
general matters of the Kingdom be first considered of, and settled.

And in regard that it is supposed that the absence of these Members will make
way for the present more quiet proceedings, to settle the perplexed affairs of
the Kingdom.

That they are so far from making any interruption or disturbance to the
proceeding upon, or settlement of the general affairs of the Kingdom, that
they desire.

1 That they may have leave to absent themselves from the House for the space
of six months to go about their own particular businesses.

2 That they may have liberty, or so many of them as shall desire it, to go
beyond the Seas, and have passes granted them during that space of time.

3 That by that time the said six months shall be expired, they conceive that
the great and weighty affairs, tending to the peace and settlement of the
Kingdom, will be over, and the House judge it seasonable to call them to a
trial.

July 20. 1647.
Resolved upon the Question, by the Commons assembled in Parliament,

That leave be given to Denzill Holles Esquire Sir Philip Stapleton, etc. for the
space of six months, to be absent from the House, and to go into the
Country, to follow their necessary occasions of business, as they shall
think fit.

2 Resolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament.

That Denzill Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, etc. or any of them, have leave to
go beyond the Seas, provided that they return to the Parliament within the
space of six months after this present; to attend the House upon the business
concerning the Charge brought into this House (from Sir Thomas Fairfax and the
Army) against them.

3 Resolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament.

That Mr. Speaker grant warrants to Denzill Holles Esquire Sir Philip Stapleton,
etc. or any of them that shall desire it, to go beyond the Seas, and to return
within six months after this present time.

FINIS.

