THE Devil seen at St. Albons. BEING A TRUE RELATION HOW The Devil was seen
there in a Cellar, in the likeness of a Ram; and how a Butcher came and cut
his throat, and sold some of it, and dressed the rest for himself, inviting
many to Supper, who eat of it. Attested by diverse Letters, of men of very good
credit in the Town. Whereunto is added a Comment, for the better understanding
of the unlearned, or Ignorant.

Printed for confutation of those that believe there are no such things as
Spirits or Devils.

Sunt mala, at tu non meliora facis.

Printed in the year, 1648.

THE Devil seen at St. Albons. BEING A TRUE RELATION HOW The Devil was seen
there in a Cellar, in the likeness of a Ram; and how a Butcher came, and cut
his throat, and sold some of it, and dressed the rest for himself, inviting
many to Supper, who eat of it.
Saint Albones is a goodly Town, The description of that goodly Town St.
Albons, with the distance thereof from London.
situate in the County of Hertford; and of distance from London (according to
the compute of the ablest Carriers of that Road) some twenty miles. This Town
is very ancient, or as I may so say, a Borough Town, sending Burgomasters to
the Parliament. It is likewise a Corporation, The Mayor.
having yearly a Mayor of Worship elected for the better administration of
Justice. The Church.
The Church belonging to this Town is of a curious structure, and very large,
famous for the Tomb of Humphrey, Tomb of Duke Humphrey.
called the good Duke of Gloucester, son of King Henry the fourth, brother to
King Henry the fifth, and uncle to King Henry the sixth, See Hollenshead,
Martin, Stow, Speed, and Shakspeare in the second part of Henry the sixth.
in whose reign the said good Duke was murdered, and was buried in this
Church of Saint Albons. This Duke leaving behind him the best monument, a good
name, had his memory much reverenced, insomuch, that many (those being
superstitious times) held him for a Saint. The Duke a Saint.
Now it fortuned that an old man, having been long impotent in his feet, Here
begins the story of the old man, Shakspeare, ut supra.
could not be cured; but after he had spent all he had on Chirurgions and
Doctors, was at last feign to be content with this unreasonable salve, You are
past cure. This old man I say, after all this, yet dispaired not, but calling
to mind this good Duke of Gloucester, hre resolved to make him his particular
Saint, and imposing unto himself a confidence, He makes the Duke his
particular Saint.
that by going to this good Dukes tomb, and invoking him for help, that
thereupon he should be cured.

This poor soul went unto the Tomb, rejoyceing as he went, He goes to his
Tomb.
with a conceit of being made whole; but (a thing not to be spoken) the old man
no sooner offered up his hands in Orrisons to the Duke, Infandum
but the Duke sent down such an Alms into his legs, that the old man went
away frisking and skipping like a young colt.

But now Reader, from the Tomb of Saint Humphrey, turn thee to the Bull at
Saint Albons, Here begins the Devils story.
which Inn is as famous as the Tomb we spoke of; only Reader I pray thee
observe, that these two memorable accidents should happen in the two most
memorable places of the Town; Note Reader.
for who have not heard of the Tomb of Saint Humphrey, and how the old man was
cured? And who has not heard of the Bull at Saint Albons? but how the Devil
appeared there in the likeness of a Ram, I shall now relate.

This Inn called the Bull at Saint Albons, Description of the Bull at Saint
Albons, with the commodities thereof.
has not only good victuals of all sorts, as flesh, fish, and foul, to
entertain travelers withal, but also good store of refreshing wine, viz.
Sack, Claret, and white wine. This wine lies in a large Cellar that is cut
under ground, a great way from the house, Description of the Cellar, where the
Devil was seen.
and having no cealing but the earth, out of which it is taken. Now it fortuned
that an old acquaintance of the Hoasts traveling that way, came to lodge with
his good friend the Host on monday night last, being the 27. of November last
past; the good joviall Inne-keeper was very glad to see his ancient
acquaintance, and as a testimony thereof, he commands one of his Drawers to go
down, and pierce a fresh But of Sack that stood at the furthermost end of all
the Cellar.

The Drawer takes a candle in his hand, The Drawer goes down into the Cellar.
and very nimbly slirs down the stairs, goes to the appointed vessel, and
pierces it but whiles the wine was running into the pot, he casts his eyes
aside, and savv a huge black thing like a Ram, He sees the Devil
having glassie eyes, shag hair, wreathed horns, and (which assured him it
was the Devil) cloven feet. Hereafter for shame, let none deny that the Devil
has cloven feet.
The Dravver stood so long amazed at this horrid apparition, that the pot
overslowd even to the ground, at least a gallon, and the Drawer being so wise,
as to take care for himself in the first place, Note the policy of this Drawer
in the extremity of his fear.
for his better lightness, flings wine and pot away, and leaving the vessel
running, with a strange alacrity mounts the stairs, appearing to his Master
and Mistress, and many other beholders, very pale, and distracted with some
strange chance that had happened. At last his fear burst out into these words,
Oh Master! the Devil is in the Cellar, and appeared to me, and I was so
frighted, that I left the vessel running, and came up as you see; the Host
answers him with a box on the ear, which he felt, calling him faint-hearted
rogue, and that it was nothing but fear which made him conceit such a thing:
The Host descends the stairs, and after he had seen the Devil, sommersets
them up again.
But the Hoasts wife saying, husband, though you venture your self with the
Devil, yet, let us not lose our wine; the Host obeyes his wife, and taking a
candle, he valiantly descends the stairs, running with all have toward the
further end of the Cellar, to stop the vessel, the Devil with his horns
meets him full butt in the midst of the way, the Host not being used to see
the Devil, Note that to Somerset, is to toss heels over head, and to light on
heels again, the word is frequent amongst tumblers at this day.
knew not how to look on him, but casting himself backward, like an
activetumbler, never left playing the Sommerset, till he mounted the stairs:
and shaking and quaking, swore that he had seen the fearfullest, ugliest Devil
that ever he saw in his life, and that he should have all his wine, before he
would venture to stop a drop of it. These outcries bring all the neighbors into
the Inn; and amongst the rest a Butcher, worthily deemed, and taken to be the
stoutest man, The Butcher with his indowments described.
both of heart and hands, within the jurisdiction of the Maioraltie, he had
broke two arms the last football playing, and would knock down an Ox with an
Axe 7 pound lighter at the helm then any other could; briefly, Note that the
Sack run all this while of it own accord.
he was the very George of Green of St Albons. The said Butcher manfully
looking on these affrighted ones, courageously asked what was the matter, or
what could make them so fearful; the Host replys that the devil was in the
Cellar, and had appeared to him and his man in the likeness of a black Ram,
telling him withal, how they had left a But of Sack running, and promising the
Butcher, that if he would venture down and stop the vessel, The Butcher goes
down into the Cellar-Note that non went down without a candle.
he would give him a gallon of the best Sack he had; the Butcher looking
somewhat surly, as being angry they should make a doubt of his prowess;
snatches up a candle, and swears that he would fetch up the devil Ram, stick
him, and quarter him, to make amends for the black Ram he had lately lost. He
stopped the vessel.
Armed with this resolution, down he goes, and nothing regarding the devil, he
goes first and stops the vessel, He vanquisheth and brings up the Devil.
and suddenly turning himself about, he cast his angry eye upon the devil, and
after he had looked so long, as to perceive how his horns grew, he steps to
the devil, and seiseth on his horns with his approved hands. The cunning
devil, knowing by instinct, that he could not prevail against true valor,
meek as a sheep, suffers himself to be dragged up the stairs, the noise
whereof makes all retire to their ground, at the furthermost end of the room,
The Butchers speech after he had brought up the Devil.
but the Butcher no sooner come up with his infernal captive, but thus he
speaks, Lo here is that fiend of darkness, which shall dearly pay for
frighting you, for I vow to manacle his feet, Some incredulous people seeking
to deceive the truth, impudently give it our, that the earth falling into the
Cellar, a black Ram fell in therewith, which Ram the Butcher had lost the day
before, sed benign lector utere sapientia tua.
and carry him to my slaughter house, cut his throat, flea off his skin, and
sell his flesh, and this by Lucifer his Prince, I swear to perform.
Allapplauded the Butcher, and the Host thanked him for saving his Sack: But
the butcher intending to prosecute his revenge against the now silly quiet
devil, hales him to his slaughter house, cuts his throat, fleas off his skin,
sells all of him but a hind quarter he had reserved for his own supper, to
which supper he invites many of his friends, who eat heartily of his flesh,
and picked his bones, whilst the Butchers story of this his atcheivement,
together with his hoasts wine, made excellent sauce to this hellish food, so
that merrily down it went the Devil and all, That the Devil may, and has
often appeared, Read Friar Rush, Dr. Faustus, Dr. Lamb and that man of men,
and glory of the black art, the famous Lilly now living.
at which mirth I leave them.

Claudite jam Rivos, pueri sat prata biberunt.

I might have enlarged this discourse with a querie, whether cuckolds go to
hell or no, since as it appears by this story, the devil himself has horns,
but I affect brevity, especially when the question depends not on the thing
related.

Courteous Reader, I thought good according to Brittanicus custom, to add a
Comment to this my concise relation, this being (as most of the learned will
avouch) of equal validity with any thing he ever writ.

FINIS.

