SEVEN ARGUMENTS to prove, that in order of working God does justify his
Elect, before they do actually believe.

With some Answers to the Objections that some make against the same.

For the confirmation of those that do truly believe, lest they should
attribute any part of the Office of Christ to the act of their believing.

Ezekiel 16. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations. And say, Thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, Thy ^^^th and
thy nativitie is of the land of Canaan, thy father ^as an Amorite, and thy
mother an Hittite.

And as for thy nativitie, in the day that thou wast borne, ^^y navill was not
cut, neither wast thou washed in water to ^^pple thee, thou wast not salted at
all, nor swadled at all.

None eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, ^^^t thou wast
cast into the open field, to the loathing of thy ^^^son, in the day that thou
wast borne.

And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine ^^ne blood, I said
unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live: (...), I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, Live.

Printed in the year 1643.

SEVEN ARGVMENTS, to prove, that in order of working God does justify his
Elect, before they do actually believe.
With some Answers to the Objections that some make against the same.
THis Proposition being contradicted, We are justified before God, before the
act of our believing: This is the Proposition which I do now undertake to
vindicate, by the assistance of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
honor is not a little concerned in it. I will first of all lay down seven
Arguments for the confirmation of the Truth: and then I will answer unto five
Objections, brought by some against it.

The Proposition;
We are justified before God, before the a^^ of our believing.

Argument I.
LEt me speak for those that are not abl^ to speak for themselves; I mean
the little Babes, to whom belongs the Kingdom of God. I argue thus: Infants
do^ not believe; But Infants are justified: Therefore some that do not
believe, are justified: Which if it be granted, it will follow, tha^ some are
justified before they believe. Tha^^ Infants are justified, need no proof;
Tha^^ Infants believe not, must be proved, (^^though the Church of England has
lon^ since put it out of doubt.) First, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17.
How sh^^ they believe in him of whom they have n^^ heard? Shall we say, that
Infants in the Womb hear the Word? Secondly, Fait^ is a Knowledge, as some
say; a Persuasion as others; a T^^st, as others: But Infan^^ are capable
neither of Trust, Persuasion, O^ Knowledge; therefore Infants are not capable
of Faith. But some have said, That Infants hear the Word of God, believe in
God, and love God, in an un^nowne, way; is sometimes John Baptist sprang in his
Mothers Womb for joy, at the salutation of the Blessed Virgin: But Saint
Augustin^ did answer long ago, not more wittily then truly, That this was
done by a singular Miracle. Neither does this conclude, other Infants to
believe any more, then we may conclude, all Asses to be good Counselors,
because we read, that Balaams Ass spoke more wisely then her Master.

Argument II.
HE that is in Christ, is justified; But we must be in Christ, before we can
believe: Therefore we must be justified, before we can believe. The Major is
plain, the Minor is proved, That we most be in Christ before we can believe:
To believe, is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. But we must be in Christ, before
we can bare fruit; Therefore we must be in Christ, before we can believe.
Joh. 15. 4. As the Branch cannot bear frui^ of it self, except it abide in
the Vine, (...) more can ye, except ye abide in me. Secondly, if Faith be a
good fruit, it is required, that men must be good Trees, before they can bring
it forth; otherwise, Grape^ should be gathered of Thorns, and Figge^ of
Thistles, Matthew. 12. 33. If you will, the Argument may be this: He that has
the Spirit of Christ, has Christ; But we have the Spirit before we believe;
Therefore we^ have Christ before we believe.

Argument III.
ALL the Elect of God are justified before God; But some of the Elect of God
do not yet believe: Therefore some that do not believe, are justified before
God; and so by consequence, before they believe. The Major is proved: They that
cannot be charged with any thing, are justified; But none of the Elect of God
can be charged with any thing: Therefore the Elect are justified. The Minor is
proved; Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
justifies: Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that
is risen again, Romans 8. 33. He rose again for our justification, Romans 4. 23.

Argument IV.
THey that have their sins taken away, are justified; But the Elect have
their sins taken away before they believe: Ergo, The Elect are justified
before they believe. The Major is proved: Blessed is the man whose iniquity is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Romans 4. 7. The Minor; That the Elect have
their sins taken away before they believe, is proved Joh. 1. 29. Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; and Esaias 35. 8. The Lord
has laid on him the iniquities of us all; and 1 Pet. 2. 24. Himself bare our
sins in his own body on the Tree; and Romans 6. 6. Our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed. Did Christ take away
sin, or not? Did he bear them? Did he destroy the body of sin? If you
say, No; how will you escape the Sword of the Spirit? If you say, Yea; I desire
no more.

Argument V.
WE were made sinners in the first Adam, before we had done good or evil;
Therefore we are made righteous in the second Adam, before we have done good or
evil. This consequence is proved. Romans 5. 18, 19. As by the offense of one,
Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation; even so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life: for as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous. If you shall place the Emphasis of this Text, in All, and
Many, you will cause the hearts of the universal Gratians to leap for joy;
which (I believe) you would not willingly do. Therefore you must be forced to
place the Emphasis in As, and So: As we sinned all in the loins of the first
Adam, So were we all made righteous in the loins of the second Adam, The Lord
Christ. And this agrees with the Ministry of Reconciliation; to wit, That
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Truly, this Argument was of so great force,
that it did wring out of Cardinal Bellarmine this confession, as the Apostle
teaches, Romans 5. That Christ may be put on, without a proper act of our soul:
I confess, I differ from the Cardinal, in his means of putting on Christ;
yet this his confession I acknowledge to be true.

Argument VI.
WHere there is full satisfaction made, and the party offended accepting that
satisfaction, and contented to rest in it, there must needs follow perfect
remission of sins; But in Christ crucified (before we believed) was full
satisfaction made, and God was contented to rest in that satisfaction:
Therefore there will follow perfect remission of sins, etc. First, that there
was full satisfaction made in Christ, is proved Heb. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14, verse.
For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. But
the second, that God is therewith contented to rest in that satisfaction, we
have the witness of the Father, Matthew. 3. 17. This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. Aquiesco, says Beza. See Esaias 53. 11. He shall see the
travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.

Argument VII.
IF we are not justified in his sight before we believe, then are we unjust
sinners, workers of iniquity; then does the Lord hate us, for he hates all
the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. You know what absurdity will follow, if you
say, we must believe before God can love us: But if God hate us to day, and
love us to morrow, let Arminius with his disciples hear this, and wonder, why
they should be blamed that say; We may be loved to day, and hated to morrow;
Children of God to day, and of the Devil to morrow: when they who would seem
their greatest Adversaries, will not spare to say; We may be hated to day, and
loved to morrow; the Children of the Devil to day, and of God to morrow. But
that God loved us first, before we believed, when we were enemies, in our
blood, etc. is so plain, that I will not willingly so dishonor you, as once
to conceive that you will deny it.

Here is an end of the seven Arguments; which (if need had required) might have
been seventie. Now I will answer the Objections.

Objection 1.
We are justified by Faith; therefore, not before Faith.

Answer. First, it should have concluded, not before the act of believing.
Secondly, I deny the consequence, and say, we may be justified both by it,
and yet before, in a different sense.


This Proposition, We are justified by Faith, is very ambiguous. He was not
a Fool who (an hundred years since) said, That this Proposition was one of
those things, hard to be understood; which they that are unlearned and
unstable, wrest as they do other Scriptures, to their own destruction, 2 Pet.
3. 16. I would our Age had not proved it true, that the misunderstanding of
this Proposition has turned upside down the Doctrine of Justification amongst
pudling Preachers.

There is in this Proposition two words ambiguous and doubtful:

The first (Justified) which sometimes in Scriptures signifies to be reputed,
reckoned, or accounted Just; as, It is God that justifies. Sometimes it is
taken for to be declared, or manifested to be Just; as, By works a man is
justified, James 2. 24. If you take Justified in the first sense, we say, we
are not reputed or reckoned Just by the act of believing. If you take Justified
in the second sense, I say, we are justified (that is, declared to be Just) by
believing; Faith manifesting to our Consciences, that we are Just before God:
By Faith we understand, that God has freely justified us in his Son.

Another word ambiguous in this Proposition, is (Faith) which is diversely
taken: sometimes for the act of Faith, or believing; and sometimes for the
object of Faith, the thing believed: as, Faith was reckoned unto him for
righteousness, Romans 4. that is the object of Faith: So that it is all one as
if he had said, God or Christ was reckoned to him for righteousness. If we
understand the act of Faith; then I say, as before, we are not reckoned Just
by the act of our Faith: if by Faith we understand the object of our Faith;
then I say, we are reckoned or reputed Just by God, in, by, or through Christ
Jesus, our Faith.

Objection 2.
He that believes not, is condemned already, John 3. 18.

Answer. This is all one with, He that believes not, shall be damned: which
you must understand of final unbeleefe, which I grant to be a Note of
Damnation.

Objection 3.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God: therefore we cannot be
justified without it.

Answer. I deny the Consequence; and I perceive so will you also, when you
please: For you will affirm, a justified person may displease God; and then,
why is it not possible for a man to displease God, and yet be justified? To
please God, is so to do those things which God approves in us to be well done;
which we cannot do, without Faith. That this is the meaning of the Apostle,
is plain by his reason; For he that comes unto God, must believe etc. We
cannot come unto God, before we believe; but cannot God come unto us, before
we believe. Now Justification is Gods act upon a sinner, not a sinners act
upon God.

This also answers the fourth Objection. Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

Objection 5.
We are by nature the Children of wrath, etc.

Answer. This were of some force, if you could prove us altogether in the
estate of nature as well in Gods account as in our esteem, and so quite
exempted from grace until we believe; which you cannot do, for the Apostle
witnesses the contrary, 2 Timothy 1. 9. According to his own purpose and grace
given us before the world began: if grace were given before the world began,
surely before ever we believed.

God is Alpha and Omega; therefore what he promises shall come to pass to
his, is done with him, Rev. 21. 6. For his works were finished from the
foundation of the world, Heb. 4. 3. And so I rest

A Servant of Jesus Christ to live and dye, H. D.


