A BRIEF DISCOURSE, PROVING JNDEPENDENCY, IN Church Government, Destructive to
the Positive Laws of this KINGDOM, and inconsistent therewith.

By ROBERT DERHAM, of Grayes Jnne, Barrister.

Published according to Order.

July 13th LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates, at the Maidenhead on Snow-hill,
near Holborne Conduit. 1646.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IF thou be Jndependent in thy opinion, yet (J hope) thou art not an enemy
to the Laws of this Kingdom, which are thy Birthright, as well as thy
Possessions: Peruse this Work without passion or partiality; see if thy tender
affections will suffer thee to divide the Child, J mean, the Temporal, and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which if done, must needs prove destructive and
fatal to both.

They are Twins, lovingly embracing each other; seek not thou to sever this
unity: they are acquainted with each others wants and defects, having such
sweet intercourse the one with the other in legal proceedings: endeavor not
thou by estranging them the one from the other, to endanger the ruin of both,
lest thou unhappily prove not only a Patricide, but Occisor Patriae. J will
say no more, but commit thee to God and his goodness.

Farewell.
A brief Discourse, PROVING JNDEPENDENCY IN CHURCH GOVERNMENT Destructive to
the Positive Laws of this Kingdom, and inconsistent therewith.
THe subject that I intend to debate at this time, is not, whether
Presbyteriall or Independent Government in the Church simply of themselves
considered, be most warrantable by divine Authority, but how they stand with
relation to the Laws of this Kingdom, for that shall be the compass of my
thoughts at this time; wherein I shall not labor to justify the Laws of this
Realm by the sacred Rule expressly, for surely some of them Con^vall to the
people of this Nation, so as it cannot possibly be ruled by any other Law,
being Customs made by themselves, (...) Prince being the Low-giver, many
Statut^s, especially in this Discourse mentioned, being declaratory of these
Customs, sworn to by Kings and People; An^thema on them pronounced that seek
to alter any of the fundamental Customs or Laws, Praemunire, high Treason by
Law.
or the most are praeter Scripturas, not Contra, they being laudable
constitutions generally received, yea, allowed by Gods Word implicit, though
not explicit: so that they may be inconsistent with the Independent Government
in the Church so much now contended for, (although we should admit the said
jurisdiction warranted by Holy Writ) and yet no blemish to the Civil
Magistracy. Come we then to the point, What say the positive Laws, which are
the common Law, or Statutes?

The common Law and Statute in this particular, appear in the Act of 1.
Elizabeth 1. for that Act is but declaratory of the ancient common Law, as it
was resoved in Cawdries Case by all the Judges of England, not of any new Law
introductive, The words of that Statute are, That such Jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, as by any spiritual or ecclesiastical power has heretofore
been, or may be lawfully exercised, for the visitation The Kings Laws limit
and bound the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 5. Eliz. 23. Co. Iurisd. of Courts,
321.
of the ecclesiastical Estate and Persons, and for Reformation, Order, and
Correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, abuses,
Offenses, Contempts and Enormities, shall for ever be united and annexed to the
imperial Crown of this Realm: and that her Highness, her heirs and
Successors, shall have power to nominate Commissioners to exercise all
Jurisdiction eccesiasticall in the causes before-named etc. So that although
the high Commission (grounded upon this Act) be taken away, yet the
Jurisdiction still remains in the imperial Crown, to be dispensed in these
causes before named, as the ancient Law of this Land, also in all other causes
Ecclesiastical, the King by his Ecclesiastical Judges ministers justice,
wherein if a man be injured in any Court, he may have redress, by Appeal to a
higher Jurisdiction, and for default of Justice in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
last of all to the King, as supreme, in his High Court of Chancery, as
appears by the Act of 25. H. 8. cap. 19.

See here justice subordimately ministered, and the King or civil Magistrate in
all Causes Ecclesiastical supreme in point of Jurisdiction.

Now that the Independent Government in the Church takes away all In civil
causes as well as others, until the offender be cast out of the Church, and
then you may appeal to the civil Magistrate, not before; in matters of
personal injury only, not in matter of scandal.
Appeals in matters pertaining to their cog^izance, I suppose needs no proof
at all, it is so clear: Their very title and name intimates as much, they are
Independent, viz. they depend upon no other Court of Justice, to give account
of their Actions judicially by Appeal or otherwise. They stand not at Caesar's
Judgment Seat, that is, the temporal Magistracy, they are like the great
Potentates of the Earth, accountable to none but God, in case injustice be
found in their judgments; if in their wisdoms error appear (as Humanum est
errare) you may fill Justification of Independency by Chidley.
the skies with complaints bootlesse. If any shall be censured in their
Judicatories, for profanation of the Sabbath, by working on that day, tippling
in Alehouses, or the like, if he be injured, he cannot have justice elsewhere,
whereas the Ecclesiastical and Statute Law in those cases give Appeal, as
appears by 25. H. 8. before mentioned, 4. Jacob. 5. 3. Caroli 1. In all which
cases, if he be proceeded against by Censure Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, he
has remedy by Appeal, error, or other legal course to right himself if
injured.

If in Doctrine or Discipline, this Independent Governor with his Assistants
shall be heretical, erroneous, or scandalous to the Government, or any
particular person* no remedy, but as it is truly said of the Divine Majesty,
Confugiendum a Domino i^^to ad Dominu^ placatum. Whereas by 2. H. 4. 15. 13.
Eliz. 12. he is to be censured for heresy by the Bishop of the Diocese, and
to be delivered to the secular power to be burned. And if he shall maintain
any Doctrine contrary, or repugnant to the Articles of the Church of England,
and penist therein, he is to be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical promotions,
and further to be punished by the Ecclesiastical Law, as appears by 13. Eliz.
aforesaid.

If he shall preach any Doctrine scandalous to the Civil Government, he may be
indicted at Common Law, and punished according to the quality of the Crime: In
all which cases, there lies remedy by Error, or Appeal.

See now, at one view, how many Laws are nullified by this strange and unheard
of power, I might instance unto See C^vvd^ies case, where they are recited.
you throughout all matters, of which the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction has
cognizance, Ancient, or Modern, the same mischiefs follow; no Appeal, no
Redress.

Besides the Common Law and Statutes many and numerous depending upon the
Ecclesiastical Law, corroborating, strengthening, or assisting, woven and
interlaced with them, are all at one blow cut off, and destroyed.

Also the Common Law Courts ( a fortiori, then the High Court of Parliament)
have supreme Power in moderating the exorbitancies of the Spiritual
Jurisdiction, if the Spiritual Courts incroach upon the Common Law, yea upon
one another, (as it has been too familiar of late times especially) See
before, he is free in all cases, so long as he continues in the brotherhood.
the King's Bench, or Common Pleas, by prohibition, have power to curb, and
restrain them, although the Common Law holds no Plea of them.

I need not to give you some examples, the Law is so plentiful herein: I
believe Independency frees from the If they will not cast out of their Society
a hainou^ offender against the laws, what remedy?
Power of the Civil Magistrate in Matters, Coram non Judice, as the Law says,
as well as in Causes, within their cognizance.

But peradventure it may be objected, their Power shall be regulated, their
Jurisdiction shall be known, and if Upon the point they will assume all
d^spensati^n of justice in all cases to themselves, and the civil Magistracy
shall be contemptible.
they exceed their limits, they shall be under Censure of the Law.

If this should be admitted, (which how true it may be I know not) yet in
causes pertaining unto them, it will not be so, they will grant no dependency
upon the Temporal State in matters Ecclesiastical; the Common Law nor
Parliament shall have nothing to do with their judgments, which supreme Power
has been by great Antiquity invested both in the Common Law, and in the High
Court of Parliament; yea, although in things pertaining to spiritual
Jurisdiction, and the ground of this, you shall see presently.

I will cite you but two Statutes, by which you See the pr^^mble of the said
Act of 21. H. 8. Parliaments have power not only to dispense, but to abrogate,
adnull, amplify or di^sh all human^, Ecclesiastical, or Temporal laws, by
natural equity and good reason.
shall perceive that both in Doctrine and Discipline in the Church, the supreme
Power has rested in the civil Magistrate, and does so continue to this day:
the one is 25. H. 8. 21. granting the Parliament power to enact any thing not
repugnant to Holy Writ, yea even in matters of Faith, and Doctrine in the
Church, also note the words of this Act further, viz.

Not minding to seek for any reliefes, suc^ours, or Nota.
remedies for any wordly things and humane Laws, in any cause of necessity, but
within this Realm, at the hands of your Highness, your Heirs, and
Successors Kings of this Realm, which have, and ought to have an imperial
Power and Authority in the same, and not obliged in any worldly causes to any
other Superior.

Where observe the largeness of the words, ( Humane Laws) comprizing
whatsoever in Doctrine not repugnant to Scripture, or Discipline, for the
Government of the Church, by the King, and his great Council, the Parliament,
shall be judged expedient; as you may see in another branch of this Act
immediately foregoing it must be intended, (The King) viz. in his politic
capacity conj^yned, and united with his High What will become of independent
Synods, if no Synod be to be called but by the civil power?
Court of Parliament, for so are the express words of that branch, giving the
King Power with the Nobles and Subjects, and so must of necessity the second
branch be interpreted; the other Act is 25. H. 8. 19. enacting no Constitutions
Ecclesiastical of force, or to be of force, without the royal assent; None to
be made in fut. without leave.
and that none be executed repugnant to the Laws of this Realm,

What now becomes of this Independent-Government, Those already made to be
perused by the Parliament.
if it be contrary to the Laws of this Realm, (as it is manifest it is)
unless you destroy Co. Iurisd. of Co. tit. Convocation.
the Kings Ecclesiastical or Temporal, or Civil Laws, yea the great mulcts
added by the Laws of this Land, by way of assistance, or corrobation to many
spiritual offenses by fine, and imprisonment, death, etc. ut poena ad paucos,
metus ad omnes perveniat; wholly lost, and taken away by this new frame of
Government; for sure this Independent State will never demand that Power, since
no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction ever of right enjoyed it: I mean the Power to
fine, and imprison, only Power of imprisonment granted to Bishops, and others,
having Episcopal Jurisdiction, and that of Priests only, but still the power
of Appeal saved by 1. H. 7. 4.

What will also become of their power of Excommunication, Major or Minor, unles
they crave aid of the Civil Magistrate, to have a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, who will regard their excommunication, it will be but contemptible
without the Laws of this Realm, to aid and assist them: Thus you see they
enervate half the Laws of this Kingdom, yea their own strength, as formerly
I have showed you by this Anarchy, as I may term it.

They make their own power despicable, being they seek to abrogate those
Laws which do and must strengthen and assist their Jurisdiction, unless you
will say they shall have that vast Power of fine and imprisonment
beforementioned, which surely will never be granted unto them; for that were
Misera Servitus, that a man's body should rot peradventure with imprisonment,
his Salvo Contenemeno mentioned in the Laws of this Land so often, destroyed;
and yet no Habeas Corpus, the precious liberty of the Subject, in course of
Justice, to be obtained, nor any prohibition or legal proceedings, to rectify
these enormities: The Turkish tyranny were as tolerable.

Thus I hope I have plainly proved the Ecclesiastical State must in all
things be (in Doctrine and Discipline) subordinate to the Civil Government, as
before is specified, or else you nullify and destroy the Laws and Statutes of
this Kingdom.

It remainoth now to show you the reason why Parliaments of this Land have
always exercised this supreme Power over the Ecclesiastical State, one reason
was, I conceive, because the Civil Law which concerns much the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction here established, used the same power in the time
of the Roman Emperors, both before and after they had received the Christian
Faith, for the space of three hundred years after Christ, and the distinction
of spiritual and temporal causes in point of Jurisdiction was not then known,
but all Power was in the Civil Magistrate. But afterward out of a zeal they
had to grace and Se^ Ridley in his view, 115, 116, 117.
honor the godly, and learned Bishops of that time, they were pleased to
single out certain special causes, wherein they granted Jurisdiction unto the
Bishops, namely in cases of Tithes, because they were paid to men of the
Church: in causes of Matrimony, because Marriages were for the most part
solemnized in the Church; in causes Testamentary, because Testaments were many
times made in extremis, when Churchmen were present, and therefore they were
thought the fittest persons to take the probate of such Testaments.

Howbeit these Bishops did not proceed in these causes according to the Canons
and Decrees of the Church (for the Canon Law was not then hatched or dreamt of)
but according to the Rules of the imperial Law, as the Civil Magistrate did
proceeed in other causes, neither did the Emperors in giving this Jurisdiction
unto them give away their own supreme, and absolute power to correct, and
punish the Judges as well as others, if they performed not their several
duties. This then is most certain, that the Primitive Jurisdiction in all these
causes was in the civil Magistrate, and so in right it remains at this day:
and though it be derived from him, it remains in him as a Fountain: for,
every Christian Monarch, as well as the godly Kings of Juda, is Custos
utriusque Tabulae, and consequently has power to punish, not only Treason,
Murder, Theft, and all manner of force and fraud, but also Incest, Adultery,
Perjury, Usury, Symony, Sorcerie, Idolatry, Blasphemy; neither are these
causes, in respect of their own quality or nature, to be distinguished one
from another by the names of Spiritual, or Temporal: For, why is Adultery a
spiritual cause rather then Murder, when they are both offenses against the
second Table? or Idolatry rather then Perjury, being both offenses against the
first Table? And truly, they were not so called from the nature of the Causes,
but from the quality of the Persons, viz. The Clergy being men intended to live
secundum Spiritum, whom the Prince made his subordinate Judge in these Causes;
and this distinction of Temporal and Spiritual Causes began first in the
Church of Nota.
Rome, where the Clergy having (by this Jurisdiction) got great wealth, their
wealth begot pride, their pride ingratitude toward Princes who first gave them
their Jurisdiction, and then, according to the nature of all ungrateful
persons, they went about to extinguish the memory of the benefit; for, whereas
their Jurisdiction was first derived from Caesar, in the execution where of
they were Caesar's Judges, so as both their Courts and Causes ought still to
have born Caesar's Image and Superscription, as belonging unto Caesar, they
blotted Cae^ars name out of the Style of their Courts, and called them Courts
Christian, as if the Courts holden by other Magistrates, had been b^t Courts of
Ethnicks, in comparison; and the Causes which were merely Civil in their
nature, they called Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical; so as, if the Emperors
should again challenge their Courts and Causes, and say, Reddite Caesari qua
sunt Caesaris, they would all cry out on the other part, and say, Date Deo quae
sunt Dei. Our Courts bear the Name and Title of Christ, the Superscription of
Caesar is quite worn out, and not to be found upon them: And this point of
their policy is worth the observing, That when they found their Jurisdiction in
Matrimonial Causes to be most sweet, and gainful of all other, (for, of
Matrimoney they made matter of Money indeed) to the end, that Caesar might
never resume so rich a perquisite of their Spiritual Jurisdiction, they
reduced it into the number of the seven Sacraments: After which time it had
been Sacrilege, if the Civil Magistrate had intermedled with the least
matters that had relation to Matrimony, or any dependency thereupon. Hac ille.

Thus you see the power of the Civil Magistrate supreme over the
Ecclesiastical State, and some grounds and reasons of it cleared, many other
might be given, but I think I have said enough.

Now to draw to conclusion. They exempt not only the Clergy, but all the
brotherhood, not only in criminal cases, but in civil also, until be be
cast out of the society or brotherhood Thus you see they exceed the Romish
Church.
Indeed (as to me it seems) this Independent Government in the Church is
derived from Note. They will erect ten thousand Indicatories in England, and as
many Doctrines, whereas the Doctrine of the Church of England ought to be one
and the same, 21 H. 8. 21. 13. Eliz. 12.
the Church of Rome, who have always in all ages laid this as the foundation
of their pride, where they have prevailed, to exempt the Church and Clergy
from secular power, attempted in England, even of late times, in the time of
King Henry the eighth, by the Clergy here in matters criminal, as appears
in the legal reports of Keloway, and in the times of other Kings practiced
more ancient, as Henry the third, and others.

Thus briefly liberavi animam meam, let every man use his liberty in censure,
Utere tuo judicio, nihil enim impedio. My wish is, that they which sit in the
high places would well weigh the premises, and do that which is consistent with
this Government, whose proceedings we pray may be prosperous; yea we wish unto
them good luck in the name of the Lord.

FINIS.

