CHRIST EXALTED, AND Alone worthy to open the Seals of the Book. And the
Scriptures owned in their place. A True TESTIMONY of him, as is manifest, in
Answer to a Book, Entitled, The Quakers Apostasy, from the perfect Rule of
Scriptures. Given forth by John Timson, of Great Bowden in Leicestershire. And
the Deceits and Blasphemies he charges upon the Quakers, is turned upon his own
head, and he found guilty of what he reproaches them with, in what is written
for the simples sake, and truth to clear from false accusations and lies cast
upon it. And the Ten Queries he says he vindicateth, and would Print but four
of them, they are all published, with the Answers that he charges to be
confused, dark and deceitful, that the Answers may witness for themselves
against what is charged upon them. He that has an understanding in the light,
read and judge.

WILLIAM DEWSBERRY.

Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have
life.

John 5. 39, 40. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the
life, no man comes unto the father, but by me,

John 14. 6. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the west end of Paul's. 1656.

Christ Exalted, AND Alone worthy to open the Seals of the Book, And the
Scriptures owned in their place, etc.
John Timson.
THE Book thou has Printed, is seen with the light that returned an Answer to
thy first Queries; and for the truths sake, and it to clear, from the lies,
slanders, and aspersions cast upon it, in the light here is writ, to witness
against the falsehood and untruth, which thou have charged us withal, that
answers thy Queries, which to that of God in all consciences, who it minds,
will give them to discern, that what thou have charged against the people, who
in scorn are called Quakers, is false, and on thee is returned, as the lines
following make manifest, wherein is writ what thou have charged them withal,
and to clear the truth, an answer thereunto is returned.

In thy Preface as thou calls it, which thou presents to the Reader, thou have
not much of it expressed, before thou begins falsely to accuse us, charging us
with drawing people aside, and intangling them with dark Diabolical snares,
etc.

And thou says, The answers thou received to thy ten Queries, were so obscure,
deceitful, and confused, that it constrained thee to Reply. To which thou
says, an Answer thou have received, etc. and has now undertaken to give the
sense of what thou understands of what is writ to thee, and has given it forth
publicly to the world, that we have accused thee of slanders, in things that
are too gross in plainness of speech, to publish to the world, etc.

Reply: Dark diabolical snares we deny, the word of the Lord God we witness
which was in the beginning, which word is life and the life is the light of
men. John. 1. 1. 4. which word we preach to turn the minds of people from
darkness to light; from the power of Satan to the liveing God, Acts. 26. 18.
in the light of his liveing word, which discovers the thoughts and intents of
the heart: Heb. 4. 12. to wait in his light, on him for power, to lead out of
all the ways of darkness, into union with the father of life, in Christ the
light, who in him walk, there is no occasion of stumbling; Jo. 2. 10* but who
deny to be guided by his spirit is none of his; To. 8 ver. 9. but in darkness
walk and stumble at noon day, and it is truth we declare, as it is recorded in
the Scripture of truth, he that can receive it, let him, and for thy charging
the answer to be obscure, deceitful, and confused, seeing the deceit in thee,
has published that they are deceitful, and could not publish them to make
manifest what the deceit is and some of them which thou have published thou
has both added and diminished, for the truths sake, the queries with their
answers is published, that the answer may witness for it self against the
falsehood thou have charged on it, he that has an eye to see let him see;

And for thy giveing thy sense of what thou understands of our writeing and
says we accuse thee of slandering etc.

Reply Thy sense thou gives of our words with thy dark understanding we deny,
and slandering we deny, it is thy own practice, proved to thy face, by thy
own words, as follows. Second false accusation.

2. Thou says, that we judge our novices, and all others besides our selves
u^c^peable to receive some of our principles, as yet, and therefore we study to
darken the sense, by subtle glozing, equivocating expressions, and shuffles.

Reply, Thy false accusation we deny, we do not judge Novices besides our
selves uncapeable to receive our principles, we know Christ the true light has
lighted every one that comes into the world, and the Gospel we preach, is to
turn the minds of people, from darkness to light, and who it minds it will
give them an understanding the principle of pure religion to know, Christ the
light in whom we stand clear of thy slanders, in his light we plainly speak
as moved of him, and do not study to darken the sense of our words, as thou
do falsely accuse us, the Lord is Judge between thee and us.

3. The third accusation charging us with damnable heresies, etc. and further
thou say, what thou have charged us withal is upon such rational grounds,
that thou art sure we are convinced in the secret of our hearts and Consciences
that thou lies not; In the presence of God I charge thee to be a liar, in the
slanders and lies before written, what follows will make thee more manifest;
thou say we frequently judge men by the light which gave forth the
Scripture, even while we are opposing the authority of Scriptures, as they are
the only rule of knowing God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, etc.

Reply. Thy charge is false, in saying we oppose the authority of Scriptures
which Christ the light who gave forth the Scripture, who spoke as one having
authority and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7. 29. and the Scripture is a true
testimony of him who is the way to the father, none knows the father but the
son and he to whom the son reveals him, Mat. 11. 27. so thou in the light art
seen to be guilty of what thou chargest us withal, in denying Christ the
light, within, to be the authority of Scriptures, and the perfect rule of faith
and obedience, therefore let flesh be silent, and the lying mouth be stopped,
for Christ we own, which was before the Scriptures, and is the authority of
them, for when he spoke them forth he spoke as one having authority and
according as Christ speaks of the Scriptures, we them own in their place; a
true testimony of him, Jo. 5. 39, 40. who is the way the truth and the life,
and no man comes to the father but by him. Jo. 14. 6.

So none comes to the knowledge of the father by reading the Scriptures though
they think to find life there, they shall not, if they come not to Christ, of
whom they testify, and in whom the life is, who says search the Scriptures
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me, and he reproves all who will not come to him that they may have life. So
what thou charges us withal, thou art the man that denis the authority of
Scriptures, and found guilty of slandering the Children of light, as what is
written makes manifest and what as follows will make thee more manifest to
all that have eyes to see the many falshhoods and lies thou have begun the
book withal, in that thou calls the preface to the reader, so out of thy own
mouth thou art condemned.

4. The fourth false accusation, thou say we are so drunk with delusion and
impudency, that we will rather charge the Scripture with deceit then question
our own deceitful hearts.

Reply. In the presence of God we witness against thee, we own the Scripture
to be the Scripture of truth and do not charge the Scripture with deceit, but
with the light of Christ that gave forth the Scriptures, and discovers the
deceit of the heart, with which light we judge the deceit of the heart, and
witness against thee in the light, which makes known to us the Scripture in
the truth as it is in Jesus Christ the light God is our witness.

5. The fifth false accusation, thou say we rite and speak the L^nguage of
Scripture as if we were for it, and is not, which is rank hypocrisy and done
of purpose to deceive.

Reply. We in the light speak as moved of the Lord 2 Pet. 1. 21. whose Language
is according to Scripture, and doing any thing in hypocrisy we deny, as to
deceive any the Lord is our witness, who will rebuke the lying spirit, and
stop thy lying mouth.

6. The sixth false accusation, thou say we boast, that we are as perfect as
Christ that dyed at Jerusalem.

Reply. Thy charge is false, boasting we deny, or any perfection that is of
self, our righteousness without Christ is as a filthy ragg; and a menstruous
cloth, Christ our righteousness, who is the true light, that lights every
one that comes into the world, Jo. 1. 9. we witness him the same Christ, as
was in that body that suffered at Jerusalem; and every one of the Children of
light in the measure of growth in him, the same mind is in them, that was in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 5. who is the brightness of the fathers glory, Heb. 1.
3.

7. The seventh false accusation, thou say we say, that he that trusts in
Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, for Salvation, shall be deceived.

Reply. This charge is false as the other, in the presence of God we witness
against thee, no other Christ we bear testimony of to be the salvation of lost
man and woman, but that Christ according to Scripture testimony, who was born
of the virgin and bore a good confession before Pilate, and suffered at
Jerusalem, and rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and sits
at the right hand of God, and this Christ we witness the true light, who
lights every one that comes into the world, and says I stand at the door and
knock, who opens, I will come into him and sup with him, and he with me, Rev.
3. 20. and we witness him faithful: and as many as receives him, to them he
gives power, to become the Sons of God, and this is the condemnation of all,
because they believe not in him. Jo. 1. 12.

8. The eight false accusation, thou say we reproach Christ's institutions and
holy ordinances, with the odium of men's tradiditions, outward observations
inconsistent with Gods Kingdom, and compares them to Nebuchadnezzars great
Idol, etc.

Reply. Thy Charge is false, Christ's institutions, and holy ordinances, we own
in the dispensation of time they were to be continued, and what is now in this
dispensation of time known in the administration of his spirit, we own, but
who upholds any Idolatry, in observing any thing by tradition, and not guided
by the Spirit of Christ, and so walk contrary to the perfect Law of God in the
Conscience; and though their words be never so glorious in outward appearance,
in crying the Ordinances of Christ, while they deny to be guided by Christ,
they are no Ordinances of Christ, but an Image, set up in the proud exalted
nature, which Nebuchad nezzar set up his Image in which with the power of God
shall be thrown down and thou with the rest of the Idol worshipers shall be
broken to pieces and lies shall not save thee, for the Lord will exalt his name
and his Children that observe his holy ordinances shall reign in his his
spiritual power, that preserves them therein to observe the moveings of his
spirit, which does lead to worship the father, in spirit and truth, according
to testimony of Scripture, Joh. 4. 23, 24.

And when thou John Timson have presented thy false accusations and lies to the
Reader, in the preface of thy Book, that they might receive the falsehoods,
and lies that are written therein, and these lies and slanders, which are here
laid before thee, and witnessed against, in the answer there to returned will
sufficienly prove to thy face, and be manifest to that of God in every ones
Conscience, that thou have spoken unadvisedly with thy lips, when thou say
thou lies not, and all these lies found in thy mouth, given forth publicly
for all to read and thou declares to the Reader that the Lord knows, what
diligence and tenderness of bowels, thou have had to prepare it for them, etc.

Reply. Blush for shame O vain man to appeal to the Lords knowledge of thy
d^l^gence and tenderness of bowels, to prepare so many lies and falsehoods for
people to read thou shall certainly know that the Lord takes notice of thee,
and he will lay thee open, and make thee manifest, and lies shall not cover
thee, nor be thy refuge; Isa. 28. 17. when our God will clear his truth, and
thy tongue, and all others, that rise up against him, shall fall in judgment,
the day shall declare it.

Further thou goes on saying, as for those persons that have answered me who
have charged me with bringing forth many lies and slanders, and have made a
noise thereof, as if I were some carnal lying wretch, that matters not what I
write.

Reply. To that of God in every ones conscience I appeal, that lies proceed
from a Carnal wretched heart, and the Lord is making thee manifest, who would
make lies thy refuge; which with the light thou art seen, and thy lies turned
upon thee, that in the light thou may be read what thou art, and in the light
our Books are known, and no such thing is in our Books as thou falsely charges
us with, and would make people believe is written therein, in giving the sense
of our words in thy dark mind, and for the Simples sake, an answer is returned,
to clear the truth of God in what he has given out by his spirit, both in word
and writing, and whether thou will receive it yea, or nay, thou shall know and
all others, that Christ is the authority of the Scripture, and when he spoke
them forth, he spoke as one having authority and not as a Scribe, and who in
his light walk, cannot be persuaded to turn from him, by any lies and
reproaches thou can cast upon them, who say we are wholly turned from the
truth, which against thee witness it is not so, let God be judge, and in his
day make manifest what we are in whose will we rest, as moved of him to
witness against the falsehoods, thou have further charged upon us in what
follows.

Thou have not done justly nor honestly in that thou have not Printed the
questions as given forth by thee, and answers as returned by us, and in an
answer to what is of thee required, to prove the charge thou charges us
withal, in thy reply to the answer to the first Question, and the false
accusations, lies and slanders is not proved in all thou have writ.

The one baptism we own Ephesians. 4. 5. and the watch in the Church we own, in
the spirit of life, which in order does keep, in obedience to the pure God,
who is the God of order, and not of confusion, but keeps his Children in
himself purely to live, according to what is pro^est.

Further thou goes on and queries, what proof would we have, is it not our
own profane language, both in papers and conference, it is no ne^es to hear
most of their way, dispute against water Baptism, the Lords Supper, a settled
fixed Ministry over particular Churches, and queries, further, what Quakers
administer water baptism, the Lords Supper* and constantly watches over a
particular flock, or else for shame thou say we must own the charge, and
confess our sin, in telling the world these are thy lying slanders.

Reply. Profane Language we deny, and shadows and figures we witness done
away, the substance being come, water baptism was in its time a figure of the
substance, as John witnesses, to whom that dispensation was committed, Mat. 3.
11. I indeed baptize with water unto Repentance, but he that comes after me is
mightier then I, whose sh^^es I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you
with the Holy ghost* and with fire. And John's baptism we deny to be in force,
he did decrease and Christ must increase whose baptism we own, according as is
recorded in the Scripture of truth, and since he ascended, there is no
Scripture does witness his sending any to baptize with water, Paul who was
sent after he ascended, what he did in the liberty given him, his liberty he
knew, when he circumscised Timothy, and baptized Crispus, and Gaius, and the
household of St^phanus* besides I know not that I baptized any other says
Paul, for Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the Gospel, not with
wisdom of words, least the cross of Christ should be of none effect, 1 Cor.
1. 16, 17. And John who bare record, of the word of the word of God, and
testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 14. 6. says I saw an Angel in the midst of
Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell in the
earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, tongue and People, John did not say,
he did fly through the midst of heaven preaching the everlasting Gospel, and
baptizing with water, we know John faithful in his testimony of Jesus Christ,
who is now revealed, and the Angel is come, and the Gospel preached and the
shadows done away.

And Bread and Wine were the Supper of the Lord, in the dispensation of time, a
figure of his death, which were fulfilled, when he had suffered and rose again,
and now he is known to stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in and Sup with him, and he with me, says
Christ, Rev. 3. 20. And we being many are one bread, and one body, etc. 1 Cor.
10. 17. and knows the wine renewed in our fathers Kingdom, Christ the
substance we now witness, shadows and figures done away, he that can receive
it let him.

And the Churches set up by the will of man, we deny, and the fixed ministry
set up over them by the will of man, that watch for the fleece, bear rule by
their means, and seeks their gain from their quarter, these we deny; Jer. 5.
31. Isa. 56. 11.

And those in scorn called Quakers, does watch over the flock of God, every one
as the Lord them calls, and not for filthy lucre, as the Priests that bear rule
by their means do, neither by constraint, but of a ready mind 1 Pet. 5. 2. in
obedience to the spirit of the Lord, as he them moves, and thy slanders thou
have not yet proved, our conscience does witness it, that what thou have
accused us with is a lie, and not the truth.

And thou further says that Will. Deusberry in a lying paper, as thou calls
it, which is entitled A true prophecy of the mighty day of the Lord already
risen in the North of England, etc. in which paper he makes it his work, to
slander the Ordinances of Gospel worship, under the notion of outward
observations, which Christ's Kingdom comes not in, Luke 17. 20. and thus he
accounts of all the ordinances and institutions, prescribed by Christ himself,
in the Apostolical Churches, and accounts all the strict observing of outward
forms of worship, is but immitating the Saints practices, in their Babilonish
and heathenish wisdom, all these outward forms, is the outward Court without
the temple, Pa. 1. 2.

Reply. The lie will be found in thy own mouth, in calling that a lying paper,
a true prophecy it is of the mighty day of the Lord, and for thy saying,
William Deusberry makes it his work etc. as before written thy charge is
false, and the truth is witnessed against vain man, who in his dark mind seeks
the Kingdom of God in observations where it comes not Luke 17. 20. neither
shall men say lo here or lo there, he called by name as before written does
witness they are not the Ordinances of Christ, according as is declared of
them, they will be found and made manifest to the shame and confusion of their
face, who in their own wisdom immitates the Saints practices in form, which
they did practice in life and power in the dispensation of time they served
their generation, in the manifestation of the spirit, according to the will of
God.

And whereas thou say in the 4 Pa. it is more clear, that he profanely
compares the holy ordinances and institutions of the Lord to that great Image
set up by Nebuchadnezzars proud nature, spoken of by Daniel, and that that
Image was but a tipe and figure of this which now shines gloriously in forms
and observations.

And thou say, that in his speaking to the Anabaptists and Independents, he
tells them they have set up a finer Image in the Gospel ordinances (as they
call them) and what other ordinances (thou say) does these or you set up, but
what was practiced in the Apostolical Churches, thus you may see how this
Impostor, does reproach the holy things of God.

Reply. Blush for shame who say William Dewsberry compares the holy
ordinances and institutions of our Lord to that great Image, etc. Holy
Ordinances, and Institutions of the Lord is not there expressed by him, where
thou say he them so compares; he vvitnesses against the Image you have set up
in your minds, of the truth as you conceive where you are in confusion that
does you divide into forms and observations as before written to look for the
Kingdom of God to come, and though you call them the Ordinances of Christ you
denying Christ the light you to guide in the daily cross, you are in the same
nature, wherein Nebuchadnazzar cast the Lords servants into the fiery furnace,
because they witnessed against his Image so do you who walk in your
imaginations and deny Christ the light, cause the servants of the Lord that
walks in the life, and cannot bow to your Image but witness against it, to be
haled out of your meeting places, beaten, stoned, whipped, stockt, imprisoned,
which are the fruits of Nebuchadnezzars nature as is manifest this day amongst
those, against whom he witnesses and who is the Impostor and reproaches the
holy things of God, the fruit makes manifest, he that has an eye to see let
him see.

And further thou say that he in the height of his insolent rashness and
madness, says thus the word of the Lord came unto me saying, I will gather my
people out of all forms and observations, and out of all Kindreds, Tongues and
Nations, and I will power out my spirit upon them. And this thou say he
writes in a different Character, as if it were all Scripture, by this you may
see it proved what I have accused them with, in denying the Ordinances, and
Administrations of the Gospel Churches true, and yet this impudent liar tells
me its a lying slander they would render me a liar, for telling them the truth,
but it seems they can rather, and with more ease deny the accusation then prove
themselves Saints, and stand to it, thus when they are pincht they will say and
un say, and any thing to evade.

Rashness and madness is thy own, in speaking evil of that thou know
not, the day will declare, the Lord will gather his people together according
as is declared, Rev. 5. 9. And the lie and false accusation will still rest on
thee, for charging W. D. as before written, and the impudent liar he will not
be found, when the Lord will separate between the precious and the vile then
shall it be known, who walk in outward forms and deny Christ the light and
those that live in the light, life and power of Christ, them to lead in the
daily cross, which keeps them in a pure life, and holy conversation, and thy
false accusations does not us pinch, neither do we any thing to evade, but
witness the truth, against thy false accusations, and in patience do finish
our testimony in sufferings, and all with us that in the light walk, are in the
ordinances of the Gospel Church and witness the everlasting Gospel where all
types shadows and figures are done away, which thou so much cries up and the
Lord will throw thee and all down and a day of tribulation shall come upon
thee, and thou shall not escape except thou repent.

And whereas thou reviles us for saying that the spirit is the only rule of
faith and life, Joh. 16. 13. which thou say that promise was made directly to
the twelve.

Reply. Who art thou that limits the holy one, the promise of his spirit is to
all who wait on him in the manifestation of his spirit, according to the
Testimony of Scripture, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. the manifestation of his Spirit is
given to every one to profit withal, for to one is given by the spirit the
word of wisdom to another the word of knowledge by the same spirit, to another
faith by the same spirit, to another the gifts of healing, by the same spirit,
etc.

And for thy unsavory words which in reproach calls us proud worms that vilify
and diminish from the Scripture, etc.

Reply. Pride is thy own, we do not vilify nor diminish the Scriptures, we
witness them a true testimony of Christ the life, and who in his light walk
knows the truth of the Scriptures as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21.

And whereas thou say in confession to what was declared to thee that Abel,
Enoch, and Noah had says before the Scriptures was written, to which thou
quotes Heb. 1. 1. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
p ast unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us
by his son, and thou say before there was any thing commit to writeing the
Lord did more visibly reveal his will by voice, vision, Angels, etc. But since
he has committed his whole will unto writeing by the Prophets and Apostles,
these former manners are ceased, and thou say to look for the same
discoveries, still by voice, vision or inspiration, is madness we run into.

Reply. Thou vain man, who dare to say the Lord has ceased making himself
known to his people, by voice vision or inspiration, holy men of God did speak,
and does speak, as inspired by the spirit of God, and moved by the Holy Ghost,
2 Pet. 1. 21. An^ the Lord has promised in the latter days I will power out
my spirit upon all flesh, Joel. 2. 28, 29. Acts 2. 17, 18. Jer. 31. 33, 34.
Heb. 8. 9, 10, 11. Isa. 54. 13.

All the Children of the Lord, who are led by his spirit, does witness these
Scriptures fulfilled and knows the Lord is fatithfull according to his
promise, who will recompense into thy bosom thy just reward, for speaking
evil of his truth, and whiles thou denis the manifestation of his spirit,
which the Lord manifests to his people as is recorded in the Scripture of
truth, thy pride and confusion thou have made manifest, and neither knows Moses
ministry nor the Apostles, which thou in a buisy mind speaks of, in thy dark
understanding, which leads thee to fill thy Book with false accusations, as in
thy 10th Pa; where thou say we do not make any clear difference, between the
outward declaration and the word of faith.

Reply. For the Simples sake as we have declared the truth, we do declare it,
which is witnessed with all the Children of light, the word of faith is in the
heart and in the mouth, and who are guided by it their hearts are kept pure,
faith purifyes the heart Act. 15. 9. whether they have the outward declaration
yea, or nay, and they that have the outward declaration, and though they read
it, if they mind not the word which is life and light, which gave forth the
Scripture, they do not live according to the Scripture, for they are without
faith, who are not guided by the word, faith comes not by reading, the outward
declaration, faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8 given to his Children, who
diligently hearken to his word, which is life, and the life is the light of men.

And for thy chargeing us with contradictions, confused nonsense, bitter
censures and shuffles, and how notorious false it is wherein we say, that not
any does know the Scriptures by the outward declaration.

Reply. To the light of Christ in all Consciences we appeal, let the righteous
judge, a natural man knows not the things that are of God (though he read the
outward declaration) for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and none
is found worthy to open the seals of the Book, but the Lion of the Tribe of
Juda, etc. Rev. 5. 3. 5. and then thou denis Gods speaking to his people, by
voice vision or inspiration, and say they run into madness that expect any
such thing, here thou art found in the Contradictions confused nonsense, bitter
censures and shuffles, and notorious falsehoods, which thou have falsely charged
us withal, and its turned upon thy own head, and proved out of thy own
mouth, that while thou art making a show in words to maintain the Scripture
authority, thou denies both the dispensation of the spirit of God in Christ,
the light, and the Scriptures which bear testimony of him, as is manifest in
the reply to what thou have writ in the 6. and 8. Pa.

And whereas thou in the 11 Pa. calls us deceivers and says to those thou
calls thy friends, we have them abused by the deceit and cheats of our own
hearts, etc.

Reply. Deceit and cheats thou art proved to be in, and what thou endeavors to
do in the deceit of thy heart against the truth, thou will see thy hope fail
thee, and not a blessing but a curse upon thy endeavors; which to thy face is
proved, in what is before written to be contrary to the dispensation of the
spirit, and Scripture, for which the terror of the Lord shall take hold on
thee, for thy uttering words without knowledge, and speaking evil of the
things thou know not, as in the 12. Pa.

And whereas thou appeals to them thou calls thy friends how their hearts have
been heated, and warmed by the power of the word and Sacraments etc. Which is
now in contempt and reproach, by those that seduce you: Which thou charges upon
us, and say thou have clearly discovered our slanders, shifts, and shuffles,
and our reproaching the Ordinances, and Ins^tutions of our Lord as Heathenish
by compareing them to that great Image of that heathen King, Dan. 3. 3. and how
we deny the Scripture to be a perfect rule of knowing God believing in him, and
liveing unto him, and reproach thee to be a lying slander for chargeing us with
that which is an apparent truth, as thou say thou have proved by our lying
papers, and that we have reproacht they falsely, and the lies are returned upon
our own heads, whilst thou say we witness our selves perfect and without
sin, and have entered the new Jerusalem into which none shall enter that makes a
lie, etc.

Reply. Them thou calls thy friends, who are in the light, with all the
Children of light, do witness, that their hearts were never warmed in
Sacraments, no such words is found in Scripture, and thou that art pleading for
the authority of Scripture, is with the light of Christ in all his Saints
denied and thy Sacraments, which is not found in Scripture, and in the light
thou art clearly seen the slanders shifts and shuffles is thy own, as is
manifest in the answer to the same reproach and accusations, in the 2. and 3.
Page of thy Book and what we witness is according to Scripture, which we own,
and in many things thou have writ, as before is manifest by thy own words, the
Scripture thou denies, so on whose head the falsehood remains, to the Children
of light is made manifest and the day will further declare it, wherein Christ
our King shall be exalted over all, in whom our perfection and cleansing from
sin is, and lead us into new Jerusalem, into which nothing enters that works
abomination or makes a lie, but who enter therein are led by the spirit of
Christ in whose mouth is found no guile, he that has an ear to hear let him
hear.

And whereas thou say to some of them thou calls thy friends, some of you
have heard W. Dewsberry say of himself, that he, was as perfect as that Christ
hat died at Jerusalem, this is witnessed by one of credit and fidelity amongst
your selves. I forbear his name. In Dewesberry new birth he thus witnesses of
himself.

Reply. Thy spirit in the light is seen, who has published what thou has
received from a namelesse Author, and thy acusation is false, which thou have
published to the world, there were never any heard W. Dewesberry say of himself
that he was as perfect as that Christ that died at Jerusalem, and that thou
calls his new birth will be a witness against thee, There is no such word
expressed by him, as thou say this namelesse Author has related of him. In
the presence of God He (called W. Dewesberry.) does witness that self is
imperfect, and self righteousness as a filthy ragg and a menstruous cloth,
etc. Isa. 64. 6. And he does witness Christ Jesus the true light which
lights everyone that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9. which discovers the
imperfection and filthynesse of self, with all its righteousness, and his
perfection is in Christ, the light, which he does witness, the same Christ and
no other, but he which suffered at Jerusalem, who is the brightness of his
fathers glory, etc. Heb. 1. 3. 13. 8. which he thou falsely accuses, as before
written, which all the Children of light does witness, the Righteousness of
God in Christ the light, 2 Cor. 5. 21. which for the Simples sake the truth is
witnessed forth in the presence of God, which the Lord will clear, from the
lies and slanders cast upon it, and he shall be known what he is, whom you call
a proud polluted worm, that dare exalt himself to a perfection equal with
God, which are thy own words and what thou have gathered up from other who
falsely accuse as thou do, which words were not spoken by him, thou calls a
proud polluted worm, who can bear thy revileings, but for the truths sake,
that the Simple do not stumble, at the way of truth, does witness against thy
false accusations and revileings, which thou have filled thy Book withal.

As in the 14. and 15. Pa, Speaking to them thou calls friends whom thou say
is seduced, and thou declares that those whom thou charges with seducing them
does teach them to cease from all religious duties of commanded worship,
without scruple or check of Conscience, before they can enjoy God, or be
taught immediately what to do, first put out the true light, and power of
Conscience to do his office, by de spising the means of enlightening, and
convincing it to act in the soul, and then resolves to follow the immediate
commands of Conscience, without questioning the Author of those Laws at all.

Reply. Thy accusation is false, we do not teach any to cease from all religious
duties of commanded worship, neither put out the true light, we teach all to be
obedient to the commands of God, who says this is my beloved Son in whom I am
wel-pleased, hear him, Mat. 17. 5. And we bear testimony of him that he is the
true light that lights every one that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9. and
convinces the world of sin, Righteousness and Judgment, Joh. 16. 8. and he
alone commands in the Conscience for God, and is the Author of the perfect Law,
handed in the hand of a mediator, to whom we exhort all to be subject, and in
whom all the Children of light walk, Col. 2. 6.

And for thy expressing, a depth of deceit and delusion, which thou charges
upon us, which is found in thy self who has made lies thy refuge to slander
the innocent which is further manifest in thy 16. Pa.

Thou say we take no notice of Scripture authority, as if they were
altogether out of date, which false accusation is witnessed against in what is
returned in answer to the preface of thy Book.

And in the 17. and 18. Pa. thou charges us with impudent foreheads to make a
show of one thing, and intend another, purposely minded to deceive, and yet
they tell us often that as they write so they mean, and speak the truth in
plainness, most horrible hypocrisy and deceit, which nothing but a lying and a
knavish head, dare go about to excuse, etc.

And all those unsavory words as before written, wherein thou say we have
discovered to purpose the deceit of our answer, in saying the revelations of
Christ are according to Scripture, and where the new Covenant is witnest, the
law is written in the heart, and the witness and testimony of Jesus within
bearing witness with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God.

Reply. Doing any thing of purpose to deceive, through hypocrisye or knavish
heads, we deny, and in the presence of God we speak the truth in plainness, and
do witness there is no deceit in saying the revelations of Christ are
according to Scripture and all in the new Covenant do know, the law of God
written in their hearts, and the witness or testimony of Jesus, within, 1 Jo.
5. 10. bearing witness with their spirits that they are the Children of God.
To. 8. 16. and this declared is neither deceitful nor knavish, which is the
unsavory words thou charges on us, let the truth of God in all Consciences
judge, to whom they belong, the Scriptures we are not against, they bear
testimony of Christ the light whom we witness the way to the father. Mat. 1.
27. None knows the father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him,
by the revelation of the Spirit of God, is the things of God known to his
people, 1 Cor. 2. 9. 10. 13. To. 8. 11. 16. according as is recorded we
witness the Scriptures, fulfilled in Christ the light who is our life, Col. 3.
3. 4.

And whereas thou queries, did ever any read of the law and testimony in the
heart, and that the law and testimony in the heart, is the law of the new
Covenant.

Reply. Who has read the Scripture in the fear of God, has read what the Lord
has promised as declared, Isa. 8. 16. Bind up the testimony, seal the law,
among my Disciples, and Jer. 31. 33. This shall be the Covenant. I will make
with the house of Israel, in those days says the Lord, I will put my Laws in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Heb. 8. 10 11, 12. and the
law written in the heart we witness, and the Lord faithful in performing
according to his Promise in the new Covenant.

And thou goes on in the 19. and 20. Pa, calling us impostors and pervertors of
the new Covenant, and to be in Idle proud fancyes, and itching humors of our
own brains in our Apostate Condition.

Reply. We in the light can bear thy reproach, and have witnessed the truth
that it may stand a witness against thy revileings, and in the Lord we rest,
who will make manifest, whether thou or we be the perverters of the new
Covenant, and guilty of what thou charges us with.

And whereas thou in the 22. Pa. says that W. Dewesberry. tells us that the
mighty day of the Lord is appeared in the North of England, and is riseing
toward the South, and shall overspread this Nation, and all the Natious of the
world, etc. what the man's fancy and design is in bruiting and making such a
noise of the appearance of the mighty day of the Lord judge ye, I am sure he
has sufficiently discovered his own folly in blazing abroad such dreams of
his own lying heart, etc.

Reply. In thy 2. Pa. thou has enlarged thy self concerning that Book calling
it a lying paper, etc. and the truth is witnessed in answer to thy charge, and
this in answer to what is here written, fancies, bruitishnesse, folly dreams,
and lies, W. Deusberry denis the truth he has declared, as the Lord has him
moved, in faithfulness to the souls of all people, that they be not found the
sloathfull servants, putting the day of the Lord a far off, in this his day
wherein the hour of his righteous judgment is come, (Rev. 14. 7.) to all that
wait on him, the truth is declared, that all men may prepare in the light the
Lord to meet, and no longer in sloathfulnesse remain, least he come upon them
as a theife in the night, and if the day of the Lord do not arise over all the
world, and the kingdoms of the world, become the kingdoms of our Lord and his
Christ, and the Lord, perform not as is declared, then say the Lord harh not
spoken by me who is known to the world by name William Dewsberry.

And in the 22. Pa. thou says we have set our selves in the Throne of Christ
judging the whole world.

Reply. Thy accusation is false, self we deny, to Christ we are snbject who
sits on his Throne, and is come and comeing in his Saints to judge the world,
Jude 14, 15. 1 Cor. 6. 2. and 2. 5.

And in the 23. Pa. thou say, why do not we command the dead to rise, and
appear before us, and many other unsavory words are there expressed.

Reply. A wicked and adultrous generation, shall seek after a sign, and there
shall no sign be given it, but the sign of the Prophet Jona, Mat. 16. 4.

And whereas thou charges Howgill, and Borough (as thou calls them) with
pernicious blasphemous opinions.

Reply. Thy accusation is false, they are faithful men, serveing their
generation in the light, Ministers of Christ, in whom is witnessed the God head
dwelling bodily, Coll. 2. 9. and in him were one in God, they that join to the
Lord are one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. he that can receive it let him.

And whereas thou in the 29. Pa. says that the Revelations of Christ that are
according to Scripture, are either texts of Scripture, expressed, or rational
deductions consequences and conclusions; that naturally flow from particular
passages of Scriptures, and not any other revelations can be pleaded for as
rule.

Reply. Thy dark mind is shut out from knowing the revelations of Christ, and
though thou say that answer that was returned to these words was not to
purpose, it stands a witness against thee, and will be found to purpose in the
light, when thy reward thou shall have, for all thy unsavory words expressed in
thy Book.

And in the 33. Pa. where thou falsely accuses us, that we will allow of no
Laws of God nor Scripture, but the Revelations and edicts of our own bewitched
hearts, etc. And when thou have reviled us with false accusation as before
written, thou beseeches those thou call, thy dear friends to be serious in
their thoughts of what thou have written, in discovering our deceits and
blasphemies denying the rule that all things are to be tried by, and make
themselves the absolute rule, and we must not question what they say though it
be never so insolent, and to be abhorred of all sober Christians etc.

Reply. Thou has brazned thy face to slander the truth of God, with lies and
blasphemies, which is the foundation of all heresy, and there thou art found
and thy accusation is false, Christ the rule that all things is to be tried by,
we own and our selves deny, and to the light of Christ in all Consciences, we
appeal, whether thou or we deny the rule, thou that say the revelations of
Christ, are either texts of Scripture expressed, or rational deductions
consequences, etc. as before written, or we who witness Christ the true light,
revealed by the father, and none knows the father but the Son and he to whom
the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27. Luke 10. 22, Let all that are in Christ
with sobriety in the light judge.

And for the rest of thy slanders in the 37. and 38. Pa. where thou says, these
miserable worms uncovenant themselves and unChrist themselves, as if they cared
not for grace and mercy in standing before God, denying the Scripture, etc. and
in the 40. Pa. thou say of those in scorn called Quakers, thou can safely
say they deny the benefit that comes to the Church, by Christ suffering in that
flesh, that he received from the Virgin Mary, or else deny it to be are all
body of flesh and so make it but a tipe and a figure of Christ in the Saints
who are his true real body, which he now suffers in, and by his suffering makes
satisfaction, for them making the death of the Cross of none effect.

Reply. The miserable worms that uncovenant themselves and unChrist,
themselves, who denis Christ the light thou art found to be one, whom thy dark
mind art working abomination, and making lies, which thou have published to
the world, in thy Books, and thy place thou may read as is recorded, Rev. 21.
27. and the rest of thy accusations, recorded in 40. Pa. we witness against,
and for the Simple sake declare as follows that benefit came to the Church by
Christ suffering, in that body God gave which was born of the Virgin Mary, and
with one offering has Christ perfected for ever, them that are sanctified,
Heb. 10. 14. and these are his Saints in whom he is now revealed, who are his
body, Ephesians. 1. 23. which now suffered by thee, and all that are of the murdering
generation, who bore false witness against Christ, when he was in that body
which they crucified at Jerusalem, and thou have manifest thy self to be of the
same murdering generation, who has published to the world the false witness
against the innocent, to perfect thy evil intent, toward the body of Christ,
if the Lord prevent thee not, but thou shall know the Lord faithful, that thou
and all that forms your tongues against him shall fall in judgment, Isa. 54.
17.

And what is charged upon thee in answer to thy reply to the answer to the
third question, that thou sets at naught the corner stone, and prefers the
testimony of him before him, limitting the eternal son of God as thou has in
what is Printed in the 55. Pa. where thou speaks of the Scripture that they are
designed of God, to be the only instrument and vessel of his spirit, to convey
the knowledge of Christ as Redeemer to lost man, and without them Christ is not
known at all to any saveing ends.

Reply. Who art thou that dare thus utter words without knowledge, Christ is
known where the Father reveals him to be the souls life, whether they have
the Scripture yea, or nay, according to the will of God* he makes known his
mind of his people, who wait upon him in his fear, and the secrets of the
Lord are with those that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14. And the spirit of the Lord is
witness with our spirits that we are the children of God, O man repent, least
the Lord cut thee off, and thou perish in thy gainsayings.

And further what thou has written in Reply, to what was returned in answer to
the question before mentioned, the most of the false accusations is answered,
in what was returned to the former part of the Book and all thy false
accusations and reproaches denied with the light, and for the Simples sake
there is returned in answer to thy questions which thou have propounded.

1. Qu. Where we read of a perfect law of God in the heart, and where it is
made the Rule and Ground of the Saints obedience.

Ans. The Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. and is the rule to which the
Saints are to walk in obedience to, and to be guided by, Psalm. 119. 12. and
the Law to be in the heart is proved, Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will O
God, yea thy law is within my heart.

2. Qu. Whether the law in the heart be under another Covenant, distinct from,
the perfect law of God declared in Scripture.

3. Qu. What were to understand by the law of God i n the heart, which is the
same with Scripture, whether the 10. Commandments written in Tables of stone
only, or all those positive Precepts of Gospel worship and obedience conjoined
with them also.

Ans. To thy 2. and 3. Question in the old Covenant the Law was written in
Tables of stone, which Law having a shadow of good things to come and not the
very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered
year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect. Heb. 10. 1. And
when he came who says, Lo I come to do thy will O God, he takes away the
first that he may establish the second, ver. 9. by which will we are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, ver. 10. and by
one offering he has perfected for ever them, that are sanctified, whereof the
holy Ghost is a witness to us, as he said before, this is the covenant that I
will make with them, says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their hearts, and
in their minds will I write them, ver. 14, 15, 16. Jer. 31. 33.

4 Qu. Whether the Law in the heart, without the use of Scriptures make any
Evangelical discoveries of the person, natures, and Offices of Christ, as he is
Redeemer of lost man?

Ans. Thy feigned words we wave, the truth we witness, the Law in the heart
witnessed in the New Covenant, Christ is known to be King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. And the faithful High Priest, Heb. 2. 17. 3. 1. 4. 15. 5.
6 7. 26. 10. 2^. who has made us Kings and Priests to God and his Father, etc.
Rev. 1. 6.

5 Qu. Whether all shall be saved, that have the Law of God written in their
hearts, by virtue of the New Covenant, or any be saved that live to years of
discretion, that know not Christ, as the Scriptures testify of him, in order
to his coming to the world to save sinners?

Ans. All are saved, who are guided by the righteous Law of the Spirit of life
in Christ, which sets them free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. And
what years soever any live unto, they have no discretion to know Christ, as the
Scriptures testify of him, but they who in his light waits upon him, to be
guided by him; for who has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his, Rom, 8. 9.

And for the rest of thy aspersions, and revilings thou have writ, calling us
deceivers that fear the Authority of man, or else we would deny Christ himself.

Reply. Christ we do not deny, but him we own, who respects no man's person,
Romans 2. 11. and in him no fear of man is, and we in him Reigns over thee, and
all the authority of the power of darkness, that stands in opposition to
Christ, the Son of God, to whom every knee must bow, Phil. 2. 10. the day shall
declare it.

And in what thou have replied, to the Answer to the fourth Question, which
thou charges to be untrue, to say That man in the fall, as he stands in the
state of corrupt nature, has not therein any light without Christ, to do any
thing acceptable to God, etc. Which thou goes about to prove the contrary, and
says there is the light and use of reason, and understanding faculties, though
corrupted.

And further thou says, This light of corrupt reason, as before expressed,
presents to the conscience good and evil, etc.

Reply. In the light thou art seen to be in the corrupt Fountain, from whence
all these corrupt words has come, which thou have Printed in thy Book, and thy
words are not true. Corrupt reason of man does not present to the conscience,
things good and evil, a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat. 7,
18. There is nothing makes manifest darkness, but light, Ephesians. 5. 15. which
all men in the Fall is gone from, out of the way, and there is none that does
good, no not one, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, etc. And the natural man receives not the
things that are of God, nor can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 12. 14. And all the righteousness of man in this state, is
as a filthy rag, and a menstruous cloth, Isa. 64. 6. And this is the state of
man in corrupt nature: And the light that convinces man of this dark and
corrupt estate he is in, is the light of Christ that convinces the World of
sin, righteousness, and judgment, John 16. 8. So we that were sometimes
darkness, are now light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. And who walk in the light,
there is no occasion of stumbling, 1 John 2. 10.

And whereas thou say, Thou knows we will lie, as thou have made it
manifest.

Reply. It is not so, thou has not made yet manifest any lie that we have
spoken, by any truth thou has declared.

And thou goes on, as in thy 89 Page thou says, The rational soul of man
corrupted, is called the candle of the Lord, which we invent to be Christ;
which is false, we deny that the corrupt soul of man is the candle of the Lord,
or Christ.

And further thou says, It was thy intended work to go through all the Answers
to the ten Questions, but for want of thy paper, which thou sa^es we detained
from thee, contrary to our Promise.

In which thou says not true, for the promise was to thee thou should have a
copy of thy paper which thou sent to us when it was ready for thee, which was
not then written, neither was any time set down of thy having it, and as way
was made, a copy according to our promise, came to thy hands.

And in the close of thy Book, thou goes on as thou begun, saying we deny
Scriptures as to the end they were intended, and reproach the Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus, which the Scriptures teach, under the notion of heathenish
worships, etc. which is answered to in the truth declared, a witness to stand
against all the reproaches, that thou have cast upon the truth of the liveing
God, and the God thou art pleading for cannot crown thee with honor, in the
day wherein the liveing God will exalt his son, and clear the innocence of his
people, then shall the God whose worship thou art defending, be confounded, and
confusion and shame shall stop thy mouth, and if this come not to pass as
declared, then say the Lord has not spoken by me.

And in that thou calls thy Postscript in the end of thy Book, the things
therein thou falsely accuses us with, and calls them the Rocks which we are to
manifest how we shall escape, which is clearly made manifest in what is written
in answer to thy Book. Only this, where thou says we make no difference
between the visible professing Church, and the Pagan world, all may be saved
alike if they will, etc.

Reply. They that make a visible Profession of Christ, and deny to walk in the
light of his Spirit, are of the world that lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19.
Mat. 7. 21. as well as them thou calls the Pagan world; and not any can be
saved by what they do in their own wills, all that is done in that nature is
abomination to God, as is plain in the Answer to what thou have writ in the 70
Page. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. which he makes manifest in the riches of his grace,
in Christ the light, who leads all that obey him, in the strait way of
self-denial, and the daily cross, in obedience to the will of God, which is
our sanctification: And he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are
one, Heb. 2. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 31. He that can receive it, let him.

For the truths sake, that the simple be not turned out of the way, by the
false accusations, reproaches, and aspersions thou have cast upon it, what is
before written in Answer to thee, the truth does clear, and the Answer to thy
ten Questions, which thou charges to be deceitful, that they may witness for
themselves against what thou have cast upon them, that all that desire to know
the truth may them read. The Questions and Answers are as follows.

1 Qu. Whether the writings of the Scriptures are a declaration of the Holy
will and mind of God, that necessarily oblige the servants of God that profess
them, to believe and observe whatever is revealed therein, to be believed and
done; and whether the Scripture alone be a perfect Rule of faith and life, unto
all of years amongst us* yea or nay?

Ans. The Scriptures is a true declaration of the things believed amongst the
Saints, and a true testimony of Jesus Christ, but not any does them know,
neither can believe what is written therein, by the outward declaration and
testimony of Scripture, but by the word of Faith, which is in the heart, and in
the mouth, which is the word of Faith which we Preach, Romans 10. 7, 8.

2 Qu. Whether any other Revelations and Observations, not to be found in the
Scripture, be binding to the consciences of those persons that have the benefit
of the Scripture, or whether such revelations or dictates within a man's heart
and soul, be as binding to the conscience, and to be urged to a man's self, or
others, as the Scriptures are.

Ans. The revelations of Jesus Christ, is according to Scripture, which
Revelations binds up the Testimony, and seals the Law in the hearts of his
Disciples; and what dictates is in the conscience or heart of man, contrary to
the Law and Testimony, is not to be regarded, but disowned and judged with the
light which comes from Christ, the Saints life, who guides them in a pure life,
and holy conversation, according to Scripture, Isa. 8. 20.

3 Qu. Whether any thing besides the Scripture, is constituted of the blessed
God to reveal Christ as Redeemer and Savior, to the spirit of miserable lost
man, to bring man unto happiness, or whether corrupt man without the knowledge
of Scripture, may ordinarily attain unto salvation, yea or nay?

Ans. No man can come to the Son any other way, but whom the Father draws by
the power of his unlimited Spirit, and never any shall know the Father, but he
to whom the Son reveals him; and he that thinks to attain the way to eternal
life, by reading the letter of the Scripture, and regards not the light that
comes from Christ, that witnesses for God in the secret of the heart and
conscience, he deceives himself, for the mystery of eternal life is sealed up
in the sealed Book, from all the Sons and Daughters of men; and none shall ever
know it by the outward testimony of Scripture, but by the inspiration of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who is found worthy to
open the seals of the Book, and is the way, the truth, and the life, to all
that in his light wait, his power them to guide, in faithful obedience to the
righteous and perfect Law of God, written in the heart, for the exercise of the
conscience, which keeps them void of offense toward God, and toward men,
according to testimony of Scripture, Acts 24. 16. 23. 1.

4 Qu. Whether that light of conscience which is more or less in all since the
fall, be the remains or some relics left of the first Adam, in reference to
the Covenant of works, or whether common to all, from the redemption of the
second Adam, as flowing from the Covenant of grace, or how else? I desire you
would clearly express your thoughts in this.

Ans. Man in the fallen estate has not any light remains in him, to guide him
to do any thing well pleasing to God, as he stands in the state of corrupt
nature; for all his righteousness is as filthy rags, and as a menstruous
cloth, the light that convinces man and woman of the evil of their hearts,
and discovers the filthiness of all their own righteousness, is the light
that comes from Christ, the true light that lights every man that comes into
the world, John 1. 9. And this light is not common to man by nature, it is the
great gift of God, his grace that has appeared, and teaches all that are
guided by it, to deny all ungodliness* and worldly lusts, and to live godily
and soberly in this present evil world; and all that walk contrary to the
light, this is their condemnation, the light, John 3. 19.

5 Qu. Whether the end of God in giving and continuing this kind of light to
all men in the world, was not to be a restraint and curb to the exorbitant
lusts of so corrupt a creature as man, and so made subservant to God in the
Government of the world, in order to the peace and continuance of the same, and
to leave all without excuse, Or what besides this the end of God was, that this
kind of light should be minded and improved according to the power of man by
what he is from creation or universal grace or redemption, in order to
eternal happiness; and the not heeding this light in all men, shall be the
only condemnation of the world. Or whether this light be the Gospel, or Christ,
or his Spirit, or whether it be a light either equal with, or inferior to, or
of a different kind with the Scriptures?

Ans. The light which comes from Christ is given of God, to guide the creature
out of its own strength and power, to Christ the mighty power and wisdom of
God, the creature to guide with moderation, in the use of all creatures, and to
order and govern the creation to the praise and glory of God: And this light is
of the pure nature of God, and leads to Christ the everlasting Gospel. And this
is the condemnation of the world, that hates the light which comes from Christ,
because they believe not in him, John 3. 18.

6. Qu. Whether the light of Conscience the light of Scripture, the light of
providence, the light of grace, ought not to be pressed upon all, to reform
them, and draw them up to a higher pitch of Christian obedience, according to
the written word of the Lord.

Ans. Thou with all who are in the light is seen to be in thy wisdom,
querying after many lights, but as is formerly written, in answer to thy 4.
Quest. the^e is but one true light, Christ who lights every one that comes
into the world, and all his ministers turns the minds of people from
darkness to Christ the true light, in it to wait on him for his power to
destroy the power of Satan, and to lead in the strait narrow way of self
denial and the daily Cross, which is the way into the Kingdom of God, who
ever will be my Disciple, (says Christ) he must deny himself, and take up his
Cross daily, and follow me, Luke 19. 23.

7. Qu. Whether a sinner condemned by the Law, is made just before God, unto
eternal life, by an inherent power within, or work of Sanctification, or
whether by the satisfaction, and suffering of Christ in man's nature, and
behalf,, rested on by faith.

Ans. The Creature whose Conscience is awakened by the light, the righteous Law
of God in the heart, which shows it, its sinful state, and stands condemned
before the Throne of God for disobeying the light, shall never be justified by
any self righteousness, for it is uncleanness in the sight of God, for
justification is through faith in the Lord Jesus, but this faith which lays
hold on Christ for justification, is not attained by any power the creature
has of its self, neither can any know it, who receive honor one of another,
Joh. 5. 44. How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and seek not
the honor that comes from God only, faith is the gift of God, given to the
Children of light, who waits in the light on the Lord, in the way of his
judgments, Isa. 26. 8. till judgment be brought forth into victory, that the
creature be brought into true poverty, of spirit, for ever to perish, without
free redemption in the Lord Jesus, which the father in his appointed time,
reveals the son to the soul, that stands condemned before him, and by the
arm of his mighty power, creates it to a lively hope, and he that has this
hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure, so whom he justifies he
sanctifies, and he that says he is justified and lives in sin deceives
himself, for faith purifieth the heart, and purges the Conscience from dead
works to serve the liveing God, which is witnessed in the Children of light,
according to testimony of Scripture. Heb. 9. 14.

8. Qu. Whether the person or essence of Christ, or his spirit dwell in any
upon earth, or whether by his gifts and graces only, or whether all those that
have Christ in them, must forsake all outward teaching of men, and whether the
Scripture be but a dead letter, and of no use, otherways then Christ within
does witness unto them.

Ans. He that knows not Christ to be in him is a reprobate, for he that has
not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and he that is guided by the spirit of
Christ, needs not any teaching of man, (for you shall not need to teach one
another, for all my Children shall be taught of me, says the Lord God,) and
the Scripture is but a killing letter, but of use in its place,d testimony of
Christ, but not any knows Christ by it, for Christ is known by the light of his
spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures, and all that are guided by his spirit
knows the Scripture in the truth as it is in Jesus, ^ph. 4. 21.

9. Qu. Whether the conversion that was wrought upon the souls of many, under
the ordinary outward ministry of the word, in our public assembles, turning
men from darkness to light, from profaneness to true Godliness, be true unto
salvation, and whether those that have been thus converted were in the state of
salvation, before they joined themselves unto your society, or whether can none
be converted, and saved, that never came under, nor gave their assent to the
dispensation of your way, and how you will justifye yours to be in the true and
good old way, that all have and shall be saved in, you may do well to make it
out by some evident demonstration.

Ans. Who can witness a true conversion by the power of the spirit of God, in
turning their minds from darkness to light, that comes from Christ, and in
his light wait to receive the sentence of death in themselves, to destroy all
self confidence in any thing below Christ, and in the state of death to wait
till that they hear the voice of the Son of God, and by his power was raised
up to a liveing hope in Christ to walk, who throw his blood do witness their
garments washed and made white, to reign Kings and Priests upon the earth for
ever, to worship the father in spirit and truth, and who ever can witness this
conversion whether it were wrought when they frequented your public
assemblies, or absented from them, this conversion we own who it can witness,
and of our way they are, and will to us come, and all shall know the truth we
witness is the good old way, that all souls that came to God walked in, Christ
the way the truth and the life, the ancient of days, which was before time,
but manifest in time in all the Children of light, who does them lead in the
narrow way of self denial, and the daily Cross, with him to enter, through the
strait gate, into the holy City, new Jerusalem, where the soul has union
which the father of light, and beholds his face, and his name is written in
their foreheads, and there is no night there, neither need of Candle, nor light
of the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever
and ever, Rev. 22. 5.

10. Whether any of your way attain unto perfection in this life, that they
can truly say that they do all that God commands, without failing, either in
matter or in manner of obedience, no not in thought, word and deed, and whether
the persons of any stand just before God, that are not thus perfect.

Ans. All that are in the way we are in, which is Christ the way to the Father,
in whom all in their measure are pressing on to the fullness of stature in
Christ the perfect man, and who in him is grown to the fullness of stature, in
his power does stand, which does them guide, that in their mouths is found no
guile, for they are without fault before the Throne of God, Rev. 14. 5.

FINIS.

