THE Daily Proceedings OF HIS MAJESTY'S Fleet on the Narrow Seas, from the 17.
of October to the 15. day of November, since the departure of the EARL OF
WARWICK, Lord Admiral of the Navy, being now under the conduct of the
Vice Admiral Captain Battie.

Wherein is declared the Journall and passages of every particular day, what
Ships and Ammunition they tock, and what special places they coasted during
the foresaid time,

LONKON, November. 18. Printed for Jon. Wright. 1642.

A PERFECT DIURNALL of all such Passages as have happened in the English Fleet
on the narrow Seas, since the departure of the Lord Admiral: From the 17. of
October to the 13. of November.
October 17. ON this day about 10. of the clock the Lord Admiral with a number
of Captains and Gentlemen landed at Dover, at whose landing there was a great
triumph in token of our love to his renowned actions, our Fleet of Ships being
about 32. discharged three times on all sides, so that there were near 200.
Pieces of Ordnance discharged at that time, with many expressions of joy and
hearty wishes for our Admirals good success upon the land; at whose departure
all Masters and Mariners much lamented, though they had Malago Sack of the best
to cherish their comfortless hearts, that afterward there was health upon
health drunk that day in abundance, as also to the Vice Admiral Captain
Battie, who has the whole charge of the Navy in the Earl of Warwicks absence.

October. 18. We weighed our anchors, and the greater Ships bore for the Kings
Channel, where they anchored that night, and some of the lesser Ships kept
their course through the Channel next the Downs, by 8. of the clock in the
evening they were welcomed by the Rear Admiral, and the S. George, which were
newly come into the Downs from Portsmouth, but our Vice Admiral with the rest
of the great ships came not until the next day at noon, at whose arrival we
met with three French Men of War which refused to do their obeisance to His
Majesty's ships, whereupon our Admiral gave them a broad side, who straightway
struck their top sails.

October. 19. Our Vice Admiral came ashore at S. Margarets with diverse
Captains, where he was welcomed by the expression of diverse pieces of ordnance
shot from several places.

October. 20. We rode still at anchor, the Vice Admiral neither visiting any of
the ships, nor going ashore, but placed and displaced certain Captains, whose
names for the present I forbear to speak of, till the next opportunity.

October. 21. We had a muster, and rode still in the Downs, the Whelps being
employed unto Holland, and weighed anchor with a Westerly wind; about 5. of the
clock in the evening the Antilope came into our Fleet, who had been at the
Brill, and bronght us news that there were 17. sail of Flemmish Hoyes as then
going to the Brill with French soldiers: another ship being full of French
Commanders, would not strike sail unto His Majesty's ships, upon which
Captain Fox discharged two or three pieces of Ordnance upon them, and then,
and not before, he struck the top-saile down upon the cape.

October. 22. We lay still at anchor, and the Vice Admiral going ashore was
again welcomed as before.

October. 23. We were divided into Squadrons of 3. and to each Squadron were
annexed 5. Merchants ships, and so by consent were dispersed about several
places.

October. 24. The Leopard and the Samson with two Whelps weighed anchor very
early in the morning, and coasted about Callis Road, and came in to the rest of
the Fleet on the Downs that evening.

October. 25. The Lion, the Freeman, with two Whelps, weighed anchor and left the
Fleet, the Whelps came in the next day about noone, and the other two about
night; at whose return we had news of a fight betwixt a Hollander and 2.
Dunkerks Slopes on our seas near Dover road, the Hollander, having 10. pieces
of ordnance, was taken by the Slopes, his men all hurt but 4. and the Gunner
killed; but an English ship, called the Blessing, rescued him, and gave the
Hollander his ship again.

October. 26. About twelve of the clock we met the King of Denmarks Man of War,
chasing of a Merchants ship of London, which came from the East Indies, but she
was constrained to put in for Ireland, where this Man of War had fetched her
out: he saluted our Vice Admiral with many pieces of ordnance, which were
answered again with the like: at the last we boarded her, and took therein
armor for 5000. men going to Newcastle, which we made stay of, and intend to
send her with a safe convoy to London.

October. 27, 28, 29. We lay at anchor, wanting provision of biscuit, but we were
supplied in Sussex.

October. 30. The wind being calm at W. and by S. we weighed anchor, and sailed
to and fro, praying for a fair gale of wind to course the sea; for our
Vice Admiral had notice given him of 14. Flemins and 14. French which kept
nigh Portland, but since we heard they were parted, nevertheless we discharged
a piece of ordnance, and put out a red flag in the Meson shroud: immediately
the Captains and Masters of every ship made their repair aboard, where we
called a Council of War, in which it was ordered, that if in case we met
with the Hollanders and French Fleet together, and that the French would not do
their obeisance, to send to the Hollanders to tell them, we did not think they
would any ways come against the King and Parliament, so according to their
answers to deal with them, who sent us a fair answer, that they never had any
intent to come against the King or Parliament, the King being their only
Protector.

November. 1. We came to Dannase, which is the Easterly part of the Isle of
Wight, and about 11. a clock we came to anchor 2. or 3. leagues from the Isle,
where we lay till 4. of the clock the next morning.

November. 2. We came to S. Ellen near the Iste of Wight, where we rode until
the 5. of this month, and weighing anchor we descried 40. and odd sail, whom
we thought to be the Dutch and French Fleet; but when we came up to them, we
found them to be Flemmish Merchants which came out of France with salt, except
some 3. or 4. men of war: we spoke with some of them, and after some small
view of them, we parted.

November. 5. We came into Plymouth Sound, all the way not past any thing of
note, save that we seized on two Dunkerks laden with Ammunition for Ireland:
but since our coming here, and before, we heard that the Flemins have sworn
never to lift up their hands against the King or Parliament of England, and
that they are not in company with the French, who have been about our coasts,
but are now gone; we only stay for a fair wind to carry us to the Lands end,
and as far as Silly, and so I think we shall return hither again, whence
what may pass hereafter of more consequence I shall be glad to advise you, and
should joy to see some sport if any durst meet us; but I fear that labor will
be saved; but we shall not rest till we have met with the King of France his
Army, which is about 10000 soldiers, but we shall narrowly watch their landing
upon any of onr coasts.

November. 6. We weighed anchor out of Plymouth Sound, and came near the Isle of
Silly, and on the same day we came into the Sound again, where we found one of
the King of France his Dragons, being such a ship as one of His Majesty's
Whelps, having with her two small Barks, the one he had relieved out of the
hands of Dunkerks; the Captain of the ship went aboard our Admiral, but
stayed not long, but was discharged, he told our Vice Admiral that 12. sail
of Dutch, and 14. sail of French which lay about our coast, waiting for
purchase.

November. 7. We coasted up and down, and within shot of Poole there were three
French Barks laid at anchor driven in through tempestuous weather, our ships
were too great a burden to follow them, but we sent our shallops well manned to
board them, and there was found therein 1000. men's armor, going for Ireland,
all which we seized on, and have stayed the Barks till further order of
Parliament.

November. 8. Within 3. leagues of Dartmouth we seized on a Flemish ship who had
landed diverse commanders, as by the examination of the Master of the ship it
appeared, that they were sent into Cornwall with Letters from Colonel Goring
to Sir Ralph Hopton, the ship we gave in charge to the Mayor of Dartmouth, the
Captain and soldiers sent to London.

Novem. 9, 10. We spied a Fleet of Dunkerks coming from the Southward,
suspecting Colonel Goring and others to be therein, but the swiftness of their
small vessels out-sailed our Fleet.

November. 11. We took the Dutch man of war that landed Prince Robert in England,
who was laden with store of ammunition, and going for Lyme in Dorsetshire, we
have distrained both ship and ammunition till the Prince shall reprieve them.

November. 12. We had order to come for Portsmouth, and what further order as
yet I know not, but we hope we shall make a good voyage, and take all the
scouts roving up and down our coasts; for we have laid diligent wait in all
creeks, to stop the passage of the Cavaliers from coming out or going in, in
the interim if any thing pass, you shall hear from me, but believe no report
contrary to this journall, which is the truth of our proceedings.

FINIS.

