A DESCRIPTION of the SEIGE of BASING CASTLE;

Kept by the LORD MARQVISSE OF WINCHESTER, for the Service of HIS MAJESTY:
AGAINST, The Forces of the Rebels, under Command of Colonel NORTON, Anno Dom.
1644.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE SIEGE OF BASING CASTLE.
BAsing Castle, the Seat and Mansion of the Marquisse of Winchester, stands on
a rising ground, having its form circular, encompassed with a Brick Rampart,
lyned with earth and a very deep trench, but dry; The lofty Gate House with
four Turrets looking Northwards, on the right whereof without the compass of
the Ditch a goodly building containing two fair Courts; before them is the
Graunge, severed by a Wall and common road, again divided from the foot of
Cowdreys Down by Meades, Rivilets, and a River running from Basingstoake, a
mile distant upon the West, though Basing Town joining upon the East, the
South side of the Castle has a Park, and toward Basing Town a little Wood,
the place seated and built as if for Royalty having a proper Motto. Aymez
Loyalte. Hither (the Rebellion having made houses or pleasure more unsafe) the
Marquisse first retired, hoping integrity and privacy might have here preserved
his quiet; But the source of the times villainy, bearing down all before it,
neither allowing newtrality or permitting Peace, to any that desired to be
less sinful then themselves, enforces him to stand upon his guard which with
his Gentlemen Armed with six Muskets (the whole remainder of a well furnished
Armory) he did so well, that twice the enemies attempts proved vain.

But finding their numbers in those parts (after the Loss of Reading) grown
more formidable, their forces quartering round about him, he solicited His
MAJESTY for one hundred Musketeers, which (being sent under command of
Lieutenant Colonel Peake) marching with speed and Secrecy the 31. of July
1643. were thrust into the place, which from that time became a Garrison; it is
former fortune still continuing, Colonel Harvey and Colonel Norton, within a
few hours after attempting to surprise it, being not only beaten off, but the
same night forced retreat to Farnham.

The place is then begun according to the quantity of men now added, to be
fortified, and some time after upon report of a puissant Army, under command of
Sir William Waller, to be appointed for the taking of it in: Colonel Rawdon
with the rest of his Regiment (being about one hundred and fifty more) is
commanded thither. The Lord Marquisse taking forth Commissions as Colonel and
Governor, for the raising of more forces for defense of the same.

November. 6. shows Waller with the expected Army (consisting of seven thousand
Horse and Foot) before the House; where having lain nine days, and three times
storming it, he again retires to Farnham, having dishonored and bruised his
Army, whereof abundance were lost, without the death of more then two in the
Garrison, and some little injury to the House by Battery.

He thus drawn off, and His MAJESTY'S Army, under command of the Lord Hopton,
advancing two days after, affords the Liberty of farther fortifying, which
thus (as time and number would permit) made up, is rather strong then Regular.

The ensuing Spring the Rebels, as well consulting the importance of the
place, as the injuries suffered by it, both in their Trade and Force, resolve
(having before assayed it by Surprise and Storm) to try by starving it, to
which their Armies six weeks Quartering at Farnham, Odiam, Grewell, and
Basingstoake, was a preparative, harrowing the Country about until their March
to Oxford.

June. 4. 1644.
At what time Colonel Norton drawing some forces from the adjacent Garrisons,
by Order of their pretended Parliament, is to block up the House, and (by the
treachery of a Soldier giving intelligence two days before) defeating a party
of the Garrison drawn out to Odiam, and taking diverse Prisoners upon the
fourth of June faced the House with a Regiment of Horse and Dragoones, and
after some hours stand Quartered in Basingstoake, each day (his Foot not yet
come up) keeping his guards of Horse upon our Aveneues to stop the fetching in
Provision.

Jun. 11.
Colonel Morleyes Regiment of six Colors of Blew from Sussex, and Sir
Richard Onslowes Regiment of five of Red, from Surrey, with two of White from
Farnham, and three fresh Troops of Horse fetched in by Nortons Regiment, are
all drawn up before the House, upon the South of Basingstoake; The Companies
of White at Evening, with one Troop of Horse, marching to Sherfield, Sir
Richard Onslowe, with his Troop of Horse to Anwell house, and Morleyes Foot
with Colonel Nortons Horse quarter in Basingstoake. During the time of lying
at this distance, visiting us with horse (with whom entertaining skirmishes at
their return) were usually made worse with little loss to us.

Jun. 15.
To see the countenance of the Enemy, fifty Foot are sent toward Basingstoake,
under the covert of a Mill and hedge, whilst our Horse forced theirs into the
Town, they reenforced, ours orderly retreat, drawing them on in danger of our
Foot, who galling them, they stand the coming of their own, 'twixt whom some
Vollyes being spent, ours are Commanded in.

Jun. 17.
The Enemies horse seize on two Teemes of ours, fetching Provision toward
Sherfield, and three horse grazing in the Park. At night, the Companies of
white quarter in Basing Town, and fortifying the Church, next day from the
adjoining houses shot two of our men; And being now come here, our numbers few,
we divide our men into three parts, keeping two thirds on duty, whilst the
other rest, appointing to each Captain and his Company a particular Guard,
dividing the Quarters of the Garrison to the Field Officers, viz. to Major
Cuffand, the works adjoining to the Park; to Major Langley, those in the
gardens; to Lievtenant-Colonell Johnson, the care of the Graunge; to Colonel
Rawdon, the works next the Town; and dispose of the Guns to Lieutenant
Colonel Peake; the Troopers fitted with Muskets, and part of his Foot Company
as a Reserve for supply of all places as any need required; The Lieutenant
Colonells and Majors by course being Captains of the watch, Colonel Rawdon,
only in this excused by reason of his years.

Jun. 18.
The Regiment of Blew from Basingstoake releeve the White, on whom at midnight
sallying forth, we Fired one of the houses which annoyed us; but the next night
sallying again, we Fired all between us and the Church, themselves at same
time Firing some beyond, by which their works grown hot, some fly into the
hedges, others further off. But at the ringing of the Bells (their custom upon
all Alarmes) relief coming on all sides, ours retreat; they that night
Quartering round the Park under the favor of the hedge and pale, where they
continue till next Evening, and with continual Firing kill us one Sentinel,
and hurt another.

Jun. 20.
The following day, the Park being cleared, and they returned to quarter, and
their guard at Church, our Horse are put into it, and 12 Musketeers lodged at
the corner of the Lane in covert of the hedge, some Officers of theirs thinking
the Lane secure are blooded from the hedge, and hardly escape to Basingstoake,
our Horse pursuing them, and whilst their guard on Cowdryes Down perceiving
it, Troop to their rescue; ours are recalled, and sent up by the Graunge to
Fire their Quarter, which is done, and one of them brought in; At same time,
more of theirs riding along the Lane, our Musketeers killing the horse of
Colonel Greaves his Brother, take him Prisoner, the Colonel and the rest
escaping to pursue their Journey to the West. Two hours after, a Trumpet is
sent in from Colonel Norton to demand his liberty, under pretense of being a
Traveller, but is returned with a proposal of Exchange, next day two of Sir
Richard Onslowes Foot are taken in the Park, and a third killed.

Jun. 24.
Finding a sufferance by our Liberty resolving now more straightly to begirt
us, two Companies more from Portsmouth, being joined to those of Farnham in the
Town, the Regiment of Blew is drawn into the Park, and Colonel Onslowes to
the Lane and Close toward Basingstoake, where having fixed their quarters,
they presently break ground, shutting us up on three sides with their Foot,
and on the other side their guards of horse keeping on Cowdreyes Down, at
night busying themselves with Spade and Pick-axe to secure their Quarters,
three of ours run to them.

Jun. 26.
Some Musketeers are sent by the point of Basingstoake (a Bulwark) to view
their lodging in the Lane, and to cut down some Trees blinding a ruined Mill,
from whence they played on us, both which are done and diverse of them killed,
with loss of two of ours; At night they run a Line toward the Mill, where we
had galled them the day before, next night a Party of horse Firing upon their
Sentinells on Cowdreyes Down, much amuse their guards, whilst others of them
are sent by to Oxford.

Jun. 29.
Their work in the Park is brought to some perfection, and by noone their
Cannon Baskets placed make known they had a Culverin there, giving us six
shot thence. Next day being Sunday (their Cause allows not now for Sabbath)
doubling their diligence throughout the Leaguer, forwarding the Sconce at
Morleyes Quarters in the Park, and on the Town side toward a Mill, drawing a
Line from the Church. At Onslowes Quarter rasing a platform in the Lane with
so much speed, that the next morning a Demy-Culverin plays from it; at night
our Messenger from Oxford informing us His Majesty's success against Waller at
Cropready, We Ecchoe it to our neighbors with Volleys both of small and great,
they answering with their Guns, battering our Kitchen and Gatehouse, till a
shot from our platform spoiling the Carriage, silenced their Demy-Culverin.

July. 3.
Their Lines being run within half Musket shot, by their continual Firing
pouring their Lead into the Garrison, they spoil us two or three a day,
passing within our works, and shoot the Marquisse himself through his
Clothes, the Carriage of their piece being repaired, they now renew their
Battery on the House unto the detriment and topping of our Towers and Chimnies.

July. 8.
This morning they assay to draw us forth by making an Alarm to themselves
(leaving their piece neglected without a guard) but fail; at Evening a
Prisoner escaping from them under the hazard of 100 shot so chafed them, that
they continue Firing until midnight; and shot two of our men next morning:
four Companies of Red from Surrey, coming to the relief of Colonel Onslowes
men, marching too near, have three shot placed amongst them from our Minion,
making them change their march to Troop at further distance.

July. 11
One Company from Southampton of sevenscore, marched by the way of Hackwood
unto Hollowayes Mill; with which (and those four Companies come in two days
before) Morley is now so raised in his hopes that making use of Colonel
Nortons absence (ambitious of the honor, but of summoning the next day being
out Fast adding to our afflictions) sends by a Drum this harsh demand;

My Lord,
TO avoid the effusion of Christian blood, I have thought fit to send your
Lordship this Summons to demand Basing house to be delivered to me for the use
of King and Parliament; if this be refused the ensuing inconveniences will rest
upon your self, I desire your speedy answer and Rest; My Lord,

Your humble servant HERBERT MORLEY.


The Marquisse, upon small deliberation, returned Mr Morley this Answer.

Sir,
IT is a crooked demand, and shall receive its answer suitable, I keep the house
in the right of my Sovereign, and will do it in despite of your Forces; your
Letter J will preserve as a testimony of your Rebellion.

WINCHESTER.


This answer being returned by the Drum with a Have have have post have upon
the Letter, Morley speaks his choler from his Gunns, which now and some days
following played on our Waterhouse; Colonel Onslowes men courteously permitting
eight of our Foot to fetch six Beasts grazing before their Works. At night
Coronet Bryan, and some Troopers, passing a Messenger by Cowdreys down, bring
in two Prisoners.

July. 18.
A Bonefire in the Park, with two Volleys throughout their Leaguer, speak
their Committees welcome unto Basingstoake.

July. 20.
A party of our Musketeers fall out upon them in the Lane, and having done
some execution there, retreat; a Captain of Colonel Morley's being shot dead
at same time from our works; two hours after comes a Drum with Letters for
exchange of Prisoners, but rather to inform us Norton's safe return from the
defeat of Waller, and gain time to draw a Morter-peece more covert to their
trench; from whence (their Drum returned) they send us a Granado of 801 next
night, concluding their devotion and the day with thundering from their
Culverins, two passed through the Quarters where our sick men lay, but without
hurt.

July. 22.
Their Lines are much advanced, and their Sconce flanking their Battery in the
Park finished, the Marquisse himself hurt by a shot, and two men killed by
chance shot, and the Carriage of our Cabonet broke from their Culverin; The
following night being dark and Stormy, we dispatch our Messenger. Eight
Prisoners taking the opportunity do the same for themselves to their Leaguer
making our allowance of great shot to be next day doubled, and at night more
Grenades.

July. 25.
The trenches on the Town side in the Meades flote with the quantity of rain
that fell, thereby forcing them, lie more open to our Towers from whence our
Marks men spoiled diverse, whilst on the other side our men draw covert to a
Blind, and do as much upon them: in the Lane at night two pieces charged with
Case, so luckily are placed upon them (working upon their Lines) that they were
heard complain their suffering.

July. 26.
Early this morn the Blind again being manned, an Officer with more of theirs
are killed; and a Trooper of our own afterward fetching a Hog and Cow near
the same place occasioning some service from the Blind and Bulwark they
receive more loss. The Evening spending with dispute between our great Guns,
they add six Granades, one falling in our Granary, spoiled some Corn, and
two missed Firing; at night two Soldiers run to them.

July. 27.
This morning shows a traverse Cross the Close from the burnt Mill, flanking
our way unto the aforesaid Blind, and in the Park the enclosing of the nearer
side of an old Orchard securing Morleyes Quarter. At night from out their
Morrer piece, they shot us six great stones sized with the Granades of 361,
with each day continuing like allowance, these and the Granades for a while
seemed troublesome, but afterward become by custom so familiar to the
Soldier, that they were called, as they counted them, Bables, their mischiefs
only lighting on the house, and that the less, our Courts being large and
many.

July. 30.
They plant a Culverin by Basing Church, from thence battering a Tower, on
which our Marks men stood, that much annoyed that Quarter, continuing shot
from both their other platformes; This day ends the year of the places being
Garrisoned, and the second month of the Leaguer, next day a platform is begun
by the Wood side, within half Musket shot of Basing Bulwark. Toward Evening
paying the shot (it having been their Fast) they spared all the day: At night
running a trench from the Church to their work by the Wood, and (by four men
which last night run to them) persuaded of strange executions done by stones
and Granades send us store, one whereof Firing our Hay falling into the Barn,
had done much hurt, had not our diligence soon quenched it.

Aug. 1.
Our men tired with length of 48 hours duty are now divided into two parts
relieving every 24: our Gentlemen and Troopers doing the same; and here I
cannot pass them over without due Commendations, all the time of the Leaguer
undergoing the duty of Foot (that of Sentries only except) going forth in all
Sallies, as well on Foot with Muskets or Browne-Bill, as otherwise on
Horseback, as occasion was; and for seven weeks time keeping their Horses with
grass and Sedge, which in the nights they cut under Command of the Rebels
works with hazard of their lives.

Aug. 4.
Perceiving the intention of the Rebels rather to starve then storm us, and
the doubt of a more potent Army now removed, which hitherto had made us frugall
of our men (already few in number and much spent with labor) as well to
animate our men dismayed through diverse wants and reigning of the pox, as also
to annoy the Rebels, retard their works, and gain by Prisoners, somewhat of
their condition: We resolve upon advantages to make some Sallies, and finding
then an opportunity, a Party of their Foot lying at hazard upon Cowdreys Down
in Wallers work, Lieutenant Cuffand with about 20 Horse is sent to fall on
them, whilst Coronet Bryan with like number riding at rate, is to cut in
betwixt them and the hedge, where stood their guard of Horse, who seeing
themselves thus unexpectedly charged, suddenly rout, flying to Basingstoake,
and are pursued with execution on them, almost to the Town, the Coronet
bringing in their Colors, Trumpet, seven Horses, and three Troopers, besides
what slain and maimed; of the Foot eleaven killed on the place, and four
brought in; our men returning under Command of their Cannon without the loss
of a man; At first of the Alarm, they apprehending it, a Party with relief,
began to fly the Park, till informed better, and again returning, they spend
their heat at distance with their Guns and Mortar-peece, we learning from the
Prisoners their intention to batter upon Basing-Bulwarke from their new
platform by the Wood, lay on all hands for Lyning it, as yet being very weak
there, laboring without enforcing us to do the like within our works, in
many places slender and no where finished, of which defects our Renegades
giving them information necessitates us work to frustrate their reports.

Aug. 5.
Their guard at Wallers work is doubled, and strengthened with Pikes, keeping
their guard of Horse by exercise in better readiness; In the Park side their
Lines advance toward both our platformes, and their work by the Wood
forwarded, liberally bestowing great Shot, Stones and Granades, of which they
send us of three several sorts, besides their hand Granades.

Aug. 10.
Colonel Whitheads new raised Regiment of five Companies, marching through
Basingstoake to Cowdreys Down, take up their Quarters in the Delue, for whose
welcome and entertainment (with some sport) they founder a round Tower in the
old Castle, by their Battery; in requital whereof next morning, Major Cuffand
with 6 Files of Musketeers and 20 Troopers with Browne-Bills, falling into the
Park attacque, their outward Lines, where killing some of them, burning their
Blinds and Baskets, they bring off one of their Mortar pieces and store of
Arms and Tools; with having two men hurt. Lieutenant Snow with 20 Musketeers
and 12 with Bills during the amazement falling upon their Quarter in the Lane
with execution on them, breaking their Demy-Culverin, Firing their guard and
Baskets, and from hence with Arms and Tools bring in some Ammunition. These
Sallies were so much unto their loss, and touched so near their honor, That
Oram (Captain of the Guards) for vindication must be brought to trial, and
for neglect and Cowardice (running as others then and after did) holding
correspondence with the place, (where no man knew him) and sending in
Ammunition (which was never received) with the hazard of life is Cashiered
their service; A sentence much like that against the Earl of Strafford made
with caution not to be brought to president for after times, least it too
nearly might concern themselves: At night provision for our Horse being spent,
we make a work beyond the Graunge near the Foot of Cowdreys Down, securing
the Meades for our Troopers in dark nights to fetch in grass.

Aug. 12.
We see them busied making provision of Baskets, Brush, and Turfe, to go on
with their works; which for some days lay still, filling their Baskets now
with grass to save their fireing; and in the mean time ply their Culverins.

At night an Alarm beating through their Quarters, we expect according to the
noise, but they stay quiet till between three and four, what time a Trumpet
sounding on Cowdreys Down, from forth the Delue, they fall upon us, busied at
our new work with 50 Musketeers, but soon draw back; at same time 60 more by
favor of a Wood, had gotten to the ditch under our platform, where fired on
by the Guard in the Park Bulwark flanking the ditch, they returned in have
leaving some Arms behind, having three Guns with case shot powered on their
rear, for which they send us plenty from their several Guards. And now begin
a trench into the Park from the Lane side, the better to secure that quarter,
running it toward their great Work, meaning to close their Lines throughout
their Leaguer. Next day they spare their great shot, but at night give us a
false Alarm.

Aug. 14.
Toward evening Lieutenant Cuffand and Cornet Bryan each with twenty Horse and
forty Musketeers, Sally upon the Down again, beating the Foot from Wallers
work, and the Horse guard from their Post, pursuing them to Basingstoake,
whence strengthened with fresh Horse, they force ours to retreat, take Cornet
Bryan and one Trooper, wound three others, and kill Ensign Amery, ours having
done abroad good execution bring in Lieutenant Cooper, a Corporal of Horse,
and seven more of theirs; from whom we learn, Morley four days before was
shot in the shoulder viewing his works in the Park; The two next days were
spent in Parlee for release of Prisoners. They sending us one wounded, we
return them three, offering Lieutenant Cooper and the Corporal (both stout
men, wounded, and taken fighting) for our Coronet, but would not be accepted,
so much they valued him; the Parlee ended they play as formerly, at night
sending three Granades, whereof one failed them.

Aug. 17.
They bring Baskets to Wallers work, and the Delue where they had wrought the
former days to raise a Battery, and to secure themselves, learning our Sally
intended the beating up that Quarter, and had been done, had not our Horse
pursuing them too far, engaged our Foot to secure their retreat; for at the
first they ran, carrying their Colors with them from the Delue, though 300 men
were said to Quarter in it; but animated with coming in of more, and drawing
to the hedges in the Meade some-Musquetiers from Hollowayes Mill, they again
make good the place streightening our Horse retreat; at Evening planting a
Culverin there, they play from thence, and from the piece at Church, this night
three run to them, and one the night before.

Aug. 19.
This day getting their Demi Canon to the work by the wood, they batter us,
with 48 shot; and the two following days with eight score more, the least
whole Culverin, with which and with Granades they killed two men, and
mischieved two more, break our best Iron Gun, and make a breach in one of our
square Towers: The injury of the work before it, the Officers and Soldiers
putting hand to Spade repair, making it Canon proof, before scarce Drake.

Aug. 22.
This day they are more sparing, and permit the night enjoy its proper silence,
disturbed only by such, whose baseness prompted them with hope to gain by
craft, what by their force they could not, shooting Notes fixed to arrows with
proffers of preferment to the Soldier, persuading Mutinies, and laboring
divisions 'twixt the Regiments, leaving no stone unturned; but all in vain,
except the gaining some faint hearted Knaves, The following days sending of
Cross bar, shot Loggs bound with Iron hoops, Stones, and Granades, whereof
two missed firing; Two more run to them.

Aug. 25.
Their Battery near the Wood having much torn the Tower, they now begin on
that side next the Town, within Pistol shot to make a work, to batter it
from thence; In the mean time continuing shooting from their other Guns, they
kill two men and maime a third; And in the Park they show a Sow made for
their Musketeers, thrusting before them for to play behind; this night two run
to them, and next night four; enforcing us to seasonable justice in executing
one who had attempted to have gone with them, by which our Soldiers were so
fastened, that for a long time not one man that stirred, though our necessities
grew fast on us, now drinking water, and for some weeks past making our bread,
with Pease and Oats, our stock of Wheat being spent.

Aug. 28.
The Lines from Onslowes Quarter are brought on with a redoubt upon it,
opposite to Basingstoake Bulwark, and having broke their Culverin, at the
Delue, supplying it they play again from thence, and in the night steal off
five Horses grazing in the Meades; next night two Troopers cutting grass, our
River by the Mill being drawn down, enforce us make a Damme raising the water
to secure the Graunge.

Sept. 2.
At noone with Letters for Exchange of Prisoners we receive this Summons.

My Lord,
THese are in the name and by the authority of the Parliament of England, the
highest Court of Justice in this Kingdom, to demand the House and Garrison of
Basing, to be deliveeed to me to be disposed of according to Order of
Parliament. And hereof I expect your Answer by this Drum within one hour,
after the receipt hereof, in the mean time, I rest

From the Quarters before Basing, the 2. of Sept. in the afternoon. Yours to
serve you RICH: NORTON.


To which the Lord Marquisse instantly dispatched this Answer.

Sir,
WHereas you demand the House and Garrison of Basing by a pretended authority
of Parliament, I make this Answer, That without the King thore can be no
Parliament, by His Majesty's Commission I keep the place, and without His
absolute Command shall not deliver it to any pretenders whatsoever, I am

Basing. 2. Sept. Yours to serve you WINCHESTER.


Sept. 4.
This Answer sent: From their new Battery by the Town in six hours time they
thunder sixscore shot Cannon and Culverin; with which they Founder one of our
great Brick Towers, from whence we had annoyed that Quarter, their small shot
playing thick this day, they killed us three, and hurta woman. The rubbish of
the Tower filling the end of a Curtain under it, we cut off the other by a
traverse, lyning the Bulwark where their shot had run: next day their great
shot is reduced to 20; their Cannon by the former heat being made at fault, is
this day drawn to Farnham, The night brings on their Line at Graunge, blocks
up our way to the Down, and slights the work we had made, by us some days
before deserted, now grown too hot and wanting men to keep it.

Aug. 4.
The day of promised relief our men in readiness, Noon come and no appearance
of them, unwilling to be idle, we resolve a Sallie; Lieutenant Snow, Lieutenant
Byfeild, and Ensign Outram, each with 12 Troopers, with Brown Bills, and 18
Musketeers are sent at once to fall on Onslowes Quarters in three parts, which
is so well performed, that gaining their redoubts, they draw their
Demy-Culverin near our works, bring but three Prisoners in, our Jail being
full, and having lost three men by the Enemies Case shot, and one hurt,
retreat; the great Guns being plied on both sides, some of ours luckily fell
upon them at the Delue. Sir William Waller with two Troops of Horse, two
hours before arrived at Basingstoake, came forth to see the sport, and with
his Horse facing the House too near on Cowdreys Down, they had their Captain
killed with round shot from our works. In this days service by confession of
our Enemies they had 60 common Soldiers killed, and 12 dangerously wounded,
besides two Gunners and two Lievtenants, one whereof belonged to Sir William,
and brought by curiosity to see the Leaguer was there slain: of ours, besides
the former, we had three slightly hurt with dirt beat up by Culverin shot. At
night we endeavor to fetch off the Gun, but find it heavy, they having doubled
Guards, we place 12 Musketeers to wait the engaged piece.

This day and next spends 50 shot from their new platform, by battering down
a stack of Chimnies, making a large breach in the new building; toward night we
see two Companies of Foot marching by Hackwood Westward, followed next Evening
by two Companies more, two Wagons and twelve Troops of Horse; Next day again
at noone ceasing their Battery, permit us to see two Regiments of twenty
Companies follow the Horse had passed, two companies of White turn into
Basingstoake and their Artillery, ten of several sorts conveyed by one Company
more of Yellow. This night we expect Alarmes, and were well prepared having for
four nights since kept all our men upon duty. But it passes without
disturbance, more then that of tongues, boasting their Army to be next day
showed us, which Sir Williams have into the West permit^ not; And well
satisfied with Wednesdaies Sally, the strife for plunder of the house
maintained with so much pertinacy between his men and Nortons ceased, and we
again with our old guests are left to try it out, grown now so mute upon this
parting, as in 48 hours we hear but of two Culverin shot, next day recovering
heart, they tell us 22, and resting some days past, now find their work again.

Sept. 11.
Silent till toward evening, ten great shot; at night our Messenger Edward
Jeffery assures the certainty of our reliefes advance to Aldermarston, and
taking of some Scouts, we then make fires upon the Gatehouse in sign of
notice, and of readiness, though (through the Fogge) it hardly could be seen
to the next hill. By seven next morn, the Noble Colonel Gage with Horse and
Foot past through so many hazards, had attained Chinham Down, where Colonel
Norton with his strength having intelligence did stand in readiness. And now
what here was done I shall refer to what has been said by others from some
one present there, which may relate to each his due desert, in all so much,
That notwithstanding all advantages of place, and Men fresh and prepared
against tired Troops and wearied Foot, a Fogge so thick as made the day still
night, helping the shrowding of his Ambuscades, and clouding passes unto such
who neither knew nor could discern a way more then their Valor and the Sword
did cut, and Maugre all, with execution forced his retreat the Fogge
befriending him serving as covert, for his safer flight through Basingstoake,
the day then clearing, and report of fight brought near the Garrison,
Lieutenant Colonel Johnson with some Musketeers issuing by the Graunge,
beats them from off their Line, pursues them to the Hill, and thence unto the
Delue, clearing that Quarter with so small defense as is incredible. The pass
thus cleared, meeting our welcome friends, our joys are ecchoed, whilst the
sad Prisoners are led in to see the House they lay so long about, their number
64 Common Soldiers, two Sergeants, one Lieutenant, whereof the wounded were
next day sent forth unto the care of their own Surgeons, and two that ran
from us had execution.

The Ammunition brought put in, and the Lord Marquisse visited by his worthy
friends, they return to Cowdreys Down; whence the Horse under some hazard of
the Enemies Guns retreat to Chinham, thence 100 Musketeers being sent unto the
House, they march through Basing-stoake, facing the Rebels works whilst 14.
barrells of powder and 100. Arms found in the town, and what provision of all
sorts could be got, were sent into the Garrison, where 100. Musketeers under
command of Major Cuffand, seconded with like number of supplies led forth by
Captain Hull, attacque the line on Basing side, take in that quarter and the
Church which they had fortified. In it 2. Captains (Captain John Iephson and
Captain Iarvas,) 1. Leivtenant, 2. Sergeants, and about 30. Soldiers the rest
by several ways escaping. During the former fight their Guns being drawn from
off that platform to their works in the park; Sir Richard Onslowes quarter
toward Basing-stoake, that fatal place again is taken in the skonces
slighted; and their piece brought in by Musketeers, led by
Leivtenant-Colonell Peak, their Tents and Huts fiered near Holloway Mill, the
enemy so hastening from these works as scarcely 3. could be made stay the
killing.

Thus might we see at once, three of their Quarters blaze, only one (well
fortified and their remaining strength drawn in) is left them quiet.

Sept. 1
The next day is employed in sending warrants forth, fetching provision from
the adjacent Towns, and getting in a Culverin the enemies have had left near
to the wood, which they permitted us with so much tamenesse, as called our men
to fall upon their works, but most part of our foot then busied abroad these
are commanded off having a Sergeant and 5. others shot, whereof they after
died, care being taken for such Gentlemen of our releife as had been hurt,
night coming on, intelligence of enemies appearing from the towns near
Silckester and drawing toward Kingscleare, Colonel Gage ordering his horse
and foot to be in readiness, having supplied the Garrison as much as
shortness of his stay gave leave, about 11. at night takes Conge of the place,
marching the way of Reading, leaving the enemy next morn amused with a letter
for exchange of Captain Love for Jephson, which by noone was done; and they by
it assured the certainty of his retreat to Oxford.

Sept. 14
The town of Basing not yet repossest, a hundred Musketeers are sent under
command of Captain Fletcher to guard our Carts fetching provision thence, on
whom the enemy with horse and foot falls out toward evening, Norton himself
there present, ours taken in disorder are beat back, but soon restored by the
coming forth of the field Officers, and they forced back into their works,
sixteen of them being slain in the retreat and 11 taken, of ours an Ensign
and two common Soldiers killed, six hurt, whereof 4. dyed, and 8 made
prisoners, Leivtenant Colonel Johnson Doctor of Physique, was here shot in the
shoulder, whereby contracting a Fever he dyed a f^rt^^ght after, his worth
challenging Funeral tears, being no less eminent in the Garrison for his
valor and conduct, as a Souldie^, then famous through the Kingdom for his
excellency as an H^^barist, and Physician. The following week keeping the town
with guards we fetch provision, slight their platform, and throw down their
works without the least Alarm.

Sept. 23.
The Rebels again falling upon our guard in town, ours are commanded in,
having replenished our store for some week time, and wanting men to spare. The
Church by them thus repossest, they now enlarge themselves and keep us to our
works, of late too loosly grown familiar in the town. This day two Gentlemen
of our releife was exchanged from Reading for three of theirs with us. Next day
a party of our Horse are sent forth by the Grange to face their guard on
Cowdrey, whilst our foot draw in twenty fat hoggs from of the Down, their
Scouts draw back unto their Guards kept near to Basing-stoak whence strengthened
ours orderly retreating, are pursued near to a hedge lyned with our Musketeers,
who salving them, they quickly face about, having swormd out the number of 5
Troops. The morrow entertaines them in like manner whilst our men spoiling
their platform at the Delve, bring in their planke and timber.

Sept. 27.
Some of our horse sporting on Cowdreys Down, and there amusing them, six
others through the Park Lane toward Basing-stoake fetch in eight of their foot
passing unto their Leaguer. And a water leveller employed for the drawing of
our River, Morley himself hardly escaping them, causing some foot come forth
to stop our horse retreat, are galled by our Musqueteeres purposely lodged in
covert. An hour after we receive a Drum from Colonel Norton, for the sending
out some gentlemen to treat the change of Prisoners, and is returned with fixing
of a day.

Sept. 29.
The Stage of Coudrey furnished again with Actors, a Coronet and three more of
theirs are killed and one of ours, At night (the morrow being a Fair at
Basingstoke,) six Foot with Pistol and Brown Bill are sent to try the Market,
and four miles off at a Committees house finding to serve their turn, from
thence bring in twenty three head of Cattle by the Delve, which pass our daily
skirmishing kept free, nex day informed the enemy imploed in fortifying the
Church, sometimes kept but a careless Guard, 100 Musqueteeres led forth by
Maj^r Cuffaud are sent to force the place, and having gained a work, wanting
wherewith to force the door, theirs coming fast to rescue, ours retreat
having a Sergeant and six Soldiers shot in the attempt, whereof most dyed, of
theirs an Ensign and some others slain.

October. 2.
We send forth Captain Rosewell and Captain Rigby secured by Hostages, with
instructions to treat release of Prisoners. The same night M. Greaves, and
Captain Iarvis, next day two Lieutenants with diverse more sent out receiving
Captain Rowlet, a Lieutenant, and two Sergeants lost at Odiham, and some days
after Coronet Bryan and three Gentlemen of our relief released to Oxford.

October. 4.
This and the eight days following our Horse and theirs change Pistolls upon
Cowdreys down, they having number we advantage of a hedge with Musketeers, so
as the odds was ours, and three or four of theirs was daily carried off, we
all the while loosing one Horse and two Foot Soldiers, at night send forth our
Chapmen well furnished and good Market folks, in five hours time return with
25 Beasts under the noses of their Sentinells, some Mesqueteers of ours lying
abroad for their security.

October. 17.
Past noon from off our Towers, we see the Van of Manchesters Army Marching to
Basingstoake and Sherfield; next day some of his Horse visit the Leaguer, and
by our Markes-men two of them are shot, the following day eight Regiments of
Foot and some of Horse with all their Carriage and Artillery, drawn on the
South of Basing-stoake facing the House, make halt some hours, and toward
night return into the Town, most of their Horse which all the day had stood
at two miles distance near Rooks down, at night with have enough Troop to
their Quarters toward Farnham.

October. 20.
Three Foot Soldiers coming too near to see the House receive the curtesy of
fetching in, and next day by our Foot in Ambush in the lane a Cornet of Sir
Williams Regiment and two Dragoones were taken, our Horse from off the Hill
fetch in two straggling Foot, at noon some Regiments of Horse and Foot belonging
to the Earl of Essex, join to the Leaguer, their Army toward evening drawn in
Battalia, that night keep the field, the Van near Rooks Down, the Battle at
Basing-Stoake, and Reere by Hackwood, next day Marching the Army toward
Reading, the Foot by Sherbone, and the Horse keeping along their left, the
following day three Troopers more brought in, keeping our Horse abroad to wait
on them. At night part of a ruined Tower falling by Tempest on five of our men,
killing one, and somewhat bruised the rest.

Lieutenant Cuffand with some 40 Horse charging their Guardian Cowdrey's-downe,
spoiling five Horses and as many men, takes one of theirs, with loss of one of
ours; next day facing their Horse again, whilst Coronet Bryan with some few
Horse fetched off a Load of Corn, driving near to their Guard. And riding
through the Garrison from off the other side, bring in a Cart and Teame passing
to Basing-stoake, These Carts did help us in 3 following nights, secured with
Convoyes, to fetch in 5 quarters of thresht Corn, and 12 load in the sheafe
from Piats hill, the same nights furnishing us 14 Beasts, they some days after
keeping at those Barnes a Guard of Horse and Foot, releived each night at nine.

Nov. 1.
Our slender stock of Bread and Corn, that of Beer being spent, invites the
sending forth Lieutenant Colonel Peake with Horse and Foot, to try what yet
could more be done at Piats Hill, where coming about eight at night, finding
their Fires, but their guards gone off: taking two Prisoners begin their work,
loading their Carts, and sending them away continuing so till 12, what time
their Horse from Sherfield coming down the hill, and Foot from Basing drawing
up, fall on our Guards, and for some time dispute it, but our Foot from the
lyned hedges having gauled their Horse, give way to ours to draw theirs farther
off, whilst their Foot acquainted with the ground strive to possess the
hedges some of ours maintained, but an Alarm from the Castle given upon the
Church, and our Horse now freed of thefts, cause them retreat, driving them
through the River, they thus beat off, we to our Work again, and by the
morning carry in 16 Cart loads in sheafe, our Drovers at same time passed
through our Guards eight Beasts, at noon next day some Soldiers ste^ping out
seize on 12 sides of Mutto^ and some Pork loaded upon a Horse as contribution
food going unto the Church.

Nov. 5.
Our Beer being now spent, the Officers content themselves with water, having
for ten days past spared one meal a day, and now persuade the Soldiers who
as yet had two, this causes one at night to run away, telling our wants unto
our Enemies, now animating them, before dishartened, had not the coming in of
Strowds and Ludlowes horse with some Dragoones fastened their Leaguer, almost
on remove.

Nov. 6.
Coronet Bryan with a party of Horse using the benefit of a fogge, getting into
the Bottom near to Basing-stoake, steals off three Sentryes, and placing
there his own, after a while without the noise of Pistol, takes a Corporal
and two Troopers more coming to their relief, This was a welcome to Strowdes
new-come Horse. At night Major Cuffand with Horse and Foot killing a Sentinel,
and beating off their Horse, cleereth the pass to Piats Hill, and sends
forth our men for Beasts, but the enemies Horse that night too much abroad,
make void this Journey; two run to him, one of ^^em with a horse.

Nov. 9.
The like party sent out at night under Command of Major Rosewell, beating
their Foot from a work thrown upon the pass at the Delue (their Horse not
daring come too near the hedges) possess the Avenues, to Piats-Hill, then
sending forth our Grasiers, who in four hours time return with eighteen
Beasts our Guards in mean while from the Barnes thereby passing six Load of
Corn in sheaffe and securing two Messengers on ward to Oxford, one sent three
nights before being taken by the enemy.

Nov. 13.
Colonel Ludlowes Trumpiter is taken upon Cowdreys down, next day a Regiment
of Foot showing themselves at Chinham, march to Basing-stoake; And the morrow a
Trumpet from Sir William for his Coronet is returned with naming an Exchange;
another bringing in two Officers of ours that long had layen at Farnham, for
them carries out seven of theirs, we taking care to fill their rooms again,
within two hours after fetch in one and kill two more abroad, There Army now
again hovering about, afford us sport, each day killing or taking some of
their curious ones. And seize two Carts, one with a Load of Hay passing too
near our works.

The enemy wearied with Lying 24 weeks, diseases, with the Winter seazing them,
his Army wasted from 2000 to 700, fearing the forces of His Majesty now moving
about Hungerford, raises his Leaguer, and at eight this morn drew off his
Wagons, and two Gunnes, three days before brought in, The Foot at noone march
toward Odgiham, the Hots being fired, and some Troops of Horse left to secure
their reere, On whom a party of our Horse with Coronet Bryan waiting their
opportunityes disorder their retreat.

Next night honored Sir Henry Gage (the enemies remove not known) sent by His
Majesty with 1000 Horse brings in supplies of Ammunition and Provision, each
trooper in a bag beating his part having a skeene of Match swadled about his
wast besides what brought in Carts, and staying here three days most amply
victualled the Garrison (drawn down by length of Seige, almost unto the worst
of all necessityes, Provision low, the Soldiers spent and naked, and the
numbers few, having besides our hurt and maimed, and such as run from us,
lost near 100 men by sickness, and the Seige, whereof a Lieutenant Colonel,
two Ensigns, three Sergeants, and seven Corporals.

I shall end all with these observations viz. That seldom has been a Sei^e
wherein the preservation of the place more imediatly might be imputed to the
hand of God, That the Soldiers in so long a Seige with all the sufferings
incident thereto, should never Mutiny; Nor that that the customary Liberty at
all our Parlyes for to meet and talk wrought any treachery, Wants of
Provisions always so supplied as if by miracle, during the Leaguer; we not
having less then seavenscore useless mouths, that had releife come at the
time appointed, Waller then hovering with his force at Farnham in probability a
hazard whether they had releived us, or preserved themselves. Or had Norton
(able to bring three times, their numbers forth) when the next week they came,
drawn out his strength, or had we not got Powder from them, that, by our
releife scarce serving till the Seige was raised; or when we were releived, had
they not suffered us to possess the Town a week, thereout supplying our
selves for horse and man, before not having for above three weeks, Or had they
when we first fetched Corn from Piats Hill, or fired or removed it.

But God that holds all things in his hand, appointing times and seasons:
orders all that tends unto those ends he wills; in vain it therefore were to
Villisy the enemy; blaming his valor or descretion, Or yet to say the care and
diligence of the Lord Marquisse Governor, the skill and valor of the
Officers, the courage and obedience of the Soldiers, (though all these did
their parts) had thus preserved the place, in vain we watch and ward, except
God keep the House. Let no man therefore speak himself an instrument, only
in giving thanks that God had made him so, for here was evidently seen He
chose the weak to confound the strong, Non Nobis Domine. Not unto us, not unto
us O Lord. but to thine own name be all Glory for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

