A DESCRIPTION and PLAT OF THE Seacoasts of England, from London, up all the
River of Thames, all along the Coasts to Newcastle, and so to Edinburgh, all
along Scotland, the Orchades, and Hitland, where the DVTCH begin their Fishing.

AS ALSO: All those parts over against us, as Norway, Denmark, the Sound,
Holland, and Zealand.

With the Depths and Showlds about these places, in what Depths men may see
the Land.

Of the Tides and Courses of the streams about these foresaid places, with the
Courses and Distances, and how these Lands do lie one from the other, and from
other Lands.

With the heights of their degrees, and minutes, in their respective places
where they are Situated.

Unto which is added: A List containing the Monthly wages of all Officers,
Seamen, and others serving in the States Ships at Sea: And as to the wages to
common Seamen, to their shares in Prizes, and relieving of sick and wounded;
which is referred to the Commissioners for ordering and managing the Affairs of
the Admiralty and Navy, with power to see the particulars aforementioned put in
execution, and to give such Orders from time to time, as shall be requisite for
the effecting thereof.

Useful not only for Seamen and Merchants, but for all that desire to know
where our Fleets lie, either on the Coast, or the Neighboring Lands, that any
man may be as experienced in the Seacoast by this Card, as they have been by
Land, by the six Mapps of England, wherein the Villages and smallest Places
were known to travel unto them, and where the Land Armies did lie.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Tho: Jenner at the South-entrance of the Royal
Exchange. 1653.

A List, containing the Monthly Wages of all Officers, Seamen, and others,
serving in the States Ships at Sea; and as to the Wages for Common Seamen, to
their Shares in Prizes, and relieving of sick and wounded, which is referred to
the Commissioners for ordering and managing the Affairs of the Admiralty and
Navy, with power to see the particulars aforementioned, put in execution, and
to give such Orders from time to time, as shall be requisite for the effecting
thereof.
Officers Names. 1 Rank. 2 Rank. 3 Rank. 4 Rank. 5 Rank. 6 Rank. l. s. d. l. s.
d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. A Captain. 21 0 0. 16 16 0. 14 0 0. 10
10 0. 8 8 0. 7 0 0. A Lieutenant. 4 4 0. 4 4 0. 3 10 0. 3 10 0. A Master. 7 0
0. 6 6 0. 4 13 8. 4 6 2. 3 17 6. The Captain to the (...). A Mosters Mate, or
Pilot. 3 6 0. 3 0 0. 2 16 2. 2 7 10. 2 2 0. 2 2 0. A Mid-shipman. 2 5 0. 2 0 0.
1 17 6. 1 13 9. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. A Boat swain. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5
0. 2 0 0. A Boat swains Mate. 1 15 0. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. A
Quartermaster. 1 15 0. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. A Quarter Masters
Mate. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. 1 5 0. A Carpenter. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3
0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Carpenters Mate. 2 0 0. 2 0 0. 1 16 0. 1 14 0. 1
20 0. 1 10 0. A Gunner. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Gunners
Mate. 1 15 0. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. A Quarter-Gunner. 1 6 0. 1
6 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. A Chyrurgion. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. 2 10 0.
2 10 0. 2 10 0. A Chyrurgions Mate 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10
0. A Corporal. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 5 0. Yeomen of the
Jeers, Sheats, Haliards, and Tacks. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 8 0. A Purser to
be Clerk of the Cheque. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Steward
to take charge of the Victuals. 2 0 0. 1 16 8. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 6 8. 1 5 0. A
Cook. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 4 0. A Master Trumpeter. 1 10 0. 1 8
0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 4 0. Other Trumpeters. 1 4 0. 1 4 0. A Cock swain. 1
12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. An Armorer. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. A
Gun-Smith. 1 5 0. 1 5 0.

Yoeman of the Powder-Room. These to have the pay of an able Seaman. A
Stewards Mate. These to have the pay of an able Seaman. A Cooks Mate. These to
have the pay of an able Seaman. A Cock swains Mate. These to have the pay of
an able Seaman. A Swabber. These to have the pay of an able Seaman. A Cooper
besides three shillings and four pence a Month, Adds money. These to have the
pay of an able Seaman.
ALL able Seamen fit for the Helm and Lead, twenty four shillings by the
Month; whereof one shilling to be paid to the Chest, Minister, and Chyrurgion.

All others, not capable of performing the duties aforesaid, nineteen shillings
a Month, Boys and Gromets excepted.

Gromets fourteen shillings and three pence a Month, and Boys nine shillings
and six pence, whereof one shilling to be paid to the Chest, Minister, and
Chyrurgion.

The Captain, Master, and Boatswain of each Ship, do before the payment of
their respective Ships Companies, rate the Wages of each Ships Company,
certifying the same against each man's name according to their Abilities; and to
that end to sign the Sea-Books with the Purser: And in case of the discharge
of any from the Ship, the foresaid persons are to certify upon the Ticket
whereby they are discharged, their abilities, and rate them according to the
aforesaid distinctions.

The Treasurer and Commissioners of the Navy have power to determine all cases
or differences that may arise.

Such Mariners and Sea men as shall voluntarily come into the States service,
shall have the same allowance of Conduct-money as the Pressed men have, they
making it appear to the Commissioners of the Navy, how far they have traveled
to enter themselves into the States Service; and shall also have the benefit of
the Chest.

As to the Shares in Prizes.
All Captains, Seamen, and others, that do or shall serve in any of the
States own, or Merchants Ships employed in their service, shall have from the
State for every ship or Prize, Merchantmen, or men of War, laden or light, ten
shillings for every Tun, and six pound thirteen shillings and four pence, for
every piece of Ordnance, whether iron or brass, to be paid by the Collectors
for Prize-Goods, within three days after the payment of the Wages (in case
Adjudication be made of the ship in the Admiralty Court) to be shared and
divided amongst them proportionably, according to the respective Places and
Offices in the ship in which they served. All Captains, Seamen, and others, to
take and have to themselves as Pillage, all such Goods and Merchandise as shall
be found above the Gun-deck, for every man of War sunk or destroyed by fire,
ten pounds a Gun, upon Certificate by the Council of War.

All common Seamen shall out of the Proceed of Prizes, have one Months pay at
the coming in, and paying off their several Ships, to be paid by the Treasurer
of the Navy.

As to sick and wounded men.
Sick and wounded men on board, five pounds for six Months service for every
hundred men. Upon the discharge of sick and wounded men, payment of their
Tickets and Conduct-money.

All Majors, Bailiffs, or other Magistrates in any Port-Townes, to take care
for all necessary accomodations at the charge of the State, for the relief and
cure of such sick and wounded men as shall be sent on shore.

A convenient House be provided in or near Dover, Deal, or Sandwich, as an
Hospital for the Receipt and Accommodation of wounded men that shall be there
sent on shore.

All Hospitals in ENGLAND, employed for the cure of wounded and sick people, be
reserved during this War at Sea, for such as shall be wounded in the service of
the Navy.

The Tenths of all Prizes, taken or to be taken, customarily due to the Lord
High-Admirall, be appointed for defraying the charges of sick and wounded men
as aforesaid, and for the relief of Widows, Children, and impotent Parents of
such as shall be slain in the service of the Commonwealth, at Sea; and for
Meddals, or other Rewards to such Officers and Seamen of the Fleet, as shall
be found to have done any eminent or extraordinary Service.

A DESCRIPTION and PLAT of the Seacoasts of England, from London, all the
River of Thames, all along the Coast to New Castle, and so to Edinburgh, all
along Scotland, the Orcades, and Hitland, where the DVTCH begin their Fishing.
The First Demonstration.
In which The East Side of England, and Schotland, is showed, from the River of
London, to the New Castle.
BY two ways men may sail into the River of London: from the southwards,
along by the North Forland, and by the northwards along by the Naes. if you
will sail in there from the Southwards, then you must first shun the North
Forland, it is there showld a good ways from the shore, bring the north
Forland also not more southerly from you then southwest, that you do not run on
against the North-grounds, which lie far to seawards. Coming by the land, run
along by it, but come not so near it, that you leese sight of the spire of
the steeple of Margat behind the land, for then you should come too near it;
but if you keep so far from the shore, that you can see the foresaid steeple
above the high land, or keep it even in your sight, then you cannot take hurt
of the south grounds. Coming thwart of Margat, then you are past the foresaid
showlds or south grounds. Run then boldly toward the shore, and within two
cables lengths along by it, for to avoid the north grounds, which lie far to
the southwards toward the land. Sail on so west all along by the shore,
until that the Roculvers (which are two steeples upon one Church) come one in
the other, and then you shall run in sight of the first boy upon the Lasts,
which by e^h upon the to resaid marks of the Roculvey a being by it you can
also see the other boy which lies like as the first also on the north side,
and over against it on the south side stands a Beak on, there you must sail
through betwixt them both, leaving the boy on the starboard side, and the
B^akon over against it on the larboard side. From thence you may with little
ships, or ships of little draught, but not with ships of great draught, at high
water run over the Swallow on west-north-west toward, Sheppy, for it is there
showld water, with ships of great draught you must run through the Fishers deep
toward Black tail. You may also run from Margat with small ships along by the
shore upon the lead at high water, even unto Sheppy, but in sailing along there
you must cast your tides well, for the flood falls very strong into the
Swallow, and the ebb to the contrary very strong out.

When you come by Sheppy, Sheppy.
run within two cables lengths along by it, for to avoid the tail of the
Spaniard, until that you be past Quinsborough, The Spagmard.
edge then off from the south shore for to avoid the Noere, which is a sand
that shoots off from the River a good ways to the eastwards, upon the
outermost end whereof stands always a Beakon whereby you may know it, The
Noete.
run along to the northwards of it, leaving on the larboard side, and along in
the middle of the channel into the sea-reach for to avoid the grounds which
lie off from the north shore, go in so along toward Gravesend.

To sail with ships of great draughts along by the north For land up into the
Thames, you must (when you are past the buys upon the Lasts) sail through the
Fishers deep toward Blacktaile, which lies from the second buy upon the
Lasts, Fishers deep.
unto the first buy in the Fishers deep, northwest, and northwest, and by
west, which lies upon the north fide of the sand, which men do call the
Spaniard, these two buys lie a great way one from the other.

Sailing from the buy upon the Lasts, it is a great way, all showld water, so
that you must run over there with high water, but coming near the buy upon the
Spaniard, it is by little and little, deeper water. He that will sail over
here, must reckon his tides well, the flood falls there along toward the
southwest almost thwart over the deep, and the ebb to the contrary.

The second buy in the Fishers Deep you must leave on the starboard side:
being past that, you come against the Blacktaile, to the southwards of the
Shoebeakon into the right deep. The east point of Sheppy shall then lie about
south from you. From the Shoe-beakon the course is southwest to the point of
Blacktaile, there runs off a hook which men might (at unawares) sail within
(coming from the northwards) in five or six fathom, but if you keep from the
shore in seven fathom, you cannot sail within it. From Black-tail to the
Beakon upon the Noere, the course is west-south-west, leave it on the larboard
side, as before is said, and run it along the River, in the middle of the
Channel betwixt both lands unto Gravesend.

For to sail into the River of London coming from. the northwards, For to sail
into the River of Land: from the northwards.
you must come near the coast to the northwards of Orfordnes, which is to the
northwards of all the sands, there lie Albrough, Dunwich, Walderswike, Soul
and Covehit, all betwixt Orfordnes and Leystaf. Covehit is a sharp steeple like
as also Leystaffe, but Soul and Walderswyke, Albrough and Orfordnes, are all
flat Steeples, Soul and Dunwich lie both upon the high land, betwixt them both
is a valley, therein you may see Walderswike, Soul.
when you are thwart of it. Dunwich.
Dunwich is the best to be known of all these foresaid places: it has two flat
steeples, and on both sides some trees. To the soutwards of it lies Albrough,
Albrough.
which is also very good to be known, it has one high flat steeple with three
mils, the two stand to the northwards, and the third to the southwards of
Arbrough when you are thwart of it, but sailing to the southwards, they come
all three to the southwards of it. The Land without Albrough, and to the
southwards of it is very low, flat and chindely land.

Betwixt Albrough and Dunwich, about half ways betwixt them, lies a wood,
which is at both ends high, and in the midst low with a saddle; this you
shall commonly see first when you fall with land thereabouts, and is the best
to be known for to know the coast by; the land without it, and to the
southwards, is very low flat chindely land. Orfordnes.
About two leagues to the soutwards of Albrough lies Orfordnes, betwixt them
both stand also two woods of trees, which show themselves a far off like
Castles or Towers. Or fordnes is a flat steeple with a thick or broad castle,
which has also a thick flat steeple, almost of fashion like the steeple of
Rarop, open above with holes in it like Bellholes.

Before Dunwich you may anchor, there is good lying in eight or nine fathom
somewhat soft ground. Before Albrough is the best road of all the coasts
thereabouts, in six and seven fathom.

East from Albrough about two leagues, Aelbrough Knock.
lies Albrough Knock, this is a sand which at low water is not deeper then
seven or eight foot: you may sound round about in five fathom, but it is not
good to come nearer it: with sea winds you may discern it plainly, by the
breaking of the sea upon it; but with landerly or westerly winds, and fair
weather, the sea breaks not upon it; he that runs thereby to the
northwards with an ebb, shall see it commonly ripple very much upon it, like as
upon most the English bancks, and not indeed upon the bancks, but against them,
for upon the showlds or midst of the banks is the smoothest water, like as
you find every where.

When as Albrough is west from you, Marks of Aelbrough Knock.
and the two steeples of Orfordnes are one in the other, there you shall find
Albrough knock.

These are sure marks of that Sand.

The Whiting, or Whiting sand, is somewhat a long small sand lying before
Orfordnes, and the chindely land to the southwards of Aelbrough, and lies
along the reach, but the south end lies further from land then the north end,
there is at low water not above six or seven foot water upon it. Coming from
the northwards, men sail commonly to the westwards of it, that is through
betwixt the land and Whiting-sand, toward the Naze. Whiting sand.
Men may also sail along to the eastwards of it, through betwixt Whiting-sand
and the eastermost point of the Court, or Court-sand, which some do call the
Rib. The Court.


The north end of the Whiting lies along close to the shore, and lies from
the steeples of Orfordnes southeast and by south, it is so exceeding steep and
needle too, that you shall have the one cast nine, the next cast five fathom,
and then you are no more but a ships length from it, before you can heave the
lead again you shall be upon it. When you sit with the foreship against it, it
is at the stern five or six fathom deep.

Along the inner side it is also every where so steep, that you cannot sound
it, but on the outer side you may run along by it in five fathom upon the lead,
until you come within the sands.

When as you come from the northwards and will sail through within the
Whiting, you must run close by the shore, and south w. about by the point of
the chi^dle to the southwards of Aelbrough, until you come within the north
point of the Whiting, when the steeples of Orfordnes come to be north-west and
by north from you, then you are right thwart of the north point of the Whiting,
being within it go again more southerly, to wit, southwest and by south
toward Balsy cliffe.

If you should fall to the southwards of Whiting, or else coming from the
southwards will sail in there to the northwards, then bring the steeples of
Orfordnes westnorthwest, or northwest and by west, but for all not more
northerly then north-west from you, and sail so right in until you come by
the Chindle strand, then run in along by it, as is before said, and then you
shall run far enough along to the northwards of the Whiting.

If you will sail in to the eastwards or the southwards of the Whiting, then
bring the steeples of Orfordnes north north-west, or north-west and by north,
or northwest from you, For to run in to the eastwards of the Whiting.
and sail in so right with them, until that the wood of trees, that stands
upon the next point to the south-wards of Balsy cliffe, come to Balsy cliffe,
which shall then stand about west-southwest from you, keep that aforesaid wood
to the southside of the cliffe, and sail in boldly right with it, and then you
shall run right in the the faire-way in betwixt the Whiting, and the tail of
Court-sand, but if you bring the foresaid trees more then a hand-spikes length
without the cliffe, you shall not fail to run on against the point of the
Court. That aforesaid wood of trees is very good to be known, because
thereabouts stand no other trees.

Or bring the steeple of Balsy w. s. w. from you, and sail in so right with
it, until you come by Whiting sand, in five or six fathom, and lead it in so by
it upon the lead, until that you come by Balsy, or that you get deeper water.

When you come near Balsy, whether you be come in from the northwards, or the
southwards of Whiting sand, you must keep somewhat off from the shore, because
of a little riffe, or small tail, that shoots off from the shore, thwart of
Balsy-cliffe, which you must avoid somewhat, with ships of great draughts,
there remains at low water upon it no more then two fathom, you may commonly
perceive it well by the rippling of the tide.

You may also sail in to the southwards of the Ribb, (that is, For to sail in
at the channel through the Court.
the tail of the Court, or Court-sand) thus, bring the steeple of Balsy north
north w. or a little more northerly from you, and sail in so right with it,
and so you shall run in to the northwards, or through the Court, at a channel
of eight fathom depth, the east side of this channel is steep, come no nearer
it then eight fathom, but by the west side you may run in about by the Court,
upon the lead, until you come within the sands.

Balsy has a high flat steeple, Balsy.
and lies somewhat within the land behind the cliffe, when as you come from the
northwards, you may see Balsy to the northwards, or the westwards of the
cliffe, but you sail it altogether behind the cliffe, so that at last it
comes out again to the southwards of it.

If you will sail to Harwich being past Balsy, For to sail into Harwich.
then bring Balsy to that steep point to the southwards of Balsy, where trees
stand upon, keep these marks so standing, and run so along by the shore,
until that you be over the point of the Chindle, the marks thereof are two
high trees within the land, when they are about N. n. west from you, then they
come one in the other with the steeple of Harwich, and then you are right over
the point of the Chindle, and then you shall get deeper water, four and five
fathom, or somewhat more against the highest water. Run in then about by the
point, the channel lies in right N. but in the midst of the Havens mouth
lies a suncken rocky and stony ground, which you must avoid, you may sail in
about it on both sides, by the one shore or the other, but along by the east
shore it is best, being within it, you cannot sail amiss, to take hurt, if
you do not sail bluntly against the shore, there you may ankor all over,
where you please, before the Town, in five, six, and seven fathom. You may
well also go further into the bight, there it is clean every where. The
faraway betwixt Orfordnes or Whiting-sand, and the Naze lies most s. w. and by
s. and is six, seven, and eight fathom deep, in turning to windwards you may
run to the shore in five and four fathom, but close to the sands it is deeper,
to wit, eight, nine, and ten fathom, the nearer the sands, the deeper water.

But to sail from Balsy to the Naze, The Naze.
you must mark the steeple of Balsy, when it comes within a Capstone-bars
length near to the s. end of the cliffe, then keep them so standing, so long
until that the house upon the Maze come over the two fields, which lie on
against the Highland, or come over a black head upon the seaside, sail then
right in with them, until that the steeple of Harwich come to be n. n. w. from
you in the little valley of a red cliffe, leave then the first marks, keep the
steeple of Harwich in that little valley, and go on s. s. e. until that the
third point of the Naze come without the two other points, so you shall run
through betwixt the Naze and the Course, there remains at low water no more
then eight, ten, and at some places twelve foot water, therefore it is not good
to run through here, unless that it be a quarter flood, or with a ship of
great draught at half flood, there it is very uneven of ground, rocky and
stony. The point of the Naze is very foul, and uneven, the nearer the shore
thwart of that point the showlder, but the nearer the sands the deeper.

When that the third point of the Naze comes without the two other points, or
the other land, and that it does again begin to deep off, to wit, four or five
fathom, then go southest somewhat southerly, or southwest and by south, unto
the bye upon Longsand. Thwart of the Naze is Long-sand very steep, so that it
cannot be well sounded with the lead by them that are not there very well
acquainted, Longsand.
but somewhat more to the southwards you may run along by it in four fathom, and
three fathom and a half, until that you get the buy upon Longsand in sight of
you. The n. shore to the southwards of the Naze is also flat, you may run along
by it also upon the lead, without any danger.

The buy upon the Longsand lies in two fathom and an half, Buys upon
Longsand and the Spits.
at half flood, you must leave it on the larboard side, and the Buy upon the
Spits, on the starboard side, which lies a little showlder, they lie about
south and be east, and north and by west, a musket shot one from the other. The
Course betwixt the two buys, is south-southeast, and northnorthwest, but you
must reckon well your tids, The Spits.
whether you run through there with a flood, or with an ebb. Upon the Spits
betwixt the two buys, is at half flood at least three fathom and a half, or
almost four fathom, in the right channel, a little to the southwards of the
buy upon the Spits stand two masts above the water, of a lost ship, which are
good marks. Whitakers Beakon.
Being over the Spits, the course to Whitakers beakon is s. southwest.

About half way betwixt them stand also two masts more on the same w. side,
Middle-plate.
and over against these masts lies a middle plate, whereupon lies a buy on
the west side: the fareway is along to the west-wards of this middle-plate,
through betwixt that foresaid Buy, and the Maste.

To the northwards of that foresaid Middle-plate, goes out a Channel by the
south side of Long-sand, which you may sail out and in, called the Kings deep.
If you come from Whitakers-beakon, past the Middle-plate, so far that you get
sight of the buys of Long-sand, or Spits, go then boldly e. n. e. and n. e.
and by east into sea, or upon the lead along by Longsand, but if you should run
into sea, to the s. wards of the Middle-plate, you should with an e. n. e. way
sail within the Hook of the Mouse. This Kings-deep is a ready Channel, Kings
deep.
and is used almost forall ships for to run out at.

For to run in at this channel out of the sea, For to sail into the Kings deep.
then bring the point of the Naze northwest from you, and sail in so with it,
until that you come near Goemfliet or Longsand in five fathom, go in then
along by it about westsouth west, and southwest and by west, and keep the
sounding of Long-sand, and so you shall not fail to run in sight of the buy
upon the Spits, and the foresaid masts to the southwards of it.

From Whitakers beakon to the Shoebeakon the course is s. s. w. somewhat
westerly, coming thwart of the Shoebeakon, Shoe beakon.
then lies the east point of Sheppy about s. from you. From the Shoebeakon the
course is along s. w. to the point of Blacktaile, Blacktaile.
there runs off a Hook, which men might sail within, coming from the
northwards, but if you keep from the shore in seven fathom, you cannot take
hurt of it, but in five fathom you run within it. The like Hook is also a
little to the southwards of the Shoebeakon, which you might unawares sail
within, coming from the southwards.

From Blacktaile to the beakon upon the Nore, the course is w. s. w. The Nore
is a sand, The Nore.
lying from the south point of the maine land of the River, far to the
eastwards, therefore leave the beakon on the larboard side, and go on west
along amidst the channel, into the River, betwixt both the lands, as heretofore
has been said in the description of the Fishers deep.

From Aelbrough along by Dunwich to Covehit, the coast lies north and by east,
somewhat easterly, and south and by west, or somewhat westerly five leagues,
but from Covehit or Leystaf, north and south two leagues Aelbrough, Dunwich and
the sands lying thereabouts, are described here before.

Betwixt Dunwich and Covehit lies the Haven of Soul, Soul.
which is a little showld River, a little within it divides it self into
three parts, upon the northermost arm lies Soul, upon the middlemost
Walderswyke, and upon the souther most Dunwich. Dunwich.


Covehit has a high sharp steeple, thwart of it lies a bank not far from
land, which falls at low water, but at half flood you may sail through
betwixt it and the land in three fathom, upon the outer side it is very steep,
so that you cannot come nearer it then nine or ten fathom. When the steeple of
Easton is westnorth west from you, then you are to the southwards of the bank,
and when the steeple of Covehit is s. w. and by w. from you, then you are to
the northwards of it.

Two leagues to the northward of Covehit lies Leystaf, Leystaff,
and two leagues more to the northwards of it lies Yarmouth. The steeple of
Leystaf is a high sharp steeple, and stands a great musket shot within the
land from the houses, so that in sailing along you may bring the steeple on
both sides of the houses. Off from Leystaf begin the bank or Holins of
Yarmouth, and lie along to the n. wards past Yarmouth, until thwart of
Winterton there go diverse marks, for those that are there acquainted; you may
sail through within these banks, off from Leystaf, until past Winterton.

If you run through from before Leystaff within these banks, then look out for
the fire-beakon, For to come within the banks of Yarmouth.
which stands by Leystaf, which at two little white houses, the one stands
beneath upon the chindle on the seaside, and the innermost upon a little
Hammock, somewhat further within the land. When they come to the southwards,
they show themselves to the northwards of the Town, but come at last thwart of
it. In the night there is always fired upon them, for to sail in there also
by night. Bring these foresaid fire-beakons n. w. and by north, or somewhat
more northerly from you, and sail in so right with them, either by night or by
day, the Church of Leystaf comes then to the southwards of the Town, over a
Country House by the water side: when you come against the Channel, there is
at low water no more then three fathom depth, keep these foresaid fire-beakons
one in the other, or bring the innermost rather a little northwards of the
outermost, for to avoid a little plate, which lies on the south side of the
Deep, but the Channel is indifferent wide, run until you come against the
strand in two fathom and an half, or two fathom, so near as you will or can
and go then up northwards along by the shore, you shall then (being sailed a
little to the northwards) meet with a flat, whereupon remains at low water
less then two fathom depth, with laden ships you must ankor before that flat,
and stay for high water, it flows there about eight foot up and down, so
soon as you are over the flat it will be five, six, and seven fathom deep, edge
then to the shore, and sail toward it, and then you come before the
Brew House, there is the road where you may ankor in four, five, and six
fathom, from thence n. wards toward Yarmouth along the shore is all over good
ankoring and good ground.

About an English mile, Haven of Yarmouth.
or somewhat more to the s. wards of the Town Yarmouth, is the Haven of
Yarmouth, it has two wooden heads, where you must sail in betwixt them both,
against the highest water, when the strongest of the flood is spent, at half
flood it is dangerous, because of the strongest tide, which should lighlty
carry you into the bight, Road before Yarmouth.
against the shore (against your will) it is also best to run in along by the
southerhead, there it is deepest. At Yarmouth in the road, men do commonly
ankor to the northwards of the Heaven, right thward of the Town, in five, six,
seven, or eight fathom, the nearer you ankor to the sands, the deeper water
you shall have, but all good sand, and soft ground.

If you will sail into the road of Yarmouth, through the Holmes, then bring
the sharp little steeple, that stands to the northwards of Yarmouth within
the land, over the broad Castle, or bring the Mill to the north side of the
Town. Keep these marks so standing, and go in so west n. west, you shall find
in this channel not less water then eight or nine fathom at half flood.
This channel is called S. Nicholas channel: S. Nicholas channel.
On the north side it is deepest, being come in, the road is right before the
Town, in five and six fathom.

Thwart or over against the Haven of Yarmouth, goes also a channel through the
Holms, for to sail in through there coming to the southwards, then bring
Southon on the north side of the Haven, the great tree betwixt Northen and that
flat little house or Castle, sail in right with them, and keep these marks so
standing, until that you be within the Holmes, within them lies a plate on
the starboard side, a little to the n. wards of the Haven, called the
Middle-ground, you may sail about it on both sides, on the inner side in five
fathom, but toward the Holms, or about to the eastwards of it, in eight and
nine fathom.

From Yarmouth to Winterton the coast lies n. and by w. and n. n. w. two
leagues.

If you will sail from Yarmouth forth through within the banks to the n.
wards, sail along by the land, and keep the sounding of the shore in five,
six, and seven fathom, until that you have the two fire-beakons (which stand
a little to the northwards of the Castor) one in the other, sail then right
with them, either by day or by night (in the night there is fired upon them)
you shall so run over a flat, through betwixt two buys, which lie each of them
upon a tail of a sand, sail boldly in with the foresaid fire-beakons, until
that you come again near the shore, in five or six fathom, being come by the
shore, run then again along by it, and keep the sounding thereof as before, all
along until you come before Winterton.

Thwart of Winterton runs off a dangerous riffe, which is dangerous to sail
about by night, Riffe of Witerton, or Winterton Nesse.
if men do come too near it, which is upon the end so steep, that (in three
fathom, or two fathom and a half) you shall not be a ships length off from it,
but when as you (coming from the southwards) keep your self in six or seven
fathom, then you cannot sail too near to it. To the s. wards of that riffe
upon the land, stands a fire-tower which is very good to be known, with a
fire-beakon, and also a little white house, when these come one in the other,
then you are thwart of the point of the riffe.

To the northwards of this riffe upon the Land, stand two white fire-beakons,
whereupon there is fired by night, for to avoid this riffe. When as you come
thwart of the point, then are these also one in the other, so that these do
serve for thwart marks, and the other to the southwards of them, for long
marks, for those that will sail about it from the southwards. Coming from the
n. wards along the shore, in five or six fathom, until you come by the
fire-beakons, upon the n. side, you must keep somewhat off from the shore,
before they come one in the other, or else you should run on against the riffe.
When they are one in the other they stand s. w. and by west from you, and when
as the high fire-beakon to the southwards of Winterton, comes to be s. w.
somewhat more westerly from you, then you are thwart of the point of the riffe:
you may not also run about far within that riffe, for then you should lightly
be foul to the grounds to the eastwards of it, especially when you come from
the northwards, for there it is not very wide betwixt them both.

From Winterton to Haesbrough point, the course lies n. w. three leagues.

Betwixt Haesbrough and the Admirals house stands a ruinous Tower upon the
strand, when as you keep it and the steeple of Haesbrough one in the other,
coming from the northwards, then you run right upon the point of the foresaid
riffe. Four leagues without the land lies Winterton sand, the s. end thereof
lies about e. and the n. end n. e. from Winterton.

Thwart of Admirals house, not far from the shore, lies also a little plate
where no ships can go over, but if you go in fix or seven fathom, you cannot
sail too near it, you may also run through in two fathom, betwixt this plate
and the land.

From Haesbrough to Cromer, the Coast lies along north-west and by west, and
west-north-west, three or four leagues.

Of the Depths and Showlds about these Plates, and in what Depths men may see
the Land.
Five or six Leagues n. and by e. and n. n. e. from the n. Forland, or from
Marget, lies a bank called Kentish Knock, upon it is three fathom water, being
by it you may even see the Land from below.

Five Leagues n. e. from this bank it is twenty fathom deep.

N. e. and by n. from the North Forland, nine or ten Leagues, and about e. from
the Naze, eight leagues into the sea, lies a bank called the Galloper, of
five, six, and seven fathom depth.

The Westrocks is a stony ground, lying between the Court and Longsand, where
is no more then two fathom water at a half flood.

Without that sand, or Harwich, five Leagues from the Naze it is 20. and 22.
fathom deep, being there you may see the Land.

Thwart of Orfordnes you may see the Land from below, in two and twenty fathom.

Five or six Leagues without Leystaff and Yarmouth, s. e. and by e. into sea,
it is 27. and 28. fathom deep, there you may see the Land.

Four leagues e. and by s. from Land, without the Holms of Yarmouth, lies a
bank called the Newsand, which is not deeper then two fathom.

E. n. e. at least seven Leagues from Land, thwart of Yarmouth, it is 15.
fathom, the ground red gross sand, with little round stones, being there you
may even see the Land from below.

Thwart of Winterton and Cromer, seven or eight leagues from the Land, it is 18
and 19 fathom deep, and there you may see the Land.

Winterton sand lies 4 or five leagues from land. n. e. from Winterton.

What Moon makes High Water at these places.
At the North Forland a north and south Moon makes High Water.

Within the Thames a s. and by e. Moon.

Before the Thames, at Harwich and Orfordnes, a s. s. e. Moon.

At Leystaff and Yarmouth, a s. s. e. Moon makes High Water.

Without the banks of Yarmouth, and before Cromer, a s. e. Moon makes full sea.

Betwixt the Banks of Harwich, and the Holmes of Yarmouth, the flood falls s.
and the ebb n.

Thwart of the banks of Winterton and Cromer, the flood falls s. s. e. and
the ebb n. n. w.

Of the Tides, and Courses of the Streams.
From the n. Forland the flood falls to the Roculvers, and over the Brakes w.
s. w. and w. and by s.

Without about Goodwin, toward Kentish Knock, the flood falls n. and by w.
and n. n. w. there comes the flood also against it from the n. wards, and meet
one another by the Gallopper, with very great rippling, and noise (whereof this
bank is also called the Gallopper) and falls to the westwards, into the sands
and channels, and also to the eastwards toward Flanders.

Betwixt the n. Forland and Orfordnes, the stream falls without the sands, s.
and by e. and s. s. e.

When you are to the n. wards of the Gallopper, then you can reckon no ebb,
then that which runs along England to the n. wards, the streams fall there
all along the Coasts. To the s. wards of the Gallopper, the ebb goes to the
contrary, to the s. wards, and the flood to the n. wards.

Courses and Distances.
From the n. Forland to the n. end of Good wine, the Course is s. and by e. One
great league. From the n. Forland to Kentish Knock, n. e. and by e. and n. n.
e. 4 or 5 l. From thence to the Orfordnes n. 12. l. From the n. Forland to the
Gallopper, n. e. and by n. 9. l. From the Gallopper to Orfordnes n. n. w. 9 or
10. l. From the n. Forland to the Wielings, the Course is e. somewhat
northerly, about 27. l. From the n. Forland to the Mase, the Course is e. n. e.
or somewhat more easterly, about 33. l. From the n. Forland to the Tessel, or
Marsdiep, n. 45. l. From the Naze or Harwich to the Mase, e. 29. l. From
Orfordnes to Tessel, e. n. e. 39. l. From yarmouth to Leystaff, to Waloheren or
the Wicklings southeast, and s. e. and by s. 38. or 40. l. From the point of
Cromer or Schield, to the Tessel, the Course is e. 40. or 42. l.
Of the Heights of these Lands.
The North Forland lies in 51 degrees. 25. min. Orfordnes lies in 52 degrees. 12 min.
The Second Demonstration.
In which The Coasts of England are set forth, between Cromer and Orkney.
THe land lies from Cromer to Bornum first w. n. w. and w. and by n. and then
west, and west and by s. 9. or 10. leagues.

From Cromer to Blakeney it is three or four leagues. Blakeney.
At Blakeney stands a high steeple, which you may see along far over the
Land, when it comes to the little steeple, then you have the first buy of the
channel, which lies at the s. end of the Pole, which is a sand at the w. side
of the Channel of Blakeney, go from the first buy to the other, and along by
them, until you come within the Haven; this is a Tide-Haven, where men do lie
dry at low water.

Four leagues to the westwards of Blakeney lies Wels, Pol and Pyper.
betwixt them both lies the foresaid showld, called the Poll and Pyper, there
it is showld a far off at Sea. At the west end of this showld, goes in the
Deep of Wels, the beakons that you must sail in along by, stand all along by
the Pyper. When Hoebrom stands east-south-west from you, then you are to the
westwards of the Pyper, thwart of it is good road in six fathom. Wells.
Wels lies then southeast from you, and the trees stand then also against the
steeple, then you may sail open into the Haven of Wells, along by the foresaid
beakons.

Betwixt Wels and Bornum lies a bank, you may ride under it in five or six
fathom, at half flood there is upon it no more then two fathom water.

He that will sail into Bornum, Bornum.
must go in at high water, and he must bring the steeple against the
Black-house, and sail so in by the beakons, leaving them on the larboard side.
These are all Tyde-havens.

From Bornum to Chapel the course is west-southwest two leagues, Chapel.
to the northwards of it lies the Sonck, which is a sand that falls dry at
low water. You may sail about it on both sides of the Sonck unto Lin. The
Sonck.


For to sail into the Easter channel of Lyn, Easter channel of Lyn.
then sail about to the eastwards of the Sonck, and bring the wood of trees,
over the point of Sitsein or Suytson, and Chapel east from you, then go in
s. e. and by s. and you shall find the first buy, then in s. and by w. and s.
s. w. and by little and little more westerly, until you come about the point,
there the buys and beakons shall show you the way.

When you come about the point, then you may run through the sands, into the
northern channel, and sail out again by the same into sea, by the buys and
marks that are thereof. This norther channel lies into sea n. e. and n. e.
and by east, and is very well buyed and beakoned.

You may also sail into the westwards of the Sonck, Wester channel of Lyn.
to wit, south and by east in all along by it, and so run to the first buy, and
then from the buy along by the beakons unto Lyn before the Town. When you
come from the eastwards, you may well run through within the Sonck, along by
the land, close along by Chapel, and in south and by west unto the foresaid
first buy.

For to sail from Cromer or Blakeney, Boston deep.
to Boston deep, you must go on west and by north, until you come by the land
betwixt the Hommor and Lagernesse. From the Sonck lies a long bank, called the
Flats, The Flats.
north into sea a league, which at low water falls dry at diverse places. You
run with the foresaid west and by North Course (when you are by Cromer or
Blakeney a little without the land) along without, or to the northwards of this
bank, at high water, you may well go over it, the ground on the east side
goes up flat and plain, run boldly to it without fear, until you come in
four or three fathom, he that uses his lead can take no hurt of it, but on the
inner side, that is, on the west side, it is very steep, so soon as you be over
the showldest, you shall get suddenly deep water, and good sand ground, under
it, or within it, it is good riding for easterly winds.

For to sail into Bostom deep, For to sail into Boston deep.
through within the Knock, or Elleknock, you must keep the sounding of the
shore in four or five fathom, so long until that the point of Lagarnes be
west-north-west from you. Betwixt the shore and Elleknock remains at low
water five fathom in the midst of the channel, Elleknock.
but Elleknock falls dry at low water. When that Lagernesse is west-northwest
frrom you, then go on south-east, through betwixt Elleknock and the showld
(which shoots off from the shore to the westwards Lagernesse (until that you
get again depth of six or seven fathom, in this going over remains at low
water no more then two fathom, but it flows there about three fathom up and
down. Being over it, Longsand.
then go on south-west along betwixt Longsand and the showld, which lies off
from the shore, there it is deep betwixt them both, nine and ten fathom, you
may sound both sides (as well the showld which lies off from the Land, as
Longsand) in five fathom, but the flat is somewhat steeper then Longsand.

For to sail without Elleknock into Bostons deep, coming (as is before said)
to the west land, Ingoldmils.
you must look out for the two steeples of Ingoldmils, standing somewhat to the
northwards of Lagernesse, bring them one in the other, and then they shall
stand about north-north-west from you, keep them one in the other, and go on
south-east, until that the trees upon the point by west Lagernesse, come
without the point of Lagernesse, and then you run through betwixt Elleknock and
Dogshead that is a showld without Elleknock) when these aforesaid trees come a
handspikes length past, Dogs head.
or to the eastwards of the point of Lagernesse, then go on south-west and
then you run right into the deep, betwixt Elleknock and Longsand, and so you
shall find betwixt Elleknock and the point of Longsand, five fathom depth,
being past Elleknock, it will be eight, nine, and ten fathom deep.

If you will sail out of the sea into Boston deep, and not along by the Land,
as is before said, then bring the foresaid trees a handspikes length without
the point of Lagernesse, which shall then stand from you about west-south-west,
sail in so right with them, until that the high-land within Lagernesse or
Winfleet begin to come even without the point of Lagernesse, which shall then
be from you somewhat more northerly then west, then you are within the point of
Longsand. Or else there stand three little houses on the seaside, about half
ways betwixt Lagernesse and Ingoldmils, when they come to be north-west from
you, and those foresaid trees without the point, then you are also within the
point of Longsand, go in then s. w. betwixt Elleknock and Longsand, as
aforesaid. A little past Lagernesse lies a showld or plate about the midst
in the fareway, but nearest Longsand when the trees upon the point to the
southwards of Winfleet come in the second valley of the high-land within
Winfleet, then you are right thwart of this showld, edge therefore to one side
or other, rather toward the showld, there is widest, keep boldly the sounding
of the showld, and run southwest along by it, until that the steeple of Boston
come over the steeple of Butterwyke, that is also a flat steeple (but smaller
then that of Boston) standing in a wood of trees, Butterwyke.
thwart of it runs the showld somewhat off with a point, being past it, go
on west-south-west, all along by the foresaid showld, until that the great
steeple of Boston come over the second Mill; there it is good anchoring by the
west shore in five fathom at low water. He that comes there at low water, must
ankor and stay for the tide until half flood, before that you may not sail
further in from thence, and then you shall not also find more then two fathom
upon the showldest.

From thence to Deep lies in along by the beakons about south to the third
beakon, being past that w. s. w. and then by little and little more westerly
and northerly, but run all along by the beakons, leaving them on the starboard
side, at last on north into the River.

Upon the point of the River stands a house, which is a sheep house, before
that you come by it, it seems as if there were no opening, by reason that it
is all even green land, run in by it, all along by the land, being past it, the
River does open it self. Being come within the points, you must run in betwixt
two dikes, a league up, until you come before the Town, in the River it is at
half flood every where deep enough. When as that you come a little within the
houses of the Town, on the larboard side, there you must let fall your ankor,
and stay until that the water begin to fall, then you shall have flood enough
for to drive to the Key, there you must fast with one Cable, it does not begin
to ebb there, before that water be fallen three foot.

An east and west Moon makes in Boston deep the highest water, but before the
Town an east and by south and east-south-east Moon. He that comes from Boston,
and will sail out at the deep with a high water, let him look out for the
foresaid high-land within Lagernesse, when that comes behind the point of
Lagernesse, then he may boldly set his course whether he desires to be, either
to the eastwards, northeastwards, or northwards, there is no thing then that
can hurt him.

From Lagernesse to Hommer it is about seven leagues, most north, betwixt them
both, about a league to the southwards of the Hommer lies a place called
Saltfleet-haven, a little to the northwards of a sharp steeple called Wilgrip.
Plate by Saltfleet Haven.
Thwart of that foresaid Saltfleet-haven, about an English mile from the
shore, lies a bank, or sand-plate, not very great, which at low water falls
almost dry, you must run about without it, and leave it lying toward the land
from you, but yet for need you may also sail through within it.

For to sail into the Hommer coming from the northwards, For to sail into the
Hommer.
you must sail along by the shore, and run about by the north point, but
coming by the point you must keep somewhat off from the shore in four or five
fathom, for to avoid a little tail, which lies off from the point, being
about it, run to the little Island, which lies a little by west that foresaid
n. point.

If coming from the southwards you desire to sail to the Hommer, then bring
the Pawle steeple (which is a high sharp steeple standing on the north side of
the Hommer) a little by south the north point of the Hommer, or over that
foresaid little Island, and sail so right in with it, until that you come by
that little Island, being come by it, leave it on the starboard side, and run
in close by it, for to avoid a great sand called the Bull, which lies off from
the s. shore almost unto that little Island. When that you come within that
little Island, then bring the two Beakons (which stand upon that little Island)
one in the other, keep them so standing, and sail so on the westwards toward
Grimsby, you leave the buy upon the Bull, lying then on the larboard side, and
run along to the northwards of it: In this fair way it is seven and eight
fathom deep. You may not come nearer the Bull, Road before Grimsby.
then in six fathom. Before Grimsby you may ankor in three or four fathom at
low water, it flows there at least three fathom up and down, a
west-south-west, and east north-east Moon, makes before the Hommer, the
highest water. Within the foresaid little Island, at the n. point of the
Hommer, you may ankor in three or four fathom, there lie commonly ships that
are bound out, and tarry for the wind.

From Grimsby in along to Hull, the Course is w. n. w. to the end of the bank,
or ballast plate, which you must leave lying on the n. side. On the s. side
there lies also a little plate, there stands commonly a Beakon upon it, that
you must leave on the larboard side, and run along to the n. wards of it, being
past it, you may run along by the south shore in three fathom. The fair way
there is four, five, and six, and thwart of the said Beakon, eight and ten
fathom. When you come to the end of the bank, you must edge up to the w. wards
about by the point on the s. side, but there runs off a Flat which you must
avoid. Being a little about that point, you shall see the Town of Hull lie
before you, there you may ankor before it in six, seven, or eight fathom: an e.
and w. Moon makes full sea before Hull. He that will ankor upon the Ballast
plate, let him bring the flat steeple, which stands a little to the n. wards,
or the e. wards of Hull to the high point of Pael, and keep them so standing
until that he come to the Plate, there it is best for to ankor upon it.

From the n. point of the Hommer, Flambrough head.
called Spurn-head to Flamborough-head, the Course is n. and by w. eight or
nine leagues, betwixt them it is showld water of six, seven, and eight fathom
deep. Flamborough-head has many white spots, and chalk hills, especially upon
the n. side toward Fyley. Flamborough has a Head or Piere. A league to the w.
wards of it, on the s. side, lies a little Town called Burlington, which has
also a Piere. Burlington.
You may ankor there in the buy in six or seven fathom.

Three leagues by west Flambourgh head lies Fyley, Fyley.
in a round bay to the southwards of a point that lies out, which has a Piere
or Head, where you may lie within it, but it falls there dry at low water.

Without the head of Fyley lies a rock under water, Fyley bride.
called Fyley bridge, betwixt it and the Piere you may well lie afloat with a
ship of an hundred lasts, in five fathom at low water, and have shelter for a
n. e. and e. wind.

From Scarbrough the Coast lies along by Robbin-hoods bay, until before
Whidbye, Robbinhoods bay. Whidbie.
most n. w. but past Whidbie the land falls in w. n. w. and by little and
little more westerly unto the Tees.

Robbinhoods bay is a good road for a s. s. w. and w. wind, there men lie in
seven or eight fathom.

Whidbie is a tide-haven, which falls dry at low water, at the e. side of the
Haven, runs off a riffe of rocks, whereof you must take heed. For to sail
in there, you must run in betwixt the two Beakons, until that you come in
betwixt the two lands, and ankor there.

From Whidbie to the Tees the Coast lies most w. n. w. and w. and by n. about
seven leagues, Huntleyfoot.
betwixt both lie Huntleyfoot, and Redcliffe. Huntleyfoot is a high hill, lying
on the seaside, about four leagues to the eastwards of the Tees. Redcliffe.
Redcliffe lies about half ways betwixt Huntleyfoot and the Tees, it is a
cliffe of such very red earth, that when the sun does shine against it, it is
to see to like red cloth: these two are very good marks for to know this Coast
by.

Close to the southwards of the mouth of the Tees lie three Riffes, which lie
about a half league e. n. e. into sea, which are very foul and stony, and
fall dry at low water, upon the n. side they are very flat, so that you may
sound about by them in five, six, and seven fathom, but on the s. side are so
steep that coming near them, and sounding in thirteen and fourteen fathom, you
should be upon them, before you should be able to heave the lead the second
time.

A league and half to the n. wards of the Tees lies Hartlepoole, upon a point
that lies out almost like an Island. For to go in there you must run in to a
bight to the southwards of the Town within a head, until you come against the
Town, there you shall lie dry at low water.

About half ways betwixt Hartlepoole and the Tees, Hartlepoole.
runs off also a riffe of rocks thwart from the shore, a good ways into
sea, come no nearer it then five or six fathom. There stands a Mill to the
northwards of the Town Hartlepoole, if you keep that to the west side of the
Town Hartlepoole, then you cannot sail upon that foresaid riffe, but if you
bring the foresaid Mill a little to the westwards of the Town, so that you may
plainly see through betwixt the Mill and the Town, then you shall not fail to
sail upon that riffe.

For to sail into Teese coming from the northwards, For to sail into the Teese.
you must observe these marks following. A good ways to the northwards of
Hartlepoole, a little to the southwards of Sonderland, and a little within the
Land, lie upon the high-land two Hammocks, one close to the other, very good to
be known, The Paps.
of fashion like women's breasts, called the Paps, keep these two Hammocks even
without the point of Hartlepoole, which shall then stand from you n. w. and by
n. and sail so on to the southwards, and you shall fall before the Teese, and
shall not sail too near the sands that lie out before the mouth of the Teese,
and lie off about a half league into sea.

On both sides, as well on the n. side, as the s. side of the Teese, stand two
little white houses for fire-beakons: If you come from the n. wards, and get
sight of them, then bring first the two southermost one in the other, which
shall then stand from you s. and by e. sail right in with them, until that
the other two, which stand on the n. side of the Teese, come also one in the
other, then leave them on the s. side, and sail in right with them that stand
on the n. side, and so you shall run in amidst the channel, there is upon the
bar, or showldest, at low water, no more then five foot, but it flows there
with a common tide, at least two fathom, up and down. A s. w. Moon makes
there full sea. If when you come from the south wards, you will sail into the
Teese, then bring the innermost of the two fire-beakons (which stand on the n.
side) at least a handspikes length, or the length of a capstone bar, to the
n. wards of the other, and run so w. wards toward them, until that the two
fire-beakons on the s. side are one in the other, then sail in right with
them, as has been said, until that two fire-beakons on the n. side come one
in the other: when you have them one in the other, run in right with them,
until that you come by the n. shore, and then close along by it.

When as that you come so far in past the first fire-bea-beakon, to wit, that
you may see Hartlepoole betwixt the two fire-beakons, there you may ankor in
three, four, or five fathom, or when Hartlepoole comes betwixt the foresaid
fire-beakons, then go s. s. w. until that you come by the s. shore, there it
is also good ankoring. Further it is Pilots water unto Stockton, for there
within, the Deeps do shift oftentimes, and that in short time, three, four, or
five times in a summer.

He that will sail in there with northerly winds, and a flood, must reckon
well his tides, for the flood falls strong to the southwards over the
grounds, and should there be lightly carried behind the bank to the s. wards of
the buy, which lies upon the point of the bank.

Besides this foresaid channel, For to sail in to the new channel.
there runs yet another channel through the grounds, which lie off from the
n. point of the Teese. For to sail in there, you must take mark of the two
high lands within the land, to the s. wards of the Teese, bring them within a
handspikes length one of another, or bring the Paps to the w. side of
Hartlenope, then shall also the two foresaid high lands come within a
handspikes length near one to the other, sail in right with them, and so you
shall run right into that new channel, along through that aforesaid land, and
come against the buy (upon the sands, on the s. side of the Deep) again in the
right fareway. When that you get again deeper water, or have the two
fire-beakons on the n. side one in the other, then go in toward them, and
further, as has been before said.

About seven leagues to the n. wards of the Teese, lies the River of
Sonderland, a little to the n. wards of the Paps, which are very good marks for
to know the land by thereabouts. When the Paps are s. s. w. from you, and that
you are about an English mile from the land, then you are right before the
River of Sonderland, the ground is there about indifferent clean, but somewhat
stony, you may ankor there in four, five, and six fathom. On both sides, as
well on the n. point, as the s. point of the River, it is stony. On the n.
point stands a Beakon in the water, there you must run in, within a little
ships length along by it, being past that, you shall get deeper water, to wit,
a fathom and a half, and two fathom at low water, but upon the bar
remains no more then three foot: with a common spring and high water there is
about two fathom and a half, or a little more.

After this aforesaid first depth of a fathom and a half, Sonderland.
or two fathom, you shall meet again with a stony floor, about three ships
length broad, upon it is at high water about eleven or twelve foot deep,
according as the Tides shall run, being over it there, it is again deeper. A
little past that is a narrow place, where a long ship shall scarce be able to
wend within it, it is wide enough, and every where good ground.

From the Teese to Tinmouth the Course n. n. w. eight or nine leagues. Tow
leagues to the fourth wards of Tinmouth lies the point of Sonderland, but
close to the s. wards of Tinmouth goes in the river of Newcastle. From the
point of Tinmouth shoots off a ledge of rocks, you must sail in by it,
leaving it on the starboard side. The marks for to sail into the River, are
two fire-towers, or fire-beakons, which stand upon the n. shore, bring them one
in the other, or the innermost (that is the highest) a little to the n. wards
of the outermost or lowest, and sail so right in along by the aforesaid ledge
of rocks on the n. side, and so you shall have upon the showldest two fathom
at half flood: a s. w. Moon makes there full sea. The s. shore is flat, you
may lead it in there with the sounding pole for ships that go not deep, in ten
foot at half flood. When you come within, run all along by the n. shore,
until past the little Town Sheels, edge then over to the other shore, until
you come through the crooked reach, there the river lies up again to the n.
wards, and then to the s. wards, to Hawke-bil, and about by it to the Town
Newcastle.

Seven or eight leagues to the n. wards of Tinmouth, Bly.
lies the Cock Island, betwixt them both about half ways lies a River called
Bly, where the French men do much sail to fetch Coal. From the n. point of
this River runs off a ledge of rocks a great shot of a cast piece about s.
e. into the sea, but the s. side, and the Coast to the s. wards of it is very
clean and sand-strand. Upon the s. point stand two Beakons, if you will sail in
there, bring them one in the other, and sail right in with them, and then you
can take no hurt of the foresaid ledge or riffe of the n. point. When that you
come by or thwart of the outermost of the two foresaid Beakons, you shall see
there by it another smaller Beakon, that stands upon a little ledge of rocks,
that shoots off from the s. point, leave that on the larboard side, and run
in along close about n. wards of it. The foresaid ledge of rocks on the n. side
remains at high water (a good ways from the land, and also at a spring tide)
above water, within it is a bight, there it is good lying for a n. or n. e.
wind, and there remains at low water two fathom depth. In the mouth of the
River it is with an ordinary tide, and high water, about two fathom deep, or
somewhat more, and it flows there two fathom up and down, so that at low
water it falls almost altogether dry.

The Cocker Island is a very little Island, Cocker Island
and not high, it lies about a half league from the land, you may come to an
ankor in it for an e. s. and s. e. wind, but the wind coming to the n. wards of
the e. makes there a bad road, for you must lie betwixt the Island and the
maine land, where you have no shelter for a n. wind. On the s. side of the
Island the ground is foul, and a little to the s. wards of the Island runs
off a foul ledge of rocks from the shore until thwart or past the Island. He
that comes from the s. wards must keep the Coast of Bambrough without the
Island, or else he should not fail to sail upon the point of that foresaid
ledge.

Betwixt the ledge and the Island it is also very narrow, so that a man
standing at low water mark upon the rocks of this ledge, should almost be able
to cast with a stone to the Island. For to sail in there, take heed unto these
marks hereafter described: There stands a house upon the seaside, which is a
Salt-kettle, and also a Castle somewhat further in within the land, which does
show it self high enough, bring them one in the other, and then they shall
stand somewhat more n. then w. from you, and run in so right with them, and so
you shall run in amidst the channel, between both, being come within, edge up
behind the Island, and ankor there in five or six fathom. Staples.


About this Island there run also many more diverse little Rivers into the land,
but they fall most dry at low water.

From the the Cocket Island to the Staples, the Course is n. n. w. eight or
nine leagues. The Staples, that are high Islands and rocks right to the e.
wards of Bambrough, lying at least three leagues from the land n. e. into sea,
a little to the n. wards of them, lies the Holy Island, Holy Island.
to the s. wards or the w. wards of the Holy Island is a Bay, where you may lie
landlockt almost for all winds, against the Castle is the best road: you may
also run in there from the s. wards, through betwixt the Staples and the maine
land.

Betwixt the Staples and the Holy Island, lie two sunken rocks, which at low
water come very near, Goldstone Plough.
even within the water, the westermost toward the Holy Island, is called the
gold stone, the eastermost by the Staples, is called the Plough. For to avoid
them when you will sail through betwixt the Staples and the Holy Island,
whether you come from the s. wards or the n. wards, then bring the steeple of
Toustenbrough over the Castle of Bambrou, and keep them so standing, and then
you shall run through betwixt them both, this channel lies so through n. e.
and s. w. From the outermost end of the Staples to S. Abbens head, the Course
is n. w. seven or eight leagues.

From Holy Island to S. Abbens head it is n. n. w. seven or eight leagues. S.
Abbens head.


To the n. wards of S. Abbens head men do run in unto Lies and to Edenbrough
in Scotland.

S. Abbens head, and the Island Bas lie e. and w. four leagues asunder. The
Island May and S. Abbens head, n. w. and s. e. four great leagues. May and Bas
lie one from the other, s. w. and by w. and n. e. and by e. three leagues and a
half. The Bas.
The Bas is a high round Rock, clean round about, which you may sail along by
on both sides. Betwixt the Rock and the s. shore it is ten and twelve fathom
deep, but the common fair way is along to the n. wards of it. Between S.
Abbens head and the Bas, it is most part a clean Coast, but without ankor
ground. The Island May is greater then the Bas, and also very clean round
about, Island May.
except on the e. side, there it is foul.

From S. Abbens head along to the n. w. of the Bas, the course is w. and by
Nore, and w. n. w. four leagues, and from n. by the Bas to Inchkieth w. and w.
and by n. about five leagues. Inchkieth.
Between the Bas and Inchkieth by the s. shore lie many rocks, little Islands,
and foul grounds, where at diverse places is road, but not to be used, but by
them which are there very well acquainted. Inchkieth and the Island May lie s.
w. and by w. and n. e. and by e. seven great leagues asunder. Inchkieth is
somewhat a long small Island, a league to the n. wards of it lies an out-point
on the n. Coast called Kingornesse, Kingornesse.
before it and about it lie some little Rocks under water, but a little to the
e. wards of the point is good ankor ground, and road for westerly winds.
Between that point and the Island May, or the point of Fifines on the n. shore
lie diverse little havens, whereof some of them do also yield out Coals, but
are little or nothing used by the Hollanders. On both sides of the Inchkieth is
good ground, and good lying, as well for w. or e. winds.

From Inchkieth to Lies it is s. e. a league. Lies.
Before Lies about half an English mile from the shore lies a Rock, upon
which stands a Mast (with a cross or some other thing of wood upon the top
of it) for a Beakon. At high water the sea flows over it, and at low water it
falls dry. With a spring tide at low water men may go on foot to it. From the
e. side of that Rock lies off a Riffe almost unto Inchkieth. You may also run
through to the s. wards of Inchkieth, betwixt that foresaid riffe on the s.
shore, but it is not to be done but by them which are there exceeding well
acquainted, there it is altogether full of rocks and foul ground. When as you
sail in to the n. wards of the Inchkieth you must leave the foresaid Mast on
the larboard side, and run about to the n. wards of it, and then toward the s.
shore, and ankor about half an English mile by w. Lies, and also half an
English mile from the shore, in six, seven, or eight fathom. Lies is the
Haven of Edinburgh, a tide Haven which falls dry at low water.

From Lies to Queens Ferry there lie on both sides many Rocks, some above and
some under water. Queens Ferry
In the Narrow before Queens Ferry lies a little Island called Inchgrave,
which you must run along to the n. wards of, on the s. side it is with a stone
bank (where men may go over at low water) fast to the maine land: along to the
n. wards of it is clean and deep. Within that little Island lie Caryn and other
places more where men do lade Coals.

Under the e. side of the point to the n. wards of Queens Ferry, is good road
in two, three, or four fathom, according as you lie far from the shore.

A league n. from the Island May lies the point of Fifsnes, Fifsnes.
lying from S. Abbens head n. w. and by n. five great leagues, from thence to
Dondee it is n. n. w. five leagues. Dondee is a good Haven, Dondee.
which goes in betwixt two high lands, being within men do ankor before the
Town. Farther in upon the River, lies another Town called S. John's, which you
may go up to at high water. S. John's.


Between the point of Fifsnes and Dondee lies also the Baye of S. Andrews,
there is also good ankor ground. S. Andrews.
Four great leagues n. and by e. from the point of Fifsnes, and n. e. from S.
Andrews, Inchkap.
lies a great Rock called the Inchkap, which the sea flows over at high
water, and at low water it falls so dry that the Fishermen go upon it.

Seven leagues to the n. wards of Dondee lies Monros, Monrosse.
a good Haven. First you must sail in there amidst the Channel, and then edge
up to n. wards, and ankor before the Town.

Betwixt Dondee and Monrosse lies an out point called Redhead, Redhead.
about a great league to the s. wards of Monrosse. There stands a high Tower
upon the Land called Albrot.

From Monrosse to Stone-bay, Stonebaey.
or De Torre, the Course is n. e. and by n. four leagues. This is a deep bay,
and a good Haven for those that are bound to the s. wards, where men may lie
land-lockt with many ships.

Three leagues to the n. wards of it lies Aberdine; Aberdine.
in this Havens mouth it is three fathom deep. The w. point is somewhat foul,
therefore you must run in by thee. land, until you come within the Haven, and
ankor before the Town in four or five fathom. Up to the n. wards is a great
Bay, but is showld on both sides. There goes through a little Creek toward
old Aberdine, which is an old ruinous Town.

From Aberdine to booknesse the Course is n. n. e. 12 or 13 leagues. Booknes.
Betwixt them both lies a tide-haven. Booknesse is a high Hill, and lies upon
the s. side of the point. To the n. wards of Booknesse lies a Bay as a Haven,
called Spy, Spy.
or Spilaers, from thence the land lies in w. and w. s. w. unto the Haven of
Rosse or Luvernes.

To the n. wards of Rosse lies an out point called Cape Terbate, right in the
bottom of the bay betwixt Catnes and Booknes, distant from Booknes about 19 or
20 leagues. Ceterbate.
In this Bay are many Havens and Sounds, which are deep enough for to come into
with great ships. It is from thence to Catnes 26 leagues n. e. and by n. Catnes
lies from Booknes n. w. and n. w. and by n. 21 or 22. leagues. From Booknes
unto the outermost Orkanes it is n. and n. and by w. two and thirty or three
and thirty leagues.

The Orkneyes are one and thirty Islands in number, first Wayets or Elhoy,
which lies next to Scotland, five leagues about the point. About n. n. e. off
from the point of Catnes, lie two little Islands, Pits and Pichlantsscare there
you may run through to the w. wards betwixt Elhoy and Scotland.

To the n. wards of them lies an Island called Heynda, with another Island
called Platta, to the n. wards of Platta lies Mayland or Ponoma. On the n.
side of this great Island are all the Havens where the ships come to.

Upon the e. side of this great Island lies another Island called Kabunsa, to
the n. wards of it lies another Island, at the n. e. point of the great
Island, you may also run through there toward Papewester, and leave Sand a lie
on the starboard side.

Close to Papewester lies Fara, to the s. wards of it is Sirza, to the e.
wards of Sirza and Fara lie two Islands, in the midst of all these Islands,
called Eeda and Chapnoza.

Sanda lies to the n. wards of all these Islands, but Papa and Stronza lie to
the s. wards of Sanda.

To the e. wards of Stronza lies an Island called Culstella, that is the
eastermost Island of all, the northermost is called Ronalze or Northernanse.

Eleven or twelve leagues n. w. from the great Island lie two Rocks, the one
under water, and the other above water, he that comes from the w. wards must
take heed of them.

Of the Depths and Showlds about these Plates, and in what Depths men may see
the Land.
Thwart of Winterton and Cromer, 7 or eight leagues from land, it is eighteen
and nineteen fathom deep, and there you may see the land. N. e. and n. e. and
by n. from Cromer, lies a Bank, whereupon remains at low half flood no more
water them four fathom, from thence you may see the land indifferent well.

N. and by e. from Blakenry lies a Bank whereupon remains at half flood no
more water then five fathom. In eighteen fathom thereabouts you may see the
land. From thence to the point of Chapel it is all showld.

About n. n. w. and n. and by w. from Winterton-sand lies the bank before
Crommer, five leagues without the Coast.

To the n. wards of the Hommer of Hull you may see the Land in twenty five
fathom.

Flambrough-head men may see the land in five and thirty fathom.

Scarbrough men may see from below in five and forty fathom.

Of the Tides, and Courses of the Streams. about these foresaid places.
Before Cromer a s. e. Moon makes high water.

At Blakeney, Wels, Bornum, and Lyn, an e. and w. Moon.

Before the Hommer of Hull an c. n. e. and w. s. w. Moon.

From Blakeney to Flambrough-head the flood falls s. e. and the ebb n. w.

At Flambrough and Fyley, in the Peer, a w. s. w. Moon makes full sea.

At Scarbrough and Robbin-hoods bay a s. w. and n. c. Moon.

In the Teese and at Hartlepoole also, a s. w. and n. e. Moon.

Before the River of Newcastle, a s. w. and n. e. Moon makes also the highest
water.

Thwart of Flambrough-head, Scarbrough, the Teese, and also thwart of the River
of Newcastle, the flood falls s. e. and the ebb n. w.

To the n. wards of the Teese, the flood falls s. s. e. along the land, and
from the Teese to Scarbrough s. e. and by e.

On the Coast betwixt Tinmouth and S. Abbens head, a s. e. and n. e. Moon
makes High Water.

At Lies in the Haven, a s. w. and by w. Moon, makes full sea.

The flood falls along these Coasts s. s. w. and the ebb n. n. w.

At Orknes and Booknes a s. w. and n. e. Moon makes high water.

The floods come about from behind Scotland, from the w. wards through betwixt
Fairhill and Orknes, and make there about full sea with a s. w. and n. e. Moon.

From Booknesse the flood falls s. along the Coast toward Lies, and the
ebb n. to the contrary.

In this fareway it is deep forty, fifty, and sixty fathom, in forty five and
fifty fathom you may see the Land. In this fareway in the summer the first
Herrings are caught.

How these Lands do lie one from the other, and from other Lands.
From Cromer to Blackney, w. n. w. 3 or 4 l. From Blackney to Bornum through
within the sand west 7 l. From Boruum to Chapel w. s. w. 2 l. From Chapel to
Elleknock, or the n. point of Bostondeep, the Course is n. w. and by n. 5 l.
From thence to the n. point of Cromer, n. and n. and by west 7 l. From the n.
point of Hommer to Flambrough head n. n. w. 9 l. From the point of Crommer or
Shield to the Tessel e. 40 or 42 l. From the n. point of the Crommer to the
Tessel e. and by s. and e. s. e. 60 l. From Flambrough-head to Fyley, n. w. 3
l. From Fyley to Scarbrough n. w. 2 l. From Scarbrough to Whidbie, n. w. and by
w. 5 l. From Whidbie to the Teese, the Course is first w. n. w. and afterward
w. and by n. 7 l. From the Teese to Tinmouth n. n. w. 8 or 9 l. From Whidbie to
Tinmonth, is n. w. and s. e. 16 l. From to Cocker Island n. n. w. 8 or 9 l.
From Tinmouth to Staples n. and by w. 16. l. From Staples to Barwick w. n. w. 3
l. From Barwick to S. Abbens head n. n. w. 5 l. From the Staples to S. Abbens
head n. w. 8 or 9 l. From S. Abbens head to the Bas, w. 4 l. From the Bas to
Inchkieth w. and w. and by n. 5 l. From S. Abbens head to the Island May, n. w.
4 l. From S. Abbens head to Fifines, n. w. and by n. 5 l. From Fiftines to
Dondee, n. n. w. 5 l. From Tinmouth to Scuytenes n. e. 104 l. From Tinmouth to
the Naze n. e. and by e. easterly, 130 l. From Tinmouth to the Scawe, e. n. e.
136 l. From Tinmouth to Holy land, e. and by s. easterly 106 l. From Fifines to
Stone-bay, n. and by e. 16 l. From Redhead to Monros n. w. 4 l. From Monros to
Stone-bay, n. e. and by n. 4 l. From Stone-bay to Booknes n. n. e. somewhat n.
16 l. From Aberdine to Booknes, n. n. e. 12 l. From Booknes to Phyloort, or
Spyloort, n. n. w. 3 l. From Phyloort to the point of Elgyn, west 10 l. From
the point of Elgyn to the Haven of Rosse, or Luvernesse, w. and by s. somewhat
southerely 7 l. From Cape de Terbate to Catnes, n. e. and by n. 16 l. From
Booknes to Elhoy, w. n. w. 5 l. From Booknes to Catnes, n. w. and n. w. and by
n. 21 l. From Booknes to the Orkanes, n. and by w. 26 l. From Booknes to
Hanglip, or the s. end of Hitland, n. and by e. 53 l. From Booknes or Scuytenes
e. and by n. 69 l. From Booknes to the Naze, e. somewhat s. 88 or 90 l. From
Booknes to Bovenbergen in Jutland, e. and by s. 104 l. From Booknes to Holy
land, s. e. and by e. easterly, 123 l. From Booknes to the Tessel, s. e.
southerly 125 l. From Booknes to the Holmes before Yarmouth, s. s. e. somewhat
easterly 96 l. From Aberdine to the Holmes before Yarmouth, southeast and by
south 93 l.
Heights.
Yarmouth lies in 52 degrees, 52 minutes. The n. point of the Hommer of Hull
in 53 d. 20 m. Flambrough-head lies in 54 d. 5 m. Scarbrough in 54 d. 12 m.
Tinmouth, or the River of Newcastle in 55 d. S. Abbens head in Scotland in 56
d. 12 m. Booknes lies in the height of 75 d. 50 m. Catnes in 58 d. 32 m. The
greatest or the outermost Island of the Orkneyes in 59 d. 8 m.
The Third Demonstration.
Wherein Are set forth the Coasts of Fairhill, Hitland, and the Islands
thereabout, as also the Island of Fero, and some Islands behind the Northwest
corner of Scotland.
THe Island Fairhill lies from the e. point of the Orkanes n. w. and from
Booknes n. and by w. about 37 leaguer. Fairhill.


On the w. side of Fairhil is at some places foul ground, but upon the s. e.
side is good ankor, there you may ankor every where.

Fulo lies from Fairehill n. w. and n. ten leagues, Fulo.
betwixt them both lies the southermost point of Hitland, lying from Fairhill
n. n. e. seven or eight leagues, and from Fulo e. and by s. four leagues.

The s. w. Coast of Hitland (to wit from the southermost point to the n. w.
point) lies northwest and by north, seven or eight leagues. On the same s. w.
side over against the Island Fulo lies a Sand-bay, where men may ankor, but on
the e. side of this bay it is somewhat foul. From that northwest or west point
off to the n. end, the land of Hitland lies north-east and south-west,
seventeen or eighteen leagues.

Two leagues to the n. wards of the foresaid w. point, lies the Haven of S.
Magnus, S. Magnus.
which is a broad Sound, within it is good ankor ground in sixteen or seventeen
fathom depth, according as you shall be far within the land. On the north side
lies a high Rock, which you mustrun in to the southwards of. And on the s.
side lies two or three Rocks, which you must leave on the starboard side, when
you sail in there.

Even to the eastwards, about the s. point of Hitland, lies a fair Sand-bay,
where you may ankor in twelve or thirteen fathom, from thence to Hanglip the
Course is n. e. somewhat westerly nine or ten leagues.

Betwixt Hanglip and the south point lies an Island, Hanglip.
which you must sail about on both sides, within it lies Hambrough Haven, or
the Scottish Haven, which is a lade place for the Hamburgers and Scots. There
lies also a high steep point to the s. wards of Hanglip, Hambrough Haven.
to the southwards of it men do run into Broad Sound, the chiefest Haven of
all Hitland, which is deep and has clean ground, there men do lie handlockt
for all winds.

From the Broad Sound lies a Sound in along to the northwards, Broad Sound.
through the land, which comes out again into the Sound to the northwards,
and so makes an Island of the land whereupon the high hill Hanglip lies. When
as you will sail in there from the northwards, that is, to the northwards of
Hanglip, you must run in nearest by the south shore, and edge to it betimes. In
this channel betwixt both lands lie two Islands or Rocks, the greatest lies
nearest the north shore, and the smallest nearest the south shore, betwixt
them both lies also a suncken Rock, which at low water is uncovered, and at
High water you may know it by the breaking upon it. When as you will sail in
here, you must leave the foresaid greatest Rock, with the suncken Rock, on the
starboard side, and the smallest Rock on the larboard side, there is upon the
showldest three fathom and a half water.

Within this Haven lie also two Havens at the n. point, which lie into the
land, where is good lying.

When as you will sail from this foresaid Haven through within unto the Broad
Sound, you shall meet scarce half ways with a Rock, from which lies off a
riffe toward the west shore, thwart of it you must run close along by the
west shore, for to avoid that riffe.

To the northwards of Hanglip, the land of Hitland lies n. n. and by e. and n.
n. e. at last north, and at some places you may sail in through Hitland,
especially to the northwards of Hanglip, where a fair broad Sound lies
northwest through, there is good ankor ground to find at some places, for those
that are there acquainted. From Hanglip to the n. e. point of Hitland, the
Course is n. n. e. ten leagues, there lie some out-rocks called the Out-scares.
From thence along to the n. point of Hitland, Out-scares.
the Course is n. about four leagues.

A little about the east point goes in a fair Haven called Bloem Sound, lying
in south-west. Bloem sound.
On the west side lies a long Rock, you must sail in to the eastwards of it,
and ankor a little within the Haven, it is there within all clean sand ground,
and good lying. Bloem sound lies in first (as has been said) south-south-west
afterward, south and south and by east, on both sides is good ankor ground,
there you may sail altogether through, and come out again through Jellesound
into sea, about the Island Fero.

The greatest and chiefest Islands of Fero, Names of the Islands of Fero.
are 12 in number: as Suydro, Satrdo, Moggenes, Wage, Stromo, Ostro, Calso,
Cuno, Bordo, Wydro, Sreyno, and Fulo.

The little Islands of Fero are ten, as Little Dymen, Stoer Dymen, Schuyvo,
Dalifles Hesden, Trallo, Colster, Moggesholme, the Monk, and the Bishop.
Besides these are yet some Rocks, and little Islands, to seven or eight in
number.

The southermost great Island, called Suydro, Suydro,
lies most south-rast, and north-west, about seven or eight leagues. At the s.
e. end of this Island lies a high Rock, called the Monk, Monk Somby.
or Sombie, after the name of the first or south-ermost Haven in Suydro.
Betwixt the Monk and the s. e. end of the Island Suydro, is a Race or Well,
which men must avoid, especially with spring tides.

Upon the west side of the Island Suydro, are no Havens for to save any ships
in, but it is altogether high steep land. On the north side are may Havens,
where men may sail into and save ships, as Sommersound or Hest, Hofwyke,
Urobie, Quaelbie or Rane, all broad sounds of Havens, a Countryman or Pilot
can bring you in there every where to your desire.

From the northwest end Suydro to Moggenesholme, Moggenesholme.
the westermost and outermost Island of Fero, the Course is north-west, and by
north, and north-north-west, about eight or nine leagues.

At the east end of Moggenesholme lies Moggenes, to the eastwards of it lies
the Island Wage, Moggenes. Wage.
and to the eastwards of Wage goes in a fair sound from the southwards off
from the Island Sando, about Hesten, and the Island Colster, for you may run in
about these Islands on both sides, and leave the great Island Stromo on the
east side, and so come into Wage. In the midst of the Sound of Wage, goes up
a haven to the eastwards into the great Island Stromo, therein you may ankor in
ten or twelve fathom, but the Sound is at least twenty fathom deep.

Moggenes and the north-east end of Fero, lie east-north-east, or a little more
northerly, and west-south-west, about fiften leagues asunder. Betwixt them both
lie ten Islands, and betwixt each Island, is a fair broad and deep sound,
whereof the fourth off from Moggenes is called Somsound. All these Sounds lie
most north-north-west and south-south-east through the land, and upon all these
Islands stand Churches, Somsound.
except upon Ostra, which nevertheless is a great Island.

From the south-east end of Suydro to Scalhead, or the south-east end of the
Island Sando, the Course is north and by west about five leagues. Betwixt
Suydro and Sando lie the little Islands, Little Dymen, Stoer Dymen, Little
Dymen Stoer Dymen.
Schavo, and Dalsfles.

From Scalhead until within the Island Mulso (lying before Stromo) the Course
is n. and by w. four leagues, there you may every where ankor, where you will,
in twenty, thirty, or forty fathom. Stromo.
If any man coming in out of the sea, desires to see a good road or haven,
under the Islands of Fero, he shall keep that middlemost great Island Stromo n.
w. and n. w. and by w. from him, and then he shall see upon the midst of the
Island Stromo, a high steep hill called Schelling, Schelling.
which he must sail right in with, and so he shall meet with that foresaid
Island Mulso, a low Island, which you may sail about on both sides, but it is
best for to run in there at the s. south end, under the Island is all over good
ankor ground. Right over against this Island, on the great Island, Torshaven.
lies Torshaven, the chiefest Haven of Fero, where all the trade of
Merchandise is.

From Torshaven or the Island Mulso, to the north-east end of Fero, the Course
is north-east, and north-east and by east, about twelve or thirteen leagues,
betwixt them both lie seven Islands, and betwixt each Island, as has been
said, goes a broad sound through the land, lying through about north-west,
north-west and by north, and north-north-west. The north end of Fero is about
four leagues broad, and lies north-west, and south-east, Fulo.
and is called Fulo, thwart of it lies the Bishop.

He that desires to sail off from Mulso into Somsound, let him go on
north-west and by north, three leagues, unto the point of Bordenes, The Bishop.
up north-west off from Bordenes, and then he shall epsy a Church upon the
Island Calso, which he must leave on starboard side, and go in along
west-north-west until he come into the bight of the Island Ostro, and ankor
there in seventeen or eighteen fathom.

These Island of Fero lie in a triangle, it is from the s. e. end of Suydro to
Fulo, or the n. end of Fero n. n. e. and s. s. w. twenty one leagues asunder.

From Scotland westwards, and to the northwards of Ireland, lie many Islands,
whereof we shall here describe some with so much perfectness as thereof is yet
known.

The names of the principal Islands lying there, are these: Names of the
Islands.
Areu, Ila, Jona, Mulla, Bragedall, Hun, Lewis, St. Patricius, St. Maria, St.
Golane, St. Petous, Epth, and St. Kilda, these are the greatest; there are yet
some small Islands, as Rona, Chent, Trauta, Fladde, Grand Melul, Petit Melul,
Stalpan, Cannay, Rum, Egghe, Mule, Cut, Crandenbrough, Gronsay, St. Karbo,
Lismont, Swynoy, Machare, Gegay, Caray, and Navarsay. All these Islands do lie
and belong under Scotland, and are those which by the Cosmographers are called
Insulae Hebrides.

The Island Bar or Rona is the northermost Island lying behind Scotland,
Bar, or Rona.
and lies from Fulo about w. s. w. thirty seven, or thirty eight leagues, it
lies by two other little Islands about a great league one from the other.

The Islands of Lewis lie from Rona south-west distant sixteen or seventeen
leagues, and from the north end of Lewis to S. Kilda, it is s. w. and w.
sixteen leagues.

On the east side of S. Kilda is a good road for a w. and n. w. wind. This
Island lies by the other little Islands, whereof the two are not very great,
upon that which lies to the westwards you may see some houses stand, and these
two little Islands lie ten leagues to the westwards of the great Island of
Lewis. Upon the coast of Lewis lie also two rows of great Rocks, like as if
they were little Islands lying one from the other south and north, somewhat
easterly, about seven or eight leagues.

The southermost lie by three little Islands, but the northermost lie by eight
small little Islands or Rocks.

The Island of Lewis is divided into many parts, the which men may sail through
at many and diverse places. Lewis with the Island belonging to it, lie s. s. w.
and s. and by w. about twenty nine leagues.

But on the east side goes a broad sound through of five or six leagues. Men
sail in close by the Island of Lewis, about s. s. w. until past the Island
Cheut.

From thence the Sound lies through betwixt the great Island Bragadul and
Lewis, s. and s. and by w. toward the west end of Lewis, called the Ephts,
then you must leave Mulla and Ila, with many other Islands on the larboard side.

Jona, Ila, Mulla, and Bragadul, are four of the greatest Islands which are
lying on the west coast of Scotland, and lie close by the main land, but there
are many Havens and Sounds, so that there you may sail in and about them every
where.

At the n. w. point of Ireland lie also some Havens, which you may sail
through and round about them all.

Betwixt Rona and Orkney lie also some Islands, which also you may sail through
betwixt, and round about.

He that falls with these Islands, must be very careful and circumspect, for
the most part of them are inhabited by wild and savage people.

In Lewis and the Islands thereabouts, a s. w. and n. e. Moon makes the
highest water: and likewise also without the n. point of Scotland.

Of the Tides, and Courses of the Streams.
In Hitland within the Havens and Sounds, a s. s. w. and n. n. e. Moon makes
full sea. The flood runs there to the eastwards, and the ebb to the
westwards, especially at the s. end and n. end of Hitland, and so fall thwart
through the sounds and havens.

In the Islands of Fero a n. and s. Moon makes the highest water.

Under the Islands of Fero go very hard tides, with great turnings, the flood
comes there out of the west, and w. n. w. and the ebb out of the e. and e.
s. e. and fall so along through the Islands, there you must reckon your tides
thereafter: When you will sail from the one Island to the other, there are two
Wels, or Mealstreames, the one at the s. end of Suydro, and the other a league
within Scalhead, at Quaelnes.

Although the tides do run so strong through these Islands, yet nevertheless
it flows not there four foot up and down.

How these Lands do lie one from the other, and from other Lands.
From Fairhill to the north-east point of Orkneyes, south-west 9 or 10 leagues.
From Fairhill to the south-end of Hitland, south-south. west, and south and by
west 7 or 8 l. From the north end of Hitland, to the Rocks of Rocol,
west-south-west 127 or 128 l. From the south end of Hitland to Fero,
west-north-west, and north-west and by west 61 l. From the north end of
Hitland, to the s. end of Fero, w. and west and by north 58 l. From Hitland to
the east point of Island, the Course is n. w. and by w. about 130 l. From the
north end of Hitland to Gryp north-east and by east 125 l. From Hitland to
Stadt east-north-west 67 l. From Fero to Rona the course is s. and by e. 45 or
46 l. From the s. end of Fero to Rokol s. w. westerly 85 l. From Rona to Lewis
the course is s. w. 16 l. From the n. end of Lewis to S. Kilda s. w. 16 l. From
the s. end of Lewis to the n. w. point of Ireland, the Course is s. s. w. about
27 l. From S. Kilda to the n. end of Hitland, north-east and by east 39 l.
Of the Heights of these Lands.
The s. end of Hitland lies in 52 degrees. 48 min. The n. end of Hitland lies in
60 degrees. 45 m. The s. end of Fero lies in 61 d. 15 m. The n. end in 62 d. 20 m.
The Island of Rona lies in 58 d. 46 m. The n. end of Lewis lies in 58 d. 18
m. The Rock Rocol lies in 58 d. 20 m. The north-west point of Scotland lies
in 30 minutes. 58 degrees.
FINIS.

