A Dialogue betwixt an EXCISE-MAN and DEATH.
death, represented by a skeleton holding an arrow, converses with an excise
man standing in front of barrels

UPon a time when Titans Steeds were driven,
To drench themselves beneath the Western Heaven;
And sable Morpheus had his Curtains spread,
And silent Night had laid the World to bed:
Amongst other Night-Birds which did seek for Prey:
A blunt Excise-man, which abhorred the Day,
Was rambling forth to seek himself a Booty,
Amongst Merchants Goods which had not paid the Duty:
But walking all alone Death chanced to meet him,
And in this manner did begin to greet him.
Death. Stand, who comes here? what means this Knave to peep
And sculke a broad, when honest men should sleep?
Speak, what is thy name? and quickly tell me this,
Whither thou go, and what thy business is?

Excise-man. What'ere my business is, thou foul-mouthed scould
J'de have you know, I scorn to be controlled
By any Man that lives; much less by thou
Who blurtest out thou know not what, nor how;
I go about my lawful business: And
Jle make you smart for bidding of me stand.

Death. Jmperious Cox-combe! Is your stomach vexed?
Pray slack your rage; and harken what comes next:
I have a Writ to take you up; Therefore
To chafe your blood I bid you, stand, once more.

Excis. A Writ to take me up! Excuse me, Sir,
You do mistake, I am an Officer,
In Public Service, for my private Wealth,
My business is if any seek by stealth,
To undermine the States, I do discover
Their falsehood; therefore, hold your hand: give over.

Death. Nay, fair and soft! It Is not so quickly done
As you conceive it is: I am not gone
A jott the sooner for your hasty Chat,
Nor braging Language: For I tell you flat
It Is more then so; though Fortune seem to thwart us,
Such easy terms I don't intend shall part us?
With this impartial Arm, Jle make you feel
My fingers first, and with this Shaft of Steel,
Jle peck thy bones? As thou alive, were hated,
So dead, to Dogs thou shall be Segregated.

Excis. J'de laugh at that; I would thou did but dare,
To lay thy fingers on me: J'd not spare
To hack thy Carcass till my Sword was broken:
J'de make thee eat the words which thou have spoken:
All men should warning take by thy transgression,
How they molested men of my Profession.
My Service to the Sates, is so well known,
That should I but Complain, they would quickly own
My publcke grievances; and give me right
To cut your ears before to morrow night.

Death. Well said indeed: But booteless all; For I
Am well aquainted with thy Villianie;
I know thy Office, and thy Trade is such,
Thy Service little; and thy Gains are much:
Thy braggs are many; But it is vain to Swagger,
And think to fright me with thy gilded Dagger:
As I abhor thy Person; Place, and Threat,
So now Jle bring thee to the Judgment Seat.

Excis. The Judgment Seat! I must confess that word
Does cut my heart, like any sharpened Sword:
What! Come t'account! methinks the dreadful sound
Of every word, does make a mortal wound,
Which sticks not only in my outward skin,
But penetrates my very soul within.
It Was least of all my thoughts that ever Death,
Would once attempt to stop Excise-mens breath.
But since it is so; that now I do perceive
You are in earnest: then I must relieve
My self another way. Come, we will be Friends,
If I have wronged thee, I Will make th'Amends:
Let Us join together; Jle pass my word, this night
Shall yield us Grub, before the morning light;
Or, otherwise (to mittigate my sorrow)
Stay here, Jle bring you Gold enough to morrow.

Death. To morrows Gold I will not have; And thou
Shall have no Gold upon to morrow: Now
My final Writ shall to the execution have thee;
All earthly Treasure cannot help or save thee.

Excis. Then woe is me! Ah! how was I befooled!
I thought that Gold (which answers althings) could
Have stood my friend at any time, to Bail me!
But grief grows great, and now my trust does fail me:
Oh! that my conscience were but clear within;
Which now is racked with my former sin:
With horror I behold my secret Stealing,
My Bribes, Oppression, and my graceless Dealing;
My Office-sins which I had clean forgotten,
Will Gnaw my soul, when all my bones are rotten:
I must confess it, very grief does force me,
Dead, or alive, both God and Man does Curse me.
Let All Excise-men hereby warning take,
To shun their Practice for their Conscience sake.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by I. C. 1659.


