A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Fidelity and Honesty Alias an Informer and a Chea^^^,
Formerly Familiar Friends.

Together with the Advice of Mr. Friendly and his Wife Civility, Alias FRAVD
and DECEIT.

With the Approbation of The Most Illustrious Princes JVSTITIA.

Justitia in se virtutes continet omnes. She bears not the Sword in vain. She
is a Terror to Evil Doers. To do Justice and Judgment, is more acceptable to
the Lord than Sacrifice.



Printed in the Year 1699.

TO THE Most Illustrious, Excellent, Judicious, Admired, Pious, Virtuous,
Noble, and Renowned Princess JVSTITIA, and others your Judicial Deligates.
Great Madam,
AS the following Dialogue is a Representation of the Miscarriages of several
Persons in Authority, who Insolently insulting over their Inferiors, Abuse and
Cheat the King and Kingdom, and brand these who endeavor to detect their Ville
Practices; and as every Day produces to your Memory fresh Instances of this
kind, so none can be so Competent a Judge in this Matter as your self; and
being well assured of your Judicious Proceedings, which like the Sun upon the
Meridian, has enlightened and preserved Mankind from Rage and Violence, even
from the beginning of Time to this Day, I was encouraged to Dedicate the same
to your Excellency, not that I think it worthy of your Acceptance, but that you
being the fitest Judge, will prove the best Patron; and this being the alone
Piece that ever was presented to you, so I hope it will find the more favor
with you, and that you will the more readier peruse and consider the same, it
being chiefly intended to inform your Excellency of several Illegal and
Unwarrantable Practices committed at Sea, to the great prejudice of His
Majesty, and the whole Nation, particularly the Violent Proceedings, (...) the
Vnparallell'd and Barbarous Cruelties and (...) committed against Seamen and
Mariners, even by those who were commissioned and appointed to encourage,
support, and (...) them; as also the Immodest and Scandalous Reflections (...)
who in bounden Duty to the king and Government, (...) to discover and detect
the same, and as the repressing (...) Public Grievances will much tend to the
General Benefit (...) Tranquillity of His Majesty and the whole Nation, so the
Matter of Fact set forth in this Dialgoue, being fairly stated and discovered,
may incite your Excellency to consider the cause of so malignant a Distemper,
and to repel the same, by applying some healing Medicines suitable to the
Disease, which being duly administered according to the Rules of Justice, may
relieve the Oppressed, and punish the Oppressor: All which, with Submission, is
most Humbly offered to your Candid and Judicious Consideration,

By the Humble Admirer of all your Virtues, FIDELITY.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Fidelity and Honesty, etc.
Fidelity. MY Old Friend Honesty! I have not seen thee this many a Day, I think
not in this King's Reign; Pray how do thou do? Where have you been, that I
could neither see you, nor hear from you? Pray where are you going in haste?


Honesty. Truly, to tell you the Truth, I have been in the King's Service all
the War, and am now going to the Temple amongst the Lawyers.


Fid. I know you have been in the King's Service and in a good Station a great
while; What Success have you had? You have had a brave, and long time to get
Money; I hear you have taken a great many Rich Prizes.


Hon. So I have, and have got Money enough, but I am like to be plagued with a
Roguish Informer.


Fid. For what?


Hon. Why truly at the taking the Prizes, I even made Hay when the Sun shined,
and Plundered them, and Sold them as others did; and for that, my Officers and
Mariners, has complained against me, and all because I did not (...), or give
them what they pleased to take or demand.


Fid. Why did not you give them their Shares that the King has ordered, and
what is allowed by Act of Parliament?


Hon. No, nor never would if I could help it, I Would see them (...) first like a
poor of Damned Eternal Dogs; and if (...) Commanders has been of my Mind, we
would have (...) their Course with the War.


Fid. Pray how do you mean?


Hon. Truly by Unwholesome Food, and by Starving, Whiping, and the Biblo's, etc.
for by them Engines I have pik'd off a good many my self.


Fid. Why would your Men suffer you to abuse them, and pinch them of the King's
Allowance, and not complain?


Hon. No, they did not take it kindly, but were often murmering and complaining.


Fid. And did not you then relieve them?


Hon. Yes, I did, and with a Vengeance too; for to be plain, I abused them to
make them complain, and when they did complain, I had them Tried by a Council
of War for Mutineers, and some were Hanged, and others to avoid the same Fate,
run away.


Fid. Why could you be so cruel to abuse Men, and after that, Hang them for
complaining?


Hon. Tush, you talk like a Fool, an Ignorant Coxcomb; why all the world is a
Cheer, and they are Fools that has not a Hand in it; for by that means I (...),
and a great deal of Money to boot.


Fid. Pray what Advantage could it be to you to Hang, and make Men run away?


Hon. A great one.


Fid. In what sense?


Hon. Why them that were Hanged, were Impudent Fellows, that would boldly
demand their Right, and did encourage others to do so too, and would often test
me, That if they could not have it Aboard, they would have it in another place;
and to prevent their Cackling, I was obliged to turn them out of the way; yet
one of the Plaguey Dogs (...), did form a Complaint against me; but (...) him
(...) a leading Card, I was forced to laun^^ good Fleece, and send him packing
out of the way; and for them that Run, I keep them upon the Ships Book twelve
Months after, as I did several that Died, and by that means I draw'd all their
Wages for that time into my own Pocker, besides their Shares of Prizes, and my
honest Purser gained their Victuals by the Bargain.


Fid. Why then your Purser and you agreed very well.


Hon. Yes, he was the principal Tool that I did my Work with, for I could not
carry on my Trade without a Consort; and when the Captain and Purser is (...),
they are able to do Wonders.


Fid. But by the way I understand by your Discourse, that you did not Hang, or
make them Run merely out of Cruelty to them, but to serve your own private Ends.


Hon. Yes, what I did was merely to serve my self, and get Money.


Fid. That I believe; But pray what did your Officers say to those Passages?


Hon. Truly at first they would be meddling and advising me to keep to the
strict Rules of the Maratime Law, as they called it, but when I considered the
Inconveniency of it, and how ready they were to stir up others, I soon got rid
of them; the Master I turned out at one time, and my Lieutenant I complained of
at another, and outed him, and by that means I muzzel'd all the rest, and
brought them to know and understand (...) Obedience, I made them fawn like
Spaniel Dogs; for when once they knew my Temper, an Oath, or a Frown from the,
would produce greater Effects than a Cudgel from some.


Fid. By your Discourse you treated your Mariners very barbarously.


Hon Barbarously, do you call it? If I had the handling of them again, I Would
Sacrifice some of those Eternal Dogs for Food for the rest, which if they would
not Eat they should (...).


Fid. That would be the way to Kill 'em all.


Hon. Let 'em die, let 'em die and be Damned like Dogs and Slaves as they are.


Fid. Pray if you Slight, Abuse, and Murder Men at this rate, how shall the
King's Ships be Manned? None that knows you will come voluntary under your
Command.


Hon. I know that, but then I can have a Press Warrant, by virtue thereof I can
and will force all I meet to serve the King, and get Money by the Bargain.


Fid. But if you Press those that are not qualified, what Service can they do
the King, or how can you get Money by them? I must confess, I have known a
Press-Smack has laid in the River a whole Fortnight, attending on a Press-Gang,
and she carried down near 40 Pressed Men, but they were all cleared, except 2 or
3, and thereby the King was at 40 l. Charge for no purpose.


Hon. I believe the Smack you speak of belonged to my Ship, if she did, I got
Money by clearing them, besides what the King allows for every Pressed Man; but
as to their Ignorance, if they belong to me, I Will soon qualify them, or make
them fly to the Devil.


Fid. All that may be, but if you Press Tradesmen, or their Servants, the Lords
of the Admiralty will clear them.


Hon. No, not if Seamen be wanting; but if they do, I Will make them pay for
their Diet before they go, and that goes into my own Pocket, allowing my Purser
a Snack; besides every one has not Friends to Petition the Admiralty, and them
I carry secure.


Fid. Well, but what use can you make of Landmen aboard of Ship, they are not
fit to arreava, or go aloft to hand Sails, all the Cursing and Swearing cannot
make them fit for that presently; besides, the hurrying of Men on such Service,
indangers their Lives, and I have heard of many that has lost their Lives
thereby, and the King has lost many a good Ship too, by the Unskilfulness of
the Mariners.


Hon. I know that to be true, for it is not long since that two of those
Ignorant Dogs under my Command, going to take in a Reife in our Maintopsail,
came tumbling down like Buffoons; it was the pleasant'st Pastime in the World
to see them lie upon the Deck, panting, reaching, and stretching like Toads in
the Sun; and as for losing a Ship, that signifies nothing, it is a National
Charge; besides, it forces a Trade, and no Body now adays is blamed for that,
if they be, they are seldom punished, I have lost two my self, but I presently
got a Commission for another, and so I only leapt out of a worse into a better.


Fid. I think as you say, that Frauds and Miscarriages in the Navy, are not
much minded, if they were, or had been, I believe we might have managed the
late War with less than half the Charge we have been at, and made our Enemies
truckled long ago; but as you say, that wa'nt your Business, you were for
getting of Money; and in this Case you were a gainer two ways: First, You got a
bigger Ship, and thereby more Honor: And Secondly, A greater allowance of
Wages, when a great many others has been hanged in former times for a less
Fault.


Hon. Pish, them Times are altered, besides, some may better steal a Horse than
others look over a Hedge; don't you know that Kissing goes by Favor; he that
has no Friends, shall have no Preferment; and he that has, shall never sail nor
fear Punishment.


Fid. So I understand by your Discourse, but would it not been better for the
Nation, if Men of Merits had been prefered before Friendship? Do you not
believe that the Wars might sooner been ended, and the Taxes abated, and a
great deal of Money saved, and our Merchants-Ships and Trade been better
secured, if the State of the War had been better managed.


Hon. You talk of management and saving of Money, when I know that the Naval
Affairs was never better managed, nor Money ever more plenty than then; I am
sure I never handled more Money in all my Life, than in the Time of the War; I
don't know what those timorous Cowards meant that cried out for a Peace, I did
all that I could to prolong the War, and if my self and my Friends could have
ruled the Roast, the War should not have been ended this Twenty Years.


Fid. You talk strangely of continuing the War for Twenty Years longer; why
don't you consider what a vast Charge it has been to the Nation already? How
the Subject has been drained by Taxes? How the Nation is involved in Debt, and
the Seamen yet unpaid for their past Service, and how many Thousands has been
ruined by it.


Hon. Prithee what have I to do with that, one Man's Loss, is another's Gain;
if I get but Money, all is well, I care not who siuks so I swim: Don't you know
the old Proverb? Every one for himself, and God for us all.


Fid. Why, is that your Country Conscience to cheat the King and Country, and
make a Jest of it? You Are a fit Man to be a Captain.


Hon. Ay, and a true Jest too: Don't you know that Kings and Princes are Born
to be cheated? Or did not you hear of that honest Purser, who out of a desire
to get Money, swore he would serve the Devil for Five Pound a Year? And I think he
was much in the right of it: Prithee what is a Man without Money? It is that
which all Men aims at, and adores it too; only some Puny timorous Fools that
are Slaves to Conscience, that cannot do as they might for fear of him, and by
that means they pass by many a good Booty.


Fid. Yes, I do know that Kings and Princes ae born o be cheated by Rogues and
Knaves, and so are other People too, but that does not make it either Lawful,
or Justifiable; for he tha cheats the King and Country in jest, is a Rogue in
good earnest; and as for the Purser you speak off, he is a notorious
Blasphemer, and a Disloyal Person, one that owns neither God nor the King; who
makes his brags, That if he can but please his Captain, he cares for no Body
else, so tha his Blasphemous Expressions is no way warrantable; and those who
you call Timorous Fools, that are afraid of Conscience, they have discharged
themselves like Men of Courage and Prudence, and I could instance you the Names
of several of them, whose Generous and Noble Actions has brought a Scandal on
you and your Reputation.


Hon. Pray name me one of those Honest Men of Courage, or I Will not believe you.


Fid. Truly I don't care for bringing Gentlemen's Names upon the Stage, but
since you have put so hard upon me, I Will tell you that I happened the other Day to
be in a place where some of your Ships Company were discoursing with some
belonging to the Weymouth, Commanded by Captain Jumper, the Argument was about
their Commanders.


Hon. Prithee what did my Men say?


Fid. Truly nothing in your Praise.


Hon. Pray what was their Discourse.


Fid. Have patience, and I Will tell you: The Weymouth's Men were telling how
many Prizes they had taken, and how the Captain returned them to the Officers
for Prizes, and paid every Man their Share to the utmost Farthing, and what
care he constantly took of them, and encouraged them on all occasions, and then
merrily fell a Singing in praise of him, extolling him to the Skies for his
Valor, Justice and Civility, and drinking his Health upon their Knees, wished
him long Life, Health and Prosperity, and when they had done, your Men
mournfully complained of your Severity, and declared all your Villainous Actions
as amply as if you were to do it your self; and then they begun a Song in a
doleful Tone, complaining of your Barbarity, Injustice, and Oppression; the
Burden of the Song was, The Devil shall have him before we will Serve him, and
then he will Plague us no more; and the Conclusion was,

Our Cowardly Captain when we were engaged,
He threw down his Sword, and sheer'd off the Stage;
We see him no more whilst the Battle did last,
And Monsieur Surrendered with the loss of his Mast;
And then he starts up, and by Jove he did Thunder,
Fall on my brave Boys, and now let us Plunder,
And since by our Courage this Prize we have gained,
Go fetch me on Board all the Goods you can find;
And because you shall not quarrel in dividing the Pelf,
I Will take and I Will keep the whole Cargo my self:
But our Officers they demanding their Shares,
Were some turned out, and some Whipped at the Jears:
To see my self Choused, I was ready to cry,
But that availed nothing, the De'el a Soll got I;
He Swore 'twas all his own, and that he would keep it too,
And so the King and Seamen were Cheated of their Due,
I know, I know, I know, and I know that is true.

Hon. Why is Captain Jumper such a Man amongst them?


Fid. Ay, so belike, for they all protested if they were to go into the Service
again, they would all jump aboard of his Ship, if they could possible.


Hon. Is that all? Tush, I care not what they Sing or say of me, so I have but
the Guilt, I Will give them a Commission to sing ten times more for such another
Booty: O the Virtue that is in Gold! It wipes of all Stains: Gold and
Impudence, with a little Diabolical Rhethorick, will make a Coward pass for a
Hero.


Fid. Well, I Will believe you without Swearing, but now that Trade is over, the
War is ended now.


Hon. If the War be over, the Trade of Cheating is not, nor never will so long
as I am in the Navy.


Fid. Why if you that are Honest are such a Cheater, pray what must we expect
Knaves will do?


Hon. Why are you such a Fool to think that I am Honest, because I title my
self so? No, pray don't mistake me, for I do assure you that I have wronged the
King and the Sailers as much as any Captain that I know; and to be plain, I am
for carring on the Trade of Cheating, and am a Cheater although I assume the Name
of Honesty; that is but under a color, the better to carry on the Trade of
Cheating, for you will understand before we part, that the Trade of Cheating will
never be laid aside so long as I have a Commission; but pray proceed.


Fid. Pray how can you play the Cheat in the Navy now there is no Prizes to be
taken?


Hon. A pox of your Ignorance, will you never be wise? Don't you know there is
more ways to Kill a Dog beside Hanging? There is a great many ways to get money
without plundering of Prizes: One is making of Hogs. Secondly, I can take as
many Servants as I please; and if they be never so ignorant, I can set them
down Midshipmen, and Able: besides, I can make money of the Stores, Provisions
and Materials of the Ship; and if they happen to be discovered, I can swear
they were only Lent, and all is well. It is not long since my Ship was
unrigged, but I got an Order to have her Rigged again pretending to Cruise for
Rovers; but instead thereof I made a Trip to France, but meeting with contrary
Winds, I sprung a new Mainmast beating in.


Fid. Prithee tell me what you mean by making of Hogs.


Hon. Why the Keeping of men upon th Ship's book when they are dead or run away.


Fid. Why then what is lost to the Seamen by running away, is clear profit to
the Capt. and I believe that is one Reason you are so cruel to them. Besides, I
observe by your discourse, that you are Eminent in the Art of Transmutation;
you can turn the Naval Stores into Gold and Silver, I believe you have got the
Philosophers Stone, so much talked of. But prithee, What do you mean by going to
France? That Trade is not open: I have Read in the Weakly Pamphlets, that a
great many of our Merchants Ships has come from thence in their Ballas; and the
reason is, because there is such great Duties upon French Goods.


Hon. I did not matter the Duties, for I did intend to make my Advantage of
that, for I took in a Parcel of Wine at Breast, and upon my arrival at Plymouth,
I prevailed with one of my Men to swear it was Spanish Wine Loaded at St.
Sebastains, and some I sold there to good advantage; but coming into the River
with the rest, some of my Men out of Malice complained thereof to an Informer,
and then Poor Sampson had like to dye, for the Plot was discovered and my Wine
was seized, which cost me near 300 l. to clear it of the French Duties.


Fid. Then you were nickt that time.


Hon. Ay, Bloodily.


Fid. But what became of the Man that forswore himself to serve you, I hope you
rewarded him well?


Hon. Truly, I left him in the Lurch to shift for himself, for as soon as he
discerned the storm he pikt off, but I lost nothing by that.


Fid. Faith, you are a pretty Gentleman, but saving your Discourse if you could
carry on that Trade in the Kings Ships, where you are at no charge, you must
needs get a Damned deal of Money, but then there will be no occasion for
Merchants to be at the Charge to fit out theirs, and Pay Wages and Victual too,
you have a long Head I find for getting of Money, as well in times of Peace as
in times of War; and if you were not obstructed, you would carry all before
you, and our Merchants Ships might lay by the Wall to Eternity, for they cannot
pretend to sail at that Rate.


Hon. Prithee don't tell me of them, I have told you my mind, and I am for
getting of Money if I can, let them look out that has the watch.


Fid. So they did by your Discourse, and caught you to your Cost.


Hon. That Is too true to make a Jest off, but saving your Discourse, what must
I do with this Informer that Prosecutes me?


Fid. Why do you ask me.


Hon. Because I am Informed that you have taken up that Employment, and as I
was unwilling to believe it, so I was troubled to hear that you should
undertake such a scandalous and base a Profession which every Honest Man abhors.


Fid. That Is your mistake, for all Honest Men allow and commend it, and a great
many honest Commanders that have been in your Station, do commend me for
appearing in so Good, so just and Honest a cause. And the King and the Law
allows and requires, and encourages so good a work as the only Antidote against
Rogues and Villains, so I deny your Assertion, I am no Informer.


Hon. No! Pray, who then Informs against my Brother Captain Q. Pray, who
Informs against me?


Fid. Why truly, you Inform against your self and discover your own Villainy,
tho it is in a Braevado; but to tell you plain your Officers and Mariners whom
you have cheated and abused, they Inform against you, not out of Spite or
Malice, but for Right and Justice, and indeed, I am employed by them, and do
appear as an Advocate to Solicit for the King and them.


Hon. That is all one, you may call your self Advocate, or Soliciter, or what
you please, but all of them that you appear against, do declare you to be an
Informer; and truly if my Friendship, or any thing that I can do for you, may
obliged you to decline that scandalous Name, I should be very glad to see you
Converted.


Fid. Why, do you Account them Honest Men that I appear against.


Hon. Yes, I do, and they are Gentlemen of great Honor and Reputation too.


Fid. Why, if they be Honest and Guiltless, they need not fear or regard an
Informer or Soliciter, no, nor the Law neither, for none of them can or will
hurt an Honest Man. And if they be Knaves, it would be a greater Crime to
connive at their Villainies then to complain of their Vices, and yet to gratify
you, if you will decline Cheating, I will leave Informing, and that without
reward.


Hon. Well, tho you deny the Name of an Informer? You own the Name of Soliciter
or Advocate, and that is all one, they have a dependency one upon another in
Prosecuting us; and I do hold with several of my Brethren, and do say and
affirm to your face that you are an Informer.


Fid. Then so let it be and call me as you please, but pray do me the Justice
to consider that I am not a petty Vexatious one, that Informs against frivolous
offenders, i. e. Such as relieve distressed Beggars at the Door, or those who
for Conscience sake, refuse to comply in Ceremonies of Religion, neither did I
ever Inform against those that pick or lick Gold off of Ginger-bread, etc. Yet
I do allow there is a sort of Informers, that has brought an odium upon the
Profession, that are not sit to live in a Civil Government, i. e. Horselers,
and oaths Informing High way-men, how they may come by a good Booty, Servants
Informing thieves how and when to Rob their Masters, others Informing against
their Neighbors for not working, or paying toward repairing the Highway
where there is none; Husbands Informing against there Wives, and Women against
their Husbands for not going to Mass, or not Worshipping God against Reason and
Conscience, etc. Others prying into the Closets of Kings and Princes, and then
discovering their secrets to their Enemies, Treacherous and Cowardly Sea
Captains, Maliciously Informing against and dismissing others of Courage and
Fidelity, as was the Case of Captain Desborrow, etc. Besides I must tell you,
that every Man that bears any Office under the King, and every Parish Officer,
and every Man upon Juries of Inquest: Yea, and every Freeman of London are
Sworn to be Informers, and if so, then it can be no Crime in me, but an Act of
the Highest Justice to Inform against such Villains that has ruined Thousands
of His Majesty's Subjects, and Cheated the King and Country to that degree,
that the whole Nation Groans with the Cries of the oppressed, whilst the
oppressors Glory and Boast of their Wickedness. Besides our Great Lawmakers,
out of a sense of Duty to their King and Country, have ordained that Informers
shall be Encouraged for Informing against Public offenders, and that purely to
prevent or punish Villainies. So that an Informer in the proper Sense, is an
Officer of Justice, and a good one too, provided he appears more for Justice
then Malice: So then, if I am an Informer, I am one of the highest rank, and
with your leave, I Will wave the Name of Fidelity, and Acknowledge my self a
faithful Informer; provided you will decline the nick Name of Honesty and
appear according to your profession by the Name of Public Cheater, and then
we'll proceed if you please, but pray let it be without Cavelling.


Chapter With all my heart, but don't bear too hard upon me; for I was but one that
Acted as others did, according to the moad of the times. And certainly that
could be no great Crime in me to follow the Fashions; Besides, long custom
makes many things both Natural and Lawful, which I think you cannot deny.


In. It may be, you take your Pedigree from Cain, who was the first that
committed the Heinous Sin of murder, but if you do, that don't make it Lawful
or Natural, although some Vicious Men would have it so; Pray consider; Can any
thing be more Notorious in those who were employed with double Sallaries to
defend and preserve the Nation, then for them to Rob it, and as much as in them
lay to ruin it, by Plundering what was forbidden by the Law, and by abusing and
piking off the Seamen and Mariners, who are esteemed the Bulwark of the
Nation, as you have done? It is observable, that by your Savage and Barbarous
Practice, above 70000 of them has been driven into the other World, and above
100000 more has been quite run out of their Pay during the late War, and merely
to gratify your Ambitious and Barbarous Humors.


Chapter Prithee talk no more of that, you have had my Answer, now hear me; you
charge me and my Friends of Murder and Barbarity, when every Body knows that
the Informers are the greatest Villains and Mutherers in the whole Nation; for
were it not for them we should have no hanging nor burning of the hand, no
pilloring, whiping or banishing of Men as we had, nor no siningand imprisoning
of them, etc. And therefore it is plain, you are the greatest Rogues and
Villains, it is you that are the occasion of so many mischiefs, how happy would
this Nation be if you were out of it. I Remember a Story about the Physicians,
who being found Pernicious and Fatal to the People of Rome, they were Banished
out of the City, and none suffered to Inhabit amongst them for the space of 600
Years, the People making an Universal Medicine of Cabbage, whereby they
enjoined long Life and Health, with a great deal of Joy and Felicity. And
truly, it is my Opinion, if the Informers were Hanged or Banished out of this
Kingdom, we might enjoy the same Happiness, and truly, I would be one of the
first that would set both my hands to so good a work.


In. Really I believe you, but what makes you banter the Informers at such a
rate.


Chapter Because they are the Villains that are the occasion of all those miseries
that I have declared, and of all the misfortunes that can befall us.


In. I say, they are not the occasion of any of them, it is their own Treasons,
Murders, Fellonies, and other Vicious and Wicked deeds and practices, that is
the occasion of all your misfortunes.


Chapter Nay, then I Will be Hanged, for there is no Man that is such a Fool, that
after he has Committed an unlawful Act as you Call it, tha will Inform against
himself, and therefore it is plain, you Informers are the cause of it.


In. Yea, I do confess we are the secondary causes, and for that Reason we are
esteemed and rewarded by Virtuous and Honest Men, who well know if we did not
do our Duty to our King and Country, then no Man could be in safety; for the
same Law that forbids Theft, the same Punishes the Thief and Creates Informers,
but to turn your Roguish Similitude to your self. If all Rogues and Villains
were Banished out of the Nation, the Informers would dye in Course, and tho you
rail against Informers, your Quarrel is really against Honesty, and would
destroy her if it were not for Informers; Like the Wolf in the Fable, who used
all his Rhethorick to remove the Dogs from the Sheep, that he might the more
greedily devour them.


Chapter Then since you are so stiff in the matter, Pray tell me how long you have
been an Informer?


In. Not so long as you have been a Cheater, and truly, if you had not been a
Cheater, I could not have been an Informer; For indeed, an Informer is the
Offspring of a Cheater, and there is a greater Alliance between us then you
discern, and you ought to have a Patternal and Natural Love for Informers.
Forasmuch as they are your Natural Children, the Fruit and Product of your own
Bowels, for as Covetousness begets Rogues, and Cheaters, so Rogues and Cheaters
beget Informers. For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, so where
there is no Law-breakers, there is no Informers. So that if you will consider
how long you have been a Cheater, you may partly guess how long I have been an
Informer.


Chapter Why, then, if I make my Calculation from thence, which looks very
feasible, I Will tell you, that I was born Honestly, I was Named Honest, and
Christened and Educated Honestly; and so I lived and continued, until I got
into the Kings Service, where I soon met with such strong motives that forced
me to turn Cat in Pan, and to get Money, I soon changed my Principle and
Opinion too.


In. Why, is the Kings Service, which used and ought to be the Seat of Virtue,
become the School of Vice? Is that so Infectious as to Poison Men Principles
and Opinions?


Ch No, not the Service it self, but some Persons Employed in it, it was they
Poisoned me, for if one scabby Sheep will spoil a whole flock; how was it
possible that I could escape amongst so many, for being Prompt by the Precepts
and Example of others to do as they did; And it being continually sounded in
mine Ears, that there was a Cheating Trade in fashion, and that they were Fools
and Rogues that had not a hand in it, and that Honesty was looked on with an
Evil Eye, they were Accounted as Punies and Cowards, and that many for that
Reason had been dismised; whereupon I even tack't about and steered the common
course, and that to curry favor with the times, as one wittily observes, tell
me your Company and I Will tell you your manners.


In. But then, when you changed your course, you should have changed your Name
too; and not added Hypocrisy to Cheating, it being my Opinion that every Man
should appear in his proper Colors, and neither deny his Name or Profession.


Chapter But I will not allow of that Doctrine, for then every Man that commits an
unlawful Act, must make it has Profession, which is wholly repugnant to the
moad of the times; for we find by daily experience, and that every Sessions
produces fresh Instances, that most Men of Evil Principle do go by several
Names, and are often Arreigned by the Name of A. B. alias, C. D. alias, E. F.
alias, G. H. etc. Whereby it is manifest, that Men of bad Principles do
frequently change their Names, and if it were possible, would change their
Natural shapes too, as they do their Garbs, rather then be discovered, as is
Intimated by Don Quevedo in his Dream concerning the Resurrection, when one
pretended his Body and Soul was mismacht, another had got a head that was none
of his own, and others ran away from their own Bodies, because they would not
be known: And Mahomet, and Jack of Leyden, was so ashamed of their own Names,
that they would assume the Name of the Traitor Judas, and did quarrel and
contend for the same, and although I was a Knave by profession, yet I continued
the Name of Honesty, and that purely to cover the Crimes of Knavery; but
however, as you say, you ae not a petty Informer, so I am not a petty Fogger,
for I did not Play the Knave for triffles: No, I did not change my Name for
nothing, for I made my own market and got Honey enough by the bargain, but
Prithee tell me, what it is I am Prosecuted for?


In. Why, it is for Plundering of Prizes that you have taken, and Embezzeling
Ships and Goods, and Converting the same to your own use, without giving any
Account thereof to the King, or regard to the Ships Company, for if you had but
made a fair Distribution amongst them, I believe they would not have complained
against you.


Chapter Why should I be Prosecuted for that? When I know that in the Dutch Wars,
and in the beginning of the late War, it was Customary and Lawful to plunder
all that was above the Gun Deck in any Prize; Except Arms, Ammunition and
Tackling, and that by Virtue of an Act of Parliament, made in the 13th. Year of
King Charles the IId. and since it is so, Pray where is the offense in me, more
then in others? As for my part, I took but my degree in doing as others did.


In. Ay, but you have broke that Custom, and outrun that Law, and another too;
for besides your Pillaging above the Gun Deck, you have plundered all Ships and
Goods too, Embezzled and Sold them, which is a great Cheat and a Breach of
trust too.


Chapter The former Law I don't much fear, for if I am tried before a Court Marshal
upon the Breach of that Statute; I don't doubt, but I shall come off well
enough.


In. But you are not Prosecuted upon that Statute, neither to be tried by a
Court-Marshal now.


Chapter Pray where must I be tried then? And upon what Statute, and when was it
made?


In. Why, you are Prosecuted upon the Statute of Anno Quarto, and Quinto of his
present Majesty, Entitled an Act for encouraging of Privateers, etc. Whereby
it is provided that no Embezzelments shall be made of Prize Goods, taken or
retaken from His Majesty's Enemies; but that all such Goods with the Arms,
Ammunition and Furniture of such Ships shall be reserved entire and free from
such Embezzelments, and shall not be pillaged in any Case whatsoever; But that
all such Ships and Goods shall be delivered to some Agent belonging to the
King, and shall be sold by Inch of Candle for the best advantage, and that
three tenths of the neat proceed after all Charges allowed, shall be divided
and paid in proportion to the several Officers and Mariners that were at the
taking of them; besides 10 Pound allowed for ever piece of Ordnance in Ships,
taken or destroyed under the Commission of His Majesty's Enemies. And that all
Officers offending against this Statute, shall answer the Goods by them
Embezzeled, and shall forfeit 500 l. and be disabled from bearing any Office
under His Majesty for the space of 7 Years, and upon this Statute you are
Prosecuted in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer.


Ch Is not that Act repealed? I know there was a Bill, 'twas read the last
Sessions of Parliament for repealing part of that Act, by Indemnifying Captains
of such penalties and disabilities, as might be Inflicted on them on pretense
of Embezzeling Prize Goods, and truly, I made all the interest I could to put
it forward.


In. I do believe you, but you were grossly mistaken, by thinking to Impose or
put tricks on that Honorable House, for although they are always ready to relieve
the guiltless, yet they are as careful to punish offenders; Indeed, had your
Allegations proved as they were represented to them, you might have depended on
them for relief, but they were so well possessed of the truth of the Fact
charged against you, and of the great Embezzelments made by you, and of the
several mismanagements committed by you during the late War, that they thought
fit to drop that Bill and Leave you to the Law; Knowing that if you were
Prosecuted for pretended Embezzelments, the Court upon Trial would relieve you,
and although you may think it unreasonable to forfeit and pay the Penalty of that
Act, yet I tell you, you have no cause to complain, for before that Act was
made, it was then Death for any Man to Embezzel any Arms, Ammunition, or
Tackling of any Prize, but you have Embezzeled Ship, Cargo, Tackle, etc. To a
great Value, and therefore I think you are kindly used, if you can be excused
for 500 l.


Chapter That is not all, I shall be disabled from serving His Majesty for the
space of seven Years, and lose my share of Prize Money too.


Hon. Your share of Prize Money cannot be much, by reason you Embezzeled the
whole, and Converted the Money to your own use, if you have lately given any
Account to the Commissioners for Prizes, it is a thing of small moment, your
share of that will amount to little; as to the losing of your Commission I
think it very reasonable, that those who have betrayed their trust and cheated
the King and Seamen as you have done, should be dismised from any further
Service in this Government, the Justice of the Court will decide the
Controversy according to the merits of the cause.


Chapter (...) Life you startle me now, I did not Dream of this, yet I must
confess, I have heard as much, but I swear I did not mind it, this is very
severe; but I hope, my good Service that I have performed in serving the King
and Country will atone for my miscarriage, I Will give that in as a special
Plea in my defense, or I Will deny the charge, for what you say, is no Proof.


In. Well, you may plead, or deny what you please; I doubt, that will avail you
little, for if there want proof, your whole Ships Company can prove the fact,
and as for your serving the King and Country, it is but a Jest: I have heard
you say that your chiefest, nay, your whole design was to serve your self. And
indeed, that is sufficiently manifest to the whole Nation; but however, I would
not have you despair, you have good Friends and Great ones too, and I know,
that Friendship may avail you much in this Case.


Che. Yea, I have good Friends, it was them that preferred me, and would do me
any Kindness they can; but now I am prosecuted in Courts of Justice, and am to
be Tried by Justice her self, who holds the Scales upon an equal Balance, and
will not be busied by Flattery, or Friendship.


Inf. Why then you seem to be afraid of Justice?


Che. Yes I am, I don't know how to look her in the Face, the very Name strikes
a Terror to me, and I know she will take their part.


Inf. Good lack, how Men differ in Opinions! She is, In my mind, certainly the
most Beautiful and Chaste, the most Modest and Virtuous Woman in the whole
World, and is, by all Honest Men, Adored and Admired as our mighty Preserver
and Defender from Rage, Violence, and Oppression, etc. and the King is a great
Admirer of her, he hugs her in his Bosom, and preserves and maintains her as
one of the highest Rank; and to be plain, now she is not supported and
protected in her full Splendor and Grandeur, the People cannot be secure in
their Persons, or Estates; besides I never heard that she was any Partaker, and
I know it is impossible that she can.


Che. Well, I don't know what to say to her; but if I were to choose, I would
be Tried by Mercy in another Court; for I cannot endure to think of Justice in
Authority.


Inf. You may talk what you please, you must be Tried before her, but Mercy
will be there; for Justice will not act or do any thing without Mercy, for she
is her own Sister.


Che. Ay, but I have known Mercy to act without Justice many a time; for it is
not long since my Self, my Wife, and others of my Family, were carried before a
Justice to answer the Complaint of a Widow, whom, iudeed, we had all Abused,
but Mercy hectored the Widow, and her two Friends that came to attend her; one
of them he threatened to Bind over, for speaking in the Widows Behalf; but that
not frightning him, the Justice thundered him out of Doors, and silence the
other; and the Widow being Abashed at those rugged Proceedings, although her
Complaint was confirmed by the Affidavits of several Persons, was set aside,
and thereby my Self, and Family, were mercifully delivered: O Blessed Justice
and Mercy!


Inf. O! I remember that, I was there then, it was I that was Threatened and
thundered out of Doors; but that wa'nt Justice that did that. he was only called
so; and that Mercy that was there, is a Monster, one that will ruin a Thousand
good People, to gratify one Friend.


Che. I suppose he smelt that you were an Informer, that made him turn you out
of his House, for fear that you would have Opened or Explained the Widows
Cause; truly I did not care to see you there my self, especially when you
prayed Mr. Justice to cast an Eye, or look over that Affidavit my Men Swore
against me, for breaking open the Widdow's Son's Chest; truly I was afraid he
would have Bound me to have answered it, which he would certainly have done, if
he had not been a merciful Man: I protest I was glad to see him let fly at you,
and snatch the Affidavit out of your Hand, and throw it one way, and send you
another; I wished with all my Heart he would have sent you to Prison.


Inf. Truly I believe you; but, I conceive, he had more Wit than Justice; for
if he had Committed me, I would have Informed against him, to that great Lady
Justice, and have sued him for Satisfaction; and that, I believe, made him
afraid to execute his Threats; for I Will tell you that Justice her self has
decreed, That if any Justice of the Peace shall presume to Commit or Punish any
Person contrary to her own Dictates, that then in such Cases she will punish
them; and for that reason she has decreed, That none shall execute the Office
of a Justice, that has not a sufficient Estate to make Satisfaction to those
Injured by them, many of them has paid Sauce for their Injustice and Partiality.


Che. Well, I don't know what to say to this great Lady Justice that you talk
of; yet I remember now, I have had Business with her my self several times; and
truly, I always received a great deal of Satisfaction from her; for I observed,
that she made no difference between Rich and Poor, Noble and Base, but decided
all Controversies, according to the Merits of the Cause: Besides, I must
confess, that she has bestowed an Hundred Favors on me, by preserving me from
Violence, and restoring me to my Rites and Privileges.


Inf. Why then since you have received so many Favors formerly, what makes you
fear her now?


Che. Why truly my Case is different now, for then I appeared on the Right side
with a good Cause, but now I must stand on the Left to answer a bad one; which
puts me in mind of one of our Captains, who not long since was fined an Hundred
Pounds for Embezeling the Naval Stores, and another you told me of, that paid
three Hundred Pounds for Cheating the King of his Customs; besides the little
Gunner that hangs in the Air at Chatham, for Embezeling of one Barrel of
Gunpowder, and rather than I Will fall under those Sentiments, I Will follow the
Example of that great Hero that killed Lieutenant Cole for Informing against
him; yea, I Will Sacrifice him wheresoever I meet him, that dare presume to
Inform against me.


Inf. I must confess, that a desperate Disease requires a desperate Cure; but
alas, such desperate Actions does not extinguish but augment the Offense; and
although you may Imagine such rash and violent Actions are the Ensigns of
Courage and Magnanimity, yet they are no more than the Effects of Madness and
Despair: Indeed a Sword is a necessary Companion for a Prudent and well
governed Man, but it is pity that Fools and Madmen should be suffered to wear
them: I remember the other Day a Bravado drew his Sword in a great passion, but
when he see it naked in his Hand, he did quiver and shake; indeed I put it up
for him that time, with a Proviso, that he should draw it no more in my
Company; and as for that Hero you speak of, I hear he was in Newgate, and was
Arraigned and found Guilty of Manslaughter, for that barbarous Action, which,
if he had not been a Fool, he might have complied with his Mariners, and have
saved Money enough to have maintained himself for ever; but I perceive my
Discourse signifies nothing to you, and therefore since you care not for my
Company, or Conversation, I Will bid you heartily Adieu, for I must call upon Mr.
Friendly, an Acquaintance of yours.


Inf. Mr. Friendly, Sir, I am come to thank you for the many Favors I have
received of you, and do give you many Thanks therefore, and am heartily glad to
see you in good Health.


Friendly. Truly Neighbor this is kindly done of you, and I am glad to see you
well; pray Sir sit down, for I have something to say to you that is serious,
and was thinking to send for you to discourse you, and advise you in a Matter
of great Importance, and my Wife Civility is very urgent with me about it.


Fid. Truly, Sir, as you have so often obliged me, so I shall esteem my self
happy in your Favor, and shall thankfully take and follow your Advice in any
thing that concerns me.


Friend. I hope you will, for you may assure your self that I shall advise you
nothing but what shall be honest, and for your good: But to proceed, pray when
did you see Capt. Honesty?


Fid. Truly, Sir, I just parted with him; he and I has had a long Conference
about Cheating and Informing.


Friend. Pray what was the Subject of your Discourse?


Fid. Truly I charged him Guilty of Breach of Trust, and of Imbezeling and
Purloining of Prizes, and Prize Goods, and of Abusing and Cheating his Officers
and Seamen; and he charged me, and brands me for an Informer, and says they are
Rogues and Villains that deserve to be Hanged or Banished; and after a long
Discourse Pro and Con, we parted very Friendly.


Friend. I am glad of that, for I know he is a Huffing Spark, and one that
scorns to take an Affront.


Fid. And truly I scorn to give him any.


Friend. Indeed I always looked upon you as a Man of a good even Temper for
that; but pray how comes he to charge you with the Scandalous Name of an
Informer?


Fid. Because I Prosecute him and some others for cheating the King and Country.


Friend. Why, are you concerned in that? I heard indeed, that you and some
other Persons, had Informed against several Captains, but I could not believe
you were concerned in it; hang it, that is a Nasty Scandalous Business indeed;
for shame, for shame leave that off: Prithee see what Lieutenant Cole got by
Informing against Captain Elliot: Prithee let me advise and persuade you to
leave it off, and betake your self to something that is Honest.


Civility. O dear, is Mr. Fidelity an Informer? I hope not, I am heartily sorry
to hear that; I hope, Husband, you will advise him better; pray, my Dear, see
what you can do: Pray Neighbor, be Advised by my Husband.


Fid. Yes, Madam, I shall be glad of his Advise; I know he is a Wise Man, and
one that is able to give good Counsel.


Friend. Then if you will take my Advice, I would desire you to consider what a
Reproach and Scandal you will bring upon your self by Informing, and how you will
be slighted and hated by all good Men; and truly if you don't decline it, I
shall be very shy of your Company my self: An Informer! Fie, fie, it is the
hatefullest Name that is; pray leave it, pray let me persuade you to decline
it, and follow your Trade, I know you may have Business enough, and I will be a
help to you in Business my self.


Civ. Pray good Neighbor mind my Husband, and take his Advice, I am sure he
will give you good Counfel; pray don't he advise you well, and speak a great
deal of reason?


Fid. Yes truly, I like his Discourse, and thank him for his good Counsel, but
I don't apprehend why an Informer should be so hateful; I know Vicious Men that
break Bounds by Cheating, Robing, and Oppressing Honest People, cannot endure
him; I know they hate him for discovering their Villainies; but what of that,
would you have him decline an Act of Justice, to curry favor with Rogues and
Villains, whom every Honest Man ought to suppress? Truly I cannot see any
reason that you or any Body else, I mean any honest Body has to slight me for
that; for every Body knows. that the detecting of Villains, is the preserving
of Honest People; and truly I met with none of them but what does highly
commend me for what I do.


Friend. I don't know who you call Honest People, the general Vogue of the
People discovers an Abhorrence of an Informer; the very Name, without regard to
the Extent or Office of it, is an Odium of the most hatefullest Name amongst us.


Fid. You talk of the general Vogue of the People; why truly I think no Man in
his right Wits ought to mind the report of the Popular Multitude; for they are
as variable as the Wind, which is always shifting, or like the Moon, never
constant; truly I think we ought to regard the Advice of one Honest Man, far
above the Report of the biassed and deceived Multitude.


Civ. Why do you think my Husband is biased, or deceived? No, I scorn your
Words, I Would have you to know, he understands himself as well as the best Man in
our Parish.


Fid. Yes, Madam, I believe that; but he may be misled by false Notions, as
many Thousands are in Opinions: As for Instance, The Papists do affirm that
Bread once Consecrated, is no more Bread, but that it then is the real Flesh
and Blood of our Blessed Savior, and do declare all those Heretics, that will
not believe it; and many Thousands have suffered Death, because they would not
own it; and as that Argument has been maintained by all the Romish Tribes, so
it has been as stiffly opposed by all the Protestants in the Universe; so then,
if the Name of an Informer, which you say, and I believe, is such an Odium
amongst the biassed or deceived People, be of so great Esteem as I say amongst
the Honest, Judicious, and Unbiased sort, then certainly I ought to adhere to
them; and since it is impossible for any Man to conform in Principle to two
contrary Opinions, I will decline the biggest Party, and side with the best,
whose Judgment, my Conscience bears me Witness, I ought to follow.


Friend. Yes, I know that People do differ much in Opinions, but what I say is
reason, and truly I must tell you, I do not approve of an Informer my self, I
hate the very Name; let Honesty say what he pleases, that shall never reconcile
me to an Informer; no, I have been too much bitten by them my self, you know I
have used the Sea a great while, and have been Master of many a good Ship, and
have made many a good Voyage, and indeed they might have been much better, if
it had not been for those Catterpillers; they took from me one Night my
Longboat full of rich Goods, 'twas four Hundred Pounds damage to me my Wife
knows.


Fid. Pray what did they take it by force of Arms?


Friend. No, they pretended they were Officers belonging to the Custom-House,
and Seized them because they were not Entered, nor the Duties paid.


Fid. Why then they were not all your own, unless the Duties were paid; for the
King had a full and lawful Right to the Duties, that you know, and that you
would have cheated him of, by making a Devil as well call it, i. e. by running
them in the Night; so that you designing to Cheat the King, was Choused your
self, and truly you were served right, for he that did that, did only bite the
Biter.


Civ. Pray Husband don't talk no more to him, he does but Banter you for your
good Will; Hang him, let him go like a Knave as he is.


Fid. Truly I am no Knave, neither was he that Seized them Goods, for they were
not properly yours.


Friend. Yes they were, for I am sure I bought and paid honestly for them.


Fid. Honestly, pray not too much of that; how could you pretend those Goods
were honestly paid for, before the Duties were paid? You know the King had as
much Right to the Duties incumbent upon them, as the Person that sold them had
to the Goods; so that then you had only a Right to the one part, which, like a
Cheating Gamester, you ventured against the other part; and, like the greedy
Dog in the Fable, lost both.


Friend. Indeed I am sorry to hear you talk on at this rate; truly I had a
better Opinion of you, and did intend upon the Return of this Voyage, to have
employed you upon my Ships Business, and assisted me in carrying off some
Goods, which should have been to your Advantage, but since I have sounded your
Pulse I Will have nothing to do with you.


Fid. Well, if you will not employ me, the King will; ay, and encourage me to,
and it is possible I may circumvent you in your Knavish and dark Designs.


Friend. The King Employ and Encourage you; no, I Will never believe that he has
any Respect for Informers.


Fid. That Is your mistake, for Informers are the Eyes of a King; it is they that
keep Watch and Ward to preserve him from Violence and Injury; for as Kings and
Princes have long Arms, and wide Ears, so they have many Eyes; that is, the
Eyes of his Subjects, whose Duty it is to take care that no Violence, or
Injury, be attempted, or committed against their Sovereign.


Friend. Yes, I Will hold with you there; but what I blame you for, is for
Informing against Honest Gentlemen for Breach of Trust, and for Embezeling of
Prizes, and running Uncustom'd Goods, which is a common thing now adays, and
every Body would do that if they could.


Fid. Although it is Common, it is not Lawful; and though you blame me for
Informing, you ought your self, in some cases, to turn Informer.


Friend. Who I? What would you have me turn Informer? No, I Will be Hanged first.


Fid. Truly you had better be Hanged; then be Damned; for if you know of any
Conspiracies against the King's Peace, and don't Inform, you are Forsworn.


Friend. How can I be Forsworn, I never took a Solemn Oath in all my Life.


Fid. No? Pray what was you and I Sworn to, when we were made Free of the City?
If you have forgot, I Will tell you the Words verbatim; Ye shall know no
Gatherings, Conventicles, nor Conspiracies made against the King's Peace, but
ye shall warn the Mayor thereof; Ergo, if you know any such thing, you are
Sworn to Inform.


Friend. Ho that, I had forgot that, it was so long ago; besides, that is none
of my Business, my care is to get an Honest Livelihood, in doing which, if I
should make a Hog or two, to save the Custom of a parcel of Goods, would you
discover it if you knew it?


Fid. You had best try me, you know I am obliged to do my Duty, and I think it
unreasonable that you should cheat the King of his Duties; truly, if I should
know any Person to rob or cheat you of your Lawful Right, I would acquaint you
of it; you may call it Informing, or what you please.


Friend. Ay, that is a Neighbors part, and I should heartily thank you for it,
and gratify you too, because it would be for my Advantage, but discovering the
the other would be to my Prejudice.


Fid. Then I conceive you are altogether for Self-Interest, you care not who
Sinks nor who Swims, to cheat the King and Country too, is all one to you, so
you get Money, you have no respect to Justice.


Friend. Justice, what do ye tell me of Justice? I never got any thing by her,
nor do I Sesire to have any thing to do with her, or to know what she is, or
where she is.


Fid. I believe you, but if I be not mistaken, here she is, and I Will go wait on
her. Most Illustrious Madam, Heavens protect your Ladyship, and your Ladyship
protect me your Vassal, abused and contemned for my Fidelity.


Justice. That Is no new thing for Fidelity to be abused and contemned, I my
self am not free from the Clamor of Evil Tongues, who, if it were possible,
would rend and tear me to pieces, were not I supported by all the Powers of
Heaven and Earth, and by the Power of my Supporter I Will protect you.


Fid. Madam, my Safety depends on your Virtue, it is you always that must
support me, my Adversary Injustice, supported with Fraud and Deceit, seeks to
devour me for complaining of their Villainies, and discovering their Vices.


Justice. I have heard as much, and am an Eyewitness to some Hardships that
has been put upon you, I know you are styled and branded for Informing against
Offenders, but I would not have you be dismayed, I Will weigh your Causes in an
equal Balance, and with my Sword I Will do you Justice; for to me it seems
reasonable, Informers should have all Judicial Encouragement; forasmuch asian
Informer is the Supporter and main Pillar of the Law, and if it were not for
them, the Law would be of no effect the Violaters thereof, would trample it
under Foot, and the Care and Wisdom of all Ages would become extinct; for it is
not the Law it self, that keeps Mankind in Obedience, but the Vigilance and
Integrity of those Persons, who, in respect to the Safety, and Well-being of
their King and Country, do take care to preserve that Sacred part of the
Government, that it may not be destroyed and torn to pieces; there is many good
Laws now in force, which were intended for good purpose; one was lately made
for punishing Profaneness and Immorality, and was commended by all good Men,
but for want of Courage, or Encouragement, I have not heard of any so good as
to put the same in Execution, unless occasioned by Envy and Malice, and then
one Blasphemer has Informed against another; which appeared to me, as if the
Devil had been correcting Vice: The other Laws for preventing Frauds,
Collusions, and other general Calamities in the Government, has been
ineffectual, by reason of the Negligence, or Connivance of some Inferior
Magistrates, or for want of due Encouragement to Informers.

I have heard Honesty, and Friendly, with his Wife Civility, and although they
Rail, Cavil, and Quarrel with you, it is my Judgment that they are in the
Fault, for if they were Faultless, you would not, nay, you could not hurt them;
and therefore what they say is only to discourage you, that so they may the
better carry on their Chearing and Clandestine Practices; wherefore I do Advise
and Direct you to persevere in what you have so faithfully and justly
undertaken, and I will Protect and Encourage you so far as the Rules of Justice
will permit; being my self appointed, commanded, and resolved to Administer
Justice, with equal distribution to Rich and Poor, without respect of Persons;
being well assured, that nothing is more acceptable in the Sight of God, nor
more pleasing and profitable to the King and Kingdom. The King of His princely
Wisdom has proclaimed Days of Solemn Fast, to be Religiously observed
throughout the Kingdom, for Adverting those Judgments Impending on this Nation:
The Almighty made an Overture to the People of old by the Prophet Jeremiah, as
in the first Verse of the fifth Chapter, Run ye too and fro, etc. this shall be
my Task, this will I perform by the Power of the Almighty who knows but that
so good a Work may put a stop to the Groans and Cries of the Oppressed, and
thereby Avert those Impending Judgments, that the Oppressions and Injustice of
this Nation justly has deserved.


Deuteronomy. xvi. 19. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall not respect Persons,
neither take a Gift, for a Gift blinds the Eyes of the Wise, and perverteth
the Words of the Righteous.

2 Chronicles. xix. 6. Take heed what you do, for ye Judge not for Men, but for the
Lord, who is with you in Judgment.

Quis adipisci veram gloriam volant Justitia fungantur officiis:

They that will get true praise, let them discharge the Duties of Justice.

FINIS.

