THE DAMMEE CAVALLIERS Warning Piece, In a view on the Prophecy of the Prophet
OBADIAH: Against the Idumean Armies, that so cruelly insult over the Church and
People of God.

August. Civita. Dei, lib. 2. cap. 21. There is not any true Justice in any
Commonwealth whatsoever, but in that whereof Christ is the founder and the
ruler, if you please to call that a Commonweal, which we cannot deny is the
weal of the Commonalty. Amos 4.18. Your young men have I slain with the
sword, and have taken away your horses; and I have made the stink of your
Camps to come up unto your nostrils, yet have ye not returned unto me, says
the Lord. LONDON, Printed for Abraham Everet against Saint Magnus Church, at
London Bridge, Anno Dom. MDCXLIII.

THE ARGUMENT.
THe people of Edom were mortal enemies to the Israelites, although their
predecessors were brethren, Esau and Jacob; yet were the Idumeans a continual
vexation to the Church of Israel, and that not only in themselves, but by
stirring up other neighboring Nations against them, by which means the people
of God were exceedingly distracted: Therefore the Lord sent the Prophet Obadiah
to preach that glorious conquest which God had determined to work for his
Church, and the great ruin, and misery which should befall Edom, and all
malignants in the advancing of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Verse 1. The vision of Obadiah: Thus says the Lord God concerning Edom; we
have heard a rumor from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent among the heathen:
Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.
THe vision) imports as much as Revelation; for as often as the Scripture makes
mention of special visions which appeared to the Prophets, whereby the Lord
meant the better to confirm them when he would have some excellent thing come
to light, we are to understand that God did it by Revelation, in those days
when the Scripture says, that the word of the Lord was precious, the reason
was, because there was no manifest vision, 1. Sam. 3.1. So those Revelations in
Number. 12.6. are called visions. The meaning then is as much, as if it had been
said; There is nothing in this book but what the Prophet (being enlightened, and
having his eyes opened by God) saw by special Revelation, Thus said the Lord
God concerning Edom. Tind. translates it, Thus has the Lord God spoken upon
Edom. The Prophet delivered the word, the rod and execution was to follow, to
make good that word: for it was not a fancy of his own imagination, but the
very word of the Lord, against Edom. Edom is a name of Esau given upon his
greedy desire, or mocking his intemperance, who said to Jacob, Feed me I pray
thee with that red pottage, therefore his name was called Edom, Genesis 25.30. But
it is here taken for the inhabitants of the Country, which were the posterity
of Edom. The Rabbis usually by Edom understand Rome. Galatinus de Arcan. lib.
4. c. 28. The Thargum say also that Julius Caesar, and the succeeding
Emperors, were originally of Edom. ^or in Mal. We have heard a rumor from the
Lord, and an Ambassador is sent among the heathen: The Phylistines assailed and
molested the Jews on the one side, by raising war against them; on the other
side they had the Ammonites, and the Moabites: And on the other side were the
Idumeans, or people of Edom. They were of the Jews blood, in Isaac and
Rebecca, the remembrance whereof ought to have turned them from all hatred, and
ranchor, but they were treacherous, still plotting, and working to bring the
people of God to ruin: Therefore the Lord sends the Prophet here to thunder a
terrible message in their ears, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in
battle Tind. has it, Up let us arise, and fight against them: And the Prophet
Jeremiah says to the same effect; Gather ye together and come against her to
the battle, Jer. 49.14. For God had sworn by himself that Bozra (the chief
City in Edom) should be brought to ruin, and desolation: verse 13. a fearful
doom for all damme Cavaliers and enemies to the Church of God; God charge
his people to gather themselves together, to fight against his and their
enemies, and to admit of no peace with them.

Verse 2. Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
despised.
BEhold, I have made thee small among the heathen: Tind. I will make thee
small: Although the wicked Idumeans rested secure in their abundance, and were
become great, yet the Prophet tells them, that the time was nigh at hand
wherein they should be scattered, and though they were a great Army, yet should
there but a few remain: For what can the wicked conceive in God, but an
extreme security? and therefore when the Majesty of God comes before them,
they fall; but the faithful on the contrary, receive great joy and sweetness
in the presence of God: Although the Lord should so sharply correct his people,
as if he meant to cast them off, and suffer wicked men to domineere for a time,
yet notwithstanding he will show in the end such effects that they shall find
how good the Lord is. By the Heathen here is understood all people besides the
Jews, all Infidells, Gods people only being taken from amongst them, Isae.
49.6.

Thou art greatly despised; some translations, thou art utterly despised; Tind.
Thou shall be utterly, etc. All the heathen even those to whom they were most
endeared, he tells them were all ready to come upon them to help Israel under
the leading of the Almighty, and that at an hours warning, whenever he shall
please to call them forth, by whom they should be set at naught and lightly
accounted of, even as a base vile people not worthy of any respect or favor.

Verse 3. The pride of thine heart has deceived thee: thou that dwell in
the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, that says in his heart; who
shall bring me down to the ground?
THe pride of thy heart has deceived thee, Tin. has lift thee up: The Prophet
here tells them that they were so swelled with pride, that they thought that
none was able to withstand them, but alas they did but delude themseves; for
the Lord would so strengthen his people, and raise such a mighty power against
them, as should bring them to ruin and desolation: Here the Lord shows wicked
men what all their cunning devices, and wicked treacheries against his people
will come to in the end; God will so fight for his Saints, that their enemies
shall be destroyed; yea God will turn the hearts of those whom they have
wickedly seduced, ^o fight with them against the power of Jesus Christ, that
they shall help the people of God, rather then the Lord will see them or their
cause perish: when wicked men grow most mad against the people of God, and do
them most wrong, then is God nearest at hand to help: Psalm. 27 2. Thou that
dwell in the clefts of the rock whose habitation is on high, Tind. In the
strong holds of stones and have made thee an high seat: These places were like
Castles cut out of the Rocks, so that they were as clefts in Rocks, but high
upon hills; So that it is as much as if the Prophet had said, oh ye Idumeans,
that strengthen your selves with Castles, and fortifications, and think your
selves secure in your strong holds, know this, that the hand of God can fetch
you out thence; do not think that your Castles and Towers shall shelter your
wicked design: That say in thy heart who shall bring me down to the ground.
They thought themseves so secure that none could conquer them: As Pharaoh said,
who is the Lord? Genesis so these ungodly Idolatrous heathens cried out, who shall
cast us down to the ground? oh thought they, is not Moab our dear friend, are
not all the Gentiles about us at peace with us, and have we not the Jews in
subjection; who then shall do us any harm? who is able to cast us down? why
here the Prophet tells them that even they should be thus despised and brought
to ruin, though they thought themselves so great that none durst dare to come
against them, they should be conquered, they should be cast down to the
ground; God cares not for the lofty looks of all the Malignants in the world,
when he comes once against them, he will throw them and all their Castles and
strong holds to the ground, which is a great comfort to the Church of God,
because he himself sends them to fight his own cause, and happy are they though
they die in such a quarrel.

Verse 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest
among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the LORD.
THough thou exalt thy self as the eagle, Tin. Wentest up as high as the eagle.
They dwelt in a stony and hilly country, part of Arabia like unto the Alps,
high hills, or as our country of Wales, a very large and barren place,
Christianus Adricomius Annot. 5. in Chrogr. tabulam. In flying to these high
hills, they thought to be exceeding secure, but the Prophet tells them that
were their hills as high as an eagle could fly, above that height they are, it
could not privilege them from Gods Judgments, or be a sanctuary to save them
from his wrath and displeasure. Let the wicked persecutours of the Church of
God hide themselves where they can, let them be sure that when God comes to
judgment, he will find them out. Mich 2.10.

And though thou set thy nest among the stars. Here the Prophet derides the
folly of the Idumeans, who resting upon their own security durst be so bold as
to promise themselves continual happiness, even as if it had been in their
power to bring the event of things to pass by their star gazing sorcery,
wherein we have a fair looking glass to behold the foolish pride wherewith all
the wicked are puffed up, and the damnable conclusions of their secret fury; as
if by their own fancy they could govern all things, whose plots the Apostle
James does well discover, We will go into such a city (say they) we will buy
and sell and get gain, and yet in the mean while they know not what shall come
to pass to morrow James 4.13.

What have the plots of the Papists and wicked men been against this poor
Kingdom of England? one while they are resolved to take us captives, to cut
our throats, and to lay our towns and cities waste: when that will not take,
then they seek the secret overthrowing of the Church and State. O what a
damnable plot was that when they were resolved not only to blow up the
Parliament house, and lay it waste, (when they cried raze it, raze it, even to
the ground) but to overthrow both Church and Commonwealth, and that Honorable
assembly together, how often have they appointed our men for the swords and
slaughter, our wives and daughters for Rapes and Adulteries, and after to
cruel murder, our children to have been dashed in pieces against the stones
of the streets, as too many have been in Ireland, our cities to have been fired
about our ears, and all our wealth to be a prey for them? nay, have not some
of late distributed the stations of the City amongst them against they came to
plunder it, and to make our suburbs stables for their horses, but blessed be
God they have hitherto been prevented. God of his great mercy protect us ever
from their fury.

Thence will I bring thee down says the Lord. He threatens to overthrow them
and all the means they have to establish themselves, that though they prosper a
little by his suffering, yet they should fail of their hope, for he would
destroy all that they had done. Let the wicked plot never so much against the
people of God, the Lord will destroy all that they work, and frustrate their
hopes, The wicked shall melt away (says David) his desire shall perish, Psalm
112.10. Let not any party though never so great amongst us think or imagine to
establish themselves without the Lord, by their unlawful means, and policy,
for God will destroy them. The danger has been lively before our eyes upon
that connivence of ours, and with that strength they had raised against us:
what if they should be peaceably suffered to grow with us? Is not that which
Pharaoh feared of Israel, more justly to be feared of these? for the Jews
never held it lawful to take away the lives of Pharisees to depose them, or to
raise Arms against their counsels, but these deny with Semanca in his
institutions, that Subjects are bound to Protestant Sovereigns counsels, or
Laws, and that therefore they may rebel by taking up Arms against them, if
they have power to do it, Tit. 23. sect. 11. and 13 and Dominicus Bannes in 22
sum. Tho. quaest. 12. Artic. 2. Come ^n (therefore) let us deal wisely with
them lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there falls out any
war hereafter, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so
get them up. Exodus. 1.10.

Verse 5. If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off?)
would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the grape gatherers came
to thee, would they not leave some grapes?
IF thieves came to thee, if robbers by night? Some translations render it,
came thieves to thee, or robbers by night? Tin. If the thieves and robbers come
to thee by night thou taking of thy rest. The Prophet makes use of this example
to make them sensible of the extreme misery that was to fall upon the^, which
should exceed the affliction of those that are robbed of thieves by night, as
if he should have said, do not think it a small judgment, O ye sons of Esau,
that is denounced against you, consider the terriblenes of being robbed by
thieves who break into your houses by night, put you into a great fear, carry
away your goods, leave you fast bound, and perhaps take away some of the lives
in the family, or torture them, to relate where the best jewels, gold, and
silver is, and all this to come upon you on a sudden, in the still of the
night, when you think to sleep quietly in your beds, yet shall this misery come
far short of that which is denounced against you.

How art thou cut off? some render it how wast thou brought to silence? this is
no more but the admiration prophesied of which should be all about them to see
their sudden downfall, and the greatness of it.

Would they not have stolen till they had enough? Tin. should they not steal,
etc. Here he shows them that God will not take away part from them, and then
go away, for fear like thieves, when they come to rob, but would send such a
judgment upon them as should sweep away all that ever they had.

If the grape gatherers came to thee, would they not leave thee some grapes?
Some render it gleaning grapes. Grapes are never gathered so clean, but they
leave here and there a few behind, though there be not a cluster to eat, Mic.
7.1. but the judgment here against the Idumeans is so terrible, that there
shall be nothing left, they shall be brought to utter ruin and shame, God will
make them bare, and uncover their secret places, and they shall not be able to
hide themselves, Jer. 49.10. O that the enemies of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
would consider of this, for certainly if they do not repent, such a judgment
will befall them, either here, or hereafter in hell: oh that the wicked roarers
and cursing Cavaliers of our Land that rage against the poor lambs of Jesus
Christ would repent, and leave the works of darkness, and walk honestly, leave
their voluptuousness, and drunkenness, their chamber works, and wanton
tricks, their contentions and malice, and come to walk in the light of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Romans 13.13. This would make England a happy Kingdom.

Verse 6. How are the things of Esau searched out? how are his hid things
sought up?
HOw are the things of Esau searched out? how are his hid things sought up?
Tin. But how shall they ripe Esau and seek out his treasures? The Prophet here
shows them how wonderfully God Almighty does discover all their sins, though
they be committed never so secret: wicked men do not consider how the Lord
does eye and take notice of all their ways, but he tells the Idumeans here, as
the Prophet Zephaniah did the Jews when their hearts were so heardened against
God, that they would not regard his word nor his Prophets, I will search
Jerusalem with lights, says the Lord there, and visit the men that are frosen
in their dregs, Zephaniah 1.12. There is nothing can escape the all seeing
eye of God.

Verse 7. All the men of thy confederacy, have brought thee even to the border:
the men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee: they that eat thy bread have laid a wound under thee: there is none
understanding in him.
ALL the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the border. Tin.
renders it, The men that were sworn unto thee shall drive thee out of the
borders of thine own land he declares that outward succor shall profit the
Idumeans nothing at all, and shows with what power the Soldiers should be
seized. Now Idumea did not only strengthen her self, with the men of War of
her own country, but by a league which she had made with her neighbor
Princes, she had strangers sent to aid her: He says that they with whom the
Edomites had made a league, even they themselves should break their oath, and
raise their ensigns and garrisons against them, and pursue them with the sword
till they had driven them out of their own land. The hearts of men are so in
the hands of God, that when it pleases him he strengthens them to conquer, and
at his will again they are subdued and overcome. The Prophet declares that
even the very same people that had bound themselves in a league, and sworn by
an oath to join with the Edomites, even they should gather together against
them, and drive them out of the borders of Idumea, that is quite out of the
land.

The men that were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee. Tind. They that be now at one with thee, shall deceive thee, and overcome
thee. He here confirms that which he said before, that even those in whom they
had the greatest confidence, and thought that such a peace had been confirmed,
as could not have been ratified, yet the prophet tells them that even in them
they should be deceived, The men of thy peace in whom thou art so confident,
they shall deceive thee, and prove thy ruin; which shows how vain a thing it
is to trust in man: As if he should say that the Edomites played the fools to
suffer themselves to be gugled with fair promises, for we need not doubt but
their neighbor Princes were forward enough in promising mountains, and
wonders, although slow to perform any thing.

They that eat thy bread have laid a wound under thee. Tin. Even that eat
thy bread betray thee. He further amplifies the matter, showing how little
confidence is to be found in unfaithful man in the time of trouble: He is (as
Solomon says) a broken tooth, and a sl^ding foot. Prove. 25.19. The Edomites
had put much confidence in strangers, and advanced them to great honor in the
land of Idumea, with whom they did eat and drink, and live as one people, but
see what confidence is in unconstant man, they bound themselves with an oath,
but secretly wrought treason, they promised them that they should prosper by
joining with them, but when they once gained an opportunity they became their
greatest enemies. A domestic enemy is the most dangerous of all, and of all
domestic enemies the table enemies do a Nation or a person most mischief,
because they are privy to most secrets: they of Tire, and their other
neighbors, that were so treacherous; are not excused for this, for though God
suffered them to be punished because of their sins, yet did not God do it
for their enemies sake, but to make his power known to rebellious Edom. Thus
says the Lord, for three trangressions of Tyrus, and for four I will not turn
to it because they shut the whole captivity in Edom, and have not remembered the
brotherly covenant. Amos 1.9 Breakers of leagues, ruces, and covenants are Romans
13. ranked amongst such whom God in his secret judgment has given up to a
reprobate sense, Faederum tutor and vindex Deus est, God is as it were a tutour
or protector of leagues, and severely revengeth himself upon the breakers of
them.

Yet must we take heed how we make covenants with Idolaters, and unbelievers,
lest they draw us from the true service of God, to the profane worship of
Idols, for they will cause thy son to turn away from me (says the Lord) and
serve other gods. Amos 1.6. And therefore says Paul be not unequally yoaked
with infidells. 2. Cor. 16.14. Which similitude may teach us this lesson that
the yoke so holds the yoked together, that either both must draw one way, and
so may we be drawn to Idolatry, or else contention will break the teame and
yoke in pieces, and so occasion some mischief to ensue.

There is none understanding in him. Tind. Or ever thou perceyvest it. He
shows here, that God did not correct them so rigorously, is for good reason;
for they were a people of none understanding, like those Isa. 27.11. a people
of no understanding: therefore he that mad^ them will not have mercy on them,
and he that formed them, will show them no favor.

For seeing that true wisdom consists in the fear of God (who is the
fountain thereof) does not the Holy Ghost justly condemn all them to be blind
earthworms, who despise God to walk after their own inordinate lusts.

And yet such a blindness cannot excuse nor free us from being guilty of
malice, for they that offend God do it maliciously, notwithstanding they be
hood winked in respect of the violences of their lusts: Ignorance and malice
they are joined together, yet so that this ignorance proceeds from a corrupt
desire of the heart, thence is it that the Hebrews call all sins generally
by the name of Ignorances: and thus Moses says, They are a nation void of
counsel, neither is there any understanding in them. O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. How
should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their
Rock had sold them, and the LORD had shut them up? Deuteronomy. 32.28, 29, 30. Now
every one may easily be drawn to subscribe to this, by considering in himself,
with what crooked affections he is carried away, for being once deprived of the
light of holy doctrine, and destitute of understanding the devil sets a man
going with such head-strongnesse, that he neitner fears Gods hand, nor makes
any account of his holy word. Hence lit is, that many brainlesse Bedlams are so
ignorantly desperate in wickedness, that they will not suffer their judgment
to be convinced, that their cursing, swearing, drunkenness, luxury, robbing,
plundering, and murdering the people of God, will bring them to destruction,
and damnation without repentance, and so go on roaring and domineering in the
world for a time till they be met withal by the hand of God, in suffering the
Devil to draw them to such cruelties against the people of God.


