A DIALOGUE Between the Two GIANTS In Guildhall, COLEBROND and BRANDAMORE,
CONCERNING The late ELECTION OF CITIZENS to Serve in PARLIAMENT For the City of
LONDON.

-- Odium, timor, ira, voluntas
-- nostri est Farrago Senatus.
Beza in Calvin. Quia eam urbem omnino non sine franis ccerceri posse cernebat.
Hook. Ecc. Polit. LONDON, Printed for the AUTHORS. 1661.

A DIALOGVE between the Two GIANTS in Guildhall, etc.
Brandamore. HOla! Colebrant?


Colebrant. Vous avez, Brandamore.


Brand. Who are you for? The Word?


Colebr. I am for the City Chymes, like our Nephews at Bow great Clock: The
Word's Six and seven.


Brand. That Is at no certainty.


Colebr. No, the City follow no fashions; they may be Court-lick'd, and new
dressed, like thou and I, but still we are in our old mode and garb; look as
finely dogged, and more proudly fierce than ever.


Brand. I wonder a vengeance how we came to be so fine.


Colebr. O, I Will tell you, 'Twas for the Reception of His Majesty at His
Entertainment in our Quarters: We were principally concerned, we were the
Grandees, the Great ones in that Feast. I was going to bid him welcome in my
own name.


Brand. I was going to make a Speech too, but it is so unlucky a place for
Speeches that I said never a word, but only by way of repetition I had digested
somethings into a monstrous form, and (if Giants had been ever reputed for
Scholars) made a large Oration of I know not what.


Colebr. You should not have lackt a Second, for I could have found in my heart
to have said Grace (as Hugh Peter's made Prayers out of News-books) out of Mr.
Pym's Speeches against King and Bishops in this place.


Brand. No, that is to be done yet: The Other morning at a Breakfast here betwixt
Cavaliers, Presbyterians and Independents, they made such a quarter, that waked
me out of a sound nap, with the loud cry of No Bishops.


Colebr. I wondered what a Gods name they meant, to be so fierce; never did
Oyster Wenches with more strength of lungs cry up Walsteet, than they cried
down them. But prithee what was the matter?


Brand. 'T was Election-day for Parliament Men to serve for the City of London:
I thought King Oberon was playing reaks among them: I was never so feared but
that at last they would name us two, they named so many.


Colebr. We should have made ill Burgesses, for Giants and Knights could never
agree, there has been such a mortal feud ever since Sir Guy's time between us;
that plaguey Sir Guy, I cannot endure to heat of him.


Brand. No, nor the City of tamer and more civil names of Knights, as Sir
Richard, Sir John, Sir William, etc. I think on purpose to continue the
quarrel, we shall hear shortly how they great, when the Knights are come to the
place of the Combat. But how was the business carried? for I stand on the
other side of the Hustings, and could not see so well as you.


Colebr. You saw the manner of holding up their Hands?


Brand. I thought they would have snatched my beard away so newly trimmed and
barbed, that I was ready to defend my self with my Halbert.


Colebr. The Antiepiscopal party carried it so currahtly, that both of us had
not hairs enough to serve the Hands on that side.


Brand. Then it seems they were the major part: But how came that to pass?


Colebr. Why, did you never hear of the Covenant? They that held up their hand
when they swore that, knew now to hold up their hand to defend it here: But
here were of all sorts; some who had made the Covenant like an old Almanac,
and had worshipped the Rumps Engagement; others that had idolized Oliver's
Recognition; but most agreed in the Center of Church Lands.


Brand. Pray, were there none of such Tender-consciences as yours or mine? And
I can tell you, we have been as well famed for Conscience (witness that byword
of Showing you the Giants at Guildhall) as Kiffin or Barebones.


Colebr. O yes, they came together in troops, one Pastor of the Congregational
Churches brought a hundred, another of the Holders-forth led sixty to the
destruction of the Beast: They stretched forth their hands as if they had
learned the Strappado, or the Dutch Gesling.


Brand. And who were they for?


Colebr. For the Moderate party, as they call it; that is a patcht Motly
colored sort, but whose complexion no way favored the Clergy; they were
indeed rather negatively against, than positively for any person; for judging
it impossible to have such an Election there as Kiffin once had at Brainford,
they only kept the balance in their hands, and when they had driven the
Market, factour'd for the two Factions of Presbytery and Independency.


Brand. I had thought those two (like two Buckets) could not possibly be
weighed up together.


Colebr. Yes, there is an Engine called Necessity made with the Screws of
Interest, that does it secundum artem; to that purpose a Poet in imitation of
Capt. George Withers Esquire, (in his Lamentation over his Sacrilege, and an
obstinate Rump that would not take his counsel how to continue their villainies
longer than God had determined) presented me with a Copy of Verses (though
Giants are no better friends to Poets than Poets to them, or the honest
judicious Reader to Withers, or Withers to him) where you have the conjobling,
consolidating or soddering of Presbytery and Independency most wonderfully
expressed. Pray lend me your next lug.


WHen Cuckoo Presbyter first robbed the Nest
Of the Harmless Dove, the smaller birds addressed
Themselves to it, and having learnt by rote,
Found 'twas a harsh, rigid and untuned Note.
But yet complied, while rubbed with Cuckoos mange,
They took their Conscience-liberty to range;
So they divide the spoil, and their lewd itch
Fell scratching of the RUMP (in English) Britch;
Whose blasts the Cuckoo'd borrowed Feathers ruffled,
But since Halcyon, both together shuffled.
No Cuckoos now, but Pyebald Sir John Daw;
Do you Kaw me, and I Will you likewise Kaw.
Brand. So then, this is a coalition or collusion of both these interests, in
opposition to all other: My Grandfather was no Latin Scholar to teach me, but I
know and have heard oftentimes here, that Vis unita fortior -- There Is no
distrust in a Halter.


Colebr. That Is plain English, but a monstrous Translation; for all that I
know, it may be the rendering of Analepsis Analepthe: My Brother Giant
Polyphemus was plagued with a fellow in Greek called No body, and I hear
there is a little body one Z. C. as versute and confident as he.


Brand. Those little fellows (according to Romance) always beat Giants, let us
meddle no more with them, it is well Squire Dun is not of our Extraordinary
proportion, but one whom most men's clothes will fit. But what mean you by Z. C?


Colebr. They are Conjuring Magical letters, that with the assistance of D. B.
would have lain all the Bishops in a trance for ever, far beyond our
Enchantments of the Seven Champions, that is to say, Dr. * Burgesse's
Sacrilegious purchase of Deans and Chapters lands, grounded on the title of the
Covenant; and Zach* Crofton'* intemperate zeal and vainglory of being its
Champion against Dr. Gauden's modifying it to an honest, and (as far as can be)
reasonable sense, made all this pudder, yea, and disturbed us and the Kingdom
too.


Brand. Is that all?


Colebr. No, these Paper Kites soared so high that they approached His Majesty,
nay reproached Him, by fixing many undutiful ( Scotch Covenanted) scandalous
things on Him; by dictating an Authority to be legally residing in Parliaments,
whereby they might impose Covenants, Oaths, and c. (worse than that Ex Officio)
without the King; and at last, by way of imprecation devoting the prosperity,
peace, and well laid foundations of a happy settlement, (nay not sparing the
King himself) to a speedy ruin and confusion.


Brand. Was not this He that used to subscribe himself the utter Enemy of the
Phanariques (by way of Emphasis) to his Every-day Books, those (...) of
Presbytery, the News-books of Schism and Sedition, which will hardly live a
Sparrows age, so hot and violent they are?


Colebr. Yes, yes, the very same; would make another glorious King, by
declaiming against Sectaries, whilst no man like him was graced at St.
Antholins and Aldgate with seditious Volunteers; the stream and confluence of
many boisterous unruly floods, diverted from their own current, running into
his channels, oreswelled him beyond the bounds and landmarks of his Allegiance.


Brand. I have heard say by some that make their vetdict under me, that Mr.
Jenkins lacks some of his Courage, and that he will exchange it for some of his
Cowardice; it is a sad thing any man should be fooled like Mr. Love. But I was
no High-Court of Justice man, what care I.


Colebr. That Is a terrible fellow our Brother Giant of Presbytery, the
invincible Mr. J -- he smites such slanting blows against the King, that Mr.
Crofton's lashes at -- were mere jerks to them, this huge body and spirit
defied once the Rump, and an Army of Redcoats with Mr. Love, but his great
courage soon quelled, and he woefully kissed their tail, to save the excrescency
from his shoulders, a head like a Mortar-shell stuffed with incendiary matter,
squib'd out every Sunday at C. C.


Brand. I am amazed to think a fellow that so cowardly, shamefully, basely
begged an unnecessary life of so rascally a Crew, should presume to affront the
Majesty of his lawful Prince with such Ifs and Ands; such Disloyal, if not T --
reflections, and undutiful reservations of Obedience.


Colebr. You must style it (after them) the Christians manner of Subjection to
Princes, according to the laudable primitive practice of Knox and Buchanan: But
if ever Giant were a Prophet, let Mr. J -- beware how he engages in a new
business, for there will hardly be any room left for another Petition, or
whidling Retractation.


Brand. By these Men and their Artifices this Presbyterian Cabal was driven on:
But pray tell me, with what countenance and behavior the overvoted Cavaleirs
carried themselves, I suppose they slunk down toward the End of the Hall by
your Post or Station.


Colebr. They had been so often used to those kind of Defeats there ever since
the Region of Isaac Penington, that they were as ready to drink a Cup of Sack
according to custom, as ever: They said that that place was never reputed for
any Moderate Counsels or Actions since Bodkins and Thimbles, and the Infection
of Publique-Faith-money and Plate; nor was never like to be, till those
reforming Adventurers saw the return of the Jamaica Silver Fleet. They said
they observed some Ruffs there, who having learnt from their predecessors [
Nullifidians] to believe in nothing but Mammon and Idols of Gold or Silver, did
so shrug at the Nomination of a generous Royallist, that fleeceth his own back
when he but pareth others with Subsidies and Tallages, that as if they had
drank a Caudle of Molten Silver, or been stupefied with some great loss or
bankrupture, they stood as still and as mute as stocks. And the most (through
disuse of trade with Courtiers) having no Debentures to double upon the
security of a Regal Parliament, and so not biased by a too great credit, had
no such impulsive considerations to elect Royallists. In conclusion, they said
the Court and City never yet understood one another, but were like the
Constellation of Castor and Pollux; a rising Courtier portending a decaying
Citizen, both never shining together.


Brand. The one made all of air, of fine thin air, as thin as I know what, as
thin as Puff-past, and as light as a feather: The other a dull heavy Meteor,
which never ascends above the Middle region of Honor, that is to be Knights.


Colebr. Knights again, away with um: Come, I Will give you another Stanza of
Verses concerning the City and the Court, worth a score of Knights, if they
were of Malta; but worth all the Brigade of Knights Oliver made: 'Tii to the
Tune of, When Arthur first in Court began.

THat which the Court from City does distinguish
Is nothing else but current Money English:
I wonder then there is so much difference now,
Since the Court's a ready Money Market too:
This makes the feud, the Courts the greater getter,
And yet the City's nere a jet the better.
Virgill. Metamorph, lib. 16. according to the newest Edition.
Brand. Well sung Dogrell, you would make a rare Panegyrist.


Colebr. What Is that, the name of another Giant?


Brand. No, a fine spoken fellow, that can make Harangues, Orations, bring
forth such mighty births of wit, that thou and I am mere Pygmies to them.


Colebr. What of this Fellow?


Brand. Why, this Fellow should write a Book of this famous Convention or
Comitia, where such and such brave Fellows were Candidats, and received the
repulse, and such and such were Elected, and received the repulse.


Colebr. Goodman fool, Elected, and received the repulse?


Brand. Yes, and that will be an honorable Come off too, if it be only so.


Colebr. What, you mean one of old Nol's tricks; who ever Shuffled, he would be
sure to Cut and Deal: Choose who they would, though never so Capacitated,
according to all his Qualifications, yet if they were not for his tooth, they
might knock at the House door, but no entrance; and this without any more ado,
or the People so much as minding it then; The Phanatiques crying it was ^^act
of Reason and Justice as well as Necessity.


Brand. No, no, what the old established Law of the Nation will warrant; there
are some private secret sins, which perchance had never come to light, but by
exposing some persons to public view in such a conspicuous quality of
Parliament Men, we subject them also to some more severer inspection and
scrutiny, especially where the life of a man and his actions have been so
notable -- -- You know whom: I mean?


Colebr. No, but I guess shrewdly; I remember my late good Master King Charles
the first, sent a Letter from Oxford to my next Master my Lord Mayor, and to
all my other Masters of the Common Council, there was a word in it called
Exception of some body; but I think that does not reach any body now, because
our present gracious Master King Charles the second has forgiven all. But
what is the business*


Colebr. That Is not yet fit to be mentioned, but it has some reference to
Oliver, about that ugly business which so lately received its reward.


Brand. Well, let that pass, Time is the Mother of Truth, But hear me, I think
I saw some strange faces there, which I never saw before?


Colebr. Yes, yes, the Brokers in Hounsditch and Long-lane had good rates for
the loan of their old Livery-gowns: I suppose if those Shop-books were
searched, the names of several illegal Suffragets might be found.


Brand. Did you never hear of one Ch^^^us, such another Wencher as Harry
Marten, who at the Celebration of the Rites of the Bona Dea, to be performed
only by Women in the Night* time, disguised himself in a Mary one stole (...)
and for admitted imp^^ted the Wife of Cas^^ during the Solemnity.


Colebr. What of that?


Brand. You shall hear a Giant mike a Comparison; Sic Magnus com^^^re Parva.
This last Convention or Meeting was the great day of the Diana of Presbytery,
which ought to have bean Hallowed only by the Companies, when some lewd
Rumpers, and other Allegiance-debaucht persons crepr in in the formality of
Livery-men, and defloured the City of that duty and obedience, and loyal
chastity (being the Kings royal Chamber) which she ought to have kept
inviolable to His Majestly.


Colebr. Well said: But what became of Clodius?


Brand. He was the richest Whore-master in all Rome, what with Sacrilege and
Oppression in his Government (which was like one of our late Major Generals o^
(...) Command) he had heaped up vast sums of* Money* which they fleeced from
him, and spunged out again; she work no doubt of or ensuing --


Colebr. I hope so; I am ashamed of my self, to see Rogues wear as good clouths
as my self, and Honest (...) go in rage and (...), while others wear (...)
their fortunes on their backs, and wipe their mouths, and say, What have I
done? But was not Cas^r in the mean while hainously offended at the dishonor
done him by his Wife*


Brand. She pleaded a rape and deceit, the second part of (...), and his
Friends and (...) Seat (...) the (...) injuries of such a high (...) ^
especially of Majesty, such a great spirit as was that (...) invincible Casar.


Colebr. Such (...) that of the Honest ^ thereof, have drawn up a short
Remonstrance; (...) expressing their sensibleness of the Coolness of some men's
affections to His Majesty in the late actings of the City, they declare they
will unanimously with their lives and fortunes defend His Majesty's most Royal
Person and Government.


Brand. What the Furre wont, the Buffe will. But I wonder what Evil Spirit
haunts this place, that can so soon unsettle and change the minds of men; it is
well our composure and substance is of a firmer harder matter, else we had been
Roundbeads too, turned round, and round, and about again; but praised be Jove
we stand stiff to our Loyalty.


Colebr. One would think the City had had sufficient experience what it is to
stand tugging with their Princes, they never yet but made a rod for their own
tails in the conclusion.


Brand. It Is an old restiness in them, the King has never such a generous
Steed in his Stables, setting aside that incurable inveterate malady.


Colebr. So it is indeed, all the bleeding in the world will never cure it.


Brand. I hope thee and I shall be thought nere the worse for it, nor other
Honest Loyal Subjects, of which I dare assure the King here is good store, and
more no doubt will be, when they feel and will willingly see the happy effects
of His Majesty's admired moderation and goodness.


Colebr. On some men that will make no more impression than upon us.


Brand. They Will have the worse on it then, for that obedience which men pay
perforce is the worst kind of Service, and I Will promise them they shall never
Rump it again.


Colebr. Nay, now they have (as they think) done their business, I believe the
wisest of them wish it undone again, lot it may chance to pro^^^^^ the single,
sense of the City, whose Tunes are not always the best Airs, and to be
universally danced after: There Is a difference now from what it was last year,
when it had the only lawful Magistrates within its Walls and liberties, and
what it is now, a subordinate Jurisdiction.


Brand. But yet they were very confident of driving on the Design; what else
meant those Letters posted into the respective Counties?


Colebr. They might as well have sent them by Tom Long the Carrier, or by
either of us, it would have come all to one pass, for they were intercepted,
and the Rhotomantadoes of Presbytery found in them, laid by for Waste Paper,
and the Epistolars dismissed with a Do so no more.


Brand. Marry that is brave; now had such a thing happened in the Usurpation, we
must have had a Common Hall, and such a Plot discovered, such a bloody Design,
would make me weep and relent to hear it; Mr. Thurloe or my Lord -- must have
made a Speech, and given the particulars, and then they must have gone home to
their Wives.


Colebr. And what then?


Brand. Nay, I was never out of this place, I know not what they do there, but
any man may suppose what comes with a fear, when all that Caudle, and Muskadine
and Eggs can do, is scarce able to keep life and soul together.


Colebr. I have heard a woundy many Plots here, where the Fox was the Finder;
but I think some of them have plotted very fairly.


Brand. So may all whose traitorous wits run upon such Designs. Well, and what
think you of the approaching P --


Colebr. It Is not for such Loggerheads as you and I to know or suppose any
thing of that illustrious grave Assembly; but they say that the
Countrey-fellows are such Malignants that they choose none but Royallists, so
that they say, in stead of a List of Parliament Men, we shall have the
Genealogy of Cavaliers; and our Folks, and such like, will look like the
Members of the other House.


Brand. You shall see there will be as fair a compliance, and as much good
Patriot-work done in this as in any other preceding; such slender opposition as
will by chance be made, will rather promote their zeal to their King and
Countries Service.


Colebr. I doubt not of it: But here will be before that time a Celebrity of a
Coronation, and that will awe and six men's minds a little better.


Brand. Would the City Engineer would have spared the City some cost^ and set
you and I on both sides some Street in London in room of a Pageant.


Colebr. The King has seen as already, and they can hardly give him any
delight, or contribute to the magnificence of that day with any thing out of
Guildhall, he has been so recently distasted from thence.


Brand. What the Devil shall we do here? We Will draw a Petition to be removed
hence, the Tarpawlins ever since that Election have continued such a bawling
and clutter as if they had been chufing Burgo-masters for the Fleet.


Colebr. Here Is a fine din, if it were not for one good word when they have got
their Money in their hats [ God save the King] I should never endure it; it is
a sad thing for us of this bulk to stand so long in Little Ease.


Brand. Let Us jump down when the Rogues have got their Money, and rob um, and
go see the Coronation, it is but making a week or two Play-days the while, for
we stand merely for Ciphers to be flouted at by every Cabbin-boy.


Colebr. I, and purge our selves as well as our Brother Swordmen.


Brand. And go and offer our service to the Kings Champion.


Colebr. I am clearly out of love with this place since -- I Will do any thing to
be gone.


Brand. I am well acquainted of this side with some young Clerks of the
Sheriffs Court, I Will get you and me a Habeas Corpus cum causa, and if the Judges
of the Land don't allow it to be just and Honest, let the Kings good Subjects
be bound as we are to others Ill behavior, and have no remedy but patience.


Colebr. Who shall be our Bail?


Brand. My Lord Mayor of Quinborough, and my Lord at Basing-stoke.


C. Agreed.


Colebr. Thus we the Genii of this place,
Rather then see a new Disgrace,
Defenseless leave this thankless Hall,
A brave Adventure does us call.

Brandr. The Lawyers help us with new Suits;
Farewell Presbyters Disputes,
And your late sad Reformation;
Welcome, welcome Coronation.

FINIS.

