A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A COVRTIER AND A SCHOLAR: Wherein several Passages of
State are briefly discuste for the further satisfaction of the Common People.
October: 13. 1642
Courtier. SIR, YOu are well overtaken, your habit renders you to be a
Scholar, and (for the present) a traveller likewise; I suppose you have been
at London, and elsewhere, to visit friends, as well as I that am an honest
Courtier.


Scholar. Sir, I am a mean Scholar, and as you conjectured, have been in
London, and other parts of the Kingdom, to see some old acquaintance, which
now I did the rather, least my purpose should have been prevented by the great
concourse of Cavaliers that do daily increase in all parts, which is a means
of begetting and increasing jealousies and fears in the hearts of travelers.


Court. What say people in those parts where you have been, concerning the
differences betwixt the King and Parliament?


Schol. Truly Sir, they tell me that they are amazed about those differences,
in regard both King and Parliament, do solemnly profess in their
Declarations, etc. that they do chiefly and solely intend the good both of
Church and Commonwealth, and yet notwithstanding, have now at last after the
loss of much time, and expense of a vast sum of the public treasure,
argued themselves into a civil combustion; and engaged the Kingdom in an
unn^turall and bloody war.


Court. I pray thee Scholar tell me, since both pretend to make the common
good the end that all their undertakings drive at, and yet go two ways,
directly contrary to effect ^t, whether of the two is best believed by the
Vulgar?


Schol. Sir, they tell us in the general, that they never heard of any
Parliament, being rightly chosen and assembled, that did ever prejudice the
Commonwealth, and therefore they dare not entertain dishonorable thoughts of
this, especially since the experience they have had of some, and the
information they have had of others of these Worthies, has rendered them
faithful to their Country, insomuch, that what ever pretenses may be made by
the one party or the other, yet they are resolved to follow our Saviors rule,
in judging of the Tree by its fruit. Now Sir, I must needs tell you, they
having lately seen our stately Cedar environed with the fluttering Ivy of
Prelacie, Popery, and Delinquencie, it makes them jealous; for they stick not
to demand, why a King of England (being seduced by evil Counsel) may not say,
he has done, and will do that, which he neither has done, nor intends to
do, as well as a King of Israel, whom God had appointed to be anointed over
the people, boasted that he had done that, which afterward he confessed he had
not done.


Court. Has not the King of late both fully and frequently declared himself,
that he will maintain the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the
Liber^ies of the Subject, and the Privileges of Parliaments. I hope he is
believed, and none make question of the real performance of what he has
promised?


Schol. Believe it Sir, the people distinguish betwixt those promises that are
made by a King seduced by evil Counsel, and those that are made by him when
such Counselors are removed from him your self will say, I suppose, that,
that man is very unlikely to perform his promise, that puts himself into such
a condition wherein he will be necessitated to break it; His Majesty has
heretofore declared, that he will maintain the Protestant Religion, and yet by
reason of the negligence (wilful negligence its to be feared) of those
Counselors about his Majesty, we have seen that Popery has been tolerated,
Masses frequented, Popish Priests and Jesuits favored; and if at any time
they have been questioned by some, and brought upon the stage of Justice,
authority has fetched them off again, as not suffering a hair of their heads
to perish; whilst in the mean time, many of the faithful Ministers of Christ,
faithful to their flocks, have been suspended, imprisoned, and unnaturally
used, and Popish idle drones and such like, advanced and promoted: Sir, the
people mutter at these things.


Court. Its strange that the people should have no more confidence in his
Majesty's personal promises and protestations, then to draw up such
conclusions as these are, and that about Religion too, which is of such
everlasting concernment to us all. Prithee what cause have they to think, that
the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Subjects should miscarry,
notwithstanding the Kings solemn assurances, that he will innovate nothing?


Schol. The small satisfaction that people receive, notwithstanding these
reitterated protestations, fetches its rice from this ground; They say, that
those Councillors which heretofore have so often flattered his Majestic into
error, they remaining still near unto his person, and their whisperings
having a chief influence into his proceedings, may prove fatal both to
himself, and his good people, and in a short time woo his Majesty's
resolutions out of his sacred breast, and divert his good intentions that he
had toward his people. Sir, they have had large experience of the accursed
fruits of these counsels, the multitude of Monopol^es, the exaction of
Loane-money, Ship Money, Goat and Conduct-money doc sufficiently witness
this: Besides their endeavors to advance the Prerogative beyond its due
limits, and their suppressing of the Subjects Liberties, their attempts to
parallel the Government of this Kingdom with that of France, and this (as some
conceive) has ushered in this intestine broyle, that so in case his Majesty
conquer, our old and new Laws may be destroyed, and he reign over us as a
conquered people by his will. And now of late their drawing of his Majesty
from the Parliament, which has been an unspeakable impediment to their
proceedings; the manifest retarding of supplies for Ireland, if not
countenancing of the rebellion there; the late executing of the Commission of
Array, the inlet of beggary and slavery; their plundering, and firering of the
houses of his Majesty's Subjects, their slaying of their persons, and
exercising of most barbarous and inhumane cruelties, and all because people
will not renounce their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and all that can be
called theirs. Sir, these notorious acts of injustice are not the Kings' but
his Ministers, who then can expect that these unnatural Vines should ever bring
forth good grapes, or that a Prince looking through the false glass of their
counsels, should possibly discern, or be enabled to judge what may be good for
his people.


Court. I but Scholar, thou know the King has done much in the pursuance of
his promise made to maintain the Protestant Religion by two late
Proclamations, the one for disarming of Papists, and the other for prohibiting
any to be of his Army, unless they should first take the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance?


Schol. But Sir, what satisfaction can this give the people, since it is
notoriously known, that many Papists are engaged in this service, and some too
necre His Majesty's person, and that in many places they have had their Arms
restored, and been themselves encouraged: pray Sir, who is it that rejoices
more in the divisions and distractions of this Kingdom then they? Assure your
self, their continual countenancing, supplying and assisting of his Majesty's
Forces, renders them to stand a tip-toe, expecting a booty in the issue if
that party prevail. Besides Sir, we know the shifts of many of them for the
present, their good service here has merited dispensations from the Pope, that
will tolerate them to go to our Church, and receive the Sacrament, and to take
the aforementioned Oaths, and any thing else, so they can but destroy the
Protestants.


Court. Well, letting those things pass, thou know S^holler, that of late
the King has sent to the Parliament Propositions of Pacification, that some
might meet on both sides, to avoid the shedding of blood, and the Parliament
refuses to appoint any; what think thou now, at whose hands shall all that
blood be required that already has been and is like to be spilt?


Sc. The Parliament has sufficiently answered the grounds of that denial; Sir
the intent of those Propositions may be guest at by that precedent Declaration,
which at one clap rendered the whole Parliament an assembly of Traitors, and in
that respect not capable to treat, and yet this must usher in Propositions of a
Treaty; Sir the Parliament desires that justice may be done for Justice sake,
without leaning to the right hand or to the left: besides Sir, where to find
fit parties to treat betwixt the King and his Parliament I know not; but this I
am sure of, that if it would please his Majesty to concur with his great and
best Council, that treaty would soon be ended; believe it Sir, the strongest
Bulwarks his Majesty can make to secure his royal Person, Crown and Dignity,
must have their foundations laid in the affections of his Parliament and liege
people, and not in the tottering policies of some Malignant and Delinquent
Counselors, backed by the undistinguishing vulgar.


Court. Prithee Scholar what would thou have the King to do? what do thou
conceive would give thy self and other his good people (as thou callst them)
satisfaction?


Schol. Truly Sir, I am confidently assured, that if his Majesty would be
pleased to return to his Parliament, and to concur with their Counsels, they
would make him the happiest Prince this day in Christendom; and this I doubt
not would give satisfaction to himself, and his Subjects also.


Court. Do thou think this would bury all acts of injustice (occasioned by
his evil Counsel) in oblivion, and exalt him in the affections of his
Subjects: so, that upon all lawful occasions he may command their hearts,
persons, and estates?


Schol. For my part sir, I am confident it would, especially when some few
scruples are removed, as the pretended passage of those letters twixt his
Majesty and the Pope; and further to vindicate his innocence from those
unhappie acts wherein those wicked Counselors had most dishonourably engaged
him (by setting the sadle upon the right horse) as the publishing of the book
that gave liberty to the exercising of sports and pastimes upon the Lords Day,
the authorizing of the late popish prejudicial Canons, the delaying to send
forth Proclamations about the Irish Rebellion, the Commissions or other
authority that the Rebels pretend to have from his Majesty, the staying of the
Lord Deputy of Ireland; and the stopping of provisions sent by the Parliament
for the relief of the Protestants there. Sir, would his Majesty be pleased to
clear himself of these and such like things, which have bred jealousies in the
hearts of his Subjects it would be a means to gain infinitely upon the
affections of his people, and to add a glorious luster to his undertakings,
which will the more facillie be effected when it shall once please his Majesty
to conclude his interest to be, to unite, and not to divide his Subjects, by
which means he may lay a stable foundation of peace to himself, his
posterity, and his people. Would he say to his great Council as David did to
his Counselors, What seems you best that will I do: 2 Samuel 18.4^
then no doubt but that all his Majesty's sayings and doings would be so
acceptable to his people, that it should be said of him as it was of David,
That whatsoever the King did pleased all the people. 2 Samuel 3.36.


Court. Thou speakst honestly, have thou any thing more to add?


Schol. Yes sir, a word concerning your self, and that is about David's
resolution laid down in the 101. Psalm, where he speaks of a
Court-reformation, Sir I am of opinion, that if it would please his Majesty to
cashiere such Courtiers as David there resolved to cast out of his presence,
there would be but a few left with our King, and then what would become of you
and many of my Coat I know not.


Court. Well no more of that, but now thou speakst of Scripture, prithee tell
me, Parson, what would thou make the subject of thy discourse if thou were to
preach before the King?


Schol. I would make choice of that portion of Scripture in the 1. King. 12.7,
8. hence I would urge the excellency of that advice which was given by the
Counselors of Solomon to Rehoboam, laid down in the 7. verse, viz. And they
said, If thou will be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them,
and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants
for ever. Then having demonstrated the worth of that advice in sundry
respects, I would proceed to the following verse, and therein would show the
sad and dangerous consequence of Rehoboam: disserting of the counsel of the
old man, and adhering to, and confiding in the destructive advice of the young
men, which was to speak roughly to the people, and to make their yoke heavier,
by adding to their former oppressions; and thus I would spend the whole hour
in explicating this Scripture, for I believe the weakest of my auditory would
be able to apply it.


Court. Believe it, Parson, the Courtiers would judge thee to be a
Schismatic factious fellow.


Schol. I care not for that, if ever there were a time for Gods Ministers to
cry aloud, and to tell the people of their sins; I am sure sir a Kingdom
divided in it self cannot stand.


Court. I have but a word or two more to speak, and then I Will leave thee;
Prithee tell me truly what in thy judgment thou conceiv'st to be the cause,
that may of those great Statesmen and Counselors now with the King are so
averse to the Parliament? For I do ingeniously confess, that I am convinced in
this, that how ever they prerend to retain honorable thoughts of Parliaments,
yet their actions carry in them a bitter malignitie to Parliaments.


Schol. Sir, many of the Counselors of State (his Majesty's unhappie
Favorites and flatterers) whose consultations and actions ought principally to
have respected the common-good, they have most unnaturally betrayed (as much as
in them lies) the liberties of the subject, and most notoriously abused the
trust reposed in them, by which means they have rendered themselves friends and
favorers of injustice and tyranny, which makes them now afraid to look their
spotted faces in the true glass of a Parliament; shunning the remedy that
thereby they might increase the disease: And certainly sir, their treacherous
dealings are now boyld up to such a height, that rather then acknowledge any
unlawful act, they will strive for an unlawful power to give it countenance.


Court. I am well satisfied upon thy answer. Yet I think this might have been
added, for their envy and malice seems partly to spring from this: They tell
us that lived peaceably and quictly before such time as this and the last
Parliament were called; but now questions are raised, and differences fomented,
and the peace of the Kingdom disturbed, etc.


Schol. Truly sir, it was a miserable peace that they and others likewise
enjoyed, being it was built upon the ruins of Law and Liberty; and I believe
that there are few so besotted but they can tell you of tho great inrode that
these men had made upon the Liberties of the subject; their perverting of the
Laws of the Land, and their tyrannizing over men's consciences, did cry out
most vehemently for reformation, which could only be hopte for in a
Parliament: And I am persuaded sir, that had not this Parliament been called,
and continued as it has been, we had been most of us long since either dead
men, or living slaves. Sir, this happy constitution of Parliaments is so
essential to the well being of this Kingdom, that neither the just Prerogative
of the King, nor the rightful privileges of the Subjects, could be maintained
without it. It was a witty similie of his, that said the Prerogative was like
unto a Stag, and the Liberties of the Subject unto a Corn-field, and the
Parliament like unto the Park pale that keeps the Stag out of the Corn. Now
sir, I suppose you would account it folly and madness in him that should
condescend to have the pale pulled up, and take the Stags word that he will not
come into the corn.


Court. I give thee hearty thanks for thy good company; yet this I Will tell thee
before I leave thee, that though thou have persuaded me, yet I will not be
persuaded: and though thou have convinced me, yet I will not be convinced, for
I am a Courtier.


Schol. Sir take this with you, such has been the corruption of Courtiers, and
some State-Counsellors, that it has begot a universal diffidence in the
people; Insomuch that all the honest and true-hearted Commons in England do now
seem jointly to look both for their safety, their well being, yea and being it
self, from the Parliament. And so adieu Courtier.


FINIS.

