A DIARY of the Siege of COLCHESTER by the Forces under the Command of General
FAIRFAX.
depiction of the city of Colchester and environs The SIEGE of COLCHESTER By
the Lord Fairfax, As it was with the Line and Outworks 1648
depiction of a compass rose with the cardinal points

depiction of Colonel Fothergall's fort Col Fothergall's Fort


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard


depiction of a foot guard Foot Guard


depiction of Fort Suffolk Fort Suffolk


depiction of Fort Rainsborough Fort Rainsborough.


depiction of Fort Bloyes Fort Bloyes


depiction of Colonel Fothergall's quarters Col. Fothergall's quarters.


depiction of Colonel Harvey's quarters Col. Harvey's quarters


depiction of Colonel Gourdon's horse quarters Col. Gourdons Horse quarters


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard


depiction of a foot guard Foot Guard


depiction of Colonel Bloyes' quarters Col. Bloyes his quarters


depiction of Colonel Sir Thomas Barnadileons quarters Col. Sir Tho.
Barnadileons quarters


depiction of Colonel Whaley's horse quarters Col. Whaley's Horse quarters


depiction of Fort Whaley, including Grinstead Church and a foot guard Fort
Whaley
Grinstead Church.

Foot Guard



depiction of the derelict Hythe mill Water Mill


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard


depiction of a water mill Water Mill


depiction of Colonel Scroops quarters of horse Col. Scroops quarters of Horse


depiction of Col. Ingolesby's quarters of foot Col. Ingolesby's quarters of
Foot


depiction of Colonel Ewer's quarters of foot Col. Ewers his quarters of Foot
at first


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard


depiction of Colonel Ewer's military camp Col Ewers Leagure


depiction of the great broom heath The great Broom Heath


depiction of Fort Ingolesby Fort Ingolesby


depiction of the town's waterhouse the Town Waterhouse


depiction of Grinstead's burnt house Grinstead house burnt


depiction of Lucas' house Lucas house


depiction of St. John's Benedictine abbey S. John's Abbey


depiction of Trinity Church Trinity Church


depiction of the Castle the Castle


depiction of St. Peter's Church S. Peter's


depiction of Maudline Chapel Maudline Chap.


depiction of St. Mary Magdalene's Hospital S. Mary Magdalens


depiction of the Hythe Hithe


depiction of the Gray Friars Franciscan priory Black Friars


depiction of the Crutched Friars Roman Catholic friary Crouchet Friars


depiction of Fort Needham Fort Needham.


depiction of Mr. Barrington's house M.r Barringtons House


depiction of Colonel Fleetwood's horse quarters Col. Fleetwoods Horse quarters


depiction of Fort Essex Fort Essex


depiction of Fort Barkstead Barkstead Fort


depiction of Lexden headquarters Lexden head quarters


depiction of a foot guard Foot Guard.


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard.


depiction of Colonel Cook's foot quarters Col Cook's Foot quarters


depiction of a cannonade Train of great Gunns


depiction of Colonel Hunniwood's foot quarters Col. Hunniwoods Foot quarters


depiction of five companies of Colonel Barkstead's regiment quarters 5 Comp.
of Col. Barksteads Regt. quarters


depiction of the dragoons' guard and quarters Dragoons Guard and quarters


depiction of a horse guard Horse Guard


depiction of the General's quarter of horse The Generals quarter of Horse


depiction of two of the Lieutenant General's horse troop 2 Troops of the
Lieut. Generals Horse


depiction of four companies of the Lord Warwick's regiment 4 Comp. of the Lord
of Warwick's Regiment


depiction of Colonel Harlackenden's horse quarters Col. Harlackendens Horse
quarters


depiction of the Colne River Colne River


depiction of Suffolk Road Suffolk Road


depiction of London Road London Road


depiction of Malden Road Malden Road


depiction of a road to the Hundreds Road into the Hundreds


depiction of Merry Road Merry Road


depiction of Cambridge Road Cambridge Road


depiction of East Street East Street


depiction of Maudline Street maudline Street


A. S. Martins B. S. Rumbals C. S. Tenant Chap. D. S. Nicholas E. Allhalows F.
S. James G. S. Botolphs H. S. Gyles I. North Gate K. East Gate L. Botolphs Gate
M. Shore Gate N. Head Gate O. High Street P. East Street Q. Botolph Street.
and. S. Marys R. Wire Street S. Cow Street T. Middleborow V. Bouchers W.
More-elm Lane X. Trinity Lane Y. S. Martins Lane Z. Tenants Lane




Tuesday June 13. The Lord Fairfax engaged in the fields bef^^^ Colchester near
S.t Mary's, the Lord Gorings Forces, together with the Forces under Command of
the Lord Capell, and Sir Charl's Lucas, and beat them into the Town; Colonel
St. William Leyton and between 4 and 500 of ye Kings Forces were taken
prisoners. (200 of them being of Colonel Farrs Regiment.) and in pursuit of
the rest. Col. Barkestead, with his Regiment, entered the Suburbs as far as
head-Gate, and entered ye Gate, but being overpowered there, and out of the
Churchyard, ye Kings Forces Barracadoed the Gate. (leaving near 500 men to our
mercy:) yet notwithstanding those foot, and Col. Needhams fought many hours
after in hopes to gain the Town at that place, but could not, the Kings Forces
making good resistance; there were slain of the Kings Forces, Col. Sir William
Campion. Col. Cook, and diverse Officers of quality, and about 80 private
soldiers; Col. Panton. Capt Brunkerd. Clifford, Wors op, and diverse other
Officers wounded. On General Fairfax's side Col. Needham. Capt. Lawrence of
Horse. Capt. Cox of foot and near 100 private soldiers and inferior Officers
were slain: when we entered the Suburbs, the Lord Goring was Summoned but
returned an Answer not becoming a Gentleman: The Word of the Kings Forces at ye
Fight was Charles, the ground they fought upon. Mary's: C^. Gods -- our help.

The Forces under the Command of General Fairfax engaged in ye Fight before
Colchester, June 13. 1648 As also the names of the chief Commanders and persons
of Quality of the Lord Gorings Forces engaged at that Fight.
General Fairfaxes Forces engaged in that Fight.
Part of the Generals Regiment of Horse, being 4 Troops, Commanded by Major
Desbrough. Of Col. Whaleys Regiment, 6 Troops, Commanded by himself. Of Col.
Fleetwoods, 5 Troops, Commanded by Major Coleman. Three Troops of Commissary
Genl. Iretons, Commanded by Captain Cecill. Two Troops of Dragoons, Commanded
by Captain Freeman and Captain Barrington.

Of Foot. Col. Barksteeds Regiment Commanded by himself, consisting of 10
Companies, about 800 men. Col. Needhams Regiment, lately the Tower Regiment,
Com^anded by Col. Needham, being 7 Companies, and about 400 men. Part of Col.
Inglesby's Regiment, of 4 Companies, Commanded by Capt. Grimes, 320 men.

Of the Essex Forces. Col. Harlackenden^ Regiment, of 4 Troops of horse,
Commanded by Major Robert Sparrow; and Captain Turners Troop of Dragoons. Sir
Thomas Hunniwoods Regiment of Foot. Col. Cooks Regiment of Foot, both which
said Regiments consisted of Auxiliaries, and Trained bands.

The County Forces of Essex left to secure Chelmsford and Mansden, two
considerable Passes, left more Forces should resort from London to the Lord
Goring.

Colonel Henry Mildmaies Regiment of Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons. Part of
Col. Carew Mildmaies Regiment of Foot, Commanded by Major Bard.

The Suffolk Forces, who made good the Passes over the River at Nailand
Stratford and Cadaway, lest the Enemy should escape toward Suffolk and
Norfolk, were under the Command of Capt. Fisher, Captain Bradling, and Captain
Sparrow, besides the assistance which Capt Ball, Capt. Cox, and the rest of the
Sea Commanders gave to secure the River.

The Suffolk Forces that came afterward to help besiege this Town.

Colonel Gourdons Regiment of Horse.

Of Foot Regiments. Colonel Sir Thomas Barnadistons, Col. Fothergils, Col.
Harveys, Col. Bloises.

Of the Army that came up after the Fight. Col. Scroop, with 3 Troops of horse
of his Regiment

The Lord Gorings Forces engaged in that Fight.
Of Horse. Lord Gorings Regiment. Lord Capels Regiment. Sir William Comptons.
Col. Slingsbies. Col. Sir Bernard Gascoignes. Colonel Hamonds. Colonel
Culpeppers.

Of Foot. Sir Charles Lucas his Regimt. Sir George Lisles Regiment. Colonel
Tilleys Regimt. Col. Tewk his Regiment. Col. Farrs Regiment. Colonel Gilburds
Regiment. Col. Sir William Campions Regiment, himself slain. Colonel Burds
Regiment. Colonel Bowmans Regiment. Col. Chesters Regiment.

Colonels who had no Commd. of Regiments, yet assisting at that Fight.
Earl Louborough, Lord Hastings, Sir William Leyton, Colonel, taken Prisoner,
and wounded. Col. Sir Richard Hastings, Colonel John Heath, Colonel Lee of
Kent, Colonel Panton wounded, Colonel Cook slain. Colonel Sir Hugh Orelie,
Quartermaster Genesis Col. William-Mexey, Col. Pitman, Col. Beal, Lieu. Col.
Hatch slain, Major Jammot, Adjutant Genesis besides diverse Lieutenant Colonels and
Majors who were assistants, but had no Commands.

Wednesday 14. General Fairfax perceiving the Lord Gorings Forces would not
stand the field, resolved to sit down before the Town in order to a Siege (but
being too few to Storm it) having not then nor when he first engaged, 1500 old
Foot, and but about 1500 Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons, (besides the 2
Regiments of the Trained Bands, under Col Sir Thomas Hunniwood, and Col Cook.)
the Lord Gorings Forces at that time being about 6000 Horse and Foot in Town,
and the Town and Suburbs larger in Compass than Oxford, and would require 5000
men to Besiege it; appointed Lexden in the road to London for the Head-Quarter,
where the greatest Body was to lie, to prevent more aid for coming from London
to the Lord Goring, and kept strong Guards of Horse on Cambridge road on the
other side the River, that they might not escape Northward to join with Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, leaving no place open to them, but toward the Sea, where
they could not go far; and the same day Our General sent a Party of Horse to
secure Mersey Island, to prevent the Kings Ships from coming into the River to
relieve the Town; the Besieged sent Col. Tuke with a strong Party an hour
after, -- but came too late.

Thursday 15. The Besiegeds Canon from the Royal Fort at St. Mary's, played
very hard killed several of our men, as they did the day before; some, as they
were raising the first Work called Fort Essex, others as they were straggling in
the field.

Friday 16: Nothing of importance happened, but. 3 of Capt. Canons men killed
with a Canon Bullet.

Saturday 17. A Trumpet sent in about the Exchange of prisoners, and this day
the Besieged got provisions out of Tendering Hundred, which we could not
prevent till ye Suffolk Forces marched to our assistance.

Sunday 18. We took 2 of their Frigots, the one with 10. the other with 11
Guns: and this day Col. Ewers came up with 6 Companies from Chepstow Castle:
The Essex Foot under Sir Tho. Hunniwood and Col. Cook endured many Canon shot
this day, and were very ready upon an Alarm.

Monday 19. The party of Horse sent from the Leaguer under Major- Sparrow and
Capt Wallingford engaged the Kings Forces at Linton. (coming to assist the Lord
Goring.) where Major Muschampe and others of the Kings Forces were slain, and
Master Reynolds, and others taken prisoners, the rest (about 500.) dispersed.
This day a Trumpet came from ye Ld. Goring, prentending to desire a Treaty of
Peace.

Tuesday 20. Answer returned, if a general Peace was intended, that then it
was proper for the Parliament to determine of that, and offered them in that
answer Conditions, Viz. The Gentlemen and Officers to go beyond sea, and the
Soldiers to go home, without prejudice.

Wednesday 21. The Besieged returned a scornful answer, moving for a
free-trade for the Townsmen.

Thursday 22. A small Party of the Besieged sallied out to view a new Work
(afterward called Col. Ewers Fort) -- but were instantly beaten in by
Musketeers. Their Canon killed two men of ours. That day the Lord Goring sent
a summons to the Suffolk Forces at Callaway-Bridge, Commdd. by Capt. Fisher,
and Capt. Brandling, to join with him, which they refused Resolving still to
adhere to the Parliament and Army.

Friday 23. The Guns began this day to play from our new Battery, which much
annoyed the Besieged at North bridge. Our General sent a Reply concerning his
former offer, offering the same Conditions again to all in the Town, Except the
Ld. Goring, Ld. Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas.

Saturday 24. One of the Besiegeds Canoneers was killed. This day the Suffolk
Forces advanced out of their own County, and took up their Quarters upon
Mile-end, over against the North-gate, being about 2500 Horse and Foot, leaving
a guard at Cattaway, and Nayland, to secure those passes.

Sunday 25. Nothing of importance.

Monday 26. A party of Col. Barksteeds Foot (the Besieged having drawn out near
the Almes-house) beat them from ye Hedges, and from their Court of Guard, fired
the Guard-house, and brought away the hourglass by which they stood Centry.

Tuesday 27. A Trumpeter went in with the Lady Campions Servant, with a Letter
to her husband for she did not believe he was slain.

Wednesday 28. Chewed and Poisoned Bulletts taken from several of the
Besieged. Affidavit made by those Soldiers of ye Besieged who brought them out
of Colchester, that they were given out by the Lord Gorings special Command.
These Examinations were sent to ye Lord Goring, with this Message from Our
General, That his men should expect no Quarter hereafter, if they used such
Bullets. This day early in the morning the Besieged, with a party of Horse,
very boldly attempted our Horse Guards near St. Mary's, shot a Scout, but were
instantly beaten back.

Thursday 29. They killed some Horse and Foot of ours with their great Canon as
they shot against our men, at ye making of Col. Barksteeds Fort, fired the
House which was lately Sr. Harbottle Grimstons, and at night fired Mr.
Barringtons house, a party of the Besiegeds Horse advanced over the Bridge at
Eastgate, where Ambuscadoes being laid for them by our Dragoon's, Lieut. Col.
Hatcher, and diverse other Officers and Soldiers of the Besieged, upon their
hasty advance were slain: none on our part.

Friday 30. Exchange offered for Sir Will. Massam, but refused.

Saturday July 1. Col. Whaley possessed Grinsted Church.

Sunday 2. Strong Guards kept that night to prevent the Besiegeds escape
Northward, we having notice of their intention.

Monday 3. and Tuesday 4. Little of moment happened, except a Porter; or
Chamberlain coming from the Bell in Gratious-street stole into the Town, with
Intelligence of the Earl of- Hollands raising an Army in and about London for
their relief.

Wednesday 5. The Besieged sallied out with a strong party, -- Commanded by Sir
George Lisle, surprised our Guard at Eastbridge, and gained two Drakes, but
advanceing to ye Main Guard were routed by Col. Whaleys horse, Commanded by
Major Swallow; 19 slain on the place, the Drakes recovered, and our former
ground also; Lieut. Col. Weston, Lieut. Col. Weeks, and 80 and odd prisoners
were taken, most of them sore cut for shooting poisoned bullets ( 20 of them
died the next day) On our part, we had slain Lieut. Col. Shambrooke, and some
others of Col. Needhams Regiment, who were engaged, Capt. Moody on our side
wounded and taken prisoner, and one Lieutenant and Ensign, and 40 private
Soldiers of ours taken prisoners also.

Friday 7. Col. Scroop sent from the Leaguer by our General, with a Regiment
of Horse, to engage the Forces under ye Duke of Buckingham and Earl of Holland:
got into a body to raise ye Siege.

Saturday 8. News of Col. Rossiters routing the Pontefract Forces at Willoughby
field, where 3 Troops of the Army were engaged, and many of the men wounded;
Colonel General Sir Philip Mouncton, Major General Biron, and diverse Officers
of quality taken prisoners by Colonel Rossiter.

Sunday 9. News of the Earl of Holland, and Duke of Burckinghams being routed
in Surrey, and of the Lord Villiers being slave by Sir Michael Leversey, and
Major Gibbons, who Commanded a party of Horse of the Army.

Monday 10. Several of the Besieged came away to us; new^ came this day of the
taking of 600 Horse in Northumberland, and of Sir Francis Ratcliff, Col.
Tempest, Col. Gray, and other prisoners, taken by Col. Lilburn.

Tuesday 11. We had a Gunner and a Matrosse shot, as they were battering St.
Mary's steeple. News came this day of ye Earl of Hollands being taken prisoner
by Col. Scroop; and Sir Gilbert Gerrard, and others of quality, and that Col.
Dalbeer was slain, and their whole force dispersed at S. Needs in Huntington
shire.

The 12 and 13. Little of moment happened, only Mr. John Ashburnham offered in
exchange for Sir William Massam, but not accepted; and this day the messenger
who came to Our General with a Letter of the taking of Waymer Castle in Kent,
took his oppertunity, and carried it into Colchester to the Lord Goring, and
took up arms there.

Friday 14. The new Battery being raised against St. John's, from the Lord Lucas
house, 2 pieces of Canon played thence, made a breach in the wall: The Soldiers
entered, fell on immediately, drove the Besieged out of the first Courtyard
into the second, and thence into ye Gatehouse, and the same day a -- strong
party of Horse and Foot fell upon the Hieth, and stormed the Church, and took
all the Guard therein prisoners, being about 70. and that night we possessed our
selves of the Hieth, and a great part of the Suburbs, which much troubled ye
Besieged: the Suffolk Foot did well in this service

Saturday 15. The Gate House being a place very considerable, and mighty
advantageous for us. Our General resolved to storm the same, though it had a
strong work before it; whereupon 6 Soldiers, for 3 shillings a piece,
undertook to throw in Grenades, and 20 men to carry Ladders for half a Crown a
piece, and a Commanded party of Foot to storm, led on by Major Bescoe, which
accordingly they did as soon as 8 piece of Canon had given fire upon the
Besieged, and the Grenades did great execution the Ladders were placed with
much advantage, the Besieged much dismayed, forced to quit there -- works, and
fly into the Gate House, one Granadoe kindled their Magazin, and blew up many
of the Besieged, the rest were taken prisoners, and slain; the prisoners
confessed they were above a hundred in the Gate House and work, and few of them
could escape, 13 at one place were pulled out the next day from under the
Rubbish. This night the Besieged endeavored to escape with their horse,
Commanded by Sir Bernard Gascoign, and past the River between the North-bridge
and middle Mill, and had the Miller for their Guide, but ye Miller when he came
into the Closes, ran away, and the Pioneers after him, and our Sentinels giving
fire, the Besieged retreated; The Suburbs was Fired in 6 or 7 places, which
burnt in a most-dreadfull manner all night long, that the Town might be seen
almost as well by night as by day, so great was the flame. And on Sunday the
16. other Streets were set on fire, with design to consume the whole Suburbs,
but by the industry of the Inhabitants and Soldiers it was prevented. This day
our General had certain Intelligence. That an Army of Scots under Duke
Hamilton, had invaded the Kingdom and joined the Cavaliers under Langdale.

Sunday 16. Our General sent a Summons again to Surrender the Town: The Lord
Goring, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas jointly returned Answer (in writing)
under their hands to our General. That if the Trumpeter came any more with
such a Summons, they would hand him up. The Conditions then offered to the
Soldiers, was. Liberty, and Passes to go to their several homes, submitting
to the Authority of Parliament.

Monday 17. Again more houses were fired toward ye North street, and other
places. This day our General had certain News brought him of the Surrender of
Pembrook Town and Castle, Langhorn, and Poyer submitting their lives to mercy.

Tuesday 18. Their Horse again attempted to break through toward the North,
but were beaten in again.

Wednesday 19. Seventeen of the Besieged this day came -- over to us, and their
Horse were all drawn this day into the Castle-yard, and a certain number out of
every Troop was chosen to be killed; and there were told in the Castle Baily,
700 horse belonging to the Soldiers.

Thursday 20. They killed their horses; one Butcher ran away rather than he
would do it. The Besieged at night drew out their Horse at 12 of the clock, and
afterward at 2 of the clock in the morning to escape, but our men were in such
readiness they durst not advance.

Friday 21. News came of Captain Batten's Revolt to the Revolted Ships,
deserting the Parliament, and turning to the King.

Saturday 22. Several Soldiers ran from the Besieged, much complaining of
their Diet in horseflesh, and a Trumpeter was this day sent in again to
expedite ye Exchange of Sir Willm. Massam, for Mr. Ashburnham, but ye Besieged
refused it, as also to admit of ye exchange of the rest of ye Committee, though
they had Gentlemen of very good rank offered for them (quality for quality) in
exchange.

Sunday 23. The Besieged roasted a horse near the North-bridge to make the
Soldiers merry at ye entrance into such Diet; this day our General had
Intelligence of Col. Lamberts engagement with the Scots, near Appleby: where
above 100 Scots were slain. Col. Harrison and others on our part wounded.

Monday 24. Nothing of moment.

Tuesday 25. The Besieged had a hot Alarm round the Town about 12 at night, and
a party in the mean time fired the Middle Mill, with the loss of three men,
and cut off a sluice, but the fire did not take, so the design proved
ineffectuall at that time; at the same time we shot 20 Arrows, (with papers of
advertisement offered) into the Town, to undeceive the Soldiers; acquainting
them with what Conditions were offered them, and shall still be made good unto
them, if they come out: which coming to some of their knowledge above 200 came
out by that day 7. night.

Wednesday 26. Nothing of moment.

Thursday 27. A Troop of the Lord Capells sallied out, and took 3 or 4 men as
they were working upon the Line, near St. Botolphs, and wounded one miserably,
being a Country Soldier and but a spectator.

Friday, Saturday, and Sunday 28. 29. and 30. Nothing of moment.

Monday 31. In the night about 20 of them with Spades, 6 only having Muskets,
past the first Centinell as friends, saying, they were come to make an end of
the work where they wrought the night before, but were fired upon at the second
guard, had a Lieutenant slain, and retreated, and took a Sergeant with them
prisoner.

Tuesday August 1. A Cornet, Quartermaster, Corporal, and one Trooper came
away with their horses.

Wednesday 2. and Thursday the third, there came several Soldiers from the
Besieged, much complaining of their ill diet with horseflesh, and said it was
attended with Gentlewomen in white-Gownes and black hoods (meaning Maggots,) so
that they could not eat it, and that it had brought many of them to the flux.

Monday August 7. Nothing of moment happened: this day it was resolved at a full
Counsel of War, to proceed by way of Approaches in order to a Storm.

Friday 11. Nothing of note. This night 30 houses were burnt.

Tuesday 15. Many men came over this day from the Besieged, and the poorer sort
of people began to rise for want of bread.

Wednesday 16. They rise in great Numbers, and come to the Lord- Gorings
Quarters, some bringing their Children starved to death, they crying out so
long as Horseflesh, Dogs, and Cats were to be had, they did not complain. This
day the Mayor of Colchester sent a Letter to the Genesis That the Inhabitants
might come out, for that they had no provision, it being all seized by the
Soldiers. Our General returned answer, He pitied their condition, but to
grant that, was to make the Town hold out longer, and did not stand with his
trust to permit it. This day we had the news of the killing and dispersing the
Princes forces by some Horse and Foot of the Army, commanded by Col. Rich, near
Deal; and also of the regaining of Tinmouth Castle by Sir Arthur Haselrigg.

Thursday 17. The Lord Goring, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, who before
threatened to hang our Trumpeter if he came any more with a Message for a Party,
desired Our General they might send to the Kings Forces, and if they had not
relief within 20 days, they would then Treat. Answer was returned by Our Genesis
that he hoped in much less time than 20 days, to have the Town without Treaty.
All things are preparing in Order to a storm.

Friday 18. No action but preparation for storm.

Saturday 19. The Besieged sent for a Treaty to surrender.

Sunday 20. The General returned an answer to their offer for a Treaty, That
all Soldiers and Officers under the degree of a Captain, (excepting such as
have deserted the Army since the 10 of May last) shall have Passes to go to
their several homes; and all Captains, and Superior Officers, with Lords, and
Gentlemen to mercy.

Monday 21. The Besieged turned out of the Town in the night, many men, women,
and children, but the next morning took them in again.

Tuesday 22. The Besieged sent out Major Sheffield one of the Committee that
was prisoner in Colchester, that they would surrender upon honorable
conditions, and desire to know the meaning of ye word mercy. This day the news
of routing the Scotsh army came, which we sent into the Town.

A Manuscript of COLCHESTER taken out of the Records of the said Town.
Anno 219. Coell Duke of Brittanie began to build the City Raymore otherwise
Colchester. Anno 238. Coell Duke of Colchester began to Reign over Essex and
Hartford-shire. Anno 242. Helena Daughter of Coell was borne at Colchester.
Anno 260. Constantius Captain of the Romans in Spain comeing into Britain
besieged Colchester the space of two Years. Anno 264. The Siege was Raised by a
match Between Constantius and Helena. Anno 265. Constantine the Son of
Constantius was born in Colchester. Anno 288. Constantius then was called
Ceasar of the Gauls. Anno 289. Constantius when he had Slain a considerable
number of the Almaines that woarsted and over run Gassia: being called Ceasar
of the Gauls was now Saluted Ceasar Augustus. Anno 290. Coell when he had
Slain Asclepodatus, the Tyrant Reigned over all Britain but was tributary to
Rome. The same Coell Duke of Colchester. Anno 297. Coell King of Britain Dyed
in Colchester the Second Month. Anno 298. Constantius Returning out of Gallia
disposed of the Kingdom. Anno 299. Constantinus the Emperor dyed at York, in
the Sixteenth Year of his Empire. Anno 303. Helena upon the death of
Constantinus made a Vow of perpetual Widowhood.
FINIS.
Printed and Sold by Tho: Witham at the Golden Ball in Long Lane near West
Smithfield LONDON


