A DIALOGVE BETWIXT RATTLE-HEAD AND ROUNDHEAD, Neutralius being Moderator
betwixt both.

WITH Their peaceable agreement, and their Conference for maintaining their
several Opinions.

With the Argument against Bishops.

Full of mirth, and repleat with witty Inventions.

LONDON, Printed for T. G. MDCXLJ.

A DIALOGVE BETWIXT RATTLE-HEAD, AND ROVND-HEAD.
Roundh. IN the very portall or Entrance of this Tractate, friendly Dialogue,
or zealous commerce, we intend to discourse, touching the Etimologie of your
late published Pamphlet, which in respect our Answer was not sufficiently
punctual, therefore we have singled out this opportunity, for a more edifying
conference.


Rattleh. To It roundly then, and as I first began to write, so you to speak?


Neut. And for my part I Will hold with the wisest.


Roundh. Then thus deer brother, I do much admire that you being of so near
affinity to us in Religion can find no means to conjoyn an unity?


Rattleh. Only perverseness in the vnitage of your circular opinions, being
grounded on nothing but the ends of the Cobblers simplicity, whose long stitches
I fear in conclusion, will go near to lose your souls from the upper leather.


Neut. H^s words are dangerous, expound it well, stick but close to him, you will
put him in a Tub?


Roundh. That Is my desire, and had J him but once there, I Would all I wished for,
assist me then.


Neut. Assist ye, I Will first hang ye, do I come hither as a Constable to
command you to keep the Kings peace, and learn a new religion, for to help you
out before you are in.


Roundh. Dear brother Ruttlehead, did you but know the path, that perfect rode,
by which, tread the ready way to heaven, you would soon renounce your church you
follow now, and turn to us.


Rattleh. Your doctrine should be better first?


Roundh. Would you but grant attension, hear me speak, and but compare your
form of government with ours, I Would soon transport you to a haven of happiness,
by changing your opinion, and confute you by your own words.


Rattleh. Do so, and win me, make it appear by grave dispute what you have
said: and first begin to nominate those orders (wherein we differ) that are so
highly extolled by you.


Roundh. I shall do that, and more to gain a soul.


Neut. Here is like to be a game well played, when souls are at stake?


Roundh. First, then as for our Church, I mean the visible and select Church,
not the shadow which you so much adore, full of Papisticall Images.


Rattleh. No, a Barn?


Roundh. You interrupt me, and misconster to my real meaning, that same
Church: I say, whereas the brethren and the holy Sisters meet, where you shall
see a man unlearned, divinely expound upon a piece of Scripture, delivering
nothing but by inspirations, no toralogicall expressions, or Scolasticall
sentences whereby to hinder the benefit of the attentive Auditory: after him a
Sister, whose zeal toward the Church is inexpressible, that delivers nothing
but what the Spirit moves; is your form of teaching then like ours?


Rattleh. No, nor is it fit it should be: since when I pray was this same new
found Platform of teaching invented, when instituted, who are your Authors for
this your admirable device; away with this simplicity, either speak wiser, or
not at all.


Roundh. It seems then any thing concerning our Church will not be allowed on,
how stand you then affected toward your own,


Rattleh. As every true Christian ought, maintain it with my blood, and
uttermost endeavors.


Roundh. Say you so, can that house stand, whose principle foundation is
defective; or can that Church be the true Church, whose principal heads are the
instigators unto evil: Rat. you cannot lay that aspersion upon us. To. yes,
and most justly too; what are those neither Rattle-heads nor Roundheads, I Am
sure they are wicked heads.


Rattleh. Now Sir you have hit the mark, your documenting Tailor, never put a
yard into your hand that made better measure then this: I must confess that
they are guilty, and have been a dishonor to the Church, but wherewithal do
you accuse them.


Neut. Hold, hold my Masters, I came to be partners with you in your Religions,
but now I fear you will turn Cat in the pan and be both one; and so betwixt two
stools, my arse fall in ground.


Roundh. So shall we be both happy, and like brothers embrace with affectionate
zeal: but tell us thy opinion concerning our argument.


Neut. Truly Sir, to speak my mind of Rattleheads, Roundheads, Loggerheads,
etc. I am of the opinion, there is never a barrel better herring.


Rattleh. Short and sweet, Jack of both sides, but brother Roundhead what say
you to the former proposition concerning the heads we spoke last of.


Round. As for his Graceless Grace these shall be my objections against him:
by his uncontrollable hand at Lambeth, he made the High Commission his Delegat,
his Creature, his Fawn, his obliged servant; his tyranny over good and able
Ministers, insomuch as their ears became as familiar as sheeps ears; and so
cheap as they hung upon that Babylonian image Cheapside-Crosse like labels,
that if any wanted a pain they might have an easy penniworth in them: if these
be in his commendations, I will speak of him everlastingly.


Rattleh. J must confess this same little man has many great faults, yet when
error is like to incur, a speedy censure, and ambition were it never so
overtopping like to suffer. Humanity cannot choose but find a tear, and Piety a
sigh, at the survay of such a sight. To see the Metropolitan of a flourishing K
ngdome lose his head, is ^o ordinary Spectacle.


Roundh. The sooner, the better: such an ordinary would I give twelve pence
but to look at.


Rattleh. I must confess it would be no great eye sore nor hearts grief to me
neither.


Roundh. Since, then we are almost reduced to one opinion, be conformable to us
in uniting your selves to us in Religion, and so make us all happy.


Rattleh. As for that, my mind is altogether contrary to all your precepts
therein contained, contradicting us especially concerning your Church
government; we therefore shall take further time to discourse of it: but for
this subject, wherein we agree together, if it be your pleasure, we petition
the Parliament for a redress, I shall assist you.


Roundh. With all my heart.


Rattleh. And since we writ invective Songs one against the other in our former
books, let us now sing old rose over a pint of sack, and jovn our methods
together to compound one unanimous thing to the former purpose.


THE SONG.
Rattlehead. BIshops hold your wonted prattle,
Rather now provide for battle
An enemy has vowed to rattle
Your tippets from your Crown,
Roundheads Round.

Roundhead. Take your Miter to the field
Let it serve you for a shield,
'Twill pay your Ransom if you yield:
We have resolved it so
To lay you low.

Rattleh. Let Lawn-sleeves serve instead of Buffe,
And for your Arms your partled ruff,
You may be fierce it is pistol proof:
It is your dismal fate
Come down Prelate.
Your grown is firm, and coat of male
Your Graces person to impale,
But that your Honor now grows stale:
There is a new way found
By Roundheads Round.
Look to your selves, our show is dumb,
We give you warning ere we come,
We mean such Birds as you to plumme:
Farewell, till time produce
You no excuse.

per Roger Rattle-head. and Alexander Roundhead.

FINIS.

