Vox Caeli; OR, Philosophical, Historical, and Theological
Observations, OF THUNDER. With a more General view of Gods wonderful Works.
First grounded on Job 26.14. but now enlarged into this Treatise.

By Robert Dingley, M. A. once Fellow of Magdalen College in OXFORD; now
Minister of Gods Word at Brixton in the Isle of WIGHT, and County of
SOUTHAMPTON.

Psalm. 29.4. The voice of the LORD is powerful, the voice of the LORD is full
of Majesty.

Job 37.5. GOD thundreth marvellously with his Voice: Great things does he
which we cannot comprehend.

Propterea Tonitrua; Propterea Fulminum Terrores; Ne Bonitas DEI contemnatur:

Basil. in Proaem. ad Regulas fusius disputatas. LONDON, Printed by M S. for
Henry Cripps, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pope's Head Alley, 1658.

TO My Honored Friend Major Samuel Bull, Justice of Peace, and Captain of
Cowes Castle in the Isle of WIGHT.
SIR,
MEn of your profession have been Lovers of Learning; Rudis miles ad Bellum
concurrit, qui causam Beili ignorant. Tacitus.
And Great Soldiers have been good Scholars. Moses, the Leader of Israel, was
skilled in all the Learning of the Egyptians. Aristot. Rhet. lib. 5.
Alexander was so bookish, that he sent for the Works of Philistus into Greece,
being gone so far in Asia, that Books were wanting: Also it is said of him,
that Homer was still under his Pillow, when he slept. Julius Caesar; a great
Conqueror, and as great a Scholar, witness his Commentaries. I need not tell
you, that in our Nation, Waterhouse Apol. for learning. 127, 128.
Edward the 3d. Henry the Eighth, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Walter Raleigh, and
Harding the Historian, (besides many others) were excellent both for Learning
and Valor; and could equally handle both the Sword and Pen. Nihil firmius,
faelicius, laudabilius que Republica, in qua abundant milites eruditi, says
Vegetius de Re nal. lib. 1.
Vegetius. All which I mention to provoke our Military Worthies to the Love of
the Muses. And, thanks be to GOD, Religion and Learning do grow every Day more
and more in request. Plato said, There was as much difference between a Learned
and Ignorant Man, as between the Non intellects nulla est curetio morb
Physician and his Patient; Aristotle thought, as between the Living and the
Dead.

Rome saw her best days under her most Learned Kings; such as Numa, Augustus,
Titus, Antoninus, Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem sui. Quintil.
Constantine, and others. Yet Learning has had her Enemies in all Ages, this
not excepted: Licinus gave this Motto, Pestes Reipublicae Literae; Learning is
the bane of a Commonwealth.

But Sir, I know you wish well to our Universities, the Fountains of Learning.
Your Activity and zeal for God, and the Truth, are so remarkable; your Love to
the faithful Ministers of Christ so cordial; and the particular Favors you
have conferred on me so Numerous; that, not to Love and Honor you for the
first, would be Impiety; and for the latter, The Spiders Motto, Nemini Debea;
is also the ungrateful man's song.
Ingratitude.

You have been the Instrument of conveying the Gospel to a West Cowes in this
Isle.
Town that never before enjoyed it; consisting of about a thousand souls; and
have helped to build them a Luke 7.5.
Synagogue. Nay, the beams of your Goodness, Justice, and Vigilance do
stretch themselves into all places of the Isle: And O that we had many Rari
quippo boni, Numero vix sunt totidem, quot Thebarum Portae. Juvenal. 13. Satyr.
more such as your self to countenance Religion and good Men in this place: I
wish that all our Gentry were such as you are; Then would our At Newport.
Lecture, and conference be more frequented; Vice and Heresy be more curbed;
and the hands of good Pastors and People more strengthened in the work and way
of the Lord: And then should our Isle be more happy then any of those called
the Turk. Hist.
Fortunate Isles; or then Cyprus, that is called the Blessed Isle, for her
great variety and abundance of all things.

So commending you, and all fearing the Lord, to the Blessing, Guidance and
Protection of the Almighty, I shall ever approve my self,

Sir, Yours in the things of Christ, Robert Dingley.
From Brixton in the Isle of Wight, 1658.
To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
WHosoever dis-believeth not the Creed of Nature, that God is, cannot doubt
that God was, and was a glorious volumn of all, Psalm. 90.2
and more then all imaginable perfections, before there was any thing else: The
first Edition of himself was in his Work of Creation: Man was (not only
himself a great part of the work, but withal) the Reader to whom it was
directed; Being by the Authors goodness, designed the person, for whose use
'twas published. How much of God he came to the acquaintance of by this Book,
and how perfectly he was able to read it, before he sinned, I may not take upon
me to determine: How little, (generally) we have profited by it since, is of
no very difficult demonstration. That some learned Christians have been able to
squeeze the greatest mysteries of our Religion, out of the writings of some
Heathens (who are presumed to have no book, but that of the creature, to find
them in) shall pass for me as an Argument of their industry. But what shall we
say to a great many more pretending to altogether as familiar an intimacy with
the works of Nature as those could do? This learned throng have studied (you
know) this great subject, to so little purpose, that they have amongst them
found out, some, almost as many Gods, as there be Creatures; and others knew
not how to see any one at all: And such amongst them, as have taken upon them
to instruct the rest of the world, in the nature of the Gods, had not eyes open
enough to see the destruction of their subject in the plurality of it, nor that
the making of many was the marring of all: And what notions the present
Inhabitants of the remoter parts of the world, have of God, (who have no means
to discover him by but this) you have an account so full of sadness, that (I
know Reader) your love to mankind will not suffer you to receive it without
pity. Is then the Transcript, which God has given us of himself, in the work
of his Hands, blotted? No; Acts 4.12. Acts 14.17. Romans 1.20.
but our understanding is: Those that have no other means to know God by, have
means enough: not enough, so that they may be saved; but enough, so that they
are without excuse.

And setting aside the helps God has graciously afforded us in a second and
third Edition of himself, by the words of his mouth, and the Son of his Love;
so shallow is our acquaintance with the Character this great Volumne is written
in, that the chifest Secretaries of Nature do not seem to have knowledge
enough to see their ignorance of it: Of all those things that are extant,
concerning the principles, Essence, and Natures of the Creature, how many of
them are such, Quae docti fingunt magis quam norunt? which you must either
believe gratis, or may easily be forgiven, if you believe not at all? When a
confused multitude of Contradictions are competitors for your Assent, it is
merely at your courtesy, which or whether any of them shall have it.

The Schoolmen think that some Objects are not intelligible by reason of their
perfection; Such are those Natures that are abstracted from matter, as Angels
and Souls: Others by reason of their imperfection; as the first matter,
privations, and all things else, Quae debilem habent entitatem: Idest, we are
ignorant of many things, by reason of our want of knowledge; There being
nothing in the whole Creation, that is not knowable, objective, in it self;
And that there be so many thousand things that are not so subjective, unto the
wisest of us, must needs be from some defect at home: which I hope may prevail
with us to a penitent consideration of that which is lost; and a wise and holy
improvement of what we have left.

In order whereunto, we shall have no great need of any man's Rhetoric to
persuade us, that such a Volumne, as that of the Creature is, was not written
to be neglected: A piece made up of innumerable varieties, where there is
nothing superfluous, nothing defective, nothing out of order, no Errata's at
all, where the Matter, the Method, the Style, are all unimitable; whence if the
Author should strike out but one syllable, all the Angels in Heaven could not
supply it again. This Epistle was not written to the sons of men to be laid
aside: No, (Reader) we should study the works of God; Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4.
They are such as ought to command our meditations; Not to please our phancies,
but to further our duty. In every creature we may read God; and we look upon it
to little purpose, if we do not in the least Creature, much of God: Deus ita
artifex magnus in magnis, ut minor non sit in parvis: He is so great a Workman
in his greatest works, that he is not a jot less in the smallest; His
omnipotency, wisdom, and goodness in ALL. No power below Almighty, no wisdom
that is not infinite, can make a Sparrow, a Gnat, a Straw: No goodness less
then Gods could give the great benefit of Being to so many useful, necessary,
pleasant, excellent Creatures, for the comfort of one.

And our Duty will be altogether as legible as our God; that we ought to fear,
love, obey, praise, admire, adore such a workman; and not to censure, despise,
abuse any part of such a work: If we take this course, even in those Operations
of that Almighty hand, which have most of mystery wrapping them about; though
we may miss of finding out the work of God, we shall yet light upon the God
of the work,; and though we may not satisfy our Curiosity, (which would be
but the payment of contribution to a vanity) we shall discharge our duty; and
if not in knowledge, yet (which is a more desirable proficiency) we shall grow
in grace: It will never, Reader, I assure you, repent either you or me upon our
deathbed, that the creature, which has retarded the motion of so many toward
heaven, has facilitated ours; or that we could never look upon Heaven, Earth,
Sea, Beast, Fish, Foul, Plant, Worm, but we saw our God.

For our help in this, my much Honored Friend and Neighbor, the Reverend, and
Industrious Author has taken a great deal of learned pains, in reference
especially to those works of God, which lie much out of sight: If you will,
Reader, search the work of this good man, that is before you, 'twill the
better enable you to profit by the unsearchable works of that great God, which
are beyond you; and this he has done in the former part of this Treatise.

And for your better direction in the view of such a prospect, as the works of
God will afford you; And to teach you how to use your natural eyesight to a
spiritual advantage you have already from the same hand DIVINE OPTICS; Divine
Optics by R.D. 1655.
and a Taste of God, besides what it gathered from his works, in his DIVINE
RELISHES; Divine Relishes by R. D. 1648.
that first and last he might furnish you a Table, wanting nothing of what
shall feast you to all Eternity; the cheer being now and hereafter the same;
Only we shall then be called nearer, and have better Stomachs. Whilst you are
in the way thitherward, you are in Gods; The Angel Guardian by R. D. 1654.
and the Author will assure you of a Particular Angel to be your Guardian: And
how high a favor from God is such an Attendant for such Creatures? For you and
I, Reader, are inconsiderable pieces of Dust and Ashes.

The latter part of Thunder was occasioned by hose claps, that sounded so often
in our ears the last Winter: I hope the Proverb is crossed, Winters Thunder
never did English man good: If this do not, having brought forth these leaves,
laden with so much rich fruit, 'twill be English men's fault.

Men are naturally apt to entertain low thoughts of God; Psalm. 42.3. Job 21.15.
Exodus 5.2. Job 22.13. Psalm. 73.9. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
and out of the abundance of their hearts have wicked mouths accordingly
spoken, where is your God? what is the Almighty? I know not the Lord: Can he
judge through the dark clouds? Thus, They set their mouth against Heaven, and
lightly esteem the rock of their salvation. I have read of a King, (that
reigned in no very remote part of the world,) who having received a blow from
the hand of God, took a solemn Oath to be revenged on him; and ordained that
for ten years space, no man should pray to him, or speak of him; Nor so so
long as he was in Authority, believe in him: And of a Pope that would have his
Pork (forbidden him by the Physician) Al despetto de Dio, Pope Julius the third.
in despite of God.

To root these undervaluations out, and in their stead to fill our hearts with
holy, awful, reverentiall apprehensions of the infinite power, greatness,
glory and majesty of the Almighty God (beside what we have in his holy Word) we
have such a full demonstration of him in his Works, that we must either deny
them to be his, or confess him to be a God, greatly to be feared: Psalm 89.7.
Deuteronomy. 7.21. Pal. 33.8. humanas motura tonitrua mentes.
A mighty God and a terrible, whom all the earth should stand in awe of.

And what work of God has he qualified into more advantages of leaving upon
our spirits awful apprehenhensions of the Author, then this of Thunder? when
the Scriptures mention it seldom, (if at all) is it, without the addition of
some Declaration, either of the Majesty of the Author, or the awe and terror
it does or should beget in the Auditors. When the Lord Thundreth in the
Heavens, Psalm. 18.3. and 29.3. Job 37.4, 5.
it is the HIGHEST that gives his voice. The God of GLORY Thundreth. He
thundreth with the voice of his EXCELLENCY. God Thundreth MARVELLOVSLY with his
voice. The clouds poured out water, the Skies sent out a sound, thine arrows
also went abroad; the voice of thy Thunder was in the heavens, the Lightnings
lightened the world. What then? The earth trembled and shook, Psalm. 77.17, 18.

Virgil. lib. 1. Georg.
Ipse pater media nimborum in nocte, corusca
Fulmina molitur dextra: Quo maxima motu
Terra tremit: fugere ferae, and mortalia corda
Per gentes humilis stravit pavor.
Many dreadful effects of Thunder, you are remembered of in this Treatise: If
it fill our hearts with high and holy and reverential thoughts of the
Thunderer, that you constantly fear before him, it is one, I am sure, that the
Almighty Author does design, and the very best that the work can produce.

Bid gives us the Relation of a holy man, who never heard a great gust of
wind, but he would presently call upon God for mercy, and beseech him to be
gracious to the sons of men: If the wind increased, he would lay all other
business aside, and attend alone to that one of Prayer. If Thunder and
Lightning followed, he would then make have to the Church, and spend his time
in Religious exercises till the storm was over; And being asked by his friends
why he did so? His answer was, have you not read; Psalm. 18.13, 14.
The Lord thundered in the Heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; He sent out
his Arrows and scattered them, Lightnings and discomfited them. And it is
recorded of Aquinas, that when it Thundered, he was wont to fall down, and with
much devotion to pray, Lord help and succor thy servants, whom thou have
redeemed with thy precious blood. Job, Job 38. and 39. and cap. 40. ver. 4.
Cap. 41. and 42. verse. 6.
( if we be not mistaken in those definitions, which we have received of that
virtue) had not many equals for Magnanimity and Fortitude; and yet after an
account of the greatness of God, discovered in his mighty works, how full is
his heart of awfulnesse and fear? And his friend Elihu, being to mention the
excellent, mavelous, roaring voice of Thunder (they are his own expressions)
knows not how to do it without a preface clothed in fear and reverence: At
this also my heart trembles, and is moved out of his place, Job 37.1, etc.

Neither should it be any abatement of our respects to the great God, that
Thunder is known to have its natural causes; For those causes are kno^n to
have their cause too, and are but the effects of an higher. Nature has nothing
to boast of, but what God endoweth her with, who acts without it, beside it,
above it; Contracteth or enlarges it, even as he pleases; And when he does
not either of these, yet does he not leave any thing, at any time, merely to
the hand of its Causes, but has himself an Agency in the Production of it,
and that an immediate one; Immediatione virtutis and suppositi say some; At
least virtutis is confessed by all. Nature has nothing that she has not
received, neither is she Independent in any one (in the smallest) operation;
For that would argue an Independency of power, and that of being; which none
can challenge but God alone.

Do not say; Then, every thing that comes to pass in the world, and even the
daily employments of Nature must call out our hearts to I know not how many
duties; For can you tell why they should not? Is there any possibility of
supererogation? Can you love, fear, praise, admire, adore our God too much? But
yet (Reader) the greatest manifestation of the power and majesty of God, should
work most: Thunder is one of these; and a voice of the Almighty, loud enough to
awaken our hearts to all these sorts of acknowledgments: The reverend Author
has made it his present business, in the ensuing Treatise to persuade our
attention to it: The discourse is pious, and has cost him some pains; Your
Prayers are desired that it may be useful, and afford the people of God much
profit: which I am the more persuaded to hope of it, when I find it to be
(though in more words) not a jot more then that pathetical exhortation of the
Apostle, Heb. 12.28, 29. Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably
with reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire. Which will
abundantly praeponderate the prejudice it might otherwise receive from its
Conduct into the world, by the unable hand of so obscure and inconsiderable a
Person as,

Reader, Your servant in the work of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, Edw: Buckler.

THE CONTENTS.
TWo Observations raised from Job 26.14.

That the highest operations and most excelent works of GOD cannot be reached
by Man's understanding.

The Reasons 7.

Man's darkness and sloth since the Fall. Ubi, of the gross errors of
Philosophers: Of our want of Reading, Traveling, Meditation: Of the Brevity of
Life.

The variety of Species and Individuals.

The infinite wisdom of God, which is stamped upon all his works. Ubi, of
imperfect, false Descriptions of Gods works: Of some Rarities in Nature, for
which no reason can be given.

Gods Power and Wisdom is displayed in GREAT and SMALL creatures. Ubi, of the
Whale, Elephant, and Precious Stones.

Men are admired who have any thing well IMITATED Gods Works.

A Mass and multitude of wonders do attend the visible Heavens.

PROVIDENCE is very mysterious, and is a kind of continual Creation.

The Inferences follow, which are four.

See their presumptuous folly and madness, who pretend to know GOD and all his
works.

See the necessity of Universities and Learning. Ubi, of unwearied diligence in
study. Philosophy a fair Handmaid to Theology.

Read what you can of GOD in the Volumn of Creation and Providence.

Comfort for Saints; In heaven we shall know more of GOD and his works. Heaven
the rarest of Gods Works; It has been long preparing for us.

The terrible Meteor of THVNDER, is a most lively manifestation of the LORDS
greatness and power; The trumpet of his glorious Majesty and matchless
Perfections.

Four enquiries in the opening of this Truth.

How this expression in holy Job may be taken and understood? Answ. 3 ways.

What Thunder is? Ubi, of it is Name, Nature, Effects. Also of the Thunderbolt,
Tempests, Lightnings, Earth quakes, Hail great and fearful.

Of violent Thunders and Lightnings mentioned in our Chronicles, with dreadful
effects.

If any other then GOD be the Author, Instruments of these things?

Answ. 1. GOD, the efficient cause of Thunder, which is his VOICE. A Digression
of speech, and how many ways GOD is said to speak to us. How the voice of Man
has been loud, terrible, and persuading. Stopping our ears in time of
Thunder, proved to be a SIN.

Answ. 2. There be other Isntrumental causes of Thunder. Good, and Evil
Angels chiefly.

In what cases especially or occasions God has manifested, or will discover
his power and glory by supernatural and most terrible Thunder.

At the castigation or overthrow of his and the Churches enemies in battle or
otherwise: Diverse of Gods enemies have been routed and destroyed by Thunder and
Lightnings.

When the moral Law was delivered on Mount-Sinai: Of which 8 reasons are given.

At the Promulgation of the Gospel. A Digression of Miracles under the Gospel;
and why none wrought 800 years before Christ.

That the Gospel was confirmed by Thunder, is proved by diverse Scriptures, and
some other Authors, also by testimonies from the Gospels Enemies.

Four Reasons why the Gospel was confirmed thus.

There will be dreadful Thunder and Lightnings at the day of judgment: Proved

1 By diverse Scriptures, 4 full places for for it.

2 By four Arguments or Reasons why it will be so.

A Digression of the unknown Time.

The Inferences follow; which are four.

This Doctrine of Thunder is in travail with terror to all the enemies of
God, and his people. Thunder proves a Deity.

Reproof to such as out-brave Thunder: Ubi, of such as have presumed either to
slight or imitate this work of God. That Sodom was burnt with sulphurious
Lightning, proved out of Tertullian.

Next, matter of admonition to six duties, viz.

First, when you hear it Thunder, fear before the great Jehovah. It Is a
marvail how sinners dare go to sleep when it thundreth.

Secondly, Follow right means to provide for your safety, by getting into the
arms of Christ: For,

1 Some repair to the strongest places and buildings for shelter: The vanity of
this shield.

2 Others will ascribe rare Qualities to the Eagle, Seal-skin, Fig Tree,
Bay Tree, and ringing consecrated and baptized Bells. The folly and
superstition thereof.

3 Some few in the time of much Thunder apply themselves to Prayer holy
conference: Ubi, of laying aside our Recreations when it thundreth.

Thirdly, when the Thunder is over, be not afterward secure; but cherish a
filial awe of God upon your hearts; that the graces of his Spirit, may, like
Swans eggs, be hatched with Thunder.

Fourthly, Be not unsensible of the last Winters praeternaturall Thunder. Ubi,
How it fools the Astrologers, presuming to foretell Thunder in their Almanacks:
and that such should not be tolerated in a Christian State.

Fifthly, Learn to trust in the great and all-powerful God, who is able to
defend and deliver you.

Sixthly, Let Gods spiritual and mystical Thunder by his Word and Boanerges,
at length awaken us.

Where it is showed,

1 That Ministers should thunder in their Doctrine, by earnest, sound, and
powerful preaching.

Caution: Place not good preaching in loud speaking.

2 That the people should labor to profit by powerful Sermons, as so many
Alarms from Heaven.

A Digression; of profiting by the Word, though the Minister be not so holy as
we could wish him.

Lastly, This Doctrine of Thunder comes yet with an Olive Branch of Peace and
Consolation to the Saints, from diverse Scriptures, intimating that God is
careful of his people in time of Thunder and Tempests.

Comfort fetched in,

1 From Natural considerations; As, That Thunder is from Natural causes, and
often produces good effects in the Air and Earth.

2 From spiritual Meditations, chiefly four;

First, God of old was wont to reveal himself by Thunder; Now in a soft and
still voice.

Secondly, Thunder and Lightnings are disposed and ordered by the Lord.

Object. Then surely none of Gods children receive any prejudice by it?

Sol. 1. We may not vote all such as suffer by Lightnings and Thunderbolts to
be Gods enemies.

2 The good being in bad places or employments may suffer with the bad.

3 It may be the wise God fore-seeth greater evils and trials would befall
them if they should escape.

4 Hereby he does warn the wicked what to expect.

5 God usually does preserve his People in such perils.

6 If they perish by them, they are hastened into Heaven, though in a fiery
Charet, with Elijah.

Thirdly, Thunder and Lightning have been serviceable to the Saints. 1. By
kindling the wood for sacrifice. 2. By oppossng the Churches enemies, viz. 1.
Such as are enemies to her Truth: Heretics and other Novelists have been
destroyed by Lightning and Thunder: An Item for Lay-Preachers. 2. Such as are
Enemies to the Churches Peace, have also been subdued by Thunder.

4 There is yet another Consolation for the Saints; No Thunder nor Lightning in
Heaven; They can no more hear our Thunder, then we their Hallelujahs.

All closed with a Cautionary Advice to the Saints: Not to fear Thunder with a
low and slavish Fear.

Indices Finis.
THE AUTHORS which are quoted in this TREATISE.
ABbot. Abulensis. Aelian. Ainsworth. Albertus. Clem: Alexandrinus. Alsted.
Ambrose. Isaac Ambrose. Andrews. Annotations. Tho: Aquinas. Aristotle.
Augustine. Avicenna. Babington. Bacon. Du Bartas. Baronius Basil. Baxter. Beda.
Bellarmine. Bellonius. Bernard. Borrhaeus. Dr. Brown. Bullinger. Anthony
Burges. Calvin. Cambden. Camerarius. Joseph Caryl. Casaubon. Caussin.
Chrysostom. M. T. Cicero. Cyprian. Day. Despagne. Empedocles. Erasmus.
Evagrius. Eusebius. Dr. Featly. Feltam. Ferus. Gallen. Dr. Gouge. Gribaldus.
Hugh Grotius. Bishop Hall. Dr. Hammond. Heidfeldius. Dr. Heyling. Hildersham.
Hez: Holland. Hug de S. Vict. Huart. Jenkins. Jerome. Josephus. Isidore.
Junius. Juvenal. Lactantius. Cornelius a Lapide. Lanquet. Lawrence. Leigh.
Lightfoot. Lyranus. Magirus. Marlorat. Martial. Mead. Melancthon, Mendoza, Seb:
Meyer, Henry Moor, Mornaeus, Musculus. Gregory Nazianz. Nicephorus.
Nierembergius. Samuel Oats, Origin, Osiander, Ovid, Pareus, Perkins, Pierius,
Pignetus, Philippus Plato, Pliny, Plutarch. Polanus. Quintilian, Sir W.
Raleigh, Ramus, Dr. Reynolds. Rivius. Rupertus. Rutherford. Rueus. Salvian.
Sands. Scaliger. Shepherd. Diodorus Siculus. Simler. Solinus, Sozomen, Strabo,
Strigelius, Stow, Tacitus, Tertullian, Tostatus, Tremelius, John Trap,
Vegetius, Lud: Vives, Vossius, Waterhouse, Watson, Weems, Dr. Willet, Ystella,
Zanchius, cum aliis.
FINIS.
Job 26.14. But the Thunder of his power, (or his powerful Thunder) who can
understand?


IN this Chapter holy Job gives in his Answer to a third Disputation of his
second friend, Bildad; which Response of Job has two hinges to move on;

1 An utter dislike of Bildads dealing with him; as if what was urged by his
Friend, were not only short, but wide of the Mark: And this he does in the
four first Verses of the Chapter.

2 A Declaration of the Majesty, Power, and matchless Excellencies of Jehovah,
in himself and his wonderful works, which Bildad only glanced at; And this he
performs in the remaining part of the Chapter.

In this 14 verse, holy Job concludes his Meditations; and after he had given
an Enumeration or Induction of diverse particulars, he presents unto his friend
the whole Fabric at once, confessing it to be very defective. Behold these are
part of his ways, how little a portion is heard of him? But the Thunder of his
Power who can understand?

Observe two things from the Text;

1 In general; The Lords highest operations and most excellent Works cannot be
reached by Man's understanding.

2 In special; The terrible Meteor of Thunder is a loud Manifestation of the
Lords Greatness and power; And the Trumpet of his glorious Excellency,
Majesty, and Perfection.

Heavens, and what above them: What he did before the World was created, and
what he will do after its dissolution. I grant that men have attained to much
knowledge of Gods visible works. It Is said of King 1 Reg. 4.33.
Solomon (the wisest of men Christ excepted) that he knew all Plants from the
Cedar, to the Hysop growing on the wall. And of Acts 7.22.
Moses, that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: Of Daniel,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 1.17.
that the Lord gave them knowledge, with all learning and wisdom. Job also had
great knowledge of Gods works, and so had David and Paul.

Pliny is called by Erasmus Thesaurus, imo mundus, rerum cognitu dignissimaru^:
A storehouse, Nay, a world of Things, most worthy to be known. Austin says
concerning Jerome, Quae Hieronimus nescivit nullus hominum unquam scivit: No
man ever knew that thing of which Jerome was ignorant. Aristotle is styled by
one, Vltimus conatus Naturae; The very Masterpiece of Nature for knowledge and
understanding in all things.

Yet notwithstanding, that the highest Works of God cannot be grasped by man's
understanding, will evidently appear by these seven Mediums: As,

Adam in his state of Perfection had vast knowledge of the Creatures; They were
all brought to him Gen 2.19, 20.
to see what he would call them: So, he gave names to all the Creatures, and
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the (standing) name
thereof. This plainly shows us Adams great knowledge, and wisdom in Natural
things. For names were given at the first according to the several Natures and
Properties of the creatures. Plato in Cratillo shows us that the Man who would
give the right Name to a thing, must first know the Nature of it very well; And
so questionless Adam did, when he gave a Name to every creature.

But this knowledge of Gods works was much stained and darkened by the Fall and
Apostasy of Man: As we now see but the Back-parts of God, Christ through Cant.
2.9.
the Lattesse only; so says Job, we see but part of his ways. As well may an
Hive of Bees fathom the Actions of Princes, as we the Works of Creation and
Providence. Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
We know but in part. Austine.
Maxima pars eorum quae scimus est minima eorum quae ignoramus. All that we
know is little, if compared with that which we know not. He that has read and
considered the story of Plato de Re-publ. l. 7.
Plato's Cave, will not wonder that ignorant folk, nursed up in darkness,
should please themselves with poor shallow conceits, as having never heard, or
seen better: He will also collect, how absurd their former conceptions will
appear to them, when afterward they shall have imbibed a little knowledge.
Camerarius his Historical meditat. l. 3. etc. 3.
By nature we are chained up in a Cave of Darkness, taking mere shadows to be
things substantial, and substances to be shadows. Imperita Rusticitas credit
se omnia scire; Ignorant confidence has the wings of an Eagle, the eyes of an
Owl. One that has little knowledge may be admired by the Ignorant, Inter
saecos luscus regnare potest: A purblinde man is King among the blind. From
the Darkness and Pride of men came those many odd opinions concerning the
works of God; For Critias the Philosopher held the soul to be Blood. Porphiry
did attribute Reason to bruit creatures, Sir Walt Ral. Hist. of the world, l.
2. cap. 13.
and Melampus Language. Nay, Empedocles held, that not only Beasts but Plants
had Intellectum. The Stoics (on the other side) would not grant, Vitam
stirpibus, that Plants have life. Olympiodorus Platonicus, held the Nieremberg.
Not. Hist l. 2. c. 3 P. 18.
Elements were animated and distinguished by Sexes. Idem. li. 2. c. 11.
Seneca will needs have it that Comets are engendered not in the Air, but above
the Moon. Those two great Lights, Austin and Lactantius denied there were
Antipodes; which Hackwell may have leave to wonder at; Many Schoolboys now
being able to resute that Error. Aristotle (Natures Secretary) held the world
to be Eeternall, that there are but 8 Spheres, and that the Aristot. Meteor l.
2 c 11.
Torrid and Frigid Zones are inhabitable (which experience contradicts.) The
Basilidians held there were as many Heavens as days in the year. The Nierem.
Hist. Not l. 2. c. 8.
Chaldeans believe, that strong lusty men help move the Heavenly Orbs. Sir
Walt. Ral. Hist. of the world, l. 1. Chap. 3.
Eusebius (misled by Josephus) supposed that before the Flood, Angels, taken
with the beauty of women, begat those Giants. Philip Melancthon says, the Sun
is nearer the Eearth, almost by ten thousand Germane miles, then it was in
Ptolomies days, yet this Melancthon a very learned man. Copernicus held that
the Earth moves, and the Heavens stand still: Which strange opinion (so
contradictory not only to Reason, but Psalm. 104.5. and 19.5. Josh. 10.13. Ergo
fol movet.
Scripture) has found too many favorers in our Schools of Learning. To all
which let me add a witty conceit in Ludovicus Vives, upon Austin; He tells of
a Barbarous Nation, that condemned, executed, and ripped up an Ass, to recover
the Moon out of his belly, which they supposed he had swallowed, because they
saw him drink at the water, where the Moon appeared by reflection; And
immediately thereupon (she being muffled up with Clouds) they missed her.

Thus you have abundant proof of that darkness which has been on the
Intellectuals of Man since the Fall, in relation to Gods wonderful Works: And
as our Eyes are dim, and cannot see much, so our sloth is great, and our
inadvertency and heedlesnesse inexcusable, in that we seldom look into the
volumn of Creation, or at best but with careless and transient eyes.

Few there be that will give themselves, or bend all the Faculties of their
souls to study and consider God in his Works. The Pierij Hieroglyph. lib. 24.
cap. 22.
Sybaritae would not suffer a Cock to crow in their City, nor any Smith to work
till Noon, lest their sleep should be disturbed.

How many live without the sweat of their Brow in labor, or of the Brain in
study and meditation? The Cat would feign have water, but is loath to wet her
foot. Idleness is a Stepmother to the Muses. The Cyclopes thought man's
happiness did consist in Nihil agendo, in doing nothing. But no excellent
thing can be the child of Sloth. Who can expect if a multitude of leaden
letters be cast off the hand, to find amongst them an exact poem? God Exodus
13.13.
ordained the neck of the consecrated Ass should be broken, in stead of
sacrificing him; peradventure because that Creature has ever been the
Heroglyphick of sloth and laziness.

Here may justly deserve blame, the want of Reading, Traveling, and Meditation.

1 The want of reading and studying such Authors, as write of the Works of God.
Vita hominis sine literis mors est; The unlearned is a dying life.

The Scholar, like a Be, gathers honey from every flower, knowledge from every
Book he touches. Yet Lewis the 11. King of France, charged his Son to learn no
more Latin but this, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere; He that cannot
dissemble and flatter (said he) knows not how to live. When the People Aelian.
of Mytilene became masters of the Sea, they inflicted this punishment on those
that were revolted from them, that they should not teach their children to
read. He that is minded to apply himself to Reading, says Seneca, may have
private conference with Zeno, Pythagoras, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and other
Authors of good Arts; and he shall ever find them at liesure to commune with
him. The want of reading, and learned education, makes people as a barren
soil, unmanured, unplanted: No marvail such are grossly ignorant of Gods works.

2 Next, The want of Traveling in such as have Time and Means for it.
Alexander speaking of his Travels, would often say, that he had discovered more
with his eye, then other Kings had comprehended in their thoughts. Men do but
guess at the works of God abroad, that go merely by the relations of others.
One journey to the Alps will show thee more then many Histories do record. Let
Claudian mention it as a point of happiness for ones Birth, Life, and Burial
to be all in a Parish: But how great advantages have those that Travel into
diverse Nations? How many Rarities of Nature do they see? What strange creatures
which be not in our Country? what craggy Rocks, Mountains aspiring toward the
Sky, magnificent Buildings, goodly Vine-yards, choice and delicate Fruits of
the Earth, which our cold Climate affords not; Diverse Antiquities and Monuments
of great note; Rare men; the Courts of Princes; the customs of Nations, etc.
Such as go voyages by Sea, must needs see Psalm. 107.24.
many wonders of God in the Deep. He has lived (says one) but in a large
chest, that has seen but one Land. Italy, Feltham Resolves. Cap. 10.
France and Spain are the Court of the World: Germany, Denmark and China are as
the City of the World; The rest are most of them Country and Barbarism. It
were an excellent thing in a State to have a select number of judicious
Persons, Note.
thus employed into several parts of the world, and be bound once in seven
years to give the Nation some account of their Travels in writing, for the
benefit of such as stay at home; and that Pensions might be allotted for that
end. This would be a better employment for the youth of our Nobility and
Gentry, then to rust at home; Bowl, Dice, and Drink away their golden Time.

Again, our ignorance of God and his Volumn of Creation, may be charged on the
want of Meditation in all men. We see diverse of Gods works in the poorest
Village; but we do not weigh and ponder them in the Balance of Meditation.
Christ therefore Mat. 6.26.26.
calls upon us to Behold the Fowls of the air, and to consider the Lillies of
the field. We see these things, but do not bend and buckle our mind to the
Object, that we consider the workmanship of God in them. The generality of men
Job 37.14. Isa. 5.12.
regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider the operations of his
hands. They hear it Thunder, but it strikes no awe upon their hearts, because
they never consider it is the voice of God. They hear the whistling of the
Wind, the rattling of the Hail; Behold the Snow (that feathered rain) come
down, reap benefit by the former and latter rain, but they never consider of
these works and wonders of God. When do they, with Isaak, walk into the Fields
for meditation, or with Daniel by the River side, or with Peter on the house
top, to survey and admire God and his works? The love of contemplation made
Hieron. Epist. 4. ad Rusticum.
Jerome say that Solitude was a Paradise, and Cogitare est vivere M. T. Cicero
Acad. Quaest. l. 1.
Cicero that to think was to live. Basil wept when he handled a Rose, to
consider the prickles thereof were the fruit of man's Fall. The same did
Persius, when he saw a Toad, to think of his own ingratitude, in that God had
made him a Man, and not a filthy Toad. When Estius heard the little Birds sing,
O the Music, said he, that is in Heaven! So when David (not only saw, but)
well considered the Sun, Moon, and Stars, he cried out, Lord what is man that
thou art mindful of him? q. d. That thou set up such huge burning Tapors
for him that does so little work for thee? Surely, the want of considering the
choice and admirable things which God has made, is one main reason of our
knowing them so little, and our being affected with them no more.

To all which considerations, let me add the brevity of our Life; Ars longa,
vita brevis: It requires much time, observation, and experience to know the
works of God, and our life is frail and short; as a Span, as a Vapor, as a
Bubble: And many times says Seneca, Seneca Epist. 23.
we begin not to live till our life is ending. Sickness also, and old Age
steal upon us; Then we grow oblivious, unteachable, overcast with clouds, full
of pain and infirmities.

Now our Life is very short,

1 If compared with other creatures: Some say of the Eagle, Nec annis
debilitatur, nec morbis obnoxia est. Pliny says, It is neither Age nor
Sickness kills the Eagle, but the Psalm. 103.5.
upper Bill grows over the under, so at last she is starved. Some Elephants
live three hundred years, as Aelian, Solinus, and Strabo tell us.

2 Our life is short, if compared with the long life of men in former times:
Enochs years were of the same number with the days of the year. Adam lived 930
years, and Genesis 5.7.2^.
Methuselah a thousand, wanting one and thirty. But in David's time, old age and
70. shook hands. The climatericall year has extinguished many Lights; As
Aristotle, Plato, Diogeges, and Zenocrates; so fatal has been the year 63.
Parre aged about 160 was brought from Shropshire to London, as the longest
liver of this Age and Nation, Ann. Dom. 1634. Sep. 29.
to be seen as a wonder. So then deduce from our short life, the time of first
and second childhood, (I mean of infancy and extreme old age) next all the
time bestowed on Sleep, Food, Apparel, Visits, Recreations and Lusts, then
scarce any man of 70 would be 12 years old. Hence (in part) comes our great
ignorance of God and his works, viz. The brevity of our life.

Secondly, The most excellent works of God cannot be fathomed by man's
understanding, by reason of the variey of species, (man's weakness considered)
and the multitude of things which GOD has made. The Rabbis are very curious
in numbers, and diverse of their observations are founded in Arithmetic. They
glory in this conceit, that a man has so many bones as there be letters in
the Decalogue, and just so many joints and members as there be days in the
year; To show, that all our strength and time should be expended in Gods
service. It Is said, that at Exodus 15.27.
Elim there were 12 wells of Water, and 70 Palm Trees: in which 12 springs of
water, Saint Jerome conceived he saw the faces of the 12 Apostles, and that the
70 Palm Trees did praefigure the 70 Disciples.

But (to return to our business) who can number all the works of God, from the
Eagle to the Gnat, from the Elephant to the Pismire, from the Whale to the
Lamprey, from the Oak to the Violet, from the huge Sun to the least Star in
the milky way, from the largest Continent to the smallest Island, from the main
Ocean to the least Brook? And if the distinct species or kinds of things cannot
be found out, who will undertake (be he man or Angel) to number the
Individuals, which every Species contains? every one of those Individuals
having some private mark or note of distinction from his fellow.

It Is a proverbial speech, that no man can number stellas Caeli, still as
Roris, the drops of Dew, or Stars of Heaven. Well Psalm. 72.15.
might David say of Gods wonders, I know not the number thereof. And and
139.17, 18.
how great is the sum of them? If I should count them, they are more in number
then the sand. 'Twas no Hyperbole in Eliphaz to say, Job 5.9.
The Lord does things great and unsearchable; mavelous things without number.
Nor in Paul Romans 11.33.
when he cries, his ways are past finding out.

Thirdly, 3 Medium.
Gods wisdom is great, and every thing he does has some impressions and
characters of that wisdom stamped on it. The Psalm. 104.24.
Lords wisdom is infinite. No man knows all that God has done: God has some
rare pieces in the Sea and Earth, which he does not show unto men, but keeps
locked as in a secret Cabinet. As Drake, Candish, and Sebastran Deleano, who are
said to put a girdle about the world.
Such as have traveled round the world (as the people suppose) yet may not have
seen the fifth part of it. Sir Walt. Ral. Hist. of the world. l. 1. cap. 3.
Metrodorus thought that to deny infinite worlds is all one as to affirm that
in so large a field as the Universal, there should grow but one Thistle. Also
Anaxagoras and Democritus held a plurality of worlds. Some are of opinion that
every Star has a world ready peopled in it. Nay, they offer Heb. 1.2. but
compared with Mat. 12.32.
Scripture to maintain a multitude of worlds: But let the Reader excuse me, if
I divert him with a story of two Friars; who discoursing how many worlds were
created, one of them affirmed there were ten worlds, quoting that Text in Luke;
Annon december facti sunt mundi? The other looking into the Text replied, Sed ubi
sunt novem? Yet this is certain, though there be but one world, that much of it
is yet unknown to us, and it is not long since a considerable part of the world
has been found out; Witness those New Discoveries by Christopher Colono of
the West Indies by Hernando Magellano of the Meluccaes, and by Sir Hugh
Willoughby of those Northern Discoveries; And yet still great part of the Map
and Globe is filled up with Terra Incognita, The unknown Earth, lying either
under the Artick, or Antartick Circle; The former Dr. Heilins Geogr.
is rather supposed then known. The latter is something known, and has the
Names of Terra del Fuega, Nova Guinea, Psittacorum Regio, and such like.

Next, to come unto the known World; how many Rarities in it, that have been
imperfectly described? Travelers differing much in their relations, which may
be imputed either to a prond heart, a careless eye, a credulous pen, or a
Poets and Travelers abound with Fictions.
wide mouth. Scaliger says of Baronius, He did not write Annals, but frame
them. Palaephatus was wont to write incredible, if not impossible things.
Bellonius, (a modern eyewitness) reports that the doors of that famous Church
in Constantinople, Sancta Sophia, are in number equal to the days of the
year, yet Mr. Sands searched narrowly, Mr. Sands in Travels.
and could find but 4 only. (s) Nicephorus writes of a new Star seen, to which
a nultitude of other Stars did flock, as Bees about their King. (t) Aelian
says, he saw an Elephant writing plainly in the Roman Character with his
Trunk. Pompeius Mela writes of Chronicles which went over thirteen thousand
years. Plin. Hist. l. 7. c 2.
Pliny writes of some Indians that have no mouths, but live by the smell of
Herbs and Flowers. It Is feared the best of Historians (Canonical Scripture
excepted) are sprinkled with untruchs, else Tertullian would not have called
Tacitus, Mendaciorum loquacissimum, the greatest Liar; who is commonly voted,
the truest Historian. This may be one cause why so many of Gods works are not
rightly known to us, being misrepresented by Travelers and Historians.

To proceed. Such as have Aristotle. Pliny. Pierius. Aelian. Nieremberg. Bacon.
Dubartas. Sir Walt. Ral. cum multis aliis.
written of Gods wonderful works, and treated of the Elements, Meteors, and
Stars; of Beasts, Birds, and Fishes; of Plants, and Minerals; of People and
their shape and manners, have yet touched only the border of Gods works: For
if all those Persons who have made it their study and business to know and
describe these things, were now alive and assembled into one grand Committee,
they would not be able to give us a sufficient reason of Gods wonderful works:
As for Example; why a man that has the Jaundis, looking on the Bird Ictarus or
Galgulus, the man is cured, says Pliny, the poor Bird instantly dies? Why
Fowl that fly over the River Aurina in Italy, fall dead into it Pietii
Hieregl. l. 2. cap. 17.
says Pierius? Why Goats breath at the ear, as Alomaeon is confident they do?
Why honey in Heraclea is poisonous, which is so restorative in other places of
the world? Why the Crocadile (only) moves the upper jaw; and why he Nieremb.
Not. Hist. lib. 32 cap. 1.
lives all night in the water, all day on the Land, and not rather the
contrary, or still in one Element? Why the Remora, (a Fish but half a foot
long) should be able to stay a ship under sail, Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 32. cap.
1.
says Pliny? Why the members of an Hen, being put into a pan of melted Gold,
the Gold should be all wasted and consumed on her flesh, Pierii Hierogl. l. 24.
cap. 12.
says Pierius? Why the heat of the sand should hatch the Eggs of the Ostrich,
and not of other Birds? What moves the Adder to stop his ears against the Psalm.
58.45.
Charmers voice? In sum, whence that furious antipathy between the Eagle and
the Swan, the Panther and the Hind, Dolphin and Whale; The Siskin and Muskin,
who (says Plutarch) fight eagerly alive, and being dead their blood will not
mingle, but dissociate? On the other side, why so firm a league and sympathy
between the Peacock and the Dove, the Thrush and Crane, Sparrow and Crocadile?

So again among Plants; why the Herb, Molio, should carry a Flower white as
snow, the root being black as Ink? Why the Trees of Silon in India never loose
their leaves? Why the famous See Henry Moors Antidote against Atheism, l. 2.
cap. 7. p. 110, 111.
Indian Nut-tree should yield so many things of a different nature, as Bread,
Drink, Cups, Houses, and Boats, with sails and cables, not wanting even
Bodkins to fit those sails being made.

Yet these things are generally agreed on by the best writers of Natural
History; and are not wont to be thrust into the Catalogue of Fables.

In all which respects you see the Wisdom of God in his Works is so great and
mysterious, that no marvel it is past finding out by the wisest of the Sons
of Men. But in particular,



1 In such creatures as carry with them an extraordinary bulk, incredible to
such as never saw any creature exceeding an overgrown Ox driving to the
Shambles. Aelian, l. 15. cap. 21.
Aelian writes that Alexander found in a cave (in India) a Dragon supposed to
be 70 cubits long; They conceived his eyes to be about the bigness of a
Macedonian Shield: Alexander with his valiant Host durst not approach too near
this horrible creature. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 30.
Pliny writes of Eeles in the River Ganges that were 300 feet in length. Most
wonderful things are written of the Whale; Ambrose Hexemer l. 5. cap 10.
Ambrose says, Aequalia montibus corpora habere praedica^tur; that whales are
held to have bodies equal with mountains. Musculus says that some have
appeared in the water of the bigness of Islands. Pliny mentions Juba, K. of
Mauritania, writing unto Cajus Caesar (Son of Augustus) of great Whales in
the coasts of Arabia, that were six hundred foot long, and three hundred foot
broad. The truth of which Reports I wholly leave to the credit of the Authors,
and judgment of them that read what I have written; contenting my self with
that which the Scriptures have said of this huge creature. In general, that he
is the greatest of all living creatures; Job 41.24.
for in the earth there is none like him. And then in Job 41.5, 6.22. Jonah 1.
and 2 Chap.
particular, that his jaws are like unto doors, his scales to shields; That
he makes the sea to boil like a pot: So big was the Whale, that he swallowed
down Jonas whole, without bruising or hurting him, and so cast him up again.

I read in our Chronicles of a monstrous huge Fish, taken in the Isle of
Thanet, 1573. July 6. the length of this Fish was 22 yards, 12 foot between the
eyes, some of his Ribs were 16 foot long: Also his Tongue was in length 15
foot, says Mr. Stow. Stowes Chronicle, page 14. in the 16 year of Queen Eliz.


The same Author Idem p. 347.
writes of another great Fish, taken within two miles of Yarmouth, in Norfolk,
1583. October. 10. having Teeth 3 quarters of a yard in compass; Great eyes and
holes over them to spout out water; The tail of it was 14 foot in thickness.

Next, for the Elephant (called Behemoth) and at large described in the Job
40.15.18, 19, 23.
40 Chapter of Job: His bones are strong as brass; he drinks up a River; He is
the chief of the ways of God, says the Creator to Job: That is, The Lords
Master piece among the Beasts of the Earth. Some of their Teeth have been 8
foot long; Aelian speaks of some Elephants nine cubits high; with his Trunk or
Aristot. De Not. Animal. l. 2. cap. 5. 6.
Snout he overthrows trees and feeds thereon. The Elephant is of that bulk
and strength, that it is l Trap, on Job 40.
reported he can bear a wooden tower upon his back, and on that 32 men to
fight there from.

Next for Trees; In Brasile there be some so big that Abbots Geography p. 271.
('it is said) several Families have lived in several Arms of one Tree to such a
number as are in a Village amongst us. Thus Abbot relates it.

How much is the power of God seen in Creatures of such a bulk as I have
mentioned.

2 It is so also in small and little creatures, as the Be, the Fly, the Ant,
the sweet Violet: Any work of God narrowly eyed will beget Admiration. But how
do we slight the wisdom of God in these things. Yet we admire him that
conveyed Homers Iliads into a Nut; and the Rhodes who did carve out a ship in
every point complete, yet so little that the expanded wings of a Fly might
cover it. I Caussins Diary in Epist.
read also of a great Prince, who had a striking clock in the knob of a Ring:
And I have seen a Lady that has a Watch made to hang at her ear. But such is
our blindness, that although God show a world of wisdom drawn in a very small
map, and presents to us diverse excellent Epitomes of his power in your Insecta,
or very small creatures, (that cannot be anatomised) yet we heed, we regard
them not. Aristotle was otherwise minded; for he held the meanest creature
having life, exceeded the best void of life; In which Axiom he prefers a Fly
before an Oak, and a Worm before the Sun: Such an admirer was he of life in
general, and especially in little creatures; That in pursuance thereof, he ran
into this absurdity, which peradventure he was not aware of.

Pliny wonders, how the Gnat being so small a creature, should be able to make
so great a buzzing. Gallen much extolls the wisdom of God in making a Gnat,
Gallen de usu partium, c 7.
yea the thigh of that poor creature, confesses the hand of God, and magnifies
that Name, which many Christians blaspheme. Mat. 10.29, 30.
Providence reaches little Sparrows, nay the smallest and meanest things, even
one hair of our head. Which Doctrine it is said that Pompey could by no means
digest.

I might here add what Pliny, Aristotle, Ambrose, and Basil have written of the
Be, Ant, and such like poor little Animals; and how they magnify the wisdom
of God in the structure and properties of these creatures.

But to speak something of Pearls, Diamonds, and other precious Stones, which
are not smaller in quantity, then great in worth and estimation. Charles Duke of
Burgundy Alsted chronol.
lost a Diamond in Battle, which is said to be of so much worth, that therewith
a man might buy an whole Country: And much is written of Cleopatra's Pearl.
Yet, Dr Reynolds.
behold, that which is such an ornament to the Lady that wears it, is said to
be a disease in the Fish that breeds it. Strange things are written of the rare
virtues of Precious stones, containing in worth what they have not in bulk; The
little Pearl being more admirable then a Rock. Borrheus says the Emrauid
preserves chastity. Rueus, that the Chrysolite helps breathing: Tostatus of the
Saphir, that it frees from wrath and envy; also of the Jasper that is full of
veins, Quot venae tot virtutes. The Diamond says Pliny, is an admirable
remedy against poison. Dioscorides says, the Agat will keep him moist that
wears it. The Beril, says Abulensis, cures watrish, and running eyes, nay,
sharpneth the wit, says Ystella: And Albertus affirms, that the Dr Featlies.
Sermons, p. 498, etc.
Onix strengthens the whole Body. There is not any Precious stone, or Herb of
the Field, but has rarer properties and more virtues in it, then men can
discover or observe.

Appelles, who drew the picture of an Horse so like in Erasmi Apoph. lib. 8.
Ephesus, that horses seeing it, neighed, as surprised by the fortunate
imitation: so the Birds came and pecked the Grapes which were painted by
Zeuxis. Albertus Magnus made the Statue of a Man, which could walk and
pronounce certain words; it was 30 year about. Phidias is much praised by
Julian, for a Grasshopper and Be, which he made in brass. The wooden Dove of
Architas could fly by curiosity of Art. Wonderful was that Globe of Silver,
sent by Ferdinand, King of Romans, to Solomon the Turk; for it expressed the
time of the day, the motions of the Planets, change of the Moon, and the
wonderful revolutions of the Heavens.

If we see a glass Eye, an ivory Tooth, we praise the skill of the Artist, but
we do not observe a special power and providence in the frame and composure of
the members themselves; All the united power and wisdom of men and Angels, are
not able to make a Primrose or Fly, if they might have more worlds for their
pains, then the air has flies, or the Seashore pibbles: They must let that
alone for ever.

Heidfeldius tells us that the Sun moves two hundred and seven thousand Dutch
miles an hour. He moves so fast Day on Cor. p. 260.
says another, as if a Bird should fly fifty times the space of the world in
half a quarter of an hour, (You have my Author in the margent.) Jupiter is as
many years in going his circuit as the SUN is months. The ninth, or
Christallin Sphere is said Plato.
to accomplish his Revolution in thirty six thousand years. Who can number the
Stars? none but God Psalm. 147.4.
who calls them all by their names. Some have pretended to tell them
distinctly, and could make but a thousand three hundred and odd; Yet they had
not names for all these, and they were feign to reckon them by Constellations,
as we number Grapes by the cluster; so they give one name to an huge Family of
Stars. Day on 1^ Cor. 15. p. 271.
Some Mathematicians have adventured to say, That there are no more but a
thousand thousand and two and twenty Stars; according to the 48 Images, which
they chalk out in the Firmament, and those they sort into six Magnitudes (the
sixth Magnitude being the least) and yet the least Star is said to exceed the
Earth in bigness 18 times. And Aristot. De Caelo, lib. 2. c. 15.
such as pretend to know the bigness of the Earth, say it is four hundred
thousand miles about. It Is generally held Origin. Austin. Eusebius. and Clem.
Alexandrinus.
by Learned men, that the Earth after the Flood, was divided into 70 Languages.
Cant. 4.8. How much is thy love better then wine? The Chaldee paraphrase reads
it, Thy loves are better then the seventy Nations. If the Earth be so big as to
hold 70 Nations, and that the girdle of the Earth is four hundred thousand
miles long; judge then how big and spacious the circumference of the heavens is,
to which the whole Earth is by all acknowledged a Punctum in the midst of that
Circle. Who can understand or speak exactly of the Heavenly bodies? who can
fully declare the Names, Motions, Magnitude, and several Influences of the
Stars? Not a Star rises to morrow in the same manner as he does to day.

Thus has God adorned the goodly Canopie of Heaven with a multitude of golden
spangles, and shining Diamonds, for the use and comfort of man. Psalm. 19.1.
The Heavens declare his glory, and the Firmament, so embroidered, his
handy-worke. Unsearchable is the wisdom of God in these glorious works, which
he has created.

his clay house, or nest, and every Be of the Hive goes readily to his own
little Cell, and waxen Closet. By this all men are given distinct faces,
voices, and gestures, to prevent confusion, and that one Relation may perfecty
know another. By this the wise little Ant nibbles each end of her corn, that
it may not grow in the Earth: The Nieremb. Hist. Not. lib. cap. 11.
Cassian Birds are never seen of the Inhabitants, but when they need them to
eat up their Locusts; And the young Psalm. 104.24.
Ravens are fed, when the old ones forsake them. By this all States and
Kingdoms rise to their vertical points, and then decline. By this the whole
Creation in general, and the Church in special is wisely and excellently
governed. If, says Rutherford.
one, a creature, yea the most excellent of created Angess should sit at the
helm of this great World, to rule and govern all things 48 hours, the Sun would
not rise in due time, the walls and covering of this great building would fall,
the Globe of the World would reele too and Psalm. 104.24.
fro, and stagger like a drunken man: All would ravell into meet confusion.

But now; who is able thoroughly to discern and understand this government of
the world by Christ and Angels? Many things do seemingly come by chance; As the
cure of an Ulcer on the Lungs, an enemies sword, Opening a wound in that place
by which the corruption did evacuate to the saving of life. 'Twas not by chance
the Ram, ready for sacrifice, was entangled in the briars; Genesis 22.8, 3^.
For there was a Deus providebit. Nor was it by Exodus 2.5.
chance that King Pharaoh's Daughter found Moses in the Flags. She went out to
wash, Jun. and Tremel.
Alio quidem consilio, sed Deo impulsore; ut expositum infantulum reciperet.
But Gods design was, that she should take up the little Infant. When we cannot
understand, we must learn to admire the wise providence of God, and say, How
ever it be, yet God is just. Nihil inter Deum hominemque distaret, si constlia,
and dispositiones illius Majestatis Aeternae cogitatio assequeretur humana,
says Lactantius in praefat.
Lactantius. There would, says he, be no distance between God and man, if our
Reason and Musing could fathom all his Counsels and Works.

Thus you see our first Observation illustrated and confirmed, that the Lords
highest and most excellent works cannot be reached by man's understanstanding:
For these are part of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him?

The Inferences follow.

Alphonsus thought himself able (not only to know, but) to correct the
Heavenly Orbs. When Eunomius boasted that he knew God, his Divinity and Works;
Basil Epist. 1.68. quae est ad Eunomium.
Basil, to tame the Heretic, propounded 21 Queries concerning the little Ant;
As whether it has Bones, Liver, Kidney, Heart, etc. O Lord our governor, how
super-excellent is thy glory above the Heavens, if thy name be thus excellent
in one of thy meanest creatures?

Austin says, Nieremb. Not. Hist. l. 4. cap. 33. p. 69.
The Manichees use to ask, what need there was that God should make such a
multitude of Creatures; some no way necessary for Man, and others exceeding
hurtful unto him? But they did not consider, Omnia pulchra esse conditori, and
artifici suo; qui omnibus utitur ad Gubernationem Vniversitatis; That all
things are beautiful in the eye of our Creator, who also uses them all for the
good of the Universe. Gen 1.10, 12, 18, 21, 25, 31.
God pronounced concerning ALL the works of his hands, that they were exceeding
good. Do not pick quarrels with such works of God as you do not understand:
For Nature and the God of Nature do nothing in vain. Multo facilius inveniet
Syderum conditorem humilis pietas, quam syderum ordinem superba curiositas,
says the most learned Augustine, de Eclyps. sol^s Sermon.
Father. A proud curiosity cannot so easily find out the order and motion of
the Stars and heavenly Orbs, as an humble Piety their Wise Creator.

works, Zeno thanked God for that shipwreck which drove him to the study of
Philosophy; and Crates cast his goods into the Sea, that he might the more
quietly attend it. Much Time and Industry are required for any competent
knowledge of Gods works. Demosthenes traveled in Learning and good Studies 107
years; Plato 80. and Socrates 98. Philosophia est rerum humanarum and Divinarum
scientia; non ab hominibus inventa, sed splendidissimum Dei Immortalis Donum.
Philosophy is the knowledge of Divine and Humane things, not invented by men,
but imparted from God. Diligence in the study of sacred Scriptures and Natural
Philosophy, may bring us to know much of God in his works. Peter Ramus from his
Youth to his dying day, never used, by his good will, any other Bedding then of
straw; blaming himself if the Artizans were at work before he was at his book.

Julius Caesar having spent the whole day in the Field about his Military
concernments, divided the night also after this manner; One part for his sleep,
a second for the Commo^wealth, and a third for his Studies.

It is said of Demosthenes, that he spent more Oil then Wine, because he
studied so hard not only by Sun, but Lamp-light.

The study of Philosophy is very useful for our better understanding many
parts of holy Writ, which treat of Gods works: Julian the better to destroy
Sozomen, 1.5. cap. 17.
Christianity, pulled down all Schools and Nurseries of good Learning; Nam
propriis pennis configimur, said he: They wound and overcome us with our own
weapons. As the same earth is sweet in the Grape, and bitter in the Wormwood:
and the same odor a refreshment to the Dove, and poison to the Scarabaeus: So
Philosophy and other humane Learning, being qualified with Humility, Piety, and
Charity may be very useful to edify the Church, which through pride and
contempt, may also be employed to harmful purposes.

See Divine Optics, p. 74. ad 79.
For though you cannot not comprehend all his works, yet so much of God is
legible by all men in his creatures, as will serve to silence and confound the
reprobate Indian, who has not the Gospel. It Is a certain Truth that the Light
of Nature without the light of Scripture shall suffice to leave men without
excuse: For, The invisible things of God, says the Apostle, are clearly seen
from the creation of the world, being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are unexcusable, who neglect
God in his creatures. For the works of God, Calvin in Romans 1.20.
Artificem suum perspicue declarant, says Calvin: They plainly in large golden
Letters declare their wise and all-powerful Creator. An Apelles need not put
his Name to his Pictures; Every judicious eye may read the Author in the work:
Protogines well knew Apelles had been at his house, when he found a certain
line drawn on his Table, which he knew no other hand could perform. Every spire
of Grass stands up to proclaim a Deity.

Dubartas.
The World's a Book in Folio; Printed all,
With Gods great works in Letters Capital.
John 17.3.
To know God is eternal life. Here Providence may write in very strange and
uncouth Characters; Though now Watson in Christian Charter, p. 150.
our Candle be in a dark Lanthorn, and the Saints know not what GOD is a doing,
yet in Heaven we shall see the reason of all Transactions, and perceive their
tendency to fulfill the Promise, that Romans 8.28.
All things shall work together for good, to the Church and people of God. In
Heaven we shall see divine Promises and Providence kissing each other. We
Pilgrims see little in this valley of Tears; but our Prospect will be glorious
on the mountain of Spices. Then you shall see the chief of Gods works, the
most glorious person CHRIST JESUS, whom yet your Eyes cannot reach; and whom
having not seen, you love. To whose beauty, the SUN is but a Globe of
darkness, or spot of dirt: And in comparison of him, all the glory of Men and
Angels is but obscurity. The name of CHRIST is used by S. Paul five hundred
times; and no wonder, for there be in it a thousand treasures, says
Chrysostom. (with reverence spoken) God has been Mat. 25.34. John 14.2. 1
Cor. 2.9.
adorning and preparing for his chosen from the foundation of the world. Now
suppose there were a certain City, or Palace on earth, as all the men of the
world (famous for Art) had been rearing from the Creation to this day; having
all the Marble, Crystal, Agat, Pearl, Rubies, Diamonds and Emralds in the
world to make and adorn it with, all the Silver and Gold which the creation
affords to build it with, and all the united strength and wisdom of Men and
Angels to erect and furnish it; Yet no Believer dare question but this Palace,
would be a Shepherds Cottage, it compared with the New Jerusalem: It would be
in truth a mere Dungeon to Heaven. Nineveh (says Diodorus Siculus) had ten
thousand Workmen at a time about it, yet was 8 years in building. Pliny
says, that three hundred thousand Workmen were employed allong time about the
building of Babylon; And that the Egyptian Pyramides had three hundred and
sixty thousand men about the raising of them, yet could not be finished in 20
years. The Temple was a goodly structure, and (said the Jews) was John 2.20.
46 years in building. In a word, The famous Temple of Diana was two hundred
and twenty years about. Now if the World which GOD made in six days be so
beautiful, how glorious then is that Revel. 21. Mat. 25.34. John 14.2.
New Jerusalem, which God has been preparing from the foundation of the world?
And I go, said Christ, to prepare a place for you. If then you consider this
work of God, you may well say with Job concerning ALL his works below here on
Earth, These are part of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him?
Ad to this; we shall not only see, but enjoy Christ, and these glorious things
in Heaven: New Heaven, and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. So
glorious and transcendently beautiful (even to astonishment) is that work of
God; that (says the Isa. 65.17.
Prophet) in comparison thereof the former work of God on earth shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind. Europe is the Garden of the world, Italy of
Europe, and Naples of Italy: You may over-praise that or Rome, or the Isles
where there be two Summers yearly: But you cannot over-praise, over-thinke; or
in your ranging thoughts reach Heaven. Yet you can fancy Cities made of Gold,
Rocks of Pearl, Mountains of Diamond, and Rivers of Crystal; (though
beautiful and goodly in themselves) shall make one Bon-fire, when the day of
our Coronation comes.

And so much of the first Point, that the Lords highest and most excellent
Works cannot be reached by man's understanding.

(intended in the Text and Treatise) now comes to be handled, which is this;
that,

The terrible Meteor of THUNDER (accompanied with Lightning) is a manifestation
of the LORDS Greatness and Power; the loud Trumpet of his glorious Excellency,
Majesty, and matchless perfection.

In the opening and unfolding of which Truth our Method shall be this, viz.

To make diligent Enquiry,

1 How this Expression of holy Job's may be taken and understood; The Thunder
of his Power who can understand?

2 What THUNDER is? What its Name, Nature, and effects are? still keeping this
of Job in our eye, that no man can fully understand, (much less express) what
it is.

3. Whether the Author be any other then God?

4 In what cases especially GOD has manifested, or will discover to the Sons
of men, his Power and Glory by supernatural THUNDER?

Jobs may be rendered and expounded, The thunder of his power who can understand?

To which I answer, from the best Mr. Caryl on Job 26.14. volumn 7. p. 823.
Expositor of this Book.

1 Literally and strictly for the Meteor of Thunder; which is indeed a thing
Natural, but wherein the glory of God much appears; his glory shines in the
Lightning, The God of glory thundreth, Psalm. 29.3. Thunder is one of the most
wonderful and astonishing works of God: Though many Philosophers write
something of it, yet no Mortal fully understands it.

2 It may be taken of any extraordinary and terrible work of Providence: So
those places may import; Psalm. 68.33.
God does send out his voice, yea and that a mighty voice. Again, Isa. 30.30.
The Lord shall cause his mighty voics to be heard, with the indignation of his
anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempests,
and hailstones. So again, Rev. 10.4.
Seal up the things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not. So
Job, expressing the Job 39.19, 25.
fury of the horse in Battle (who paws destruction in the valley) he says,
God has clothed the neck of that creature with thunder. q. d. God has made
him strong, courageous, and terrible; The horse is fearlesse and furious in
Battle: He rejoices, says Job, at the sound of the Trumpets, he smells the
Battle afar off, the thunder of the Captains, and the shouting of the people.

3 It may also be taken for the highest and clearest publication of Gods power:
As if holy Job should say; I have whispered a few things to you of the power of
God, but if God should thunder out himself; or if his works were spoken out,
(as they deserve) in Thundercracks; Mortals would stand amazed, their souls
would be inveloped with horror. And for this reason, (as you shall see) two of
Christ's Disciples were called the sons of Thunder: That is; They set out God
and Jesus Christ to the people. They delivered Messages from Heaven with a bold
heart, and a powerful utterance: They set out God in his power, as if it
thundered from Heaven, when they preached. Quintil. l. 2. cap. 16.
Quintilian requires in a good Orator, Vt fulgurare and tonare videatur, that
his eyes seem to lighten, and his tongue to thunder before the Hearers.

Still remembering this of humble Job, that we cannot fully know, or understand
it.

1 Look upon the Name, 1 The name.
which may help to know the thing. Isidore derives Tonitru, a Terrendo, Thunder
from Terror: Because all creatures almost, are so terrified and amazed with it.

Others derive Tonitru from its Tone, it being the voice of God: At the voice
of thy thunder they are afraid, Psalm. 104.

2 Nature
2 Let us consider its Nature. Aristot. Meteor l. 2. cap. 2 and 9. and exam.
van. Doct. Gent. l. 1. cap. 12. Conimb. de Meteor, Trac. 22. Zanchius Tom. 3.
lib. 3. De meteor. cap. 4. These. 5.
Thunder is a fiery Meteor, in the uppermost Region of the air, begotten of
such hot and dry exhalations as the SUN has drawn up from the Earth; the which
being gathered and shut up in the bowels of a thick cloud, consisting of cold
and moist vapors, do at length rent and break with huge violence, the said
cloud enclosing them; which occasions that loud and fearful crack: Then the
Exhalations being come to maturity and perfection, and yet further incensed in
the strife, become all on a flame, while they crowd and struggle to get through
the rent of the cloud: and this makes the flash of Lightning. Tonitru in
Nubibus est sonitus propter illud quod extinguitur in ipsis.

Aristotle says, that Thunder is a noise in the clouds, by reason of that
which is Aristot. in Post. li. 2 cap: 2.
extinguished in the same. So red hot iron thrust into water, will make a very
great noise. The crashing and roaring noise of Thunder, to what shall I compare
it? It Is like the noise of Chestnuts flying out of the fire; like many Charets
and Coaches rumbling and jumping in paved Cities; like many hunger-bitten Lions
roaring for their prey; like many roaring Canons discharged one after another;
or a mighty stone tumbling down a Rock into the Sea. Yet I confess all these
are low similitudes to describe the Thunder cracks by. It makes our
Glassewindows, nay, our houses and hearts to shake.

Though the Lightning is first seen, yet all agree it is not before the
Thunder; but Fire Aristot. Meteor. li. 2. c. 9.
moving more swiftly then Air, and the eye of man being so much quicker then
the ear it therefore comes to pass, that the flash of Lightning is seen
first, and some time afterward we hear the Thunder. So the Axe of him that
cleaves wood, at some distance from us, is lifted up for a second blow ere we
hear the first: And the powder is first seen to flame at the touchhole of a
Gun, but the Report is heard a pretty while after, from the Castle something
distant from us. When the sound of the Cannon discharged reaches our care, we
conclude the danger of the Bullet is past. Job 37.3, 4, 5.
He sends out his lightning to the end of the earth, and after it a voice
roareth, says Elibu: Great things does he which we cannot comprehend: The
thunder of his power who can fully understand? Therefore,

3 Let us consider the effects: 3 The effects.
The first and most immediate effect of Thunder and Lightning is Brontia, or
the Thunder bolt hurled to the Earth; which Plinius in Not. Hist. lib. 37. cap
10.
Pliny says is like the head of a Tortois, Magirus p. 265.
Others say it is in shape like unto a Pyramide. It Is generally held that it
never goes but five foot into the earth; That there are Thunder-stones you read
in the Book of Psalms: He gave up their cattle to the Hail, and their flocks
to kot Psalm. 78.48.
Thunderbolts. Your Margent reads it. or great Hailstones. But the word
Ainsworth in Locum, p. 120.
signifies fiery coals, or hot Thunderstones: But Hailstones are Ice, or water
that is bound up with extremity of cold: So that marginal Note is such as may
be spared.

Certain steep Hills in the borders of Epirus are called Ceraunia, because often
smitten with Thunderbolts. As we read of Ombria, or Pluvialis lapis (a stone
so called) which falls down in showers of Rain; so also it is generally held,
that (besides these) there are Thunder-stones, cast down in the time of violent
Thunder, breaking and battering all that oppose them.

This Zanch. Tom. 3. lib. 3 cap. 3. p. 357.
Avicenna proves at large, and imputes the wonderful noise or rattling in
Thunder to these stones: often times, says he, after Thunder such stones have
been found, with whose violent blow some tree or house has been rent or
battered; and it is often seen that certain holes have been made in strong
Buildings in time of Thunder, which is done, says he, by the strength of
Thunderbolts, called by the Poets, Sagittae, and jacula Jovis.

The Thunderstone, says Idem ibid. p. 358.
Zanchy, is thus begotten in the clouds; with the exhalation which is hot, and
dry a more gross matter may be drawn up by the Sun from the Earth and
Minerals; which with the enclosed Exhalations, and the violent heat of the Sun,
is at lengh formed into a Thunder-stone. Some have held it is done after the
manner that stones are produced in the Kidneys and Bladders of living Creatures.

Anaxagoras Plin Not. Hist. li. 2. c. 58.
foretold, that within certain days a stone should fall from the Heavens, which
also came to pass in Thrasia in the day time; the stone is reported to be as
great as a Cart, or Wain-load; a Comet also appeared that night. Pliny tells us
the stone was seen of many, and was showed as a Wonder in his time: It was of a
parched or burned color. It puzzled Aristot. Meteor l. 1. cap. de cometa.
Aristotle and the best Philosophers to give a reason of this Stones production
and growth to such a bulky mass. Zanchy writing of it, Zanchius Tom 3. lib. 3.
cap. 3. p. 360.
says, we may see the great power of God, and his wonderful works. Which is
the best account he is able to give of this business. Reason can produce
little more for the Thunderbolt.

Again, Thunder is commonly attended with Rain and showers that violently fall
to the Earth; The moist Cloud being rent by the Thunder, dissolves in Rain.
Thunder blasts Vines, and other Fruit; burns trees and houses; destroys Men and
Beasts; beats down the lofty Turrets; turns up oaks and other mighty trees by
the Roots. Fire Job 1.16.
fell from Heaven, (viz. terrible Lightning) and burnt Jobs sheep, and his
servants, so that one only escaped. Beer, Wine, and other Liquors are spoiled
with much Thunder and Lightning; which may proceed not only from noise, and
concussion of the Air, but also impure and noxious spirits, or Influences
mingle therewith, and draw them to corruption; whereby they do not only become
Dead themselves, but also sometimes deadly to others: As that, mentioned by
Seneca, whereof all that drank lost their life or wits. Thunder Psalm. 29.9.
makes the Hinds to calve, and other Cattle to cast their young. Thunder is
many times followed with violent storms, and terrible Earthquakes, especially
in other Countries where Earthquakes are usual. The Nahum 1.5, 6.
mountains quake, the hills melt, the earth is burnt at his presence: Who can
stand before his indignation? who can abide the fierceness of his anger? His
fury is poured out like water, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. The
Prophet Nahum alludes to Thunder, Lightnings, and Earthquakes, crowding
together.

But the Prophet Isaiah does more plainly express it; Isa. 29.6.
Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with thunder and with Eareh quakes,
and a great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire.
Seneca Qu. Not. l. 2. c. 27.
Seneca writes of one kind of Thunder, which murmurs, but cracks not; and
says, Terrae metum antecedit, if fore-goeth an Earthquake. Aristotle says,
an Aristot. Meteor, li. 2. c. 7.
Earthquake proceeds from vapors imprisoned in the bowels of the Earth, which
finding no passage to escape, are enforced to recoil, to search every nook and
corner: And while they thus struggle and labor to get out, a trembling
agitation, and tumultuous motion of the Earth is occasioned (as of a woman in
travail) which is called an Earthquake that So look what Thunder is in the
hollow part of a cloud, the very same is an Earthquake in the belly of the
earth, which has then a fit of the Wind colic.

Alsteed tells of a great Earthquake at Plures in Rhetiae, Anno Dom: 1618.
Aug. 17. where the whole Town was on a sudden covered with an huge mountain,
that with it is swift and violent motion, slew 1500 people. The greatest
Earthquake I have read of is described by Evagrii hist. Ecc^es. lib. 1. cap.
17.
Evagrius, to fall out in the time of Theodosius; which is said to move and
shake well nigh the whole Earthly Globe. And for our own Country, Cambden
Cambden Britan.
writes of a strange Earth quake in Herefordshire, Anno Dom: 1571. March 12.
about six of the clock in the evening (being Saturday) a great Hill lifted up
it self with a huge noise, jumped into an higher place, carried along with it
trees and Cattle, and continued walking about till Monday noon, over-turning a
Chapel that stood in its way.

You have seen what the usual effects of Thunder and Lightning are.

Now, for the benefit of my own Countrymen, it will not be amiss here
distinctly to set down the most remarkable Thunders which have happened in
England, with their effects; As I find them recorded in our English
Chronicles, which will help to show us the dreadful consequents of Thunder and
Lightning, that we may learn to fear before the great and terrible GOD:
Knowing that whatsoever has been, may be again (the Genesis 9.11.15.
universal deluge excepted) Yea, that our God is unlimited in his power and
working, and can do more then yet he has done: Nor is it known what he will do.

In the Reign Mr. Stowes abridgement of English Chronicle^, printed 1618 p. 55.
of Henery the first, Anno Christi, 1116. in the month of March, was exceeding
Lightning, and in December Thunder and Hail. The Moon at both times seemed as
if she were turned into blood. Not long before there was a blazing Star.

In the 15 year of Idem p. 88.
Henry the 3d. Anno Domini, 1230. on Paul's day, when Roger Niger, Bishop of
London, was at Mass in Paul's Church, suddenly it waxed dark, and an horrible
Thunderclap lighted on the Church, the same was shaken as though it would have
fallen; All the Church seemed to be on fire with Lightnings: The people thought
of present death: Thousands of men and women ran out of the Church, and fell on
the ground through astonishment: None tarried in the Church, save the Bishop
and a Deacon.

In Queen Idem p. 279.
Mary's Reign, Anno Domini, 1558. July 7. within a mile of Nottingham, a
tempest of Thunder as it came through two Towns, beat down all the Houses and
Churches: The Bells were cast to the outside of the Churchyards, and some webs
of Lead four hundred foot in the Field, writhen like a pair of Gloves: The
River of Trent running between the two Towns, the water and mud were carried a
quarter of a mile and cast against Trees. Trees were pulled up by the Roots,
and cast 12 score off. A child was taken forth of a man's hands, and carried an
hundred foot, and then let fall, and so dyed: Five men were slain; there fell
some Hailstones that were fifteen inches about: After this came Quartan Agues,
of which many died.

In the fifth year of Idem page 286.
Queen Eliz. Anno Dom: 1563. July 8. there happened a great tempest of
Lightning and Thunder, which slew a woman and three children near Charing
cross in London. Also in Essex a man was torn in pieces, his Barn was born
down and Hay burnt. Within few months there was an Earthquake.

In the year Idem p. 288.
1565. July 16. about nine at night, began a tempest of Thunder and Lightning,
with showers of Hail, which held on till three of the clock the next morning so
terrible, that at Chelsford in Essex, 500 Acres of Corn were destroyed; the
Glasse-windows on the East side of the Town, and on the West and South-sides
of the Church were beaten down, with all the tyles off their houses; beside
diverse Barns, Chimneys, and the Battlements of the Church, which were
overthrown. Much harm also was done at Dover, and other places. A violent storm
of Wind happened the 24th of December following.

Anno Domini Iem. page 318.
1575. July 30. in the Afternoon, arose a great tempest of Lightning and
Thunder, which slew Men and Beasts in diverse places, also at that time fell
Hailstones seven inches about.

In the year Idem p. 324.
1577. August 4. between nine and ten in the forenoon, while the Minister was
reading the second Lesson in the Church of Bliborough in Suffolk, a strange
and fearful tempest of Thunder and Lightning struck through the wall of the
Church into the ground almost a yard deep; drove down all the people on that
side, cleft the door, went to the Steeple, rent the Timber, brake the Chains,
and fled toward Bongey six miles off. The people were found grovelling on the
ground half an hour after; whereof a man and boy lay dead, the rest were
scorched. At Bongey there was the like, for it wrung in sunder the Wyres and
wheels of the Clock, slew two men which sat in the Belfrey, and scorched
another, who hardly escaped with his life.

In the year Idem p. 332.
1580. April 6. was a general Earthquake in England; and on June 13. about 6
in the morning at Shipwash in Northumberland, there happened a storm of Lightning
and Thunder; After which (on a sudden) there fell stones of diverse shapes: On
the 8 of October following, there was a blazing Star.

Anno Dom. 1598. Idem p. 413.
September. the first, in the Afternoon, it lightened and thundered at London two
great cracks, as it had been the shooting of great Ordnance: Some men were
smitten by it at the Tower of London: and one man slain in Southwark, over
against the Tower.

Idem p. 433.
In the year of our Lord, 1601. June the last, there fell great Thunder and
Lightning, with Hailstones in many places, nine inches compass, which at
Sandwich in Kent lay a foot deep on the ground.

Well may we say with holy David, Lord how terrible art thou in thy works? All
the earth shall worship thee! Who would not fear thee, O thou King of Saints?





I Answer,

1 God is the efficient Cause, Author, and Orderer of Thunder and Lightning:
These expressions are usual in the Scripture. The Exodus 9.23.
LORD sent Thunder and Hail. 2 Samuel 2^.14.
The LORD thundered from heaven. The 1 Samuel 7.10.
LORD thundered with a great thunder. And such like places there be many, which
declare GOD to be the Thunderer. Thunder is nine or ten times in Scripture
called the Psalm. 29.3, 4, 7, 8, 9. Psalm 77.18. Psalm 104.7. Job 37.4, 5.
VOICE of God; and no less then seven times in one Psalm is Thunder styled his
VOICE. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of glory thundreth;
The voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of majesty;
The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, shakes the wilderness; The voice
of the Lord divides the flames of Fire, etc. So David goes on to magnify
this VOICE of GOD.

Thunder then is Gods voice or speech. Imago animi sermo est, Thunder, Gods
Voice.
says Seneca: speech is the lively Image and Representation of the Mind.
Loquere ut te videam, says the Proverb; speak that I may see and know you.
This excellent Faculty the Lord has communicated to rational creatures; And
diverse Of the nature and causes of speech, see Casaubon of Enthusiasm, cap. 4.
mysteries are wrapped up in this great Mercy, called by the Psalm. 57.8.
Psalmist, the GLORY of Mankind; and therefore he bids it awake unto the
praises of God that bestowed it. Euripides calls the Tongue the messenger of
Reason. The Voice is the Minds Ambassador, the Souls interpreter, the
Thoughts Image, and the Hearts Scribe. Grammar relates to the congruity,
Rhetoric to the Elegancy, and Logic to the Verity or Probability of speech.
Without speech our Life would be a burden to us: Any imperfection in speech is
no small impediment to our Affairs: Let us bless God for any perfection
therein; Moses though so dear to the Lord had it not. I read that Demosthenes
having a great impediment in his speech, attained a most handsome form of
speaking by putting small stones into his mouth: And Jerome living at Bethlem,
to learn Hebrew, was fain to have his teeth filed, ere he could pronounce it,
as he should.

Now concerning the Voice of God, (That we return to our Theme) Let us see how
many ways God may be said to speak to us; because Thunder is called his voice?

I Answer,

1 Immediately by himself, So no doubt, the Genesis 3.9, 10.
Voice which Adam heard in the Garden was the Voice of God himself, and not the
voice of an Angel, as Gregory would have it. And I heard thy voice in the
Garden. So it is said, that God answered Moses by a Exodus 19.19.
Voice, and that Deuteronomy. 4.12.
The people heard the voice of his words. Thus (a) also God the Father spoke
articulately unto Christ, John 12.28. 2 Pet. 1.17.
I have glorified my Name and will glorify it again.

2 God speaks to us by his SON, who by his incomparable Sermons spoke as never
man spoke: In these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son. Heb. 1.2.
His sheep heard his voice.

3 God speaks to us by his spirit: who said Acts 8.29.
to Philip, Go near and join thy self to this Charet. So still by his
Spirit he speaks unto our hearts.

4 By his elect Angels: So an Angel spoke to Cornelius, saying, Acts 10.4.
Thy Prayers and Alms are come up for a memorial before God.

5 By his Ministers and Prophets: Luke 1.70.
He spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world
began. Luke 10.16.
He that hears them hears Christ. I have sent my servants the Ier. 7.26, 27
Prophets, but they hearkened not to me, says the Lord. We should receive their
doctrine, 1 These. 2.13
Not as the word of men, but as it in truth the word of God, says St. Paul.

6 God speaks to us by his Works: We are bid, To hear the Rod, and him that
has appointed it. Mie^ 6.9.
The Lords voice cries to the City thereby. All the creatures of God are as so
many Organ pipes to convey his voice and mind to us. He speaks to us by all
operations, but especially by Thunder. That is more immediately and eminently
his VOICE. Efficacior lingua quam litera, says Bernard. The voice, says
Austin, has an occult and hidden influence on the Hearers. If Sir Walter
Raleigh Hist. of the world, l. 2. cap. 13.
Melampus Nieremb. Hist fl. 3. c. 12.
and Thales are said to understand the voices of Birds and Beasts; which the
Hebrew Doctors thought Solomon could do: Then much more may we in Thunder (Gods
voice) hear him chiding and threatening all obstinate sinners, and proclaiming
his own Greatness, Majesty, and Power: How should this Voice of God warn and
alarm us out of our sins? Loud, Terrible, and Persuading has been the voice
of men.

Loud; so was the voice of Stentor the Grecian, concerning whom it it reported,
that with his voice only he could make as great a noise as 50 men.

Terrible; Solomon says, Prove. 16.14. and 19.12.
The wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death, and as the roaring of a Lion.

Cornelius Gallus was threatened to Death by Augustus, and the Cambden, Eliz.
406.
Lord Chancellor Hatton by Queen Elizabeth. The Frown or Voice of a great Man
is terrible: His eyes seem to cast out live sparkles of Fire, and his voice to
thunder.

The voice of man has been very Dr. Reynolds of Passions, c. 39. p. 5^7.
Charming and Persuading. Caesar with one word quiets the commotion of an Army.
Menenius Agrippa with one Apologue the sedition of a people: Flavianus with one
Oration the fury of an Emperor; And Abigail with one Supplication the revenge
of David.

It is reported of Cynias, that he overcame more by his Tongue, then Pyrrhus by
the Sword; And of Damonides, that through Rhetoric he persuaded any one to
what he would.

Now remember that in Job Job 40.9.
Can thou thunder with a voice like God? Has the voice of filly man (a
contemptible worm, a humming fly) been so loud, terrible, and charming (as
you have heard) how then should THUNDER, the VOICE of God work upon us? How
should it scare us from the love of sin, and draw us to love, fear, and obey
the great GOD? All creatures (Man excepted) obey Gods VOICE. The Sun is stopped
in his course; The hunger-bitten Lions touch not Daniel; And if CHRIST stand
up, and utter his voice, the rough winds and foaming waves are charmed into a
calm: is now speaking to thee, and address thy self to all diligent
attention, when it Lightneth, imagine his flaming Eyes do now sparkle and
flash indignation against sin and sinners. So terrible is the Voice of God,
that it does not only shake the Earth, but the Heb. 12 26.
Heaven.

By the way,

If THUNDER be Gods voice, bold and saucy is their practice, that stop their
ears when it thunders: For if a King speak to one, and he turn away his face,
or stop his ears, it is held a point not only of neglect, but scorn and
disdain: How dare thou slight and neglect God, when his Voice is sounded, and
he speaks to thee by Thunder? Is not this to be Psalm. 58.4.
like a Deaf Adder that stops her ears? If it be a sin to stop our ears
at the cry of the Prove. 21.13.
poor, or Acts 7.57.
voice of Steven; Much more is it Rebellion to stop our ears at this voice of
God. Is it not in the words of Zechary, to Zach. 7.11, 12.
refuse to hearken, to pull away the shoulder; stop our ears that we should
not hear his voice, and make our hearts like an adamant stone?

What a childish weakness is this, to think the not hearing of Thunder can
shield you from it? Nay, what a sin is this, to stop your ears, when God has
commanded Job 37.2, 3, 4, 5.
you to hear it? Job 37.2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the
sound that goes out of his mouth. Mark,

1 You must hear it when it Thunders.

2 Not only so, but hearken, and listen attentively thereunto. Trap in Locum,
p. 320.
Mercer does thus paraphrase it out of Kimchi: Hear ye, hear ye, hear ye again
and again, and then ye also will tremble.

3 He does not only require us to hear Gods voice in general, (for so we
might think he meant the voice of his Word or Spirit) but the Noise of his
Voice, and the Sound of his mouth, when God thundreth from Heaven; As you may
see in the following verses. How can these things be done, if you stop your
ears when it thundreth? as though you would be too hard for God. How often are
we bid Deuteronomy. 26.17. and 28.1, 2, 15, 45. and 30.10.
Hearken to the voice of God? If Thunder then be his Voice, you must hearken to
that and other Voices of God: Never fear it will make you deaf, as the fall
of Nile does the Catadupe. Bernard.
Aura prima mortis janua, Prima aperiatur saluti: The ear was the first door
of sin; now let it be opened for thy spiritual good.

Thus you have seen, God is the Thunderer; because Thunder is styled his VOICE
so often in the Bible.

The ancient Romans would say, Hark! God thundreth! The mere heathens still
ascribed Thunder to God: They styled Jove, Altitonantem, thundering from on
High. The Romans had a multitude of gods; yet the power of sending Thunder,
they restrained to L. Vives in Aug. de civ. Dei, lib 4. cap. 23.
Jupiter and Pluto: Day-thunder to the former, and Night-thunder to the latter.
Fulmen supremi Jovis Gestamen est, says Pierii Hierogl.
Pierius. But Tertull. Advers. Gent. p. 33.
Tertullian shows the Pagans that Thunder was before Jupiter, and so he
concludes it is not from Jupiter, but the great and eternal God.

Therefore, although we may conjecture at the natural causes of Thunder, yet
it is safest to ascribe Thunder unto God, as the prime Agent, and Cause
Efficient.

2 Though God be the chief Author and Orderer of Thunder: There may
notwithstanding be other Isntrumental causes thereof, all commissionated,
bounded and limited by the Lord.

1 Good Angels have some Influence on Thunder: It is certain Lawrence of
Angels, p. 34.
(says one) they can do any thing which Nature can do; They can move the
Heavens; They can move all corporal things, almost in an instant; They can
stir Tempests, move Waters and Winds. They slew the powerful Army of
Senacherib; They brought Peter and the Apostles out of prison. Bless the Lord
all ye Psalm. 10.10.
Angels which are mighty in strength, which do his will! They could make a a
Reg. 7.6:
sound of many horses to be heard by the King of Assyria, to his great
amazement: And by the same delegated power, they can raise storms and tempests,
and make Thunderclaps in the air.

You read in the Epistle to the Heb. 2.2.
Hebrews, of the word spoken by Angels: Simler.
One thus expounds it; That the Thunder, and Lightning, and sound of the
Trumpet, were caused by the Ministry of good Angels, when the Law was given.
Concerning the great power of Elect Angels, I have In the Deputation of Angels,
p. 91, 92.
treated elsewhere.

If the 1 These. 4.16.
voice of an Archangel will be so loud and terrible as to awaken all that are
in their Graves; Then much more have Angels power to move Thunder, which is a
whisper to that. Have the Angels power to raise an Earthquake? (which the Mat.
28.2.
Gospel affirms) then what should hinder but they have power (if commissionated
by the Lord) to shake all the clouds, break them asunder, and so raise Thunder
and Lightnings? Nay,

2 The fallen Angels (if permitted) can do it: Satan, we know, has a
Principality in the Ephesians. 2 2.
Air, the place where these Meteors are engendered. Mr. Medes Diatribae, p. 99.
ad 107.
Learned Mede thinks it probable, that all the Devils have their seat and
Mansion there, and not in Hell, till the day of Judgment. Nay Hieronimus in
Ephesians. 6.
Jerome says it is the Opinion of all the Learned, that the Devils have their
Mansion and Residence in the space between Heaven and Earth. If so, then their
habitation and abode is in the place, where Thunders and Lightnings are
hatched, and where Thunderbolts are coined; As also where those Bullets the
Haile-stones are molded. Devils have power to shake the Air, and raise mighty
gusts of Wind by Land or Sea, else the winds could not so commonly be sold by
the Laplanders, to the Merchants that desire them for Navigation. Prince of the
Air, unless he had some power and train in that Element, above the other 3
Elements besides. Mr Jenkins on Jude 9. Vol. 2. p. 61.
One says, he is hurtful to men, by Tempests, Winds, and Fires.

Zan hius in Ephesians. 2. Tom. 6. p. 51
Zanchy observes, the Devils hover in the air, Inde nos observare, tentare,
invadere animalia and homines, excitare tempestates, Multaque denique mala
hominibus dare; To watch, tempt, invade us, and other creatures, and send many
evils on mankind. Neither is the word silent in this particular: He Psalm
78.48, 49.
gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot Thunderbolts:
he cast upon them, the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation, and
trouble, by sending evil Angels among them. These evil Angels were
isntrumental causes of Blood, Locusts, Hail, Frost, Frogs croaking on earth,
and Thunder rattling in the air. Job 1.11.16, 18, 19.
So when Satan's Commission against Job was once signed, he soon brought a
Whirl-winde upon his Children, and Fire (in all likelihood Fulgur Maximum. Iun.
flashes of Lightning) on his Cattle and People, to their ruin and
destruction. A Writer on that Mr. Caryl on Job, Vol. 1. p. 162.176.
place tells us, Satan the Prince of the Air can do mighty things, command much
in that Magazine of Heaven; where that dreadful Artillery, those fiery
Meteors, Thunder and Lightning are lodged and stored up: Satan (let loose by
God) can do wonders in the Air; He can raise storms; He can discharge the
great Ordnance of Heaven, Thunder and Lightning: And by his Art he can make
them more terrible and dreadful then they are by Nature: He can so inrage
them, that no man is able to withstand their violence.

All this they do, Apoc. 7.1. ad 3.
not by any absolute power of their own, but merely as Tyrants; By the Lords
commission, says Bullinger; And ut Zanchius Tom. 2. p. 51.
Divinorum judiciorum executores, says Zanchy; Barely as the Executioners of
Divine Judgments.

Has manifested, or Will discover his own power and glory by Thunder, in an
extraordinary and supernatural manner?

I answer chiefly,

1 At the Castigation of his and the Churches Enemies in Battle or otherwise.

2 At the Delivery of the Moral Law on Mount Sinai.

3 At the Promulgation of the Gospel.

4 At the grand Assizes, and dissolution of all things.

First, 1 At the castigation of the Churches enemies.
at the Castigation of Gods and the Churches Enemies, the bloody Persecutors of
the Saints. God has had diverse ways of destroying his Enemies; besides,
potent, numerous, valiant and well disciplined Armies; As by Gideous 300 men.
The sound of Rams horns before Jericho, Moses Rod, Shamgers Goad, Sampsons
Jaw Bone, and little David's Sling. He can destroy whole hosts of enemies by a
Isa. 41.16.
Whirlwind, nay a 2 Reg. 19.7.
Blast: He smites the Psalm 46.9.
horse and rider with madness, breaks the Bow, cutteth the spear in sunder,
and burns their Charets in the fire, says the Psalmist.

The Judge. 5.20.
Stars in their course fight against Sisera; by their Annotations in locum.
Influences raising up storms and Tempests against him and his Host, say
Commentators.

The Josh. 10.11.
Lord discomfited the Enemies of Joshuah by Hailstones from Heaven. The like
he has done by THUNDER and LIGHTNING: See Exodus 9. The Lord fought against
Pharaoh by Exodus, 9.23, 28.
Thunder and Hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; so there were
mighty thundrings, and fire mingled with hail very grievous, which smote all
that was in the field, man, beast, herb, and trees. Whereupon Origin in loc.
Hom. 4.
Origin writes thus; Vide temperamentum Divinae correptionis; Non cum silentio
verberat, sed dat voces and Doctrinam caelitus mittit, perquam possit culpam
suam mundus agnoscere: He did not only smite, but instruct them, by Thunder his
Voice from Heaven, and also by Moses his Admonitions.

In this Judgment the four Elements did meet and conspire to vex Pharaoh, who
had vexed Israel: Air in the Thunder, Water in the Hail, Fire in the
Lightning, and Earth in the Thunderbolt, if any there was.

Thus also the Lord destroyed the 1 Samuel 7.10.
Enemies of Samuel by Thunder; The story says, that Samuel cried unto the
Lord, and the Lord heard him, and thundered with a great thunder that day upon
the Philistims, and discomfited them, and they were smitten before Israel.

In the same manner did the Lord of Hosts treat the enemies of 2 Samuel 22.14,
15. Psalm. 18.13, 14.
David, For he thundered from Heaven, and the most High uttered his voice; he
sent out Arrows, and scattered them, Lightning and discomfited them, etc.

Here are three clear examples of the Lords chastising and fighting against his
Enemies with Lightnings, as shining Lances, glittering Swords and Spears: And
with Thunderclaps, as so many roaring and murdering Canon. We need not
therefore stay here to enquire, whether that Fire that came down Genesis 19.
on Sodom, or that on Nadab and Abihu, or that on the Numb. 16.35.
250 that offered incense, were any other then violent Lightning from Heaven.

I will only add two famous instances recorded in Ecclesiastical story: We
read of Anastatius the Emperor, a bitter enemy and persecutor of the Church,
that God destroyed him by a Thunderbolt from Heaven. Also Mornaus de Verit.
Relig. Christ. ca. 32 p. 350.
under Marcus Aurelius, there was a gallant Regiment wholly formed of
Christians; who when they were exceedingly straightned by their Enemies in
Germany, obtained by their fervent unanimous prayers, hot Thunderstones from
Heaven to rout their Enemies, accompanied with blessed showers to refresh
themselves, then ready to perish with extreme heat and thirst; whereupon they
were ever after called the THUNDERING LEGION.

Secondly, 2 At the delivery of the Law.
we read of extraordinary and supernatural Thunder, when the Moral Law was
delivered on Mount-Sinai, Exodus 19.16, 18.
Exodus 19. And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
were Thunders and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, and the voice
of the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the Camp
trembled. After this God spoke, and delivered his Will in the ten Precepts,
which also he wrote with his own finger on Exodus 32.15.
Tables of Stone; which were all made of Saphir, say the Rabbis: In 1 Reg.
19.17, 18.
such a terrible way did the Lord appear to Elias; For there came a strong
wind, which rent the Mountains and Rocks; after this an Earthquake, then a
Fire (most likely a flash of Lightning) after all this a still small voice was
heard.



Of this eight Reasons may be given; As,

Vt disceret populus eum magni aestimare; that the people might learn to esteem
him. God did this Dr. Willet on Exodus 19.
Tanquam Imperatore praesente, As if a great Emperor were coming, before whom
they use to blow Trumpets, says Chrysostom. Commovit omnia Elementa, says
another; He shook all the four Elements, that they might know he had power over
all things; Air in the Thunder and Trumpet, Water in the thick and dark
Congruit Nubes in functionem legalem, quae tenebrarum est, non Lucis.
Cloud, Fire in the Lightning, and the Earth in the shaking and smoking of the
Mountains. It is thus elegantly set forth by a Bishop Halls Contemplations,
lib. 5. of the Law. p. 827.
Learned Writer of our Church, in these words;

God was ever wonderful in his Works, and fearful in his judgments; But he was
never so terrible in the execution of his Will, as now in the Promulgation of
it: Here was nothing but a Majesticall terror in the Eyes, in the Ears of the
Israelites; As if God meant to show them by this, how fearful he could be:
Here was the Lightning darted in their eyes, the Thunders roaring in their
ears, the Trumpet of God drowning the Thunderclaps, the Voice of God
out-speaking the Trumpet of the Angel: The cloud enwrapping, the smoke
ascending, the Fire flaming, the Mount trembling, Moses climbing and quaking,
Paleness and Death in the face of Israel, uproar in the Elements, and all the
glory of Heaven turned into terror. In the destruction of the first World,
there were clouds without fire; in the destruction of Sodom, there was fire
raining without clouds: But here was fire, smoke, clouds, thunder, Earthquakes,
and whatsoever might work more astonishment, then ever was in any vengeance
inflicted.

But alas! the foolish Gods of the Heathens and Egyptians could do none of
these things.

no flesh might glory in his presence. Even Exodus 26.19. Heb. 12.21.
Moses quaked and trembled with the rest of the people.

As the eye of an Owl, says Lyranus, twinkles at the Sun-light, so the mind
and understanding of man is stunned and dazzled in Divine things.

Before, the people thought they were holy, but now they saw all their
cleansing and holiness was nothing worth: For they were not able to abide in
Gods presence, nor hear his voice. The Light on Mount-Sinai did help to see
themselves miserable; The Law would humble and fit us for mercy: Let us see our
selves lost creatures, that the Law may be a Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ. Such a Schoolmaster as that Lightfoots Miscelanys, cap. 60.
Livy speaks of in Italy, who brought forth his children entrusted with him to
Hannibal; so that if Hannibal had not been more merciful then ordinary, they
had all perished.

The Law does not bring us to Christ to show how well we can say our Lesson,
but to lay us prostrate at his foot, for our neglect and inability: We cannot
keep the commands either Anthony Burges Refin.
collectively, ALL, without failing in some; or distributively, there being not
ONE command that any (mere) Man at any time can keep exactly. The best may
attain to do it, Austine.
Sine crimine, non sine vitio; without enormities perhaps, but not without
failings.



It Is said the Laws of Drace, the Athenian Legislator, were writ in blood: The
Law of God was not so; Yet accompanied with great solemnities, and matter of
astonishment to show he will not endure it shall be broken or slighted;
Osiander.
For, Tales terrores in conscientia peccatoris lex Dei operatur, The Law can
terrify and thunderstrike the hearts of offenders. Strigelius in Exodum, Fol.
80.
Eadem efficit Lex in singulorum animis, quae in promulgatione terribili
effecit; says Strigelius very well: The Law works the same things in the
conscience which it did in Mount Sinai, at the terrible Promulgation. The words
of the Law are written in Exodus, but the Copy; or Counterpain is in every
man's heart; The Law is there also written, Romans 2.15.
says St. Paul. Bishop Andrews shows how people had this written in their
Conscience, before the Law was given or received on the Mount; Giving us a Genesis
35.2. and 31.34. and 25.3. Exodus 16 23. Genesis 27.41 and 49. and 38.24. and 44.7.
and 38.20. and 12.17.
particular Scripture for each Commandment: (to which the Reader is referred
in the Margent.) Also we can easily produce the ten Commandments out of Pagan
Writers. Look then with how much terror the Law was delivered on Sinai, and in
the like manner does the Lord set it home upon the consciences of sinners,
rebelling against this Law in their hearts: There be flashes of divine
conviction, Thunderclaps of terror in the soul, when once sin is set home
upon it. This drove Cain, Saul, Achitophel, and Judas on desperate Resolutions.
'Twas this made all the delights and privacy of Campania unable to quiet
Tiberias after Bloodshed and Sodomy. Spira was so afflicted, Gribald Epist. p.
34, etc.
that he wished himself in the room of Cain or Judas, to be rid of those
Terrors and Thunder claps in his soul for breaking this Law. An ill
conscience, while quiet, is like a sleeping Lion; when it wakes it roars; God
thundreth in the Conscience;

even for the People of God after breaking any branch of this Law: David's bones
were broken by such Thunderbolts as these, of which I now speak. This made
Heman, Job, Jonah, and Peter, the Rock, so exceedingly to shake and fear and
be so disconsolate: This made Psalm. 77.3.
Asaph say, When he remembered God, he was troubled.

Mistress Honywood of Kent said, she was as sure to be damned, as that the
Venice-glasse would break, which she then cast to the ground; but the glass
rebounded without harm; so the Lord by Miracle cured her afflicted, affrighted
spirit. Tertullian may well style the conscience, Praejudicium judicii, A
fore-tast of the day of Judgment: And Austin say, Sentio quem non intelligo; I
know not whether Conscience be an Habit or Act, or both; in the understanding
or will, peradventure it is in both; but I feel thee, said he, though I do not
understand thee.

it was of God, and so receive it with less hescitancy and doubting, but the
more awfulnesse and obedience. I say, without Jealousy or Mistrust, that the
Revelation might prove a Delusion: For the Law was not privately delivered in
some obscure corner of the world, or to some ONE man, or in the Nightime, or
by a private Whisper: But it was given openly on a Mount, in the Morning,
before Exodus 20.18
ALL the People, in Thunder and Lightnings.

Now as all this should banish our Doubts concerning the Divinity and Morality
of this Law; so also lead us to receive it, as a Rule of life, with the more
awfulnesse and submission. Though Seneca do not approve that any Law should
have a Prologue; Yet God, infinitely wiser, had two Prologues to his Law; The
one of Miracles, the other of Arguments; I am the Lord, which brought you out
of the house of bondage, etc.

Such Prologues are no diminution or weakening to a Law; but add more Vigor,
Authority, and goodness to it. Timere leges maxima securitas: But this Thunder
made all the people to fear before the Lord: Let him not speak in Thunder,
lest we dye! Leigh's Tr. o^ Divin. lib 3 cap. 4.
Thunderclaps then were (says one) the Lords Harbingers to tell of his
coming, to prepare the hearts of the people with exceeding great awfulness and
compliance to receive Directions from God. Chrysostom) the People should be
rouzed up by this means, and brought to attention.

Here observe,

The Law was not given until the world had stood, 2513 years Sir Walter
Raleigh Hist. lib. 2. cap. 4.
say some: 2454 years Languet Chron. fol. 34.
say others: Now because the Law of Nature did not strike at every sin so in
particular, nor sufficiently terrify the consciences of offenders, nor so
expound Divine worship as for those after Ages was required, (who gave every
day less authority then other to the Natural Law) Therefore it was but
needful the LAW should be revived, explained at large, and delivered with
Thunderclaps, to rouse and awaken those sottish and drouzy Times: And that the
Law should be written and exposed to the eyes of all men; which before they
might, but would not read in their own consciences.

splendour, and magnificence; and therefore did the Lord appear in this glorious
manner before the People. Why does our Law provide that Judges Riding in their
Circuit, shall have Trumpets sounded before them, when they enter Towns or
Cities? Why are their Persons adorned with Scarlet, and encompassed with
glittering arms? All this to strike an awe into the minds of common People: The
vulgar sort are by Waterhouse Apology for Learning. p. 242.
one compared to Rivers, which sink all that is sollid, and bear up that
which is light. But these solemnities were not only gaudy and glorious to
sense, but they were great and miraculous in themselves, so did not only
affect the Rabble, but the Exo. 20.18. Heb. 12.21.
most sollid, knowing, and judicious; All the people observed and were afraid,
Moses not excepted.

quia talis apparitio in Nube and igne non habet Figuram, say Lyranus and
Tostatus Qu. 11.
Tostatus; such an apparition in a Cloud and Lightning having no
Representation: That by this means the People might have no occasion to commit
Idolatry: As God himself says, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Take heed to your selves, for ye
saw no Image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb. For which Reason
Deuteronomy. 24.6.
also the Lord did not let them know where Moses was buried, lest the
superstitious people should have worshipped his Dust, and gone in tedious
pilgrimages to his Grave.

Bishop Babington on Exodus 19. p. 278.
shows, there will be a black and tempestuous day, when all the breaches of
that Law shall be judged. But of this we shall say more hereafter.

mighty in his operation, shooting his Influences into the soul: And the
Trumpet might fignifie Angels that publish and make known his Will, and delight
to celebrate his Praise.

Thus you see why the Law was ushered in with Thunder, Lightnings, the sound of
a Trumpet, with the shaking and smoking of the Mount, in a supernatural and
miraculous way.

Thirdly, 3 At the promulgation of the Gospel.
We read of extraordinary Thunder at the Promulgation, and for the
confirmation, of the Gospel (a circumstance it may be not commonly known nor
considered.) Here I will show the Reader in general, that the Gospel was
ratified and confirmed by diverse Miracles; and then, in particular, by
supernatural Thunder, and voices from Heaven.

1 The Gospel was confirmed by great and wonderful Hugh Grotius de verit.
Relig. Chr.
miracles; In its infancy it was crowned, and supported by diverse Hildersham on
John, p. 332. and 396. Baxters Rest, part 2. p. 223.
Miracles, as giving Food to the hungry, health to the sick, and sight to one
that was borne blind. Mavelous was his conception in the womb of a Virgin:
The miraculous Star appearing at his Birth, was observed by the Chaldean
Astronomers, who came and offered rich Presents to Christ. Now the wonderful
Miracles wrought by Christ, Proved the Gospel to be of God: As his turning
water into Wine; His dispossessing of Devils; his raising Acts 17.31. Romans 1.4.
others that were dead, and himself, the Third day according to the
Scriptures. Talmud does grant, Josephus Antiq. Iud. lib. 18. cap. 4.
Josephus confesses them: Huart his Trial of Wits. cap. 14. p. 258.
Publius Lentulus wrote of them from Jerusalem to the Roman Senate; Nay, Colsus
and Julian deny them not.

If it should be here objected, that many Prophets wrought Miracles before
Christ; How then did Miracles proclaim Christ to be the Savior? The judicious
Despagnes new observations on the Creed, p. 79. ad 87.
Despagnes has very well untied this Knot.

1 Before Christ, Miracles were rare; Few Men had power to work them; and no
ONE person did work many.

2 No Miracle was wrought for well near 800 years before Christ: So no Person
working any Miracles came any thing near the time in which the Messiah was
expected: John the Baptist, so noted a Prophet, had yet no power of working
Miracles.

Judah had ever that power or privilege, till our Saviors appearance, because
he was to come of that Tribe.

2 And more particularly, the Gospel was confirmed with a Voice from Heaven,
and supernatural Thunder to usher it in.

This I shall prove, or at least render probable, by three sorts of
Testimonies, and then proceed to the Reasons why it was so.

The 3 Testimonies are these (and a Triple cord is not easily broken)

The first and best from Gods word: 1 Testimonies from the word.
John 12.28, 29. Father glorify thy Name: Then came there a voice from heaven,
saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. The people
therefore that stood by and heard it, said that it Thundered. Now that really
it did Thunder, seems very probable, because of the number, nearness, and
confidence of them that heard and attested it.

1 Their number; Not one man, but the People.

2 Their nearness; Not the People who stood afar off, and heard a confused
noise, but the People that stood close by knew it to be Thunder.

3 Their confidence; They said it thundered; without a peradventure, or we
suppose it Thunders.

Jobn 12.29.
place, Some said an Angel spoke to him.

It thundered; but rather be directed to that Voice, which immediately followed
the Thunderclap, saying, I have glorifled it, and will glorify it again.
Some of the People conceived these words were uttered to Christ by an Angel;
when indeed they were spoken by the Father of Christ, to whom our Savior had
spoken just before.

When God revealed the things of Christ's Kingdom to St. John, Thunder was
oftentimes the Prologue to make room for their better reception, and that all
others, (and not John only) might give the more heed to those Rev. 4.1, 5.
Rev. 6.1. Revel. 8.5.
Revelations.

Rev. 4. The first voice which I heard was as it were a Trumpet talking to me,
which said, come up hither, and I will show thee things which shall be
hereafter: And out of the Throne proceeded Thundrings, Lightnings, and Voices.

So again, Rev. 6. And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, and I
heard as it were the noise of Thunder, one of the four Beasts, saying, come and
see.

So again, Rev. 8. And there were Voices, and Thunarings, and Lightnings, and
an Earthquake: and the 7 Angels which had the seven Trumpets prepared
themselves to sound. The like Thundrings St. John heard at other times of his
Revel. 14.2. Revel. 19.6.
Prophecy.

Mat. 17.5. You read there was a voice spoke unto Christ; in the Syriack, it
is, Filia vocis, The Daughter of a voice. By which the Hebrews mean, a Voice or
Discourse following some Thunderclap.

Secondly, 2 Testimonies from learned Authors.
there be some Testimonies from Learned Writers, that the Gospel was sealed
and confirmed by Thunder.

Pignetus Pignetus in Apoc.
writing of that Thunder mentioned, Rev. 8.5. says thus; Habet quiddam simile
exordium Evangelicae praedicationis, cum initio Promulgationis legis, Exodus 19.
The beginning of the Gospel is something like to that of the Law in the 19th
of Exodus.

Rupertus says, God did proclaim the fullness of Christ, and excellency of the
Gospel, with claps of Thunder.

Cornelius a Lapide says, that voice of Christ was voted Thunder by the
People, John 12.

Quia vox haec maxima, Crassisima and Resonantissima erat, instar tonitrui;
because it was a great and roaring voice like unto Thunder. But if so loud as
to be like it, then surely it was all one (as to the Peoples satisfaction) as
if it had been Thunder indeed.

Our Annotatio^s on John 12.29.
Annotations say, it was no obscure whisper, but loud as Thunder. My reverend
Uncle, the Learned Dr. Hammond is very particular on this occasion: He Dr
Hammond of the Reasonableness of Christian Religion. Sect. 7. ad 11. p. 14. ad
22.
affirms this testimony of Thunder was three times given to the Gospel.

1 At the Baptism of Christ, when the Heavens were opened, (or miraculously
parted by Thunder) the Dove descended, and the voice followed, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.

2 In the presence of three sober Men, Peter, James, and John; Behold there
came a lightsome cloud to overshadow them, and a voice out of the cloud
followed.

3 Not long before his death, when he was praying to his Father, a Voice came
to him, and the People said, it thundered.

Thirdly, to this add, 3 Testimonies from the Gospels enemies.
that there have been Testimonies from the Gospels enemies: Pulchrum est
Testimonium quo nostra probantur ab hostibus, says Aristotle. Ad probandam
veritatem nihil efficatius testimonio adversarioru^, says Gregory: Nothing
confirms our Opinion, like the testimony of an Enemy. So the Acts 23.9.
Scribes (bitter foes to the Gospel) said to the Sadduces concerning Paul,
(earnestly preaching Christ) that they found not any evil in him: But if an
Angel has spoken to him, let us not fight against God. So Gamaliel, a Acts
5.39.
Pharisee and grave Doctor of the Law, advised the People, Not to persecute the
followers of Christ, lest they be found to fight against God. q. d. who has
confirmed Christianity by so many Miracles, and Voices from Heaven. When Christ
was at Jerusalem, in the midst of his bitter enemies, assembled at the Feast of
the Passover, and crowding after him, out of novelty to see his Miracles; Yet
John 12, 12, 29, 37, 38.
when God spoke to Christ from Heaven, this People confessed there was THUNDER
joined with the Voice; John 12. But mark what follows; Though he had done so
many miracles before them, yet they believed not in him; that the words of
Esaias might be fulfilled, who has believed our report? Now observe it well,
these incredulous stiff-necked Jews, though their eyes were blinded, their
hearts hardened, that they would not receive CHRIST in the Gospel; yet they
confessed, that a Voice bare witness to him from Heaven, accompanied by
Thunder, and that themselves heard both the one and the other.

Next, Acts 22.1. ad 12.
that of Saul is considerable, Acts 22. He was an eminent Jew, by Sect a
Pharisee, and through zeal a persecutor of the Gospel and its professors; He
Acts 7.58. and 9.1.
received the Garments of those that stoned Steven; got Commissions also from
the High Priests to persecute the Christians that were in Damascus. Now hear
his confession and relation of that which happened to him by the way.

When I was come nigh to Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone from Heaven
a great light, round about me, and I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice
saying unto me; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, etc.

These things were not done privately, but were known to the Sanhedrin; and
there was company with him on the way. There is a seeming difference in the
Relations, but the present reconciling thereof will strengthen our present
observation. Acts 9.7. and 22.9. reconciled.
One place says, they stood speechless, heard a voice, but saw no man.
Another place says, They saw indeed the light, and were afraid, but they heard
not the voice of him that spoke to me.

Now Dr Hamm. Reas. Christian Religion, p. 21.
observe the same word in the Hebrew, which signifies a Voice, signifies
Thunder also; So where it is said, They heard the voice, the sense is this,
They heard the THUNDER attending the Flash of Lightning, which encompassed St.
Paul. And when it is said, They heard not the Voice; It is explained in the
words following, They heard not the Voice of him that spoke to him. It should
seem St. Paul only heard that; But by St. Paul's answers, and the consequent
change of his principles and life, the rest also came to know it very well.

The truth of this story St. Paul did boldly avow before the Jews and Romans,
that questioned him about his change; He became out of hand, a Preacher, an
Apostle of the Gospel, and at length sealed it with his Blood; For he was
beheaded, says Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 8. cap. 18.
Eusebius, under Dioclesian, praying for the Jews and Gentiles; For the
Multitude assembled; For the Judge also and Executioner, that his Death might
not one day be laid unto their charge:

Thus you see the confirmation of the Gospel, by Thunder and Voices from
Heaven, attested by the Word of God, judgment of Learned Men, and confession
of the Gospels Adversaries.





1 This was the highest Testimony that could well be given: For it is not
easily imaginable, that there should be any greater assurance of the Gospels
verity, then that which may be reaped out of Gods speaking to us from Heaven in
its behalf; The violent cleaving, or opening the Heavens; and from thence the
holy Spirit descending in a visible shape, and lighting on Christ; And out of
the clouds a voice delivered to mortal men with Thunder and Lightning: Surely
if this will not convince and satisfy us, nothing will.

Jews; and under the second Temple, the only way of Gods revealing himself
to the people: Quod solum firm Oraculi genus temporibus Templi secundi,
restabat, says Learned Hugh Grorius in Joan. 12. p. 965.
Grotius, writing of the Voice from Heaven.

Jews, that when the Messiah comes, he shall be ushered with Thunder;
Therefore, when it thundreth, the Jews light up Candles, Weems, Vol. 2. lib.
1. cap. 2. p. 12.
says Weems, hoping to see the Messiah, so long expected, or to hear his
comfortable voice.

Next, our Savior knew the obstinacy of the Jews, that except they saw signs
and wonders, they would not believe in him.

Calvin writing of the terrible Promulgatio^ of the Law, says thus, Hic timor
Evangelio quoque fuit communis; This fear was also common with the Law to the
Gospel. Applying moreover that of the Apostle thereunto, Heb. 12.26. Whose
voice then shook the earth, and now has declared, saying; Yet once more will I
shake not the Earth only, but Heaven. The very day, Bishop Halls
Contemplations, lib. 5. of the Law. p. 825.
says Doctor Hall, wherein God came down in Fire and Thunder, to deliver the
Law, even the same day came also the Holy Ghost down upon the Disciples in
fiery Tongues, for the propagation of the Gospel: No man receives the Holy
Ghost, but he that has felt the terrors of Sinai.

Venerable Bede Hom. vigil. Pentecost.
Bid also, shows the harmony between the Law and Gospel in this respect:
There was Thunder, Here the noise of a Acts 2.2.
mighty Wind: There fiery flashes; Here fiery cloven Tongues: There the
Mountain trembled, and here the place where they assembled was moved: There the
sound of a Trumpet, here they spoke with diverse Tongues.

Another thus describes it: Marlorat in Acts 2.2. p. 48.
Sicuti lex Mosis est data in monte Sinai, Exodus 19.16.
cum tempestate caeca, nubibus caliginosis, fumo ignifero, vapore denso,
Tonitru diro and Fulgore, clangore divinae tubae terribili; ita quoque datus
est spiritus sanctus Jerosolimis, insolito and ingenti strepitu, and impetu
venti; quo Deus amborum, and Legis simul and Evangelii, virtutem expressit. As
the Law was given with a dark Cloud, Thunder, Lightning, and shrill Trumpet: So
the Gospel, says he, was confirmed by that violent rushing wind, Acts 2. If
those then that slighted Moses his Law were punished with death; what shall
become of them that dis-believe, and disobey the Gospel of Jesus Christ?

For,

Fourthly, and lastly, 4 At the day of judgment.
There will be supernatural, miraculous, and most violent, astonishing, and
prodigious Thunder and Lightnings, at the day of Judgment.

That this is very probable, will appear,

1 By diverse Scriptures looking that way, 1 Proved by diverse Scriptures.
if not speaking fully to the point.

2 By the consent of many learned Authors.

3 By diverse Arguments and Reasons, showing That and Why it will be so.

First, see it proved by diverse Scriptures, looking that way: For the time of
Judgment will be, Zeph. 1.15.
A day of trouble and distress, a day of darkness and gloominesse; a day of
clouds and thick darkness. Then, 2 Pet. 3.12.
The heavens being on fire shall be dissolved; Isa. 34.4.
And rolled together in a scroll. There shall be Luke 21.25.
Signs in the Sun and Moon, viz. Stupendous Ecclipses, flaming Comets, Earth
quakes, and diverse Apparitions: The Earth shall have the Palsy, and the
Heavens Convulsion fits. 2 These. 1.8.
Christ shall come in flaming fire to be revenged on sinners. Then says Peter,
2 Pet. 3.12.
The elements shall melt with fervent heat. q. d. Like scalding lead upon the
wicked. Christ says, Mat. 24.29
The powers of heaven shall be shaken. Which I suppose will be by Thunder and
supernatural storms. The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her
light. So men shall stumble at noon day, as if it were midnight; You know it
grows very dark before a storm. The Stars shall be shaken, and misplaced; Those
goodly Lamps of Heaven shall tremble: CHRIST will loosen with one shake of his
Arm all the Stars of Heaven; A fearful confusion will then appear; All the
Elements shall be Isaac Ambrose of Doomsday, p. 94.
disordered; Fire shall fall from heaven, whereas naturally it ascends; the
Air shall be full of tempests and thundrings; the waves of the Sea swelling,
roaring, foaming and mounting above the Clouds: the Earth full of yawning
clifts and violent tremblings: Sea monsters will appear on the Land, and all
Dumb creatures run about enraged, so that none can tame them. Luke 21.26.
Men's hearts failing them for fear: Revel. 6.16.
The great ones (that were not good) shall call to the rocks and mountains to
cover them, and yield some shelter from this terrible storm. Mat. 24.31.
Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet shall gather the Elect from the 4
Winds. Mark 13.8.
There shall be fearful Earthquakes which will astonish the world. Mat. 24.27.
As the lightning comes out of the East, and shines to the West, so shall the
coming of the son of man be.

In a word, 2 Pet. 3.7, 10.
The world and all in it shall be burnt with fire: Which fire in all likelihood
Pareus in Rev. 16.18.
says Pareus, will be kindled and cherished by Lightning from Heaven.

Aquinas has many subtle discourses about that fire, yet he still maintains
that it will be, Aquin. sum. in suppl. 3. Part. Quaest. 74. Artic. 9 p. 130.
Ex concursu mundanorum ignium, from a meeting together of all mundane Fires:
Therefore Lightning will be amongst them.

Yet all these may be thought general Scriptures: There are four places of
holy Writ, which speak more particularly to the point in hand, viz. that most
terrible Thunder shall precede Christ's Appearance.

1 Samuel 2.10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces, out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them; The Lord shall judge the ends of the Earth.

The best Annotations super, 1 Samuel 2.10.
Commentators understand this place of the day of Judgment. On that day the
hearts of Gods enemies shall be frighted with loud Thunderclaps, and their
bones broken with hot Thunderbolts. What enemy of Jesus Christ can then lift
up his head?

Next consult we, Psalm. 50.3.4. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence,
a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about
him: He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may
judge his people. Saint Peter says, The heavens shall pass away with a great
noise. A fearful noise indeed; As a Whirlwind or tempestuous roaring, Jun.
and Tremel. and our Annotations on 2 Pet. 3.10.
say Expositors.

To these let me add that place in Rev. 16.18. And there were voices, and
thunders and lightnings and there was a great Earthquake, such as was not
since men were upon earth. This is St. John's prophetical description of the Day
of Judgment, as appears by the Revel. 16.15, 16, 18, 20. compared together.
context; and so Pareus Seb: Meyer, Hez. Holland, on Rev. 16.
Pareus and others understand it.

Secondly, 2 Proved by diverse Authors.
this may also be confirmed by the consent of diverse Learned and godly Writers;
So that we are not singular in this opinion, that Thunder will be one
solemnity at the day of Judgment.

Gerhard writing of the day of Judgment, Gerhard.
tells us, Then Thunder and Lightning shall amaze men and Angels, the Sea and
the waves thereof roaring.

Mendoza says, Mendeza.
Christ will thunder marvellously that day.

Gregory says, Gregory.
The Saints with loud shouts will thunder against the damned. This grants that
the many millions of Saints shouting, will frame a noise more terrible to the
wicked then they can imagine. It will make their very hearts sink and fail
within them.

Thunder and Lightning, says Seb: Meyer apud Mnrlora, in Rev. 16.18. p. 34, p.
1173.
Meyer, do now terrify those that confess not a GOD; It makes palenesse and
trembling to seize on them. Quid igitur facturi sunt omnes impii, ubi haec
super humanam aestimationem, qualia nunquam antea a condito mundo, horrenda
apparebunt; Vbi tota Orbis concutitur machina, jam jam una cum impiis
collapsura? What then shall wicked men do, when such horrible Thunders and
Lightnings will appear, as are beyond humane imagination or any thing has
happened from the Creation; when the whole frame of Nature shall be so shaken,
and broken therewith; that with sinners it shall be demolisht, and destroyed.

Pareus also is full to this Point more then once. Pareus in Apoc. 11.19.
There shall be Lightniugs, Thundrnigs, and Voices. Now, says he, John is in
the description of the last judgment, and shows how Lightnings, Thundrings,
Earthquakes, and great Hailstones will oppress the wicked.

Tossanus also writes to the same purpose, Tossanus.
and applies it to the melting of the Elements, and the shaking of the whole
earthly Globe at the last day.

Here Pareus Pareus in Apoc. 16.18.
again: There are Lightnings, and Thunders in the air: Such as the shaking of
the heavenly Powers, melting of the Elements, and horrible Tempests spoken of
by Christ and Peter; wherewith the Lord will at last come to judgment: The
Earthquake will be unsual, and supernatural; And no wonder, for the earth being
smitten with Lightning from Heaven, shall be shaken and torn into a thousand
pieces, and by fire utterly consumed.

Oats on Jude says thus: Samuel Oats on Jude 6. p. 166.
If other Sessions and Assizes be feared by Malefactors, what will this be?
Then, Fulminabit Dominus in coelo; The Lord will thunder from Heaven, and the
highest will give his voice: And if Thunder, or the rattling of a cloud be so
terrible, what terror will there be, when he shall thunder that sits above the
clouds? Then Jerome.
Terra tremet, mare mugit; The earth shall quake, the sea roar, the Air ring,
and the world burn. If the Angels stand then amazed, how aghast shall wicked men
be, whose portion is with the Devil and his Angels?

And Oats on Jude 14. p. 315.
again: Thunder, says Oats, does but demolish Mountains, root up Trees; but
when God shall thunder out his Judgments, he will crush and cast down Kings,
Princes and People, that have not made him their Tower. Thunder does but shake
the clouds, and make them fly up and down as Birds in the Air; but when God
shall thunder out his judgments, he will shake and astonish the heart and
conscience: O miserable sinner, how will thou tremble at that time?

Another thus speaks: John Trap Com. on Rev. 16.18. p. 561.
And there were Voices, and Thundrings, and Lightnings. This is a description
of the last Judgment; when Heaven and Earth shall conspire together for the
punishment of the wicked.

Another thus: Isaac Ambrose of Doomsday. p. 95.
What shall we then see but Lightnings, Whirl-winds, Coruscations, blazing
Stars, flashing Thunders? Here a Comet runs round in a circuit; there a Crown
compasses that Comet; Near them a fiery Dragon sumes in flames: Every where
appears a shooting fire, as if all above us were nothing but inflamed air:
Joel 1.10.
All the earth shall tremble before the Lord.

Another Hez: Holland Expos. of Rev. 16.18. p. 124.
writes thus: These things show the horrible effects of the last Viol; when
Christ shall come to take vengeance at the last day; Lightnings burning the
earth, and Thunder from Heaven; All the Elements conspiring against the wicked.

Thus out of the mouths of ten Witnesses you have it confirmed, that most
dreadful and fatal Thunders will attend the last Judgment.

Let us now, 3 'Proved by Arguments or Reasons.
in the third Place, see it further established by Arguments or Reasons, showing
That and Why it will be so; which are chiefly these four.

Psalm 71.6.
Rain upon the mown grass silently, sweetly into the world: Then a babe cried
in the Manger, but now Judah's Lion will roar and thunder in the Heavens; Then
he came riding on an Asses colt, but now on the clouds; Not attended with 12
poor Apostles, but 12 thousand millions of Angels. At his first coming he
offered grace and mercy, but now he will come in flames of Fire to execute
Wrath and Vengeance: Aug. de sym. bolo. lib. 3.
Jam locus misericordiae, ibi justitiae. Then he was judged and condemned of
men, but now he will judge the world.

Yet his first being on earth was not without glory interwoven with shame and
sufferings. (as I have shown:) When he spoke, storms were hushed; when he
called, the dead arose; when he commanded, the Devils were cast out; when he
died, the Sun put on sable weeds; when he arose, the Earth trembled, and when
he ascended, the Heavens opened.

But his latter coming shall be far more glorious and terrible; St. Austin
brings in our Savior speaking thus at the last day; Behold the Carpenters son
whom ye have disregarded! Christ will then come in all his glory, and the glory
of his holy Angels.

Mendoza in Reg. Vol. 1. p. 359.
Quanto igitur terrore ac tremore improbi formidabunt, quando his e Christ,
Domino, Tonitruis ac Fulminibus quatientur? says Mendosa. How great will the
fear, terror, and trembling of wicked men be, when they shall be shaken with
these Thunders and Lightnings from Jesus Christ? If Belshazzar quaked when he
saw the handwriting on the wall, how will he tremble and quiver, when he shall
see Christ in the Clouds, Mill fulmina jaculantem, hurling a thousand
Lightnings and Thunder stones at him? What care can endure those Ratlings? What
eye can bear those Flashes? Yet who can fly from the one or the other?

The Areopagita of Athens, heard all their causes in the night; But Christ will
hear his in such a light as will astonish and confound the wicked.

Lactantius says, the day of Judgment shall be at Midnight; not confidering
when it is mid night with some, it is broad day with others in the world.

If it find us in the natural midnight of darkness, or Mat. 25.6.
Moral of security; The light of that day will be so much the more terrible.
If Jerome said, Quoties diem illum considero, toto corpore contremisco: Semper
videtur illa Tuba terribilis sonare in Auribus meis, etc. When ever I consider
that day my whole body trembles; And methinks the sound of the last Trump is
ever in my ears, etc.

Then what will all profane men think of that day, when it comes like a
Whirl-winde upon them? Then the wicked shall crawl out of their graves, like
filthy Toads, against this terrible storm. Then Jezabel shall ring her painted
hands; Then the oppressor shall wish himself in the room of the man he has
injured; And the simple may have more boldness then the learned. In illa Dic
ultiouis, Hugo de S. Vict.
nihil habebit, quod respoudere possit homo peccator; Vbi coelum and Terra, Sol
and Luna, and totus mundus stabunt adversus nos in Testimonium peccatorum
nostrorum, says Hugo. What shall a poor sinner answer at that day, when all
the Creatures shall be up in Arms; when the Heaven, the Earth, the Sun and
Moon, and whole creation shall come to give Testimony against our sins?

Thirdly, Personal and Mystical; of Christ and his Members, that it should be
so carried, to the great satisfaction and ineffable Triumph of holy Men and
Angels. Nam Judex in tribunali, terrore and horrore pleno sedit, Chrysostom in
Genesis Hom. 17.
says Chrysostom; The Judge sits in a Throne full of Terror and horror.

One observes, that in stead of Lamps and Candles, there shall be continual
Lightnings: And that in the General Assizes, cracks of Thunder will supply the
room of the Trumpets. Zion loves that quarter of the Sky, which being rent and
cloven with Thunder, shall yield unto her Husband; When he shall put through
his glorious Head crowned with Stars, riding on the Rainbow, to receive and
embrace her, and so carry her to his Fathers house.

The Trumpet is very terrible in Battle; pleasing at Nuptial Solemnities: So
Thunder though terrible to Saints now, shall be pleasing and welcome to us
then; the time of our Espousals and Coronation being come. Blessed be our Lord,
who has armed and provided us to approach the horrible terror of that day,
with unutterable triumph and comfort, as being fully assured it shall do us no
harm; Not a Thunderbolt shall touch us, and in all that Fire and Lightning,
not a hair of our head shall be singed: All Saints Luks 21.28.
will lift up their heads, as knowing their Redemption draws nigh.

Ferus in Exodus
says Ferus, Vt ostenderet se vindicem Legis; To show himself a Judge and
Revenger of the Law, and in what an hideous and astonishing manner he will come
in judgment, to make the world accountable for the breaches of that Law.

Si Promulgatio tantum pavorem hominibus incussit, quid putamus futuru^ esse in
postrema mundi die, Vict. Strigel. Com. in Exo. 19. Fol. 80.
says Strigelius? If the Promulgation of the Law was terrible, then what may
sinners look for on the last day? For a Law without execution may fitly be
compared to a Bell having no clapper, or a glittering Sword having no edge. In
the Promulgation a Flame was only on Mount Sinai. All the world shall become a
Bonfire at the Execution. In the one there was Fire, Smoke, Thunder and Earth
quake; In the other, The Heavens shall be dissolved, and the Elements melt. The
Fire wherein the Law was delivered did but terrify at most; The Fire wherein
it shall be required, is consuming.

O God! how abundantly able art thou to inflict vengeance upon sinners, who
did thus in Flames forbid sin? What will become of the breakers of so fiery a
Law, and the 2 These. 1.8.
Despisers of so glorious a Gospel? Bishop Hals Contempl lib. 5. p. 827.
Happy are those that are from under the terrors of that Law, which was given
in Fire, and in Fire shall be required, says Doctor Hall, in his
Contemplations.

O Let us ever prepare and expect, and wait for this great day; That this
dreadful Thunder do not find and strike us in our sins. Who would willingly be
found at his cups or his cards; with his Dalilah, or telling his money got by
extortion? The Day is therefore unknown to us, that we might ever be preparing
for it.

Joachimus Abbas, the Year, 1258. Arnoldus, 1345. Stiphelius, 1533. on St.
Lukes day. Regiomontanus, 1588. Thermopedius, 1599. April 3. Alsted. Chr.
Others the last year, 1657. for that the Deluge fell out in the same year of
the Worlds Creation. And for the time yet to come, Trap on Mat. 24.
Cusanus sets the year, 1700. Cordanus 1800. And Picus Mirandula, 1905.

So great has been the folly and sin of many Learned men: Though Christ has
told us, no man knows the Mat. 24.36.
time of his second coming; Mr. W. S.
One of late also, presumed to set the Time, about the year, 1646. with the
particular day of the year; and when his set time was come, it Thundered and
Lightened very much in the Afternoon, which helped to affright diverse ignorant
people, who stood gazing upward, to see when Christ would appear.

I end with that of Jerome, Mieron. in Mat. 23.
Sic quotidie vivamus, quasi Die illa judicandi simus; Let us live every day,
as if it were to be the last day of the world, that when our Lord comes, he may
find us in a well-doing posture.

And thus much of the four times wherein the Lord has manifested his glory, or
will do it, by supernatural and miraculous Thunder, viz. At the subversion of
his potent enemies, when his People are in streights: At the delivery of the
Law; at the Promulgation of the Gospel, and at the day of Judgment.

We come now to see how all this Discourse of Thunder may be rendered more
Practical, and so more Profitable to us, by such Inferences, as will naturally
flow from this Theme.

Non aliter de Tonitru loquuntur Scripturae, quam de Dei, voce mognifica atque
terribili; plenaque minarum.
time you hear it Thunder, the Lord threatens Ruin and Destruction to you.
Let the secure Atheist consider, that if we had no other Argument to prove a
God, this would be sufficient. Imagine that The Persia^s worshipped the Sun;
The Egyptians an Ox; The Grecians Feavors. Some also in Cyprian, Crocadiles
and Snakes. The Romans hellish Furies. I never read of any but Diagoras and
Diodorus that denied a God. Vide Cyprian cont. Demetrian, Tract. 1.
all Nations did not confess a God, and that we could not read a God in the
volumnes of Creation, Scripture, and Conscience; Yet one clap of Thunder is
enough to convince us of a Deity, and make us lie grovelling in the Dust before
him. How dare you sin against this holy God, that cannot eudure sin; and this
all-powerful God that is able to punish it? He can easily discharge the great
Guns of Heaven, and cut you off in your sins; ONE flash of Lightning is
sufficient to send you into the lake of Fire; One Thunder bolt is enough to
tear and dispatch you into a sad Eternity. What will ye do when God is angry?
His wrath and revenging Justice are described by the roaring of Lions, by
Thunder, Earthquakes, Tempests, and devouring Fire: But Psalm 90.1.
who knows (or can express) the power of his anger? When he is wroth, the
Angels seek to hide themselves; The Heavens melt away like wax; Jordan is
driven back; The Mountains smoke; The Devils tremble, and the pillars of the
Earth are shaken. Is the Grasshopper able to fight with a Lion? Can stubble
resist a Fire, or chafe a Whirl-winde? Then may you oppose God and prosper. O
consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you. Kiss the Son, lest his anger kindle, and his jealousy
smoke against you, and there be no remedy.

(in particular) it speaks reproof to those that gaze purposely on the
Lightning, and out-brave the Thunder, saying, they fear it not; Accusing such
as are more serious, of ignorance, childishness, and effeminate weakness. Mr.
Perkins writes of one who blasphemously scoffed at this work of God, and the
Author (in Tr^p on Job 39. p. 244.
words which I am fearful to repat) and thereupon a Thunderbolt slew him.

Some bold, impious, and impudent wretches, slight and laugh at these great and
wonderful works of Almighty God; But it is dangerous playing with Edge-tools, or
jesting with things of serious importance: Some fear trivial matters, who yet
regard not Thunder; as your Divedappers, says one, duck not at this rattle in
the Air, which they do on very small occasions: So some are not moved by
Thunder, who would cry out, if a Sword were drawn, or Pistol shot off.

The old Italians were wont to drown Thunder by ringing their greatest Bells; a
bold madness.

It is recorded of Clearchus, that, ex liberis unum, Tonitrum, appellavit; He
presumed to call one of his Children by the name of Thunder, says Pierius
Hierogl. (...). 43. cap. 27. p. 552.
Pierius. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 10.
Apelles was so conceited of his skill, that he attempted to picture Thunder
and Lightning; which was at once impious and impossible: For the Poets when
they would express the celerity of any thing, Pier. Hierogl. lib. 43. cap. 27.
say Fulminis ocyor alis, swifter then Lightning; It cannot be therefore
painted, much less Thunder.

We read also of great Men, that have presumed by artificial founds to imitate
Thunder: Caligula attempted by certain Engines of Art to counterfeit Thunder
and Lightning, that the People might fear and worship him for a God: But on a
time, when there happened greater claps of real Thunder, then ordinary, he ran
under his bed to hide himself, and at last came to a miserable end; dying of
thirty wounds in his secret Gallery, going to bathe himself.

So Alladius, (who reigned before Romulus) was a notable contemner of God, and
his works; for he astonished his People with Aartificiall Thunder and Lightning,
but at length was destroyed in his house set on fire by True Lightning from
Heaven. So Diod. lib. 4.
also the K. of Elide played the same pranks, and was destroyed by a
Thunderbolt for his pains.

Hear what the Lord spoke to Job; Job 4.9.
Have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder like him? It Is a bold
madness to go about to imitate God in his unimitable works. The
counterfeiting of Thunder was common in our Play Houses; which for that and
many other causes, were deservedly suppressed by Authority.

I have given you diverse instances of contempt cast upon this voice of God: To
prevent and endure which, reflect upon the dreadful Operations of Thunder and
Lightning, which are recorded for our admonition: Thunder has been often
accompanied with fearful Judgments, as destructive Hail, burning flashes,
sweeping Rains, and terrible Earth quakes.

In the Stows Chr. p. 102.
third year of Edward the first, 1275. on Nicholas day, there were great
Earthquakes, Thunders and Lightnings, with an huge Dragon and blazing Star,
which made many men sore afraid. Observe, that some Lightnings do fill the Air
with impure and hurtful smells.

Fulmina and Fulgura sulphuris Odorem habent, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 35. e. 15.
says Pliny: Thunder and Lightning do often leave a sulphurious, Brimstony,
Unsavory smell behind them. So when you read that Sodom was destroyed with
fire and brimstone, it may be spoken of brimstony Lightnig from Heaven: For
Sodom was destroyed Dr. Willet on Genesis 19. p. 184.
very suddenly Tertullian Opera. p. 556. in Sodomam.
Tertullian seems to be of this mind: Fumantes co^eunt nubes, Novus irruit
imber;
Sulphura cum flammis flagrantibus aestuat ether:
Exustus crepitat liquidis Ardoribus Ether.


How many have been blasted with Lightning? How many have suffered in their
bodies, in their houses, in their friends, in their Cattle and substance by
Thunder and Lightning?

All which considered, we have little reason to out-brave Thunder, or jest with
Lightning.





1 Let great ones think of it, and know there is one greater then themselves:
Psalm. 29. Give Psalm. 29.1, 3, 5.
unto the Lord O ye mighty, glory and strength: The God of glory thundreth: His
voice breaks the Cedars. He would have the great and mighty Potentates on
Earth give glory to the Highest, when he thundreth: And lest they should be
puffed up with their own borrowed and momentary greatness, which is nothing
to his; the Kingly Prophet doubleth his charge, Give unto the Lord O ye mighty,
give unto the Lord glory and strength. Yet he is not contented with this, but
reinforceth his charge in the second verse; Give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his Name. Hereby he would give us to understand that Kings, Magistrates,
and great men, called by what title soever, should reflect upon themselves when
it Thundreth; and know there is one in Heaven, to whom they must give account,
who is infinitely greater then themselves: Therefore as it is their Privilege
to Rule under him, so it will be their wisdom and Honor to Rule for him: Else
God is able to crush and break the Cedars, yea the Cedars of Lebanon. None are
so great, but he is able by Thunder (or otherwise) to humble them if they
clash against the interest of Christ.

Zanchy Zanchius Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 360.
writing of the Thunderbolt, says, Quae Regum potentia apponi posset? What
power of Kings, or strength of Palaces, (though built of Marble) is able to
resist it? Claudius thought himself a God, till the loud Thunder affrighted
him, then he hid himself, and cried, Claudius non est Deus; Claudius is not a
God.

Methinks I hear God speaking to every great Potentate, as once to Job; Job
40.6, 9, 10.
when the Lord answered him out of a Whirlwind: Can thou thunder with a
voice like him? Deck thy self now with Majesty, and excellency, and array thy
self with glory and beauty; cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, and abase the
proud. q. d. Do all these things if thou can, which are done by the Lord; and
no creature can tread in his steps. There is none like unto thee, O Lord: Thou
art great, and thy Name is great in might! O who would not fear thee, O King
of Nations, Ier. 10.6, 7.
says the Prophet Jeremy.

2 Let all persons fear before the Lord, and humble themselves in the time of
Thunder. Job 37. At this also my heart trembles, and is moved out of his
place: Hear attentively the noise of his voice, Job 37.1, 2.
the sound that goes out of his mouth. He speaks this of Thunder. The Lord
(says Zanch. Tom. 3. lib. 3 cap. 3. p. 360.
Zanchy) is able to send as many Thunderbolts as you have seen Hailstones in a
storm, if he pleases. Then, Quo se miseri mortales verterent? Which way would
poor Mortals turn themselves? Fear therefore and tremble when you muse of the
unlimited power and Majesty of God. Petron.
Primus in Orb Deos, fecit timor: The fear that is in men did first bringthem
to acknowledge a Deity. Propterea tonitrua, propterea fulminum terrores, ne
bonitas Dei contemnatur, says Basil: Proaen: ad Reg. fusius disputatas.
Basil very well: For this very end, says he, are Thunders and the terrors of
Lightning, lest the patience and goodness of GOD should be despised by us. Let
us fear before the greatness of God, whose voice it is. Job 37.1. 2d 6.
Elihu reasoned for God by the consideration of his power in this wonderful
work; as you may see in Job 37. God thundreth marvellously with his voice;
Great things does he which we cannot comprehend. David has penned a Psalm
Psalm. 29.9.
purposely to adore God in this Meteor: and hopes that in his Temple every man
does speak of his glory. q. d. Whosoever observes God in Thunder and Lightning,
will adore his terrible Outgoings, and magnify him in the Temple, and say,
Glory be to God on high.

When it thundreth, sit down and reason thus with thy self: What if God
should now strike me in my sin? Could I welcome that Angel that should swear,
Thy hourglasse is run, Time shall be no more? Can I clearly evidence my
interest in Christ? Am I now busied in the Work of God? Do I now employ my
self in that which is lawful? will my rest be safe, and may I safely and
comfortably sleep till this THUNDER is over? (The night being come, appointed
for rest and sleep.)

for ought he knows, may feel the hand of God, and awake in Hellfire; A
Thunderbolt having parted his soul and body.

It Is better with Evagrius, to lie secure on a bed of Straw, then have Sin will
Turpare and Turbare: It brings a stain and sting.
a foul and turbulent conscience on a bed of Down, having Curtains embossed
with Gold and Pearl. We eat, drink, and sleep, says Hugo de Anima lib. 3.
Hugo, as if the day of Judgment were past and over! Well might Augustus send
to buy that Bed on which a man indebted could sleep: Till God has crossed our
Debt book in Heaven, I cannot believe any sleep to be sound or safe.

So then, at all Times, by Day and Night, when you hear a confused noise of
Thunder afar off, begin to call in thy straggling thoughts to God; But
especially in its nearest approaches, let thy heart be smitten with an awe of
God; and think with thy self;

Jer. 26.20.
Enter into thy chamber and shut the door; hide thy self as it were for a
little while, until the Lords indignation be over-past: Fly to GOD, in JESUS
CHRIST, alone, for protection; that you may receive no injury by Thunder and
Lightning. Think not that any thing else will secure you besides this; For,

1 Some repair unto the strongest places for defense and shelter; either in
their own houses, or some where else; changing their seats, and shifting from
place to place for their preservation. So Augustus when it thundered, fled under
strong Arches, and hollow dark Vaults for his protection. But, Dura resistunt;
Porosa autem fulmini transitum praebent; Strong places do chiefly feel the
power and fury of a Thunderbolt, when it may be, weak, porous, and yielding
things, give way, and escape unhumbled.

Your white and clear Lightning is said to have wonderful Operations; As to
Aristot. Meteor. lib. 3. and cap. 1.
melt the Blade, spare the scabbard; Dry up the Wine, leave the Pipe entire;
Kill the Embrio, not hurting the Mother. So I Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 51.
read that Marcia, a Roman Princess, being great with Child, had the Babe in
her killed by this means, she her self escaping. It Is surely no shelter
against Thunder and Lightning, to lodge in a Rock of Stone, or be immured with
Brazen walls; No security to be dipped in Styx, or clad in the Armor of
Ceneus. We may observe, that the strongest Towers and Buildings are most
battered with Thunder.

2 Others, not less foolishly, but more superstitiously, ascribe rare, occult
qualities to many vain and pitiful Remedies, which they believe will protect
them in the time of Thunder or Lightning: As to an Eagle, to the skin of a
Seal; to the Fig Tree and Bay Tree; to the ringing of Bells, crossing
themselves, and many other vanities and superstitions.

Tiberius Caesar, fulminibus praeterritus, tonante coelo, Lauro coronabatur;
Tiberius Caesar in the time of Thunder did put on a Crown of Laurel for his
defense, being very much afraid of THUNDER. Augustus Caesar always wore about
him the skin of a Sea-calf, as a preservative in case of Thunder. Porta
conceives, because Bay Leaves in a streperous manner do rise and rebel
against the Fire, if you put them into it, that therefore they are good to
resist the Lightning; Our Country people do generally plant the Bay Tree in
their Gardens, as thinking it may preserve their Houses, Fruit, and Flowers,
from being injured by Lightning.

But in a word, to confute this gross superstition, Dr. Brown of vulgar
errors, lib. 1. cap. 6. p. 100.
Vicomercatus produces experiment of a Bay Tree in Italy, that was it self
blasted with Lightning. The tree called Haliphleus, is reported to be most
commonly smitten with Thunder and Lightning; Plinius Not. Hist lib. 16. cap 6.
Wherefore the Pagans for bad the wood of that Tree should be used in
Sacrifice. Formerly the blind Papists would baptize their Bells in Churches,
and then Rivius Epist. Ded. ante Libros de Relig. p. 245.
ascribe to the found of them (being rung) a spiritual power against evil
spirits, THUNDER and Lightning.

But now Bellarmin de Roman: Pontific. li. 4. cap. 12.
Bellarmine (I confess) disclaims these doings. I need not fay much concerning
the superstition of People in former times, about matters of like estimation.
When the shadows of superstition were so overlong, it argued the Sun of our
Knowledge, or Zeal was not very high.

3 Lastly, Some few in the time of Thunder, go into their Closets, and (if it
may be done with convenience) betake themselves, with their Families to Prayer;
that they may Psalm. 29.2, 4.
give unto the Lord the glory of all his Attributes and Works; and desire him
to pardon, spare, and protect them. The Christians did use to meet together,
and pray, ingruentibus Tempestatibus, says Musculus in Psalm. 29. p. 288.
Musculus; in a violent storm, which is undoubtedly the best shelter. David
speaking of Thunder, bids us, Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness,
Psalm. 29.

In order thereunto, it is very fit that in the time of dreadful Thunder, we
should lay by all our Recreations, and other unnecessary employments, which may
be deferred: Romans, says Tul. Cicero. de Divin. li. 2.
Tully, held it unfit to keep Court in the time of Thunder and Lightning: Much
more unfit is it then to attend any idle recreation: Some have so much froth
and vanity upon their spirits, are so eager in play, and so passionately taken
with their sports and pastimes, as Cleopatra with her Viper, and the Emperors,
Caligula with his Horse, Honorius with his Hen, and Domitian with Flies; so
these with Bowls, Chesse, Music, Hunting and Shooting; (not to mention
unmanly Recreations) that they will not stop nor forbear these things in the
most hideous thunder; they will not lay by the thundering Base Viol at such a
time; which argues much levity of mind, and little regard of God or his Works:
And how much better would Prayer, Meditation, and Religious conference become
us at such a time? Keep off, says Zanch. Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 363.
Zanchy, the evils of Thunder; Fide, paenitentia and precibus; by Faith in
CHRIST, Repentance, and Prayer: For prayer in Faith is very prevalent with God:
That which hindered the roaring Lions from hurting Daniel, or the fiery Furnace
from scorching the three Children, is the best means to secure thee also from
roaring Thunder, and scorching Lightning.

Near the City Bern, in the year of our Lord, 1584. a certain Hill is said to
be carried violently over other hills, by an Nos terrae motum, and in Nubibus
Tonitru, eandem esse Naturam dicimus. Aristor. Meteor, lib. 2. cap. 9.
Earthquake, and at last covered an whole Village that had 90 Families in it,
one half house only excepted; wherein the Master of his Family, with his Wife
and Children were earnestly calling upon God: This is recorded by Polan Syntag.
841. Trap on Amos 1.
Polanus that lived in those parts. O the terror of the LORD! O the power of
Prayer! says one, relating this story.

Charenton Bridge in France, which is said Howels famil. Letters.
to quaver and render the Voice ten times in fair weather; We would not so
suddenly forget the crack. It Is mentioned as a great Aggravation of King
Pharaoh's stubbornness, Exodus 9.34.
that after the terrible Thunder and Lightning were over, he sinned yet more
against the Lord, and refused to let the Israelites go.

Swans Eggs (they say) are not hatched without Thunder: 'Twere well if the
purposes of many to reform might at length be hatched with the noise and fear
of Thunder.

Pliny writes of certain precious Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 39. cap. 9.
stones that cannot be found but in places smitten with Thunder: O that Thunder
might perfect the divine Jems of Gods graces in us, by causing us to fear,
trust and obey him more then we have done. Think not when the Thunder is over,
that the great shot of Heaven is spent or diminisht.

Si quoties peccant homines, etc. This was true of their Jupiter, not of God:
He has still a Magazine of Thunderbolts for daring sinners. The hot
Thunderbolt strikes but a few, says Seneca, but the Thunderclap should
affright all: No man knowing whose turn is next. The Lord had rather warn,
then strike the children of men.

Ovid. (...). 1.3.
Est piger ad paenas Deus; Est ad praemia velox;
Quique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox.
The Devil being asked which was the best Verse in Virgil, answered very well;
Discite justitiam moniti, nee temnite Divos.

Zanchy tells us, that Comets and much Thunder do Zanch. Tom. 3.1.3. cap 3. p.
363.
presage many evils to come: If so, then we have not only cause to fear in
the time of Thunder, but after it is gone, waiting and preparing for the
consequences of it: Especially, this being the Reason Mendoza in 1 Reg. 2. p.
358. Vol. 1.
says Mendoza, why Thunders are sent, ut incantos ad paenitentiam praemoneat;
to warn the unadvised not to sin against God.

An obstinate sinner, when he looks up, should think every cloud lined with
Thunder; Yea, that all the clouds and Planets are in travel with a
Thunderbolt to ruin him; That so the heart standing in awe of God, may not
presume to sin against him.

November, 1657. It is mentioned in our Stow's Abridgment of Chron. p. 286.
Chronicles (as a thing very remarkable) that in the year of our Lord, 1563,
from the first of December, to the 12. there were such continual thundrings and
Lightnings; that the like had not been seen or heard, by any man living.

These are Proverbial Observations among us; Winters Thunder is Summers wonder.

So also that, Winters Thunder, Summers Flood,
Never yet did England good.


When the frame of Nature seems to be disordered, and out of course, it is that
which challenges our observation and fear, lest God should be displeased with
the Nation.

Now, that Winters Thunder is besides the course of Nature, will appear by the
testimonies of Learned men. Tonitru non fit nisi ex vapore adusto; Ideo
praecipue fit in Aestate, and Tempore magni aestus, says Albertus Magnus:
Thunder proceeds from hot Vapors, so is chiefly in Summer and the time of much
heat. The same Albertus Magnus Pass: Aeris.
Author says, Winters Thunder presageth a stormy, unseasonable, and
tempestuous year following. Magirus Not. Phil. l. 4. c. 4.
Another says, Materiae fulminum non possunt in altum attrahi, percoqui, and
inflammari, nisi a validissimo calore, qui est in aestate. The matter of
Thunder and Lightning cannot be drawn up from the Earth, brought to maturity,
and kindled in the Air, without the strongest heat, which is in Summer time.

Thunder, says Zanch. Tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 359.
Zanchy. is very rare and mavelous in the depth of Winter; For then, Frigus
non sinit elevari vapores calidos: The cold forbids hot vapors elevation into
the Air. I do not find any considerable Reason assigned by Philosophers of
Winters Thunder: They are all puzzled more then a little, and cannot find from
whence it should proceed, unless by Exhalations drawn from the Earth, and
collected in the Air by Summers heat; which do there abide and remain till
dissolved by Winters Thunder.

Some Prognosticators have guessed at the time of Thunder, oftener missing, then
hitting the mark. But Winters Thunder makes the Astrologer to blush, because
he could not foreknow or fore show it. Ecclipses and things of like nature
they may foresee, but not Rain, Snow, Thunder, or blazing Comets: Here their
skill often fails them: Much more when they will forejudge of Humane Of the
vanity of judicial Astrology, consult Aul: Gellius, lib. 14. cap. 1. Weems,
vol. 1. lib. 2. K. James of Daemonology. Dr. Reynolds of Passions, p. 544. Also
Geering and Rowland of this Subject.
Actions and Events. Cicero has well observed the imposture of these men in
the famous cases of Pompey the Great, Cressus, and Julius Caesar; to all whom
the Chaldeans and Wizards promised a long and prosperous Life, with a quiet and
peaceable Death; the contrary of which is sufficiently attested by all
Histories.

Thraseus a Sooth-saier having told Busiris, that the way to take the drought
from Egypt was to sacrifice a stranger to Jupiter; Himself being a stranger,
was presently sacrificed. By the Exo. 22.18.
Law such are not to live, Exodus 22. And the Acts 19.19.
Magicians being converted to Christ, burnt all their Books, which would have
yielded 600 pound sterling. Augustus put these out of Rome, Claudius out of
Italy, and Vitellius out of the World. Sad, if such men shall be tolerated in
a Christian, in a Reformed Church.

These are lying Vanities, that will hold no water, but sadly with draw us from
the fountain of life.

Let this be one reason then of Winters Thunder, to show Astrologers how little
they know of Gods works, and Isa. 44.25.
(in the language of the Prophet) to frustrate the tokens of the Liars, to make
Diviners mad, and their knowledge foolishness. Mica 3.7.
That the Seers may be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded.

Another reason may be, to warn a People of approaching evils: Winters Thunder
presageth no good to the following Summer. All these disorders in Nature are
for our sins; Let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, on all
such occasions.

all ye that fear and serve him, for he is able to help and deliver you.

says one, to put all the powers of Faith afloat; it requires Christ's full
tide: Say with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith.

Faith (says Aug. contra Julian. lib. 6. cap. 5.
Austin) sanat vitiatum a reatu statim, ab infirmitate paulatim: It presently
removes guilt, but infirmity by degrees. Trust not in any thing else besides
God: Externis Praesidiis utendum, non nitendum.

Rely upon his Power, his Promise, and his Providence. When you Ex eo quod
potens est, potest and suos corroborare, says Musculus of Thunder. Musc. in
Psalm 29. p. 288.
hear him thunder, and with his Voice shake the Earthly Globe; Think what is
there which this God cannot do for me? Cui voluisse, fecisse est, says
Ambrose de Bon. mor. cap. 12.
Ambrose; With whom to will and act are the same thing.

Multum interest inter loqui and facere, sed hoc apud homines non Deum, says
Bernard, de Temp. 11.
Bernard, to the same effect. Every Creature, and Meteor is under the awe of
Omnipotency: Say therefore with the three Children, The God whom we serve is
able to deliver us. King David in Psalm 29. (which is a Psalm of Thunder) speaks
of the power of God manifested in that Meteor, and how that power will assist
and protect his People: Psalm. 29.1, 4.11.
Give unto the Lord glory and strength. The voice of the Lord is powerful; The
Lord will give strength unto his people. So in Job Job 40.9.
Have thou an arm like God? Or can thou thunder with a voice like him? q. d.
Though you have not seen his Arm, and though you do not know his power, and
what he can do for his People, or against his Enemies; yet judge of his Arm,
by his Voice. With the Lord nothing is impossible, but to do contradiction, to
lie, and to deceive. Surely, Psalm 9.10. Prove. 30.5. Psalm. 125.1.
They that know his Name will trust in him: He is a shield unto his People, and
they shall be as Mount Sion that cannot be removed.



Here I will show you two things.

First, how Ministers are to thunder in their Preaching. Plin. Jun. lib. 3.
Epist. 1. ad Tacitum.
Oration magnifica and excelsa, tonat, fulgurat. Hieron. Libr. contra Jovin.
Jerome faith, Demosthenes used to thunder against King Philip. The same Idem
in Apolog. ad Pammac. Ep. 50.
Father writes thus, Paulum quotiescunque lego, videor mihi, non verba audire
sed Tonitrua: When I read St. Paul, methinks I do not hear words, but Thunder.

Pericles is said to Thunder and Lighten all over Greece by his Eloquence.

Basil was said, to Thunder in his doctrine, and Lighten in his conversation.
So James the son of Zebede, and John the brother of James, were surnamed by
Christ, Mark 3.17.
Boanerges, which is, The sons of Thunder. Gregory Nazianzen says of those
brothers, Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 44.1.
that by Preaching and Writing for Christ, and against sin, they thundered all
the world over.

As Thunder awakens the drowzy, so good Preaching the secure: It spares
yielding, but breaks stubborn and obstinate sinners. Saint Paul Acts 13.9.
set his eyes upon Elymas: After the Lightning flew from his eyes, the
Thunderclap followed in his reproof.

Ezekiel was bid to stamp with his feet; clama and ulula, Ezekiel. 21.
cry and howl aagainst the Peoples sins.

How did our Savior See Mat. 11 and 23 chap.
thunder out woes to the People, when he preached on earth? It Is then the duty
of Ministers to speak boldly, plainly, powerfully to the consciences of their
People; To cry aloud, to lift up their voice as a Trumpet, and tell Judah of
her sins. We should Quintil.
be full of Affections our selves, if we desire to work upon our hearers: and
Nazianzen.
our authority in preaching is marred by unholy living.

Sad, one day, will be the account of blind seers, sleepy watchmen, and dumb
Dogs, that bark not to fright the Wolf, or warn the Sheep. Many Congregations
still continue wast: No compassionate to tell them of fire and brimstone from
Heaven for their sins: And how many shoot off a few Potguns against gross
sins, and then lick them whole with ill applied promises. But the blood of the
People shall be required at their hands.

Nay, the most faithful Messengers of Christ, will acknowledge they come short
of their duty: considering the invaluable worth of souls they have to do with.
The best of us have stammering Tongues in this great Work, and oftentimes we
do it coldly and by halves: Like Polipheme we see but with one eye, like
Malchus hear but with one ear, like the Unicorn push against sin, but with
one horn; like the Benjamites, casting stones with one hand, and like the
Amazons giving suck but with one Breast, as one complains. We do not thunder
in the Pulpit as we should, nor lighten in our conversation as we might. Many
times we pray, as if we prayed not, and preach as if we preached not: The good
Lord lay not this coldness to our charge!



Place not good Preaching in loud speaking; Judge of a Minister by his Brains,
not Lungs, by his Heart, not Throat; and rather by his Matter, then Voice or
Tone.

Demosthenes when he heard an Orator bellow with a loud and roaring voice,
said, Erasmus.
Non quod magnum est been est, sed quod been est magnum est, I mark rather the
goodness then loudness of an Oration. Had the Minister a voice like Stentor,
or Farellus; Yet if his Matter were not grave, sollid, and judicious; his
Preaching would amount to Magno conatu nihil discere, an expense of much pains
in beating the air, without saying any thing for Edification: So Stob. Sermon. 43.
Theocritus says of Anaximenes, that he powered out a flood of words, and a
drop of Reason. It Is good ut soni magnitudinem pro loci moderemur amplitudine;
that our voice be no louder then for all the People to hear us, Vossius Inst.
Orat. lib 6. cap. 10. p 508
says Vossius. Therefore let not the voice be the main thing you esteem in a
Minister; for as a good Moses may be defective therein, so the meanest voice
has some hidden grace and power to attend it.

Secondly, as Ministers should Thunder in their Preaching, so people should
gladly receive their admonitions, be warned and awakened by the Thunder of
their reproofs; saying as the People once to Moses, Speak thou with us and we
will hear, but let not God speak with us (any more by Thunder) lest we dye.
In vooe hominis Tuba Dei; The Gospel is Gods Trumpet at man's mouth. When St.
Paul thundered, reasoning of righteousness, temperance, and judgment, unhappy
Asts 24.25.
Foelix trembled. How shall God hear the Minister praying for you, (said
Gregory to King Ethelbert) if you will not hear him speaking from God? The
Lord (says one) might have preached to you in the flames, as once in the Mount
Sinai; or by the Ministry of Angels, and you would not have been able to hear
it; But now God is not in the Fire, nor in the Earth quake, but in the voice of
a man like your selves; he speaks to you by his Ambassadors; Will not Love
conquer? Will you not hear, obey, and live? If you refuse to hear Moses and
the Prophets, neither would you be convinced, if the Dead should arise to warn
you, if Angels should preach in your Pulpits, or the Lord give you vocal and
articulate Sermons in Thunder from Heaven.



I answer,

Blessed be God, disorderly Teachers are pretty well purged out.

2 If any continue, it is the fault of them that do not bring their wickedness
to light; that such may be rooted out, who make the offering to be abhord; The
sins of Teachers being teachers of sins.

3 Such as fear God should endeavor to reap all the benefit they can, from
such as preach the Truth, but live not accordingly in all things: God spoke to
Moses out of a Bush; We must attend to the words of a Minister, though himself
be fruitless: In which sense we may be said to gather Grapes of Thorns, and
Figs of Thistles.

may awaken and kindle fire on the hearth: Unsanctified Ministers may possibly
convert and comfort sinners. Admit the Minister be sinful, shall the People
despise his Doctrine? Our Savior Mat. 23.3.
forbids it. Was the glory of the Arc any thing diminished, when it came from
the Philistines? Scripture is Scripture, though uttered by Satan. Non ergo
merita personarum, sed officia sacerdotum considerentur, says Ambrose cap. 5.
De iis qui mysteriis initiantur.
Ambrose: Look not so much on the worthiness of their persons, as the weight
of their office and employment.

I have stayed here the longer, because some Expositors do understand this of
Job, to be meant rather of moral, then natural Thunder, viz. The highest
Publications of Gods power and greatness.

Sampson. Tully says of Syracuse in Sicily, that no one day passes in which
the Sun shines not clear upon them. Thunder has in its mouth an Olive Branch
of Peace for the interessed in Christ, you may gather from the 29 Psalm Psalm
29.9, 11.
The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve, and in his Temple does every
man speak of his glory, Or, (as it is in your Margent) In his Temple every
whit of it utters his glory. q. d. A Saint may take occasion from Thunder to
magnify and praise God, for his power in the Thunderclaps, and for his
goodness in their preservation, who attend his Temple. A Believer can with the
Psalmist Psalm 148.4.
alarm the heavenly Meteors to glorify God: Praise him Fire and Hail, snow
and vapors, stormy winds fulfilling his will. The Lord, says David, will
give strength unto his people, the Lord will bless his people with peace. This
use he makes of the Doctrine of Thunder, as the Reader will find it, Psalm.
29.11. The Lord will give strength unto his people, and bless them, in tempore
tonitru, says Aben Ezra; this he will do in the time of Thunder. So in the 18
Psalm: Psalm. 18.6, 16.
In my distress I cried to my God; he heard my voice, he sent from above, he
took, he drew me out of many waters. Now look just before, and you will find
in nine or ten Verses a lively and terrible description of Thunder and
Lightning.

So again, by the Prophet Nahum; Nahum 1.6, 7.
Who can stand before his indignation? who can abide the fierceness of his
anger? His fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him:
The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that
trust in him. Thus you see it proved by Scripture, that in Thunder and
tempests, in all dangers, the Prove. 18.10.
Name of the Lord is a strong tower, and the righteous run into it, and are
safe. Psalm. 91.11.
He will give his holy Angels charge over them to keep them in all their ways.

Now let us see, from what coast the People of God shall fetch comfort in the
time of Thunder and Tempest?

I answer,

From natural and spiritual confiderations:

1 Natural, such as these.

1 THUNDER is from natural causes; so is not always an Argument of Gods
displeasure; no more then Hail, Snow, Rain, or any other Meteor. Though
Thunder ever proclaims the power of God, yet it does not always trumpet forth
his Anger.

2 Oftentimes it has good effects on the Air and Earth. Sen. lib. 2. Not. q
cap. 31.
Seneca the Philosopher says, that some Thunders destroy the poison that is in
Serpents, Ipsir serpentibus illaesis. And diverse tell us of Thunders that help
to purge and purify the Air, Leigh's Treatise of Divinity, li. 3. c. 4.
doing much good in times of sickness and infection. Derat aerem consumptis
venenosis halitibus.

2 But the Saints may chiefly draw comfort from spiritual considerations, such
as these.

in a soft and still voice. Of old it was, Psalm 18.8.
I heard thee in the secret of the Thunder! But, in these last days he has
spoken to us by his Son, and Ambassadors sent by him.

Exodus 9.23. 2 Samuel 22.14. 1 Samuel 7.10.
ascribed to God. As the voice of a Man is governed and ordered by him that
speaks; so is Thunder by the Lord, it being his Voice, Psalm 29.1. ad 9.
as you have heard. Though Thunder be a terrible weapon, yet remember it is in
the hand of your gracious Father.

mercy: Jer. 31.20.
Since I spoke against Ephraim, I do earnestly remember him; I will surely have
mercy on him, says the Lord.

Are not Bullets from the roaring Cannon in time of Battle ordered by the
Lord? (which is clear in holy Jer. 39.17, 18. Job 5.20. Psalm 140.7. Eccles.
9.11. Psalm 91.7.
writ) And do Thunderbolts, from Gods own Fort-Royal, come by chance? do his
swift Lightnings fly without commission? When David had set forth this work
of God, he adds; The Lord sits King for ever, Psalm 29.10. God is King over
Angels, over men; over all Meteors, and creatures; He commands, rules, and
orders them for time, place, person, Job 37.4. opened.
and manner of operation. See Job 37:4. He thundreth with the voice of his
excellency, and he will not stay them when his voice is heard. Not stay THEM;
that is, New flashes of Lightning; or showrs of Hail or Rain; which usually
break out, either when it thundreth, or by and by after in a violent and
impetuous manner. (Mark) He will not STAY them. Thunderbolts and angry
Hailstones must have leave and commission from God, or they cannot stir.

Object If it be so; then may some object, surely none of Gods children shall
receive any prejudice by these things!

To which I answer,

(for that) conclude them enemies of God: No man knowing Divine Eccles. 9.1.
Love or Hatred by any outward Dispensations. Think not Luke 13.4.
says Christ, that those 18 men on whom the Tower in Siloe fell, and slew
them, were sinners above all that dwelt in Jerusalem; I tell you nay. If we
should judge thus, We might condemn the generation of Gods children, who have
suffered as much (if not Lam. 4 6. Dan. 9.12.
more) then any others in the world, one way or other.

2 sometimes they are in bad places, or employments with the wicked; and then
no marvel if the good be swept away with the bad: Thus the Carkases of Moses
and Aaron fell in the Wilderness, they proving incredulous with the rest of
the people.

3 It may be, the Lord foreseeth greater evils and trials would befall them,
in case they escaped. Thus Josiah was slain in Battle; yet because he lived not
to see the miseries of succeeding times, Dr. Gouge his 3 Arrows, p. 18.
he is said to Go unto the grave in peace.

4 Hereby the Lord does allarm and warn all wicked men and Heretics what to 1
Pet. 4.17.
expect at his hands, seeing he deals thus ruggedly and severely with his own
children many times.

5 Though some of Gods children should suffer by the Pestilence, Thunder or
War, yet usually, he does preserve his People in such perilous times: So Lot 2
Pet. 2.9. Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. Rev. 18.4.
was pulled out of Sodom, that he might not be destroyed with Lightnings and
Fire from Heaven; The three Children escaped the Fire, and Noah the Deluge, the
Lord often marking out his People, that Temporal calamities do not lay hands
upon them.

6 If Saints perish by Thunderbolts, or any other untimely, sudden, and
fearful death, they yet receive no injury in these Dispensations; are but
hastened into Heaven, though with Eliah in a fiery (or bloody) charet. The Lord
does them no wrong to hurry them out of sin, temptation, misery and mortality,
into an estate of glory and bliss eternal; so turning them over from Faith to
Vision, from Expectation to Fruition. Mala quae sancti patiuntur ad Deum ire
compellu^t, says Gregory. All fearful Disasters which rob the SAINTS of Life,
do but serve as a rough wind to blow them suddenly into their desired Haven, I
mean Heaven. Quid interest utrum Febris, an ferrum de corpore solverit? Non qua
occasion, sed quales ad se exeant, Dominus attendit in servis suis, says Aug
Epist. 122. ad vict:
Austin very well. It matters not, say I, whether a burning Fever, or flash of
Lightning, whether a stone in thy Bladder, or Thunderstone in thy Head, send
thee out of this miserable world. God minds not, says Austin, the immediate
occasion of thy coming to him, but the condition and posture thy soul is in,
when it comes. The thing which God looks at is, whether thou art growing on
the Crabstock of the First Adam, or art ingrafted into Jesus Christ. Sancti qui
mala temporalia patiuntur, habent suas consolationes, and spem futuri seculi,
says the Aug. Ibid.
same Father. In all their sufferings they have this Cordial, the hope of a
blessed Eternity with God.

Thus you see what to think of good men dying by Lightning, Tempests, and
Thunderbolts.

Abel, as Jerome and others think; for the Lord by some outward and visible
Genesis 4.4.
Testimony did approve of the Sacrifice of Abel, not of Cain; And most likely,
by sending a Fire from Heaven to kindle the wood for Sacrifice. But it is
certain he dealt thus with the 1 Reg. 18.38. Levit. 9.24. 2 Par. 7.1.
Sacrifices of Elijah, and of Moses and Aaron, and King Solomon. When the
People saw it they marvelled, and cried out, The Lord he is God. So it may be a
flash of Lightning rendered that Charet fiery that had 2 Reg. 2.11.
Elijah to Heaven in the Whirlwind, through the help of flaming Seraphims, and
blessed Angels, that encompassed, and drew the Charet to Heaven.

Again, Thunder and Lightning have appeared in behalf of the Church, against
such as were enemies to her truth or peace.

1 To her Truth; So Fire Levit. 10.2.
came and destroyed Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire before the Lord
to show us Humana non ad miscenda divinis, says Procopius; that humane fancies
must not intermingle with divine things. We must take heed, says Calvin, that
we do not alay his worship with man's inventions.

Nadab and Abihu were slain, was no other then Lightning is to me very
probable; in that, neither their Bodies nor Garments were touched or burned by
the flame, as you may gather from the Levit. 10.4, 5.
following discourse; for they were carried forth in their Coats to be buried.
Lightning is of a subtle nature, and might pierce their inward parts, not
hurting the outward: Some Lightnings kill, Penetrando, non comburendo; This
Fire being celestial, rather then purely Elementary, consumes not the things
which have pores and passages, but rather where it finds resistance; as it
melts the silver, not hurting the purse: So their Flesh and Garments, being
full of pores, might give way to the flash, and Annotat. in Locum. and Tostatus.
yet it might suffocate the spirits, and by drinking up the radical moisture,
cause Death.

Olympus, the Arrian Heritick, bathing himself, uttered words against the
blessed Trinity, Theater of Gods judgments, lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 64.
but a threefold Thunderbolt struck him dead in the same place.

The accomplices of Corah, Datha^, and Abiram, Numb. 16.35.
who usurped the Priests Office, were destroyed with Fire from the Lord. A
warning-piece for such as now usurp the Ministerial Function, uncur'd, uncal'd,
un-ordained. Let them take heed lest Thunder and Lightning be their ruin, when
they presume to vent their illiterate, crude, incoherent, and blasphemous
stuff: These are not Pastors, but Impostors, St. Paul says, How shall they
preach except they be sent? What have they to do with his honor, unless Heb.
5.4.
Called of God as was Aaron? Let the Reader consult that notable place, Zech.
13. from the third verse to the fifth: And oh that such men would make the like
acknowledgment in these days, and humbly acquiesce in their former course and
^ Cor. 7.24. 1 These. 4.11.
Trade of life.

Let Magistrates take heed of 1 Reg. 12.31.
Jeroboams sin, who suffered the lowest of the people to invade the
Priesthood; Nay 1 Reg. 13.33.
any that had an itch toward it. This became sin to the house of Jeroboam,
even to cut it off, and destroy it from the face of the earth. We are
Ambassadors for Christ, says the Apostle: It Is Treason to undertake an
Embassy, without commission. I sent them not, yet they ran, says the Lord:
RAN, not knowing Why nor Whither; like Ahimaaz in Samuel; and like him too they
can tell no tidings, as one very well observes: God give them repentance to
life, that they no longer play the young Vipers in gnawing out the bowels of
their mother, the Church.

2 As Thunder or Lightning or both have appeared for the Church against the
enemies of her Truth, so also of her Peace: You have seen how the Lord has
fought for Israel against Exodus 9.23, 38. 1 Samuel 7.10. Psalm 18.13, 14.
Pharaoh, with Thunder and Lightning; and against the enemies of Samuel and
David with the same Artilery. Never count your estate low and desperate, so
long as Heaven has Hail-shot, Lightnings, and Thunderbolts, to relieve his
people, and crush their enemies.

Who shall endure everlasting burninge? says the Prophet Isa. 33.14, 15.
Isaiah: He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly.

Saints triumphant shall be able to abide and endure the flame of Gods glory;
For gold and Jewels, (such are believers) will not suffer by fire. Above the
Moon there is nothing but serenity, peace and tranquillity: There will be an
everlasting calm in Heaven; Nothing but rest and joy; nothing to molest or
affright us. On Earth storms and Tempests, Thunder and Lightning, Hail and
showrs, Wars and commotions, terrors and troubles; The Sea is restless, and
all that sail therein: All the creatures on the earth, in the Air, and great
Deep, are in continual agitation, in perpetual labor and motion: Then look a
little lower, not one moment of rest or ease in Hell. But oh the blessed
Tranquillity that is in Heaven! What a glorious change will there be? When Peter
was on the Mount, encompassed with glory, by and by a cloud overshadowed him:
But no cloud in Heaven to darken us; No cloud in Heaven, big with storms and
Thunder, to break over us, and to terrify and annoy us: There will be Summer
without Winter; Day without night; Sunshine without shade; Calm without any
interposing storm; for all motion ends at the Center. There is no Earthquake in
Heaven; Heb. 12.28. opened.
That is a City that has Foundations; It Is a kingdom that cannot be shaken.
Consider that place, with the coherence; Heb. 12.28. Just before he spoke of
Gods shaking the earth with his voice; For at the delivery of the Law there was
dreadful thunder, by whose cracks the Mount quaked and trembled. And yet once
more the Lord will shake by most violent Thunders, Not only the Earth, but the
Heavens: Not only Men, but Angels; who shall quake and stand amazed at the
dreadful appearance of Christ in judgment. This will be such a shaking of
Heaven and Earth, as will loosen and dissolve the whole Frame; so that the
things shaken ( viz. Earth and Heaven) shall be removed and abolished; But
Heaven (which is above all visible heavens) the seat of blessed Souls, is
(says the Author) a kingdom that cannot be shaken: That is to say, by Thunder
or any thing else. Then Job 37.2. Caution for Saints.
Elihu shall say no more, Hark it Thundreth! There shall be no more sorrow nor
crying, no pain nor fear; all former things being passed away. Our Thunder is
no more heard by glorified Saints, then their Halelujahs are by us.

And now having spread before Saints these Consolations; Let me adjoyne thereto
a necessary caution, which concerns all Believers, but especially those of the
weaker Sex. The Caution is this;

Not to be scared, Caution for Saints.
affrighted, or transpored in the time of Thunder and Lightning, storms and
Tempests by Land or Sea; as to speak or act things unbeseeming their most holy
profession.

And that there may be no mistake, Weems portraicture of Gods image in man. p.
218 volumn 4.
Divines tell us of six sorts of Fear. 1. Natural, whereby every creature
shuns its destruction. 2. Humane, which arises from a too vehement desire of
this life, with the continuance and comforts thereof; Skin for skin and all
that a man has will he give for his life. 3. Mundane, when a man fears the
loss of Transitories more then the loss of Gods favor: Many that thought
well of Christ, did not confess him for fear of the Pharisees and
Excommunication. Servile fear, whereby men long to avoid the punishment of sin,
yet Isay 35.4. Luke 12.32.
still entertain a love and liking to sin: Some call it Esau's fear. Others,
the Adulterous fear: because the Adulteress is afraid of her husband, lest he
should surprise and punish her; She fears the Qui recte timet Deum nihil
timer praeter eum. Origin in Levit. 16.
Law and shame, more then her husbands displeasure. 5. Initiall Fear, is when
we are deterred from sin, partly out of fear to displease and grieve the Lord,
and partly because of the consequence and woeful wages of sin. 6. There is a
Filial fear in Saints, Mat. 10.28. Acts 10.2. Heb. 11.26. Mal. 1.6. Luke 2.25.
as a good Wife fears her Husband, lest he should be grieved, and a loving
Child fears the frown of his Father, more then the Rod.

Now observe it well,

From and With the spirit of Grace; as Initial and Filial fear.

2 Some Fear is From, but not With the Spirit; as Servile fear.

3 Again, some fear is With the Spirit, but not From him; As Natural and
Humane fear.

4 Lastly, some Fear is neither From nor With the Spirit; and such is Mundane,
Base Fear.

If then, your fear of Thunder be only natural, it is neither good nor evil:
If it proceed from a Res est imperiosa Timer. Martial. lib. 2. Epist. 59.
passionate and inordinate desire of life, we must strive against it, and begin
to suspect things are not with us as they should be: If you fear Thunder, more
then the Thunderer and his displeasure; Then it is sinful: If you fear, when
it Thundreth, least God should then smite you in and for your sin; This is a
slavish Fear, and wicked men have it: certainly is a Filial, Holy, and Blessed
Fear.

You then that have a share in Christ, give not way to a servile and slavish
fear of Thunder and Lightning; which makes People hide themselves, and be
almost at their In metu consilia prudentium, and vulgi rumor juxta audiuntur.
Tacit. in Hist. lib. 3. cap. 11.
wits end; speaking rashly and unadvisedly with their Lips, and doing those
things, which are far from suiting with their holy profession; That we should
rather take them to be Children or Madmen, to be Pagans or Robbers of
Churches; (In a word) to have some notable guilt upon them, as Parricide,
Incest, Adultery, Murder or Perjury; then to be serious, intelligent, and
blameless Christians; But that we are commanded to judge no man before the
time. O let the fear of God dispossess your hearts of all servile, inordinate
and slavish Mar. 18.28. Timorem Timere pellit, us clavum clavo.
Fears: If the fear of any thing unhinge you, and render you unfit for Gods
service, or the employments of your Calling, sit down and sadly conclude; That
fear is not of God.

(may some objest) when it Thundered on Mount Sinai, Moses quaked and feared
exceedingly, Heb. 12.21.

Exo. 19.16.
All the people feared; so Moses might be drawn by their example; it might be
his infirmity.

2 Moses well knew this Thunder was supernatural and miraculous, so had reason
to quake.

3 Austin says, Brevis differentia legis and Evangelii, timor and amor. The
Law produced fear, but the Gospel love.

4 Moses was afraid when it thundered, but not as the people were; Timuit
Moses, sed non Timore servili, ut populus, says Ferus. Moses indeed feared,
but his fear was not (like the peoples) servile, but Filial; which was Timere
Deum est nulla quae facienda sunt Bona praeterire, faith Gregor. in Mor.
nothing else but a religious reverence, and holy observance and Nemo melius
diligit, quam qui maxim veretur offendere. Salvian. Ep. 4.
awe of Gods Majesty and Power. Fear should be the child of goodness, not
cruelty; the one is joined with love, the other with hatred.

Let wicked men fear Thunder with a slavish and hellish fear: Omnes conscius
strepitus timet, says Seneca; A guilty conscience fears every noise. Philip.
in Job.
Aliud est timere quia peccaveris aliud ne pecees: It Is one thing to be
affrighted after villainy; another thing to fear, lest you offend God. Juvenal.
13.
Juvenal writing of guilty persons, calling to mind their wickedness when it
thundreth, says thus, Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura paellent,
Cum tonat; Exanimes primo quoque murmr Caeli.


Let it pass for the true character of a wicked wretch, to be still,
intrepidus ad culpam, timidus ad paenam; fearlesse in sinning, and fearful of
vengeance. It Is a vile heart that fears Thunder more then sin; which says
Chrysostme, Chrysostom, Hom. 5. in Ep. ad Romans
is to be feared more then Hell. We are worthy, says he, of Hell, if for no
other cause, yet for fearig Hell, and the evils of punishment, more then
Christ. Manifest you have the spirit of Love and Adoption, by crushing all
unworthy and uncomely fears, in the time of Thunder. A greater Thunder must
come, wherein the Saints shall not fear, but shout for joy; For when the waves
of the Sea shall mount up their foaming Billows; when the Earth under us shall
tremble with most terrible Earthquakes, and have throws like a woman in
travel; When Lightnings shall be our chief Light, and the Heavens over us roar
with dreadful Thunder.

In a word; When this goodly frame of Nature shall be on fire; Then all true
Believers shall lift up their heads, because their Redemption draws nigh.

LAVS DEO.
Sylvester his Translation of Du Bartas his second day of the first week p. 44.

BUt hark what hear I in the Heavens, methinks,
The Worlds wall shakes, and his Foundation shrinks:
It seems even now that horrible Persephone,
Loosing Meges, Alecto, and Tysiphone,
Weary of reigning in black Erebus,
Transports her Hell between the Heaven and us.
It Is held, I know, that when a Vapor moist,
As well from fresh, as from salt water hoist,
In the same instant with hot Exhalations,
In the airy Regions secondary Stations;
The fiery Fume, besieged with the crowd
And keen cold thickness of that dampish Cloud,
Strengthens her strength, and with redoubled vollies,
Of joined heat, on the cold Leagher fallies.
Like as a Lion very late exiled
From's native Forests; spit at, and revilld,
Mocked, moved and troubled with a thousand toys,
By wanton children, idle Girls and Boys;
With hideous roaring does his Prison fill
In's narrow Cloister, ramping wildly still,
Runs too and fro; and furious less does long
For liberty, then to revenge his wrong:
This Fire desirous to break forth again
From's cloudy Ward, cannot it self refrain;
But without resting loud it groans and grumbles,
It roules and roars, and round round round it tumbles,
Till (having rent the lower side in sunder)
With sulphry flash, it have shot down its Thunder.
Though willing to unite in these Alarms
To's brothers forces his own fainting Arms,
And the hottest Circle of the world to gain,
To issue upwards often is strives in vain;
For it is there fronted with a Trench so large,
And such an Host, that though it often charge
On this and that side, the cold Camp about
With his hot skirmish; Yet still still the stout
Victorious For repelleth every push;
So that despairing, with a furious rush,
Forgetting Honor (which the valiant prize)
Not as it would, but as it may, it flies.
Then the Ocean boyls for fear, the Fish do deem;
The Sea too shallow to safe shelter them:
The Earth does shake; The shepherd in the Field,
In hollow Rocks himself can hardly shield.
The affrighted Heavens open, and in the Vale
Of Acheron, grim Pluto's self looks pale.
The air flames with fire; for the loud roaring Thunder,
(Renting the Cloud that it includes asunder,)
Sends forth those flashes, which so blear our sight:
As wakefull Students in the winters Night,
Against the steel, glauncing with stony knocks,
Strike sudden sparks into their Tinder-box.
Moreover Lightning of a Fume is framed
Through't selfs hot dryness, evermore inflamed;
Whose power (past credit) without razing skin,
Can bruise to powder all our bones within;
Can melt the Gold that greedy Mizers hoord,
In barred cophers, and not burn the board:
Can break the blade and never singe the sheath;
Can scorch an Infant in the womb to Death,
And never blemish in one sort or other,
Flesh, bone or sinew of the amazed Mother:
Consume the shoes, and never hurt the feet,
Empty a Cask, and yet not perish it, etc.
Methinks I hear when it begins to Thunder,
The voice that brings Swains up, and Caesar's under:
By that Tower tearing stroke I understand,
The undaunted strength of the divine right hand;
When I behold the Lightning in the Skies,
Methinks I see the Almighties glorious Eyes;
When I perceive it rain down timely showers,
Methinks the Lord his Horn of Plenty pours;
When from the Cloud excessive water spins,
Methinks Heaven weeps for our unwept-for sins.
THE END.

