DING DONG, OR Sr. Pitiful Parliament, On his Deathbed.

His Pulses felt by Doctor KING, and his water cast by Doctor BISHOP.

His last Will, and Testament, with his Death, Burial, and Epitaph.

By Mercurius Melancholicus.

Have, have, good Sexton, toule the bell;
Even at the point of death
Lies our most blessed Parliament,
And scarce can draw his breath.
Go call the Doctors; Privilege,
Thou art his serving creature.
Tell Doctor King, he needs must come,
To help restore his Nature.
Ruin Directory, have I say,
Call Doctor Bishop hither;
Tell him, our dying Parliament,
Want him, and King together.
O Nol, O Tom, O Rainsborow,
O Devil, Fool, and Knave.
Come close the eyes of your Dear State,
And lay him in the grave.
Printed in the Year. 1648.

Sir Pitiful Parliament on his Deathbed.
Induction.
Our high and mighty Parliament,
Fell sick of late with discontent.
The business thus, a Scotchman came,
(Whom for his own sake) I Will not name;
And justling him, began to say,
Why do thou God, and Man betray?
And do thy league with me forsake,
Not suffering me for to partake;
Of all thy glory and degree,
Nor do set up Presbytery:
Be sure ere long, armed Cap a pee,
Strict Vengeance I will take on thee.
He gone, one Poyer, with his Mate,
Called Powell, who by happy Fate;
Had ceazed Pembroke Castle; and
Incited all for CHARLES to stand.
Came in and said, O cursed Devil!
We Will make the now repent the evil,
Thou have these seven years put in ure;
Yet would have us to count thee pure.
This put Sir Parliament, in dread,
And presently, he took his bed.
Where a sore sickness ceazed upon him,
That he dispaires to shake if from him.
And now alas, he is drawing on,
And sinking to perdition.
Enter Mr. Vete. O Run, run, Mr. Priveledge or we are all lost, Sir Pitiful
Parliament has taken grief, which has so prevailed over his powers and
mastered his faculties, that he is now become a mere Skelleton and lies
drawing on -- away with winged have -- hark how he groans -- his
heart strings crack like a Cable, when the affrighted Bark breaks from the
Anchor, -- he yawnes again, -- O good man, that he that has been so long
flourishing, of such health of body and wealthy above Craessus, should now be
wasted with a Scotch Feaves, and shaken to pieces, with a Welsh Ague, and fall
as poor as Ir^s; O run, run good Privilege, some Aquavitae, for our sick
Parliament, or all is lost.


Mr. Declaration. The Doctors, the Doctors, post, post, for the Doctors, do
you two, stand here like statues to behold your sick Master surrender his
Ghost; dare you be Spectators with the Devil; O Mr. Privilege, O Mr. Vote,
one of you run for Doctor King, the other for Dr. Bishop, but bid the last
not to appear in his Lawne sleeves; for the shape of any thing resembling
Innocence, will hasten my Masters end, -- run, run, for Gods sake:

To fetch the Doctors, Privilege, and Vote
Are gone, they are come, and now what follows note,
Behold Sr. Parliament, here in his bed,
Sr. Ralph Rebellion, holding of his head:
With all the Rabble, of his new made Creatures,
Knowing their names, you needs must know their natures

Mr. Rebellion. For Pluto's sake cheer up Sir, or else all Hell will be
sorrowful, O how his temples beat, as if he were possessed with a Vertigo good
Sir be comforted, the Scots are not yet coming, Prince CHARLES is yet in
France, Poyer may yet be named, the Londoners are still Sir at your service,
the Coxcombs are bewitched unto their ruin you yet may Rule the roast over King
and People, why should you dye yet.


Pitiful Parliament. O Rebellion, thy comforts come too late, my Conscience,
o^ my Conscience, it is that kills me were there no opposition, J am a man that
am di'd over with blood, am guilty of an hundred thousand lives, -- oh, oh, --
I have for to enrich my private Cosers, undone a Nation, made ten Thousand beg,
have wronged my King, that is the best of Princes, pulled down all order in the
Church and State, and introduc't the worst of Turcisme, -- oh -- oh.


Rebellion. Conscience is merely, but an ayrie sound; shall fear persuade you
Sir to penitence, recall your wonted temper, and imagine to be as great as
ever, dear Sr. without you, I that have seven years, maskt with the veil of
seeming Pity, been worshipped as a god shall now decline into my wonted orb, and
abhorred, as the worst of Devils.


Pitiful Parliament. I can hold out no longer, it is in vain for me to cheer
my self, when Death's approaching, shift for thy self Rebellion, I must leave
thee, I see as in a glass my Fate is cast, and that the King will have his
own again; and if the words of dying men be Oracle, believe then* that ere
Three years are accomplished, all things will be as they were seven years
since, it is best for me to dye and so escape the fury of those Lions, wait to
tear me; do thon not know the Commons of this Isle have found their error,
and do now resolve to have one King, rather then forty Tyrants; see thou not
how my miseries throng about me, perceivest thou not that Heaven it self is
bent to give a period to my undertakings, all England, Ireland, Wales,
Scotland; yea the Universe, protest to fall themselves or ruin me: Where Is Mr.
Covenant.


Mr. Covenant. Here Sr. yet with no weeping eye, do I deplore your miserable
Fortune; for you have dea't with me, as some with Iades, ride them of their
legs, then turn them to the Commons: I have been hackney to you Sr. this
seven years, have made great journyes, and yet carried double, and but of
late when you were swollen with pomp, and hemd about, with all mistaken
glories, when I expected love and great preferment, you thrust me forth of
doors, with scorn and obloquie, for which you now lie Cauving.


Pitiful Parliament. I never meant for to make thee my Rival, how ere, for
to add to my own advantage, I entertained and hugd thee in my bosom,
Machiavill was my master, any thing that might help forward my cursed
undertakings, Oaths, Covenants, and Protestations, with or against God, all was
one to me; home to thy Blew Capt brethren, both I and thee must near expect
our wishes; the King, the King man, now must rule again. -- Where Is Mr.
Plunder.


Mr. Plunder. Here my dear Master.


Pitiful Parliament. O my delicious servant, to thee J am engaged more then
to all my creatures, thou have been my supoorter all a-long, nor shall I leave
behind me now I die, a doir, but what by thy help I have gained.


Mr. Plunder. Be cheerful Sir, I still am your true Trojan, give me but
Warrants signed with your hand, I Will plunder all without distinction, fetch you
in Money, Cattle goods and Treasure, make you Delinquents, let me make them
poor, show me a Clergy man, that does preach sound Doctrine, whose life
conformable unto his words, whose Charity extends unto ye poor, dares build
Almshouses, whose sauciness is such that he dares pray for the King Queen and
Progeny, I Will soon ceaze on his living and estate, and command none for to
afford him succor, show me an honest harmless meaning man, who hold it best
untroubled to remain, and view the fate of things and not to meddle, whose
happy soul addors the golden mean, and wishes truth alone may get the
better, Isle strip him of his tenements and lands, and try his patience more,
then Satan Iobes or show me but a Citizen whose Chests, ring, loud with silver
bells, though he be nere so honest and upright though he sought for Cause and
Covenant; yet this vast treasure shall pronounce his doom; that he is rich
shall be a heynons crime, all that he is possessed of I will rifle, to add unto
your store.


Pitiful Parliament. Thou have been faithful in thy undertakings, but my
employing thee has been my ruin; come all at once about me, Mr. Privilege,
Mr. Vote, Mr. Declaration, Mr. Rebellion, Mr. Covenant, and Mr. Plunder, my
glass is almost run, I now must leave you to be the scorn and hate of after
Ages; yet ere I make my Exit 'twere convenient that my last Will, and
Testament, were drawn, which shall be in this form.


THE Last Will, and Testament of Sir Pitiful Parliament.
In the name of Lucifer, Amen.
I Sir Pitiful Parliament, lying very sick and weak, of a disease called,
the Scotch March, and Poyers resolves, do make this my last Will and
Testament, in manner and form following.

Imprimis; I give and bequeath, all my plundered housholdstuffe, money Plate
and Jewels, unto our grand Patron Plu^o, who is the God of riches, which I
desire him to improve and distribute to his best advantage, either for the
allurement of those wicked men, who shall after my decease have an itching
fancy to pocket Reformation; and shall zealously affect to be called a
Parliament, though they forfeit the Essence thereof, and instead of being the
peoples preservers, become their destroyers, the Plunderers of their goods, the
betrayers of their Laws, and the murderers of your persons.

Item; I give and bequeath all my Ordinances, Votes, Protestations,
Declarations and Covenants, to my dearly beloved brother* the Master of the
Ottaman Empire* willing and desiring my said brother, to take special notice,
of their sense and meaning, to the end he may be thoroughly instructed, how to
be more barbarous, sensual* and devilish in the contextures of all his Edicts
then ever heretofore, and the true reason that I make my aforesaid brother, my
lawful Inheritor of the aforesaid, Votes, Protestations, Declarations, and
Covenants, is because I conceive they are only fit for his imploiment, and not
to be used by any of my neighboring states, when now at the point to depart, I
heartily implore to avoid them, lest they prove as fatal, and destructive to
themselves and their Nation, as they have been omminous to me and my Countrymen.

Lastly; for that I have not deserved, eternal happiness, but my own
intellect informing that I merit the lowest and hottest place in Tartarus, I
bequeath my soul to him whose assistance J have amply enjoyed these seven
years, and wishing the whole world to make me their President, lest they fall
into the same predicament, I bid the world farewell.

Epitath.
Here lies a Devil, whose Angel-like hew;
Deceived the vul^r; and in all men's view,
He was a Saint, but ere he died, 'twas found,
He took that shape, the deadlier to wound.
Under pretense, of pious Reformation;
He ruined quite, the famous English Nation.
And while he feigned to root out Popery;
Eradicated Christian verity.
Leading the people in thick fogs, and mists,
While they like fools, obeid base Factionists.
He did his best to cause his King to die,
For ever to extirpate Monarchye
While a cloud of errors dimmed Gods glory*
The like cannot be paralelled in story.
He fell at last the mo^sters Fate it was,
To fall by those, his ends had brought to pass.
And here he lies without a Tomb interred
Whose name is both by God, and man abhord.
FINIS.

