A DIALOGUE BETWIXT THREE TRAVELERS, as accidentally they did meet on the
Highway: CRVCY CRINGE, a Papist, ACCEPTED WEIGH ALL, a Professor of the
Church of England, and FACTIOVS WREST-WRIT, a Brownist.


Wherein the errors of the Papists and the Brownists are discussed, and
themselves reconciled to the Church of England.

Printed in the year, 1641.

A Dialogue Betwixt three Travelers, as accidentally they did meet on the
Highway, Crucy Cringe, a Papist, Accepted Weighall, a Professor of the Church
of England, and Factious Wrest-Writ, a Brownist.
Crucy. WEll met, well met Master Wrest-Writ, you are such an eager man; Do you
remember, Sir, the conference we had, when we last encountered, almost in this
very place? Do you still pursue your errors with that wilful heat?


Factious. Out of my sight thou Idolater; profaneness hangs in a mist about
thee, that thou may commit thy deeds of darkness with the Whore of Babylon
with more securenesse.


Crucy. Not so hasty Master Wrest-Wright, a good cause should be disputed with
good words, and confirmed with reasons, not with passions.


Factious. Down Dagon, down, I hate thee Cringe; I hate thee and thy late
disputed doctrine of the real presence in the Sacrament, worse than the lawne
Reeves of the Prelates, which are but mere rags of Rome, and fit only for
tinder for the Tinder-box of Tophet; but go to M^ster Cringe, because society
is the injunction of nature; and good discourse (they say) does make a hor^e
that trots seem to amble, proceed in your last argument, and I promise you
both silence and attention.


Crucy. If you will be patient I will: The doctrine then of the real presence
in the Eucharist.


Factious. The Eucharist! I can forbear the argument no longer; there is no
such word to be read in all the Scripture.


Crucy. Very frequently, Sir, in the Greek original.


Factious. Talk not to me of Greek, I will believe no Greek, it is a language
that shall carry no authority with me; I hope to see Greek and Latin too, ere
it be long, in less reputation than they are.


Crucy. I do not like this fury, Even God be with you, and grant your zeal
more knowledge, and your knowledge more humility.


Factious. Nay but hark you Master Cringe, hark you one word, -- look you here,
-- Master Accepted Weighall: -- Come as wished for.


Accepted. How have you done this long time? How do you Master Crucy? Sir, I
heartily salute you.


Crucy. I return your salutation with the like testimony of good will, and
true affect on: you intervene an happy Vmpire, we two were even a falling out,
and a falling off too.


Factious. Verily, Master Weighall, the words of truth being not in his lips, I
was about to separate, and to leave him to the fogs of his superstitious
ignorance, I must beseech you, having so happily met with your better company,
that we may abandon him.


Accept. Why so Sir, Although I am a Professor of true and Orthodox Religion,
I am not of the separation; I would be neither a Trojan, nor Tyrian; it fares
with Religion as with Virtue, she must preserve her self entire betwixt two
extremes; and the safest way to truth is the middle way; I would be neither
learnedly superstirious, nor obstinately ignorant; but to the point which you
were so hot in disputation of.


Factious. Sir, when last Master Cringe and I encountered, we held a
controversy concerning the real presence in the Sacrament, which Master
Cringe believes to be truly corporal, and in adoration bows unto it.


Crucy. Sir, I believe the Sacrament to be a greater mystery then peradventure
you conceive it, and not a mere Love-feast, as idly enough you are pleased to
fancy it; I dare affirm, that the great work of man's Redemption is no where
more perfectly to be discovered, Nec tam praesentes alibi cognoscere Divos.


Factious. Sir, you are in your Latin, I will have Latin again to answer
you; I assure you I take it to be a Commemoration per fidem, only in
remembrance of our Saviors sufferings, on whom we feed with the eye of faith.


Crucy. That cannot be Master Wrest-Writ, the words are positive and punctual,
This is my Body, and will admit of no other interpretation.


Factious. The words that follow that text do as plainly and punctually
interpret the words precedent, Do this in remembrance of me, which implies a
direct absence of the party; for what needs a remembrance, when the person is
present? and in this I refer my self to Master Weighall. You affirmed
besides at our last meeting, that you did feed in the Sacrament, upon the very
body of Christ indeed.


Crucy. I feed in the Sacrament on the very Body and Blood of Christ, the
elements of Bread and Wine, being transubstantiated into his Body.


Factious. This is most horrible impiety. How is this transubstantiation? when
is it begun? when is it finished? answer me to that, Master Cringe.


Crucy. Immediately after the words of the consecration.


Factious. That cannot be, for the Metaphysics (as I have heard Scholars say)
will not allow that the substance should be altered, and the accidents remain,
that the Bread and Wine should be converted into the very Body and Blood of
Christ; yet the color and taste of the Bread and Wine, which are their
accidents, should still continue; neither will Divinity ever agree, that the
Bread, which after consecration, you say, is turned into the Body of Christ,
should suffer afterward, corruption, and moulder away, as we see it does.


Crucy. We feed, I say, in the Sacrament on the very Body of Christ; but how?
not as we feed on butchers meat bought in the shambles; but it being received
with all reverence, and prepared humility after a divine and spiritual manner;
and whatsoever you are pleased to say to to the contrary of us, believe me,
there is no Catholic but is of the same opinion with me.


Factious. That you do to avoid some dangerous absurdities which would
consequently arise, should you affirm, that in a fleshly manner you eat in the
Sacrament, the very flesh of our Savior; for then by the same argument should
the blessed Virgin, the mother of our Savior, feed in the Sacrament, on the
flesh of her own son; and then again, as often as in the time of Leat you
receive the Communion, you should as often offend against the order of the
Church, which does command, that there should in Lent no meat be eaten.
Besides, I understand how cross it is to reason and Philosophy, that one Body
should at one and the same time move in several places.


Crucy. Wonders are no wonders in wonderful subjects; I believe as the Church
believes, which does inform me, that the Body of our Savior is assisted
always with the Divinity of our Savior, and in this (as Master Wrest-Writ did
before) I refer my self to you Master Weighall.


Factious. With all my heart, and if we shall continue in our journey and
travel one way together; as in this, so in all controverted points betwixt us,
I shall refer my self to your advice, Master Weighall.


Weighall. I have not the desire, nor yet the ability to go through with so
great a task; but since it is the inclination of truth to communicate
herself, and through all my life I have made it my labor to enquire her out:
I will, as near as I can, first state the question aright, and then determine
it. I believe we ought not to make our approaches to the blessed Sacrament,
with that overweening familiarity, as the saucy Brownists; nor yet with such a
devout superstition as the abused Papists. That the Bread and wine in the
Sacrament should be transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, cannot be
admitted into the faith of any sober man, without admitting with it many gross
and grievous errors; for besides that, it is but a mere invention of latter
times, it is diametrically opposite to reason and nature; and God himself, who
oftentimes does work above nature, does never work against it. The elevation of
the Host by the Papists, savours of rank idolatry; and the unmannerly sitting
of the Brownists at the Communion, of irreverence. A decent and humble posture
is most requisite, especially where God is pleased to communicate himself to
be really, and more peculiarly present. It is no lukewarmenesse, no neutrality
to keep safe between both your errors, but a grounded knowledge and
uprightness: And I assure my self, if you would well weigh, with how much
safety between both rocks the Truth does pass by unship-wrackt, how secure
and clear she is discovered, you would then make have to disembogue, and make
up unto her, who indeed is the Center of all sublunary happiness, where alone
we may find peace with confidence. Errors in the Church result out of too
unruly an heat, or too thick and too grave a Superstition; either while we
violently are lead by our own ungoverned humors, or while blinded with pomp,
or with the shadows of Antiquity with a willing reverence we are drawn unto
Idolatry. Too much Ceremony and an affected pomp has begot much Superstition
in the Sacrament amongst the Papists. Too careless a presumption has begot
much irreverence in the Sacrament amongst the Anabaptists. The mean betwixt
both is the fate and happy way attended with a persevering care, not to
decline, either to the one, or to the other, either to the right hand, or to
the left.


Crucy. I thank you for your good counsels, and shall endeavor to embrace
them.


Factious. And I shall acknowledge my self to be much improved by you which
does embolden me to propound one question more, and that is concerning the
Original, and the Institution of Bishops.


Accept. I should with much content lend care to your Conference, but see the
Town is near, and within the full view of our eye; we will therefore for this
day repose our minds as well as bodies; and refer the discourse until the
Morning.


FINIS.

