The Dimension of the Hollow Tree of Hampsted.
ALto Deo, hospItI and aMICo.
For the LorD anD ChrIstIan frIenDs.
ALto DoMIno aC hospItI.
Deo ter OptIMo aC hospItI Laeto.
The VVelcome.
Verses on the DOOR.
Civil people, you welcome be,
That come to view this Hollow Tree.
Debaucht Drunkard, Ranting Whore,
Come no such within this Door:
Wanton Boys and ranting Rigs,
Cut no Bows, break no Sprigs.
The Salutation.
WElcome, before! welcome all you that follow!
Our heart is sound, although our Tree be hollow.
Yet know nor age, nor weakness did distress
Its willing bulk into this hollownesse:
But a desire marked out for noble ends,
To find more room to entertain fast friends,
And in the compass of it self to try
Laws of true Mirth, and Hospitality.
In such a Hollow, Music dwells; thus love
Lays forth it self, yet never does banckrupt prove.
And having read the riddle does impart,
Things sometimes hollow have the soundest heart.
Of the height and hollownesse of the great Elm at Hampsted.
WHat shall I call thee who so great and high,
Present'st thy self unto my wondering eye?
Thou Travelers fence, and guide, the Interlude
O'th ranting storms, and giant of the wood!
How in thy summers robes do thou appear,
The Sylvans joy, and honor of the year?
How the bold winds play with thy lofty locks!
How do thou scorn, and make'st them but thy mocks,
Deaf to their fighs, and whispers! Let me hear
(So please thy Wooden Majesty) draw near
To thy first door, and looking up discry
Where Hall, where Parlor, how thy Chambers lie.
Essex Broad-Oake (which twenty miles we see
And more) it but a twig compared to thee;
So vast a compass does thy might command,
That a whole Grove within thy self might stand,
And spread and flourish, and may fruitful add
To thee a growing progeny: which had
No doubt been so, but that thou thought not good
To leave out Men, to entertain a Wood.
Art here, and Order do in one engage
To make this Round complete, their Equipage
Extols thy greatness, in less room I find
With all his trusty Knights King Arthur dined.
As yet more high upon the stairs I rise,
What are these windows which enrich mine eyes?
Happy you lights, whose air so pure and thin
The morning courts to let the Sun come in,
And drink it, to refresh his heavy head
Sick with the vapors of moist Thetis Bed;
For which (not staying) he withal his wealth,
Gilds this blessed place, and thanks it for his health.
Now is my progress finished, to the height
Of all thy Turret I am come, and straight
Here on the worlds Redeemer think, when he
(Set on the Temples Pinnacle) did see
All Kingdoms of the earth at once, so stand
The Towns now subject to my eyes command,
Which to repeat the Muse forbears, for why?
The Towns would often give the verse the lie,
Whose names as Churlish as themselves are known,
And will endure no Numbers but their own.
Six neighboring Counties do on tip-toe all
Gaze on thy mighty limbs, and seem to call
Unto thy patient Greatness, when to wait
To pay thee homage for thy nobler height,
But only Harrow on the Hill plays Rex,
And will have none more high in Middlesex.
And yonder the familiar Thames (the more
To grace thy prospect) rowles along the^ shore
Her Crystal treasures, and does seem to me
Softly to murmur 'cause so far from thee.
See how the Ships in numerous array.
Dance on her waves, and their proud wings display
More white then Snow, as now the Thames did carry
A moving wood in the midst of January.
Not all Maeanders Swans, nor those on Po,
Joined with her own, make half so fair a show:
Nor all the beauteous Ladies that have been
These twice three summers on thy Turrets seen.
But what amongst these various objects, what
Is that which so much takes my eyes? it is not
Thy leavie Antlets, nor thy shoulders, high,
Though one would brush, and the other bore the sky;
Nor thy five hundred Arms by which we see
Briareus only was a type of thee,
Arms which vain winds do twist in every storm
And fain would put them in a Kembow form.
It Is not thy ample body, though it be
So full of plasure, and humanity,
That as to the quick a Palace would be found,
So to the dead their Coffins, and surround
Their loose and crumbling dusts. It Is not thy feet,
To cover which so many Acres meet:
It Is not those stately structures where the Court
Had late their mansions, when our Kings would spors;
Of whom deprived they mourn, and desolate
Like Widows look on their forlorn estate.
It Is not smooth Richmonds streams, nor Actons Mill,
Nor Windsors Castle, nor yet Shooters hill.
Nor groves nor plains which further off do stand,
Like Landskips pourtraid by some happy hand:
But a swift view which most delightful shows,
And does them all, and all at once enclose.
J^ly 24. 1653. Rob. Codrington.



1. The Bottom above ground in Compass is -- 28. foot 2. The Breadth of the
door is -- 2. foot 3. The Compass of the ztirret on the Top is -- 34. foot
4. The Door in Height to go in is -- 6 foot. 2. Inches 8. The Height to the
Turret is -- 33. foot 11. The Lights into the Tree is --. 16 18. The Stepps to
go up is -- 42 19. The Seat above the Stepps, Six may Sit on, and round about
room for fourteen more All the way you go up within the Hollow Tree.
Upon Hampsted Elm.
UPon the leaves of this fair spreading Tree
Some Blisters full of liquor you may see;
Wherein great store of Worms do breed,
Which from that fruitful juice proceed:
But if that Liquor does remain compact
In those thin Bladders, then it does contract
Great hardness, by the Suns influx,
About the end of Summers looks.
These Blisters represent Man's native Heart,
The Liquor shows its depraved part;
From which great Swarms of sins do spring,
Which do defile his sacred Thing:
But if that Spawn of all fins be restrained
Within the carnal heart, and so refrained
From breaking forth, the Heart grows hard
By its false Peace, and does retard
Lost Man his rising from the Death of Sin,
Intill the Sun of Righteousness rise in
The heart of Man, with healing wings;
For which the praise of God he sings.
O LorD! o ChrIst! Keep Me In the rIght way!
To Die to sIn, anD DweLL In LIght for aye!
Upon Hampsted Elm.
ALthough the heart of this fair Tree be out,
Yet it does spread its branches round about.
In Ulmum Hampstedensem.
Quamvis indigeat cord haec mirabilis ulmuc,
Extendit frondes circa tamen illa virenteis.
Decimo quarto Julii, 1653. Rogerus Coleman.

Upon Hampsted Elm.
AS in this Tree we go through dark to light,
So Saints ascend through death to heaven bright.
In Ulmum Hampstedensem.
Per tenebras Vlmi ad lucem nos vadimus almam,
Sic nos per mortem in Coelos ascendimus altos.
Decimo quarto Julii, 1653. Johannes Lee.

Upon Hampsted Elm. Psalm 52. 13. 14.
GOds Tree and this do differ in one thing,
That shall not, this will cease fruit forth to bring.
In Ulmum Hampstedensem.
Sunt sibi dissimiles haec Vlmus et arbor Iovae,
Haec profert dulces fructus, non illa senescens.
Decimo quarto Julii, 1653. Moses Brown.

In Ulmum Hampstedensem.
HEre all may see this stately Elm to bear
An Apple strange, which it brings every year.
Hie omnes Vlmum videant producere priscam
Insolitum malum, quod profert omnibus annis.
Decimo quarto Julit, 1653. T. W.

Verses on the Top of the TREE in the TVRRET.
NOw you are ascended up on high,
Think here upon Eternity.
Take heed what you do morn or even,
The Son will see it and tel't in Heaven:
What ever you think, or speak, or say,
You answer must at Judgement-Day.
The Elm it self, to some of the new Religion that would make a Preachment
under his reverend shade.
HOw numerous and extravagant are these
Thus buz about me like a swarm of Bees?
Remove your station friends, I Am not so fickle,
To cast a shade for such a Conventicle:
You talk to me of Slaney, How, and Cox,
Why do you vex an Elm that is Orthodox?
To sort with your complexions, I profess
There are no Elmes in all my Diocese;
If only such are for your purpose, know,
You must as far as unto Bordeaux go.
Rob. Codrington.

ME thinks when I this Tree epsy,
it may remember me,
How those that trust in God most just,
advanced ones shall be.
If I shall put here to my foot,
this Tree for to ascend,
Lord me aspire with zeal's hot fire,
to think upon my End.
T. Tranter.

Amico meo fidelissimo Domino Auriga.
WElcome most learned Waggoner, welcome to me,
That bring'st such loading, to this hollow Tree;
What is thy carriage? Learning, Virtue, Wit.
Here then unlade, this Elm for thee is fit.
This is the Tree, on which such fruit does spring,
Which made the Muses dance, to laugh and sing:
Such carriage, thou have brought to this my Arbor,
As never richer Ship came laden into Harbor.
Twelve virtuous Plants, this exile tutored so
Upon this Tree, the like let England show.
Drive on see the youngest Branch so flourish,
That Air, and Hill, and Well, and School may cherish:
And when thy wheels do off thy Wagon go,
In spite of death, thy Plants will fairly grow;
And though by him thou wrapped art in Lead,
Yet Time in spite of Death thy seeds will spread.
July 22. 1653. Scintilla.

The Close.
BLush England, blush, a shame it is to see
An Exile here, to teach civility,
More then some Natives, and for pious care
To train up youth, his pains he does not spare;
For he on top of all (this Tree) above the shade,
His Scholars taught, where they such Verses made
As spread his honor, and do blaze the fame
Of Hampsted School, I Will trumpet up the same:
Johannes A Commenius thy Countryman so rare,
For Arts and Parts thou may with him compare.
Exile drive on thy Wagon, here take rest,
And all thy carriage be for ever blessed.
July 22. 1653. Sci -- Mic --

In eandem Ulmum.
HIc est ante omnes alias mirabilis arbor,
Quam non Natura spectes, verum Art cavatam;
Octo pedes and viginti stirps continet Vlmi;
Porta duos est lata pedes, ac alta pedes sex;
Alta pedes tres and triginta a culmine ad imum;
Haec constat gradibus quadraginta atque duobus;
Qui gradibus lucem prabent, sunt sedecim ocelli.
Angusta est porta, arcta via est, quae ducit in altum,
Non illi abssimilis, coeli quae tendit ad aevum. Mat. 7. 14.

Viginti capiunt homines in vertice seeds.
-- Esto saCrata Deo MIrabILIs arbor!
Parvis arrideto. Micans Scintilla fit Ignis.
LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for M. S. at the Blue Bible in Green Arbor, and
are to be given or sold on the Hollow Tree at Hampsted.


