A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mistress Macquerella, a Suburb Bawd, Ms Scolopendra, a noted
Curtezan, and Mr Pimpinello an Usher, etc.

Pitifully bemoaning the tenor of the Act (now in force) against Adultery and
Fornication.

Bawd. O wretched times! Our Trading quite is undone:

Curt. No Bumbkin, Swordman, or a Cit' of London
Dares give refreshment.

Bawd. We must now be parting:

Pimp. For fear of stigmatizing,

Bawd. Or a Carting.

Now, in the name of Fate, What Saint is she
That keeps a shop of public Brothelrie,
Harbors the sharking Lawyer for his pence,
And (Martyr-like) consumes his Evidence,
Nuzzles the damned Atheist, makes him curse
Nature and Fortune, that his thin-lin'd purse
Should be devoid of Crowns? Do You ask what Saint?
This Saint was sent from th'fierie Regiment
Of Sodoms Apples, a lascivious stain
To Virtues habit, or a Whore in grain.
A Purple Strumper, Gangrene to the State,
Earths curse, Hells bliss, Soul soil, and Angels hate.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Crowch. 1650.

Macquerella, Scollopendra, Pimpinello.
Macquerella. Mistress Scollopendra, I joy to see you, with all your
lineaments about you; a whole Nose, a quick eye, (and I dare be confident) not
defective beneath the Navell: whither are you bound Lady?


Scol. No matter whither, I cannot be out of my way, we may even hang up our
Harpes, now no more melody: By the faith of my body, I swear to you (Mistress
Macquerella) I have not had a Cullee worth half a Crown to me this half a score
days.


Macq. Ah wicked world, that I should live to see this day; a fine Age y-faith,
when procreation must do penance in an Halter; well fare the memory of the
men of former times, who made wholesome Laws for the protection of Handsome
women; men are now clean degenerated. Blessed be thy Soul deceased
Sardanapalus, who made Laws in favor of the Female sex, had thy whole
leash of Beauties charrioted after thee in all thy progressions; and in honor
of long Coats, did wear a woman's Habit.


Pimp. Well met Mistress Macquerella, and Mistress Scollopendra, you are
happily encountered.


Scol. Pimpinello, thou see the sadness of my condition, I was not wont to
walk thus accounter'd by Venus: I, yesterday, was fain to engage my upper weed
(the Tabby Gown thou know Sir Matthew Mintz gave me) for a dinner of Green
Cheese and Chibbals; and to day (if I will eat) must I put off this Petticoat.
O the world's strangely altered (Pimpinello) time was (thou know) when I
allowed thee thirty pounds a year sterling but to wait on the stair head to
prevent the approach of strange faces.


Macq. I, I, then, was then, but now is now; not a penny stirring: we, the
Citizens of Sodom, are like those Apples said to grow near that lake
occasioned by a shower of Brimstome, a child's touch will moulder us into
powder; we may keep centry at our doors, and Hem till our lungs ache; ask every
one that passes by what is a clock till we have brought the natural day to a
period: All our sugared Speeches, and alluring Gestures, prove to no effect. The
Act, the late Act against Fornication, and other Venial sins, it is that has
undone us all.


Pimp. Farewell all former Joys: as for eating, and drinking, I despise them
both, my mouth may be sowed up for any use I am like to have of my teeth, and
(save that I desire to die, (as I was borne) crying I would play Oedipus, and
pull out my mine own eyes that I might might not behold the misery that is
fallen, and yet like to fall upon the poor pentioners of the Placket: I have
not the least employment, not a Gentleman now that dares, or cares to tell me,
when the toy takes his blood, and desire a cast of my office: All Is gone, all is
lost, I Will ene hang my self upon the next tree that stands in my way.


Macq. Be of comfort man, this is but a paper pellet, a nine days wonder at
the most. What, Mistress Gigglesby holds up still, and Mistress Tatchet, and
Mistress Fulsome do still retain their domestic Doxies, and are as well
custom'd as ever, I Will assure thee, only a great disaster happened lately to
Mistress Tatchet, to the great discredit of her occupation.


Scol. What was that for Heavens sake?


Macq. Marry thus, you know the little Tib whom she took from the Charity of
the Parish, to maintain at her own cost, till she should be of years to repay
her expense, by the sweat of her -- for want of looking to, has so pitifully
singed Master Mentula, that he looks like a cold Codling, as much breath as
would cause a Leveret to leave her hold, I Will undertake, will dis-member him:
oh he is rotten roasted.


Pimp. Such accidents must be expected sometimes, flesh will not always keep
sweet though you keep it continually buried in Salt.


Macq. Pray thee tell me (Pimpinello) for I am sure thou know, who of our
profession has the late Act put to the rout, and who have stood, and are like
to stand the shock; God forbid but some should be wiser than some.


Pimp. To answer your question, let me see:

In the City Mistress Clark. Mistress Purser. Mistress Maunge.
defunct.

In the Suburbs. Mistress Filth. Mistress Puddle. Mistress Froth. Mistress
Crack.
run away. Mistress Blear Mistress Earwig Mistress Dive Mistress Pick
Mistress Front Mistress Fawn
Flourishing.

But the last of the first rank (sweet Mistress Crack) ah, that name would
crack any heartstrings made of wire: dear [Mistresse Crack] in thy ruin my
fortunes are for ever buried.


Scol. Alas poor Pimpinello: but sirah, prithee tell me under what penalty do
we lie, what penance is allotted us in the late Act.


Pimp. Penance, say you, a small slight punishment, I wot, hanging, burning,
carting, whipping, or so, matters of small moment, trivial things these.


Scol. Alas, poor women, who are suspended from that privilege the very Cats
enjoy, who play and sport with their Tails, and yet fear no censure for so
doing.


Pimp. Now you talk of Cats, you put me in mind of some Verses that one gave
me yesterday.


Macq. For Gods love let us hear them.


Pimp. These are they, A song.
O the sad and heavy dolor
That the world has cause to make:
Were I Democritus his Scholar,
I could not, but of tears partake,
The ancient privilege of Cats,
With their Tails to be sporting:
If a woman try,
She Is sure to die,
Her paramour consorting.
Woe is me, for the old decoyes,
And young Madamoysellas,
Who unto sale expose their toys,
Alas poor Macquerellas.
No fee, for -- now to be had
No half piece for a beauty,
Nor for you Sir Pimp,
Your feet to imp.
And do your Baudy duty.

Macq. Out upon thee (Pimpinello) this Song is made in disgrace of us, and our
profession, prithee wipe thy posteriors with it.


Pimp. Nay, hear it out, (for Martin Parkers sake) the last makes amends for
the first.

Now what remains
Ye smock coat Swains
So wedded to Devotion;
But with each eye, to peep and pry
And take a special caution
How you do deal
In Lamb or Veal,
Raw, or ready roasted,
You know your Fate, and the doom of State,
As the noble Act has boasted.
See the Chambers where you sin
Have neither flaw, nor cranny,
No hole for any to peep in;
For if witnessed by any
That he did you see, and rem in re
At the work of generation,
By Cupids Bow, you are hanged, I know,
For example to the Nation.

Macq. Well, well, (Mistress Scollopendra) he that should have told me this
seven years ago, I should have spet in his face as the errantest liar ever
spoke with a tongue: For mine own part, since I must needs be honest against my
will, I resolve to practice temperance, with my will; some convenient well
situated Stall (wherein to sit, and sell Time, Rue, and Rosemary, Apples,
Garlike, and Saint Thomas Onyons) will be a fit Palace for me to practice
penance in. Oh! I hate the thought of being branded with the letter B. it is
ten times worse then the Mark of the Beast I Will maintain it.


Pimp. Oh! oh! now could I be contented to be thrown out of some window, though
it were three stories high; to stand in a Pillory day, by day, for a twelve
month together; or to receive the Lash from Charing-Crosse to White-Chappell,
so thereby I might call back the days of Yore. Oh 'twas a brave world when my
Clients were so rich, and so many, that I knew not what to ask, or whose turn
to serve first.

When the Priests came simpring in


Macq. Resolved to turn the pin.


Scol. When Lords and Knights of Fame
To dance Levaltoes, came.

Macq. When Citizens each day


Scol. Were glad to pray and pay:


Pimp. Most eager for to sease


Scol. Upon the French disease.


Macq. When Sack overwhelmed the house,


Pimp. While we did Healths carrouse;


Scol. And Music in our ears


Macq. Beyond that of the Spheres.


Pimp. All Is gone.


Scol. All Is lost.


Pimp. Now trading now for me,
Death is the Guerdon now of Venerie.

Macq. Now I think on it, there might be a way found out to hold up our trade in
spite of all the Acts in the world.


Pimp. For Heavens sake how?


Scol. How? sweet (Macquerella.)


Macq. Marry thus, it is but doubling our doors, and providing thick Curtains
for the windows; for the Act says, that Oath must be made against the parties
ere they can be liable to Censure; this will increase thy number, (my
Pimpinello) and therewithal your wages: every door must have its Guardian, and
those Guardians so politically dealt withal, that themselves (having they a
will to be betray their trust) shall have no cause to swear truly: For example
the parties entered into the Chamber of Delight lock the door; and lest any peep
through the Keyhole, some other door near that (being likewise locked) shall
give it a broad side.


Scol. Thou have talked much to no purpose: the substance of all is, things
must be carried cunningly, clandestinely, and obscurely, and then a fig for all
the Law in the world; and by this means, what is intended for our detriment
and obloquie, shall prove to our profit and glory; for if the old maxim be
true, that the worst books of sale, when once called in, sell the best; this
edict will much enhaunce our prizes, thou (Macquerella) had but half a piece
before for thy permission, now a Jacobus is as little as can be given; thou
Pimpinello have had (commonly) hitherto but two Georges for thy purveyance, now
half a Piece, or nothing.


Pimp. O rare Projectresse, let me kiss the sole of thy shoe.


Scol. My own sallary trebled to my former rates; and this mutation we may well
justify, alleging the hazard we run, and the inevitable danger of our persons
in case of a discovery.


Pimp. O rare, beyond expression, this discourse is as cordial a comfort to my
heart, as Clary and Eggs hitherto to my back, sweet Lady adopt me your sworn
servant, in ordinary; I vow, if I stay one day longer without finding some
employment for my teeth, I must ene Mill some Ken, or prig some Prauncer, and
then I know Newgate and Tyburne are not far assunder.


Scol. Alas Pimpinello, all I can do for thee is to pity thee, my self am
resolved to be far enough off from the reach of this Act, so terrible to all
our tribe; I intend to set sail for the famous City of Venice, where I may use
mine own, cum privilegio; nay, and be thought no ordinary servant as well to
the Popes Holiness, as to the Dukes Mightiness; there I will go clad like
Cleopatra, fare like Flora, drink like Drusilla, and die like Damovilla.


Pimp. I see then I cannot avoid my destiny, a short life and a merry cry I,
welcome be the grace of Fortune. Farewell Mistress Scolopendra, adieu Mrs.
Macquerella, pray Mrs. Macquerella when you see me take Cart, let me have your
best Character.


Macq. Now by all the flesh of my body (Pimpinello) I pity thee, but cannot
help, poverty parts good company: I must to my Warehouse, adieu dear Mrs.
Scolopendra.


Scol. Farewell (my loved Macquerella) have a good heart woman, the Golden Age
may once again return.


Macq. Never, never, mother Shipton has denounced the contrary; Venus hold her
hand over you where ever you go.


Scol. Adieu, adieu.


FINIS.

