A DIALOGUE BETWEEN SACK AND SIX.

three scenes, showing 1. a man sitting on a bench 2. a man working a hat 3.
three men: one on a donkey, one on foot and one on a horse Believe my
Protestation

Judge gentlemen.

Valiant Sack triumphant.



Printed in the year 1641.

A DIALOGVE BETWEEN. SACK and SIX.
SACK. Full fraught with Nectarian liquor, that wine of the Gods, such as
Jupiter and my self drunk for our mornings draught; I am now come,
Schismatic Six, to blow thee up with the Powder Treason of Spanish Canary.


Six. Schismatic Sixes; it is easily imagined Sir, what countryman you are,
your tongue betrays you expressing your self in the langauge of the hell,
which I rather believe because you come from the Devil of St. Dunstons.


Sack. Alas poor John, I am sorry to see thee thus distracted with
penitential Beer, thy very Comportment argues thee to be water scared out of
its wits.


Six. A mad couple well met, we shall make two distracted associates i will
warrant you.


Sack. And why, distracted associates? Am I your fellow syrrah, faith I Will make
you know your distance, stand off, Sixes, and come not near me by forty pole,
lest being discovered to be in your company I be branded with the Imputation of
a madman for ever.


Six. Canary-bird, you whistle well In The Spanish tongue, I wooed you were well
roasted in true English, as the old Proverb goes,

Who sings a merrier a note,

Then he that is not worth a groate?


Sack. You take your self by the spicket, small Beer, what need you have
been broacht so soon, a cup of Canary would have done better for our
mornings draught, I don't love to hear the devil correct vice, you tax me of
speaking Spanish so well, and you your self speak nothing but Schlavonian, I
take you to be some Translatour, by your metamorphos'd countenance, are you
nothing allied to the inspired Cobbler who of late preached the six shilling
sermon.


Six. Truly, Sir, I have no reason to deny my profession, and less to be
ashamed of that holy man, who verily according to the flesh was nothing allied
to me, but we were Cosen Germans according to the spirit, being both
fellow laborers together, and preaching in private Conventicles accordingly.


Sack. It Is well that at last you can tickle your sermons there, is there such
virtue in small beer? In Faith I had little thought it! but seriously out of my
wine let me ask thee one question.


Six. I Will resolve you as the spirit shall enable me.


Sack. Do you conceive that you are bound in conscience to preach the word?


Six. Yes verily, I am so, having the charge of so many souls.


Sack. Away you hypocritical knave, take heed of marring new souls, and look
to the mending of your old shoes?


Six. You know not who you revile, you reproach him that sent me, I would my
standing up were lasting, as my profession is lawful, were not Andrew and
Peter Fishermen, Matthew a Publican, yet made Apostles and Teachers.


Sack. It Is true they were called to it, but now there is no necessity that the
word of God should be thum'd with the defiled fingers of a contemptible Cobbler.


Six. But you know the scripture says; It has pleased God by the foolishness
of preaching to save many that believe.


Sack. It Is right, now I know the reason why there are so many foolish preachers
selected out of the Tribe of the Cobblers, Weavers, Porters, Feltmakers,
Chimmswepers, and the like.


Six. Well, I perceive I have met with a scholar, I am afraid I have taken the
wrong sow by the ear, entering into the lists of disputation with swinish
Aristippus, thouart puffed up with Canary of self conceitednesse, and such kind
of jeering has distracted thee.


Sack. And thou art distracted without any learning at all.


Six. Well these are but words of course; to the purpose now, lets see whether
you or I have the more followers, that one of us may carry the credit of it in
conclusion.


Sack. It Was that I looked for, and because I take my self to be the better man
of the two, I Will make the first onset: My best Proficients I Will place in the
forefront of the rest, what say you to the blithe Bishops, are not they inspired
with my canary? Could ever Canterbury have clim'd to that place of Eminency as
to overlooke the whole Church of England, I and Kingdom too, and never regard
himself, had it not been by my dexterity? From whence received he that power
to stagger the state; yea religion, and himself at last, (being now fallen
outright) but by Jurisdiction derived from the Canary Islands? And how is it
possible (I preethee) that Wren should soar so high (that Arminian bird) and
silenc't three score in Norfolk, and Suffolk, and now be silenced himself,
but by the wings of my encouragement?


Six. Nor let the glory of this victory attend upon you only, but take a
partner with you. Was it not I that laid the foundation of this greatness in
Canterbury at first? that gave him his breeding in Saint John's in Oxford? where
being a poor Scholar, he was glad to sip single Six, excepting upon Festival
days, and now of late perceiving you had inflamed him with wine, the
incendiary of ambitious thoughts, have not I coold his courage with the water
of affliction? And for Wren, so soon as I perceived the flame of his fiery
zeal in persecuting the Church, have not I now allayed it with the coolness of
my moderation, and wetting those wings that mounted so high, have not I with
discretion confined him to his nest?


Sack. But what think you of the reverend Judges? had not I such an operative
power over one of them sitting upon the bench, that made him fall from his
Tribunal, and stagger from Westminster hall to the Sherifes house in London?


Six. I also have some share in his conversion; when a Student at the Innes of
Court, was he not well satisfied with the earthen pots of Sixes, which I out
of my liberality afforded him, excepting the days of the Readers Festivals?


Sack. I think now you must yield; are you able to contest any longer? I have
also the assistance of the religious Aldermen, here is my chief favorite (to
speak nothing of him that late broke) even Abel himself, whom I appointed
Lord President of the Canary Island, and chief Monopolizer of the Wines here in
London, which wrought so powerfully in him to his repentance, that he is
contented to remain under the Rod, which notwithstanding a sharp punishment,
yet he is the less sensible of it in regard of the sweetness of my Canary.


Six. Troth sir, I must be bold with you to challenge a share in him too. Was
not he one of my Linsey woolsey Citizens? did not I make him serve an
apprentiship to Master Sixes? and that time being expired, was he not glad
(saving the Feasts of the Companies, Shrievalty, and Maioralty) to wear the
livery of Small Beer, till his coming to your wine Office?


Sack. I am almost out of breath, let us hear you make an Apology for your
disciples, as I have done for mine.


Six. I am prepared for the business; by your favor, my Lord, those of mine
own Tribe shall be present before you.


Sack. Draw the thread of your discourse methodically.


Six. How did I inspire that Cobbler, who only by clensing his brain with my
liquor, cleared his whistle so well be preached a Sermon of an hour and a
half, and that against knowledge?


Sack. The crown of this Trophee belongs to me; was not that learned Sermon
preached in a Tavern hard by Covent garden, where the secret virtue of the
wines influence of a sudden arising into his brain, made all the bristles of
knowledge stand upright in him, that he questioned our Savior himself as not
capable of humane learning.


Six. But I tell you of another miraculous passage effected by me alone. I know
a Tailor (but he lives out of the Kings dominions) who (not for drinking only,
but even for dealing in small Beer) was grown so zealous of a sudden, that he
could not in his conscience suffer his child, by his own Minister, to be
signed with the sign of the Cross.


Sack. 'Twas I that did the feat, though the glory be attributed to another: I
know the zealots of London make it an effect of penitential Beer, but if
you will believe my protestation, before Bacchus I was the man, watching my
opportunity at a marriage, where he, amongst others was invited; having
encouraged him to drink up a good share of the Wine: First, I measured his
shallow brain with the yard-wand of my apprehension; next, (that I might leave
him as little judgment as I found) with the sheares of discretion I cut off
the shreds of Understanding that remained in him, and then (knowing that that
afternoon his child was to be baptized, I pricked his conscience with the
needle of sincerity, then verily and truly he would by no means have his child
signed with the sign of the Cross.


Six. To relate something more of my conquests, was it not the chaste operation
of my liquor that caused the Adamites now of late to assemble naked and (as if
it were in the time of innocence it self) male and female to boast and glory
of their shame? Did not I by my infusion so mortify their carnal lusts, that
(until the Sermon was done, and the Candles purposely put out) there was no
reserrection of the flesh?


Sack. Mistake not your self, Sixes, set the saddle upon the right horse,
(removing it from the Ass) was it not the glowing heat of my inestimable
Canary that did so fortify their bodies against cold, that they go naked to
this very day? And did not the admirable operation of my cordial grape cause
them to preach devoutly in those pulpits they brought along with them? and so
(as it is very comely) did increase and multiply.


Six. Add one thing more to the eternal renown of Six, the enabling of six
women to preach devoutly up and down the City, by virtue of this heavenly
potion, in regard their husbands cannot sufficiently preach to them at home.


Sack. If now adays there be any faculty of preaching, it is because they are
inspired by me. Six, thou art distracted with a frenzy, yet thy disease is
not so desperate, but there is a cure, wherefore I Would advise you fort with to
take 6. pottells of the lustiest Canary, drink it all with discretion morning
and evening, and all the rest of the day besides with constancy, and in a short
time you shall find these admirable effects: your shallow brains floting on
the top of this Canary Island shall be cleansed from the sliminesse of ignorance,
washed from the froth of self-conceit, and absolutely cured of the Calinture of
distraction.


Six. It Is ad admirable cure Sir! but methinkes Sixes should do the same in
effect.


Sack. By the wine I drink, I am almost destracted in the very mentioning of
that white liverd Rascal, away with it, it is Heretical, sit for none but
Calvinians, Anabaptists, and that fellow in his Sermon at St. Margrets would
aim at nothing but else the pulling downn of Charing and Cheapside Crosses,
his doctrine was suitable to a cup of sixes; If any one will follow the advice
of Aristippus, let him drink Sack.


Six. I care not if I pledge you a cup so it be with moderation.


Sack. I hope you will drink according to the times; the times require no such
moderation I warrant you.


Six. But you told me I should drink it Physically, Physic you know must be
taken by degrees.


Sack. So: wel' drink by degrees, lets drink each of us a pottle now which is
the positive, and you shall the sooner come to the suparlative, or if you will
have me temporise a little, the Puritan being a Protestant scared out of his
wits, is the Positive; The Brownest bring a deep dyed Puritan, is the
Comparative; The Anabaptist, which is a deep dyed Brownist is the Suparlative
Scismaticke of all.


Six. Sir while you were speaking I drunk up my share, and I find already a
trombling and shaking of my joints a swiftness and volubility in my tongue, an
Earthquake in my Pericranium and a noise so loud as though the Cyclopes were
forging thunder in my brain.


Sack. You see then the effect of it, it makes a tremling in the members of the
Commonwealth, the very foundations of the Kingdom are shaken a swifnesse in
the tongues of silenc't Ministers to preach Scismaticall doctrine, the
distemperature of the head it self, and the murmur of the multitude, like the
raging of the Sea crying against conformity, and the Episcopacy it self, down
with it, etc.


Six. For Godsake, Sir, be silent, instead of curing my brains break not my
brainpan, let me take a nap and refresh my self that I may take some more of
your physic another time.


Sack. With a condition you will put in security that your brains shall be
forth coming to morrow morning.


Six. They are coming forth to night without any security at all; So shaking
hands they departed.


FINIS

