Mr. CHARLES DALLISON RECORDR OF LINCOLN, His Speech TO THE KINGS MAJESTY.
Most gracious Sovereign:
WE your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subjects, before we were
encouraged by the influence of your Majesty's presence, knew not what to do,
being amazed with fears and jealousies rumored and spread abroad; whereby
diverse of your Majesty's good Subjects were distracted; and the more, because
we neither knew nor could imagine any cause or fear of jealousy: SIR, I
cannot more properly compare our case then to a man in perfect health, yet does
fancy himself sick of a Consumption; who (if his fortune be to light of a
skillful and honest Physician) is in no danger; but, if upon an Empricke, it is
like his body shall be brought into that condition, which before he did but
fancy himself to be in. I am doubtful, if those persons who have bin the
cause of raising and fomenting these fears and jealousies might choose their
own Physician, and apply their own medicine, it would hazard the ruin of the
Commonwealth, by abolishing the ancient and fundamental Laws thereof. But the
Subjects of this Nation (God be thanked) are in a better case: It is not in the
power of those evil spirits, either to make choice of a Physician, or to apply
the Medicine; your sacred Majesty being our great Physician, and without your
Majesty's consent and command no medicine can be applied. And to the
unspeakable joy and comfort of all your Majesty's faithful Subjects it is
sufficiently signified to the world, by your Majesty's most Kingly
Declarations, expressing your resolution to maintain and govern by the known
Laws of this Realm; to defend the true Protestant Religion established by
Law: By which means your loyal Subjects shall be preserved and protected from
Arbitrary Government. Let the most evil affected person then deny (if he can)
but that we have from our King what is to be wished, and that without asking or
petitioning for. There is only one Question to be asked, and a short Answer
thereunto, What is now to be done? To which every ingenious soul must
acknowledge the want is on our parts; we owe all we have to be disposed of by
your Majesty for the maintenance and preservation of your just rights and
prerogative, which cannot be maintained, but thereby the privileges of your
Subjects will be likewise defended; the same Law defending both; and under
which Law the people of this Nation have bin most happily governed under your
Majesty and your most noble Progenitors many hundred years. For the
continuance of which Government, for my own particular (prostrating my self
at your Majesty's feet) I humbly offer and render unto your Majesty my self,
estate and fortune. And SIR, I have warrant from the Major of this City and
the whole body of this Corporation, to beseech your Majesty to accept of the
like offer from them. So with this short ejaculation I shall conclude;
beseeching God to bless and preserve your sacred person, and this our most
noble and hopeful Prince Charles, with all your royal issue; and that this
Nation and people, and all your Dominions may be governed by your Majesty and
your posterity to the worlds end.

Whereas both the Houses of Parliament have Voted a necessity of putting the
Kingdom into a posture of War, for the suppressing of any Insurrection
within, or Forces from without; and have (by their example and acceptance of
others offers to maintain Horse and Foot armed for that purpose) given us,
whose names are here underwritten, occasion (considering the present
distractions amongst us) to undertake to maintain and have in readiness such
number of Horse furnished fit for war, as we do here subscribe to, for the
maintenance and defense of his Majesty's just Prerogative, the Protestant
Religion, as it is now established; the Laws of the Realm, the just
privileges of Parliament, and the public Peace, against all opposition
whatsoever: And the said Horse to be disposed of within the County for three
months after the 20. of this instant July; at such time, and in such way as
his Majesty shall by his Commission direct.

HORSES.
F. Fane. 4 Perigreene Barty. 4 John Mounson. 12 Edward Hussy. 6 Geo.
Henneage. 6 John Bolles. 5 William Petham. 3 William Therold. 6 Charles Hussy.
2 Daniel Deligne. 3 Robert Therold. 3 Gervis Scroope. 4 Gervis Nevill. 2 John
Burrill. 2 Christopher Berrissord. 2 Robert Tredway. 2 Ralph Ewere. 4 Edmund
Ellis. 1 Arthur Redhead. 1 George Walker. 1 Hustwait Wright. 1 William Stone. 1
William Langton. 1 John Formery. 4 Charles Dallison. 4 Charles Bolles. 3 Antho.
Meres. 1 William Saltmarsh. 2 Stephen Anderson. 2 Thomas Ogle. 2 Thomas Read. 1
George Bradley. 1 William Quadring. 1 William Cony. 3 William Tirwhitt. 2
Robert Terwhitt. 2 Edward Heron. 1 Thomas Monson, 1 Robert Markham. 4 Robert
Bolles. 1 Thomas Rands. 1 Jo. Collumbell. 1 John Stutt. 1 Thomas Harrington. 2
William Dallison. 4 Christopher Berisford. 2 N. Smith. 1 John Oldfield. 2
Adrian May. 3 Edward Tourney. 1 Anthony Butler. 2 Antho. Topham. 4 Hamlett
Marshall. 3 Robt. Meeres. 3 Morgan Win. 2 Thomas Hurst. 2 Robt. Sanderson. 1
Robert Haslewood. 1 Adam Cranwell. 1 Stephen Primatt. 1 Thomas Hirst. 2 Charles
Harrington. 1 Henry Pigg. 1 Davy Williamson. 1 John Chapel. 1 William Welby.
2 Edw: Mildemore. 1 W: Desney. 2 Fran: Welby. 1 John South. 3 Henry Fenes. 1
Robert Metham. 1 Rich: Park. 1 Rich. Fancoarts. 1 Mount Cholmley. 1

London printed for William Gay, and are to be sold at his Shop in Hosherlane
at the sign of the Axe. August the 3. 1642.


