A DIALOGUE BETWIXT LEWIS and the DEVIL In the Last Year of His PUISSANCE: WITH
HIS Last Will and Testament.
LEWIS. WHat shrill and echoed Groans possess my Soul?
And what cursed Fiends my Spirits thus control?
Sure the Dog Cerberus begins to howl.

DEVIL. Make haste away, I have prepared room
^^ burning Flames, for Thee to have thy doom;
^e'er trifle, for thy fatal Hour is come.

LEWIS. Am I not Lewis, King of great Renown,
Who all cursed Heretics did trample down?
Who dare withstand my Diadem and Crown?

DEVIL. Thou must submit, both Soul and Body too,
And leave behind thee all thy Popish Crew:
Thy Pomp must drop into the Shades below,
and thy cursed Pride must have an Overthrow:
Thou straight along to Hell must with me flee,
There end thy Days in endless misery.

LEWIS. Did thou not promise to prolong my Years,
and keep me free from Jealousies, and Fears?
My bloody Hands thou give power to spill
The Blood of Heretics, even at my Will.
shall not thy dearest Friend escape thy Rage?
Will nothing but my Blood thy Wrath assuage?
^ took thee as a Friend, therefore forbear
To hinder me in my Enjoyments here.

DEVIL. Did thou expect that I should take the pains
To help thee in thy Plots, and have no gains?

LEWIS. My Diadem and Crown I Will freely give
For to escape Eternity, and live.

DEVIL. How can thou live on Earth, and never dye?
Can thou escape a vast Eternity?
No sure! therefore make haste, and come away,
Thy Soul and Body shall my Ransom pay;
In Hell's consuming Fire there shall thou be
Tormented still with Viper's cruelty.

LEWIS. Since I no longer with thee can prevail;
Since all my worldly Power begins to fail:
Since I have left no time for to repent
My Sins; here is my last Will and Testament.

The WILL.
Unto my Heir I Crown and Scepter leave,
And my Tyrannick Actions do bequeath
To him, that he may never delight in Peace,
But daily Wars and Rumors may increase;
That he his Subjects may oppress with Fear,
And all the Heretics in pieces tear:
And when has laid his Kingdom all in gore,
Be hurried hence unto the Stygian shore,
And there enjoy me, who am gone before.
To Jemmy I bequeath a Prince of Wales;
And would another, but my Vigor fails:
But hope my Son and Heir so kindly prove,
To dandle Molly in the Charms of Love.
My Subject's Curses to the Pope I leave;
And thus my Worldly Goods I do bequeath.
My stinking Tomb an Epitaph needs none,
Since Soul and Body to the Devil's gone.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by John Wallis, near the Green Dragon Tavern in Fleet Street.


