THE DEPUTATION OF ANGELS, OR, The Angell-Guardian: I. Proved by the Dim light
of Nature, clear beams of Scriptures, and consent of many Ancient and Modern
Writers, untainted with Popery. II. Cleared from many rubs and mistakes; the
Critical queries of Antagonists examined, untyed. III. Applied and improved,
for our information in many other Truths, consolation in our Adversities, and
Reformation of our Lives.


Chiefly grounded on Acts 12.15. IT IS HIS ANGEL.

By ROBERT DINGLEY, M. A. and Minister of the Word at Brixton in the Isle of
Wight; formerly Fellow of Magdalen Celledge in Oxford.

Zanchy writing of this Subject, says, Universa Ecclesia semper sic sensit.
Zanch. Tom. 3. cap. 15. And Rivius thus, In eadem nunc sententia persto nec
deduci inde me unquam patiar. Rivius de Praesid. Angelico. l. p. 717. London,
Printed by T.R. for Edw. Dod, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Gun in
Ivy Lane, 1654.

To the Right Honorable Colonel SYDENHAM, A Member of the Council of State,
and Governor of the Isle of Wight; AS ALSO To the Lord Commissioner LISLE, with
the truly Honored Colonel ROBERT HAMMOND, and Major BOWRMAN, Deputy Governor
of the Isle of WIGHT, The Author of this Treatise unfainedly wishes all
Temporal and Eternal FELICITY.
May it please your Honors,
THE Lord having fixed my Meditations on the Doctrine of Angelical Deputation,
and now by his Providence calling them to the Light, that they may be weighed
in the Balance of this discerning Age; Your Honors may justly excuse this my
Dedication thereof to your Perusal and Protection: The Lord has made you
eminently active, and isntrumental in your several Capacities and Places for
the Promotion of his Glory: Ye have been the faithful Friends and vigilant
Protectors of this Isle, and so have been employed in Angelical Services; Many
Favors also ye have multiplied on the unworthy Author of this poor Treatise.
Go on, Right Honorable, to do worthily for Sion; to undermine Atheism,
Profaness, and Heresy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine and the
power of Godliness, and the grand interest of CHRIST. Learning and Religion do
begin once more to lift up their Heads; sober and unbiased Christians do bless
GOD for the last great Change of Civil-administrations; August. de Civ. Dei
lib. 1. Cap. 7.
I may say of it what Austine spoke of a particular Passage of Divine
Providence, Quisquis non videt, caecus; Quisquis videt nec laudat, ingratus;
Quisquis laudanti reluctatur insanus. By it an happy Period was set to very
strange Designs, our Liberties and Properties secured, the Universities and
faithful Ministers not a little encouraged; Peace concluded with the
Nether-lands, and many Nations who scorned us before, do now apply themselves
by Agents and Ambassadors unto us; Nay, the Heavens also have Relented, and
after a very long and growing Drought, have rained Corn, Milk, and Honey upon
us; and who questions but now our Burdens and Taxes will be lessened? and that
by degrees, something will be done toward the building of the Temple; viz. The
curbing of insolent Heretics and the settling of Doctrine and Discipline in the
Church: So that we see it is never in vain to depend on God, who can bring
Light out of Darkness, and says to the proud Waves, Thus far and no farther!
John Baptist the Voice was a breeding when Zachary was Dumb; Man's extremity is
the Lords opportunity. Most men now are of his opinion, who said, Parliaments,
if frequent, are good Physic, if continual, are bad food: They are Bona
peritura, and like standing Pools, they cannot keep long without Corruption,
and an ill Cream of Selfishness and Faction. Experience also has showed, that
the same persons who contemn the Ministry and cannot endure sound Doctrine, but
heap unto themselves Teachers after their own lust; are also Despisers of all
Superiority and Government Political. But whither is my Cockboat floating? the
whole Fabric is little and despicable, the Poarch therefore may not be to
great: The good Lord encourage your Hearts and strengthen your Hands, that ye
may be Patrons of Virtue and Patterns of Piety. So wishes and prays,

Your Honors very humble Servant in the Lord, ROBERT DINGLEY.
From my Study in Brixton, June 1654.
TO THE Ingenuous Reader.
It Was the high Glory of Tullies Speeches, Nieremberg. Hist. Not. lib. 1. cap.
19.
Nihil addi posse; And of Demosthenes Orations, Nihil demi posse: Yet doubtless
imperfections were found in both; and I suppose this is only Applicable to the
Word and Works of God, which are so perfect that nothing may be added or
diminished; Though Momus thought to mend the Bull by putting Horns on his
shoulders, and Alphonsus King of Arragon that he could correct the Heavenly
Orbs.

As for this poor Treatise, be pleased to take notice that I walk in untrodden
places where little has been said before me; Thou art here therefore to expect
but a very rude and imperfect Draught of Angels Deputation, if I handle it not
Prout Dignum rei, but prout datum mihi (as Bernard in another case) Let the
Reader consider he has liberty to add what is materially omitted, and may
lawfully expunge what is needlessly inserted, or will not suit with the Analogy
of Faith. Puer aliquando elegantioris formae charactares exarat quam adultus,
si peritus scriba ducat manum: And it is easy for any one to write in the beaten
road of common places, where every Author does overflow, and is ready to guide
the hand of him that writes. I here present thee with a secret vein of Gold,
which has cost me some digging; And let my absence from public Libraries be
considered: I acknowledge this Doctrine is not commonly received by
Protestants, who (I humbly conceive) might reject it chiefly in opposition to
the Sea of Rome, Aristot. Ethie, lib. 1. Sen. de Ira. lib. 3. cap. 41. Drexel.
de Rect. Intent. lib. 2.
wherein such a multitude of Monsters do swim: But Aristotle's Apothegme will not
soon be forgotten; Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis Amica veritas: Nor
that other of Seneca; Nihil opinionis causa, omnia Conscientiae faciam. A man
will take the Fly out of his Glass, before he drink the Wine; And we have here
rejected the Popish additions to this truth. Howsoever others may interpret my
Design, I appeal to God, that I intend not to gratify Romanists, or derogate
from Calvin and other Learned Protestants. Recta intentio est illa Midae
virgula, quae quicquid tangit inaurat. If a man's conscience be clear Crystal
without dust or spot, Nec lauds curat nec vituperia, It is no matter though
hoarse Ravens make a noise, though Dogs snarl, and Serpents hiss, if the
Nightingall of a good conscience and sincere intention, sing and warble sweetly
in the Bosom: Ingens Solatium est, Praecipue Hora quae de Annis omnibus fert
Sententiam. And so Reader, the Door is open, Peruse and then Censure:

I am Thine, in the Lord, and service of thy Faith, ROBERT DINGLEY.

Reader,
THe Author of this Work is a good man, and it should seem by this labor of
his, that he aims to be much better, to be as holy as Angels, which is a
blessed Ambition. Angels never (as Devils) appeared in the form of Beasts,
Dogs, Cats, Rats, etc. When they appeared as men, it was with some sparkling
Glimpses of their own Glory; To teach that Man should strive to ascend to the
Glory of Angels, and not to abase himself by a brutish behavior. Angels can
work no Miracles. Pars Naturae non superat Naturam. Angels cannot convert men,
but they can and do joy at this Thing; And being such Well-willers to our
greatest good, should be beloved of us: It Was Christ, the Angel of the Covenant,
that stirred those Waters of Bethesda, and cured so many by them; And therefore
whilst thou read and admirest Angels, take heed thou do not pass by this
Angel, who will come suddenly with his innumerable Train, to gather men from
the four Winds, and to range and fix their state for Eternity. There is both
Learning and Sobriety in this Authors Endeavors, worthy of a far better friend
to the Bride, then is,

Thine unworthy Servant in the Gospel, N. LOCKYER.

The Authors quoted in this Treatise.
CLem: Alexandrinus: Bp: Andrews. Tho: Aquinas. Aristotle. Atetius. Augustine.
Paul Bain. Basil. Baxter. Bernard. Beza. Bolton. Dr. Boys. Brentius. Brightman.
Brinsley. Bucan. Martyn Bucer. Bullinger. Ant: Burgess. Calvin. Camerarius.
Chemnitius. Dr. Cheynell. Chrysostom. M.T. Cicero. Corbet. Daille. Damascen.
Danaeus. Bp: Davenant. Mart. Day. Diodati. Doway Transl. Drexelius. Eusebius.
Dr. Featly. Fuller Gerhard. Dr. Goodwyn. Dr. Gouge. Greenham. Greenhill.
Gregory Nyssen. Gregory Nazianzen. Hugo Grotius. Bp. Hall. Dr. Hammond. Hierom.
Hiensius. Hildersham. Hez: Holland. Hugo Cardinalis. Josephus. Isidore.
Lactantius. Diogen. Laertius. Lawrence. A Lapide. Edw: Leigh. Lightfoot. Pet.
Lombard. Mart: Luther. Magirus: Marlorat. Pet. Martyr. Mede. Melanchton.
Menander. Mendoza. Mornaeus. Musculus. Nierembergius. Oats on Jude. Origin.
Pareus. Stephanus Paris. Perkins. Pierius. Piscator. Plutarch. Dr. Prideaux.
Rivius. Roberts. Salkeld. John Reynolds. Salmeron. Secundus. Seneca. Jos:
Shute. Dr. Sibbs. Sleidan. R. Stock. Suarez. Tacianus. Corn: Tacitus.
Tertullian. Theater of Gods Judgments. Theodoret. Theophylact. John Trap.
Vegetius: Ludocius Vives: Vossius: Weems: Wendeline: Dr: Whittaker: Dr: Willet:
Wilson: Zanchy.
The Contents of this Treatise.
A General survey of the whole Story of Peter's imprisonment and escape 1. The
Coherence opened, and three Points raised therfrom; viz. 1. Whilst the Saints
have been praying for a Mercy, God has cast it in. 2. Deliverance may be so
wonderful as to pass our belief or expectation. 3. Angels have assumed the
shape of men. 2. The Text it self, IT IS HIS ANGEL. Four quickening
considerations to heed it. The several expositions of the Text. The Thesis
laid down and explained. Three Preparatory Concessions; viz. 1. Many Mysteries
about Angels. 2. We abhor the Worshipping of Angels.
3. When we say one Angel chiefly attends an elect person, we suppose this is
done in an ordinary way. The Point, that every Elect has his Guardian-angel is
proved three ways. 1. By the dim light of Nature, where it is showed, 1. That
what the light of Nature teaches in Religion, is well to be heeded. 2. That it
has held forth this. 2. By the clear beams of Scripture, chiefly three, all
Objections answered. 3. By the joint consent of many Orthodox, Pious, and
Learned Wrighters. A digression of Novelty in opinions. Twelve Questions or
Objections of such as cannot well digest our Truth, examined, untyed. 1. Use of
confutation of four Popish additions to this Truth. 2. Use of information in
many particulars; as, 1. The vast number of Angels. 2. The goodness of our
gracious God. 3. That it is very probable Communities have their Angels. 4. And
perhaps every Reprobate, one evil Angel. 3d. Use of Admonition to many duties.
viz. 1. To banish all slavish and base Fears. 2. Despise not the poorest and
meanest Saint. 3. Make sure of Christ, the Head of Angels. 4. Chiefly admire
and trust in God that made them. 5. Grieve not your Guardian-Angels. 6. Imitate
the Angels, as in other things, so chiefly in this, by Guarding and Regarding
the people of God and the household of faith. 1. In general this speaks to all
men. 2. More especially to Magistrates and Ministers. 1. To Magistrates, whose
Office and duty it is to guard the Saints, and provide for their peace and
safety. A necessary Digression, that Heretics must not by them be guarded in
sowing Tares; where yet somewhat is pleaded for the poor Jews. 2. To Ministers
the Shepherds and Overseers of the Lords Flock; They should watch over their
particular Congregations committed unto their care, and be like unto Angels in
twelve things. 4th. Use of Rich consolation to the Saints, both in life and
death.
THE DEPUTATION OF ANGELS.
Act. 12.15. IT IS HIS ANGEL.
IN this Chapter you see that King Herod sufficiently vexed the Jews, Lightfoot
on the Acts.
and killed James the Brother of John with the Sword; Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib.
2. cap. 8.
This happened in the days of Claudius Caesar: Eusebius says, that the Accuser
of James seeing his constancy to the Death, confessed the faith, and was
Martyred with him; Saint James crying, Pax tibi, and kissing him. Well, James
his death was seconded by Peter's Imprisonment, but his time of Martyrdom was
not yet come; Agrippa having seized on him deferred his Execution till after
the Passover; either because he would not defile that holy Feast with man's
blood, or rather that he feared a Tumult, if he should have slain him in that
concourse of people at the Passover time: In the mean time Peter lay guarded
with 4. Quaternions of Soldiers, bound with two Chains, and as some say, his
two Keepers were tied in the same Chain with him for sureties sake. That night
which preceded Peter's intended Execution, he being fast asseep between his
Keepers, was awakned, suddenly loosned, and strangely delivered by an Angel:
Peter and his Angel (being thus loosned) passed quietly through the first and
second Watch, and afterward came to an iron Gate which opened to them of its
own accord: Peter cleared of the Danger, and his Angel dis-appearing, betakes
himself to the house of Mary the Mother of John Mark, where the Disciples were
gathered together to pray for his Deliverance, whilst Peter knocked at the
door, a Damsel ( Rhoda by name) came to hearken and gather who it was, and when
she heard Peter's Voice she opened not the door for gladness, but ran in amazed
and told them Peter was at the Gate; They charged her with madness, but she
constantly affirmed that it was no Delusion: Then said they, It is his Angel:
The upshot was this, Peter was received joyfully: And there was no small stir
among the Soldiers when they missed him; King Herod was so offended with this
escape, that he caused the innocent Keepers to be examined and put to death.

Thus you have the whole Adventure and Eminent Deliverance of Saint Peter laid
before you; And from the whole History we may observe many things. As

1. Ten Observations from the whole Story.
Persecutors rage is not easily satisfied, and the blood which they shed is but
Oil to feed the flames of their Revenge. James being slain Peter is to follow.

2. The Churches Enemies are full of policy in the midst of cruelty: Peter was
not presently muthered, for fear of a Tumult: They suck in the craft of the old
Serpent, they lean upon their wisdom; and as little Boys they stand upon their
heads, and shake their heels against Heaven.

3. Close Imprisonment is a sore effect of Persecution, and he that peeps
through the iron Grates does best esspy the beauty of Liberty.

4. Believers can be secure in the midst of dangers; You see Peter being in
Prison slept sweetly between two Soldiers bound with Chains; a good Conscience
is surely a continual Feast: It turns a Prison into a Palace.

5. God has used the Ministry of Angels to effect deliverances for his people:
You see an Angel delivered Peter.

6. When the Lord intends to bestow a Mercy, he stirs up his people to wrestle
for it: So Prayer was made without ceasing by the Church unto God for him.

7. Mostly the people of God will have religious Servants; see how Rhoda
rejoiced at this deliverance.

8. Zeal is oftentimes mistaken for Madness; They took Rhoda to be frantic: So
it was said to Paul, Much Learning has made thee mad!

9. The Saints will readily own and receive a persecuted Member: The Disciples
received Peter joyfully, although it might have cost them their lives: A friend
is born for adversity.

O the miserable condition of man, who cannot be truly happy without friends,
yet cannot certainly know he has friends till he be miserable! 10. And lastly,
Wicked Persecutors are mightily enraged when their crimson Purposes are
disappointed: Hered was so highly displeased with this unlookt-for Frustration
of his bloody Designs, that he caused the Keepers first to be examined, in all
likelihood by Tortures, and then to be put to death.

But to come nearer to our Text, It is his Angel.

In these words you may observe with me, 1. The Coherence. 2. The words
themselves.

First, The Coherence opened.
the Coherence of the Text with the foregoing matter, and there are in it three
Points observable.

1. Whilst Believers have been fasting and praying for a Mercy, the Lord many
times has sent them a quick and unexpected Return, and very gracious answer:
Here whilst they were praying for Peter's deliverance, the Return of their
prayers stood knocking at the door for entrance; Poor Rhoda was accused of
madness, and they concluded it was an Angel, not Peter, so quick and unexpected
was the answer of their prayers.

2. Sometimes the deliverances of Gods people out of imminent and emminent
dangers are so wonderful, and attended with such a crowd of Improbabilities,
that they have much ado to believe though they see and hear them:

3. Angels have assumed the shape of men; you see they all thought it was an
Angel that had put on the Shape, Habit, Knock, and Voice of Peter: Of these
briefly;

First, Point from the Coherence. Dr. Goodwins return of prayers.
Whilst the Saints have been at prayer, the Lord has many times sent them a
quick and unexpected return: Thus to assure Hezekiah that his prayer was heard,
God sent the Prophet unto him whilst he was praying and weeping: So Isaac going
out to meditate and pray in the fields, meets his Rebeka then a coming; That
request for a good Wife, being surely the chief earthly thing he was then in
treaty with God for. As the Ruler in the Gospel found, John 4. See Dan. 9.20,
21.
that in the same hour, wherein he desired help for his Son of Christ, he began
to mend; So has it been often with the people of God, He has answered their
prayers in the very hour that they put them up. Luther having prayed earnestly
to God in his Chamber for the Churches success, came down saying, We have
overcom, we have overcom; And so accordingly it proved.

But lastly, Acts. 12.5.12. Hugo Card. Tom. 4.
how plain an instance is this in our Context; Whilst the Disciples were
praying to God for him, Peter knocks at the Gate. So true is that sweet and
precious Promise; Isa. 65.24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call
I will answer, and whilst they are yet speaking I will hear. By which Hugo
lays that parallel Scripture, He will be very gracious unto the at the Voice
of thy cry, Isa. 30.19. Qui timide Rogat docet Negare; But the fervent
supplications of the Saints do pierce the Heavens, and have a glorious Echo
from the Clouds: Whilst Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed.

Now this the Lord does, If Christ stopped not his ears when he was
blasphemed, will he stop them when he is entreated? If he turned not away his
face from those that spat on him, can we think he will turn it away from those
that pray unto him.

Again,

How does this reprove the sluggish and incredulous prayers or bablings of the
most? Cyprian, Cyprian. Ser. Sext. de oratione Dominica.
when they scarce hear themselves? Quae autem segnitia est alienari and capi
ineptis cogitationibus and prophanis, dum Dominum deprecaris, quasi sit aliud
quod magis debeas cogitare, quam quod cum Deo loquaris? Quomodo te audiri a Deo
postulas, cum te ipse non Audias? Vis esse Deum memorem tui cum rogas, cum tu
ipse memor tui non sis? Hoc est quando oras Dominum, majestatem Dei negligentia
orationis offendere; Hoc est, vigilare oculis and cord dormire cum debeat
Christianus, and cum dormit oculis, Cord vigilare, says divine Cyprian. In
prayer therefore, Sursum Corda, rise up and take hold upon God; To let fall a
Prayer is one thing, to pour out the Soul is another thing.

So then, 1 Samuel 1.16.
going to him in the name of Christ. Hannah after she had prayed and Eli had
seconded her request, found such an inward answer to her desires, that her
spirit was cheered, and she looked no more sad. So the Psalmist, I will harken
what the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85.8.
for he will speak Peace unto his people. Any mercy that comes as an answer of
prayer is a double mercy, but that which comes in the time of prayer is a
trebble Favor, and heaps a multitude of inviolable bonds upon us; Of this we
have had many experiences in these days, April. 7. 1654.
one very lately; For on our day of Humiliation for the late Drought, it rained
very sweetly, it was like a shour of Rose Water, coming as an immediate answer,
and in the very time of seeking God. Point from the Coherence.


Secondly, Sometimes the deliverances of Gods people out of imminent, emminent
dangers, are so wonderful, and attended with such a Train of Miracles and
Improbabilities, that they have much ado to believe them, although they hear
and see them. The Disciples took that for the Eve of Peter's Execution, and they
well knew he was guarded with four Quaternions of Soldiers, was bound with two
Chains, and that if he could escape out of Prison, and pass the first and
second watch, there was yet a Gate and that of Iron, that would obstruct his
aim; Therefore when he was delivered and stood knocking at the Gate, through
incredulity, they let him stand so long, that he might have been re-taken at
the door, and the ship sink in the Havens mouth: Rhoda though she heard his
voice, is charged with madness for saying so, Calvin in Locum.
and at last they said it was his Angel; in Sum, any thing rather then the
Apostle. Hinc colligimus Petri liberatione^ minime fuisse ab illis speratam,
says Calvin on the Text; They little dreamt of Peter's deliverance. When the
three Children were preserved in the hot fiery Furnace, and Daniel safe in the
Lions Den, their Enemies who saw it could hardly believe it. Nay, Believers (as
well as others) have been at a loss in this thing; when Christ, that great
Answer of prayer was come in the Flesh, how few did believe in him? when he
came to his Disciples in the Ship, to save them from the Tempest, they cried
out for fear, supposing he was a Spirit; And when he was risen from the dead,
the Apostle Thomas though he saw him and conferred with him, could not believe
but must put his Fingers into the prints of the Nails. The Jews when they had
long prayed for the return of the Babylonian Captivity, Psalm. 126.1.
at the receipt of that mercy they were as men in a Dream. Admonemur sic
succurrere Deum pijs, dum affliguntur; ut ex improviso liberentur; and se non
liberari sed somnium videre Putent, Musculus in explan. Psalm. 126.1 P. 1005
Genesis 45.26, 27.
says Musculus on that place: So Jacob when he was told that his Son Joseph
lived and had great power in Egypt, Old Jacobs heart fainted, for he believed
it not, but when he saw the Wagon which Joseph had sent for him, his Spirit
revived. Thus in our Text, the Disciples could hardly credit the Deliverance
of Peter, or Testimony of Rheda that heard his voice, and knew it full well;
Nay, Peter himself had little faith in this respect; For first, Act. 12.6.11.
He was fast asleep just before it was begun, and was very far from plotting or
hoping this escape. 2. When he was perfectly awakened and in the midst of his
deliverance, himself saw not ground of beleiving it; For Luke says, Act.
12.6.11.
He followed the Angel and wist not that it was true which was done by him, but
thought he saw a Vision: and when he was come to himself he praised God.

This may be so, Joseph sold and put into a Pit: The Israelites entering into
the Red Sea, and Christ being destroyed and murdered of the Jews, when all the
hopes of the Disciples were buried with Christ. We thought that this had been
he that should have redeemed Israel! The Lord uses very strange Methods of
deliverance; Psalm. 65.5.
As one that had an Ulcer in his body, being sadly (yet sweetly) wounded by his
Enemy, had his Ulcer opened and his life saved: Hag. 2.7.
By terrible things in Righteousness will thou answer us. Psalm. 99.8.
I will shake all Nations, and the desire of Nations shall come. Thou
answeredsts and forgavest them, although thou tookest vengeance of their
Inventions. When God comes to deliver a people, Psalm. 97.2. Genesis 32.24.
and execute vengeance on his Enemies, it may be clouds and darkness are round
about him; Although he answered the prayer of Jacob, yet first he put his Thigh
out of joint.

Again, Vnde quod nunc factum est illis videtur incredibile, ut magis ad
celebrandam Dei virtutem excitentur, Calvin in Locum.
says Calvin on the Text: Jonah was in two deeps, yet at the bottom of the Sea
and entombed in the Whale he despaired not, he ceased not to call upon God for
deliverance; The use.
What ever our streights be, oh let us never cease to besiege Heaven with our
prayers and let our Bullets be Tears, our Guns Groans: In the lowest ebb of
affairs let us know a spring tide of comfort may be at hand; Ephesians. 3.20.
God can and will do for his people above all that they can ask or think: For
as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are Gods thoughts above our
thoughts.

Thirdly, Point from the Coherence.
Elect Angels have assumed the shape of men: Here you see the Disciples took
Peter to be an Angel in his shape, It is his Angel. Now that the Angels have
appeared in visible forms of men, Judge. 6. and 13 Chap.
and for a while so conversed with Mortals, walking, eating, and drinking, and
talking familiarly of the matters wherabout they were sent, is full evident in
Sacred Records Abraham entertained Angels unawares, so also did Lot, Daniel,
Hagar, Zachary, the Virgin Mary, Saint John in the Revelation, Peter in the
Prison.

Angels have appeared in Dreams, in Visions, and lastly in assumption of
bodies, as here to Peter.

But how could this be?

I answer; Angeli fuerunt in Corpore per intimam, substantialem Praesentiam;
Suarez. de Angel. lib. 5. cat. 36.
tanquam Motor ad mobile, cum particulari Respectu ad Peculiarem ejus usum,
says Suarez. This body so assumed may be composed of the Elements, and they
are not more easily assumed then deposed, being again resolved into their
former Principles; And in case they were by God created of Nothing, then they
utterly vanish by Annihilation.

Here again it may be demanded,

1. Lawrence of Angels P. 14.


2. Such Apparitions were used of old to inure and prepare the people for the
Incarnation of Christ, the Angel of the Covenant.

3. Aquinas adds that they might give men an entrance into that Communion,
which they expect with them in Heaven.

3. Once more it may be asked,

Heathens ascribe this to the sins of men, that therefore God will no longer
converse with them; But the true reason is this, that God would now be
Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; His whole mind is now written and recorded.
So spiritual should we now be under the Gospel, that we are taken off from the
Bodily presence of Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 5.16. Now know we Christ no more after
the flesh. There is now poured forth a greater measure of the Spirit; So God
would have us to converse with him in the Spirit, and with those holy Spirits
in a more invisible way, as we shall above. The Church needs not now those
visible and sensible confirmations, as formerly in the Infancy of the Jewish or
Christian Church; For which reason also Miracles are now ceased.

Well then, The use.
see the care that God has of his Church at all times, and how he does
condescend and apply himself in a suitable way to his people; And see the
Dignity of Saints, that have had Angels assuming bodies to serve them, and make
known the will of God without terror unto them. But why do we wonder at the
Apparition of Angels in the shape of men? Let us rather be astonished at the
love of Christ In that he abhorred not (though Angels worship him) to be See
Stephanus Paris de Incarnatione; And Nieremberg. Theopolit. Part 1. lib. 2.
cap. 25. An Decorum suerit Deum fieri Hominem? P. 264. Dr. Sibbs. Light from
Heaven. P. 50. unto 70. 2ly. Of the Text it self.
clothed in the rags of our flesh, that he might be capable of bleeding and
dying for us. Into this Mystery Angels pry; GOD MANIFESTED IN THE FLESH! That
he who spanned the Heavens should become a Babe of a span long; That he who
thundered in the Clouds should cry in the Cradle, and when Angels laid aside
their assumed bodies, Christ has not deposed our flesh, but has carried that
as a Pledge into Heaven, and has left with us the earnest of the Spirit: After
this let us wonder at nothing. And so much of the Coherence.

Secondly, We come now to the words themselves, IT IS HIS ANGEL. I am not to
discourse of Angels in general, or of Elect or Reprobat Angels in particular:
I am not to treat of those glorious Creatures, that sing and chant their
joyful Halelujas before the Lamb, for then I should write of their Creation,
Confirmation, Place, Nature, Number, Amity, Offices, and Degrees: All which is
performed by very many Authors; But I am to treat distinctly of The Deputation
of Angels, which by few has been performed, and for that end I have chosen
this Text, which I suppose is very clear for the Point: For observe, it is not
said, an Angel, or his Angels, but his Angel.

Now besides the marrow and substance of these words, 4 Notable circumstances
about the Text.
there are four circumstantiall Observations, that like Harbingers do blow
their silver Trumpets to make way for this Text, to ride with the greater
triumph into our hearts; viz.

1. The persons speaking.

2. The time. of speaking.

3. The manner. of speaking.

4. The recording of the thing spoken by Saint Lukes Evangelicall and Golden
Quill, among the Acts of the Apostles and Primitive Christians. The Persons
speaking.


First the persons speaking are very considerable, if either you eye their
quality or quantity.

1. Their quality, they were not superstitious Heathen, but the Disciples of
Christ; They had bin tutored and instructed in the Principles of Religion
either immediately by Christ or else by his Apostles: In Scripture are sometimes
Recorded the speeches of vain and foolish men; as the vile speech of Jobs
wife, curse God and Die; of the whorish woman Personated in the Proverbs by a
Prosopopaeia; our Savior uses the saying of Socrates and Plato; Mart. Day on
1. Cor. 15. P. 132 133.
and Saint Paul quotes Menander and Epimenides, two heathen Poets: Nay in the
Scripture there is mention of things uttered by the black mouth of Sa^an
himself; Qui Plebeios and vulgares Homines putant cum haec dicerent, ex vulgi
opinione Locos, vereor ne dubitent an sint Angeli. Beza in Act. 12.15. P. 332.
But our Text was uttered by Christians, not only Nominall, but Real; Persons
knowing and fearing God; being much in Prayer, and resolved to endure
Persecution for the Truth.

2. Their quantity or Number is observable; had it been only Rhoda's fancy, we
should have past ^t over, as an impertinent speech; But mark the context; Then
said THEY it is his Angel: It seems it was their general Vote: And who, or
how many these (THEY) were, Act. 12.5.12.
you may gather by comparing the fi^t and twelfth verses together: Peter
therefore was kept in Prison; but Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church
unto God for him. So that those many gathered together in Prayer ( verse the
12) were doubtless the Church at Jerusalem where were very many Christians:
They met indeed together in a private house, because they had not the Liberty
of any Public Assemblies. Let this be weighed, and twill follow that many did
either speak, or Agree to this persuasion of the Angel Guardian; you read not
that any did contradict it. Publicus Rumor non est omnino frustra, says
Aristotle.

The General consent and Harmony of people (chiefly if knowing and good) is
very much to be heeded; For oftentimes. Vox populi est Vox Dei: I am sure that
which Primitive Christians, untainted with Heresy, so near the Fountain of
Truth maintained as Orthodox, with unanimous consent; is not by us to be
slighted, but carefully observed.

Secondly an other circumstance is the time and place, 2 The time and place.
when and where it was spoken: Not at the Table, Semel in Anno ridet Apollo.
or Recreations, when the Bowstring is loosned; For there is a Time when the
most serious and Religious may be cheerfully pleasant: But this was said at a
time of Prayer; in all likelihood joined with fasting for Peter's deliverance;
And in a Place, where the Church was gathered together, Acts 12.5.12.
for that end: Now certainly Traditionall Fables, and inconsiderat Fancies
would little become so many Christians in a time of Prayer, and in a place,
which though private in it self, ceased to be private, fo long as the Church
was there and then assembled. Solomon says, There is a Time to weep and a time
to laugh; so I may affirm, There is a time to be merrily disposed, and declare
the conceits and fancies of men; And a time to watch over the Tongue, and
buckle the Heart to all gravity and soberness. Senec.
Festis convenit Hilaritas, even Seneca could see and say by the light of
morality. Let such therefore beware of Temerity, that account and vote our
Text, a merry word; a frothy Tradition uttered at Randum by some Ignorant or
Inconsiderat Disciple; when neither the time, nor place would suit with such
Frolicks. The old saying was, Inter prandendum hilaris esto; not inter orandum.
(...); unseasonable things are absurd, and will displease God and good men. We
gather then from the time and place of uttering the Text; that it was the
received judgment and Doctrine of the Primitive Christians.

Thirdly, The manner of speaking.
an other Circumstance may be drawn from the Manner of speaking it, which was
not conjecturall or doubting, but positive and express; in few, Bernard.
not many words; It is his Angel. Nil tam cito manifestam facit veritatem quam
brevis Narratio; says a Father. Things that are not so Generally received, are
attended, with peradventure, it may be, who can tell? And the like Hesitant
speeches.

They say not, perhaps men have Tutelar Angels, but It is his Angel: And dare
the people of God be so confident in things which they doubt?

Fourthly and lastly, There is yet another Circumstance, The Recording it by
Saint Lukes Golden quill; The recording is by Luke.
without which, though the Church did speak and believe it, We had not known
their belief in this Point.

'Twas I say Recorded by Saint Luke; an eminent and holy Evangelist; who did
not record all things that passed, but the most weighty and material, both in
the Gospel and Acts of the Apostles: Though he was not an Apostle yet
Apostolical; says Tertullian. Tertul. Advers. Marcion. lib. 4. cap. 2
He whose praise is in the Gospel, throughout all the Churches (for Hierom
thinks that Brother was Luke) He, so eminent in grace, Beza in 2 Cor. 8.18.
learning of Wisdom, was immediately inspired by God, to transmit the
Deputation of Angels, as the Primitive Doctrine unto us, on whom the ends of
the World are come.

Let the Reader put all this together, and Note it well.

That a Church of most serious, knowing and devout Christians, being met
together for Prayer and Fasting, did then generally and peremptorily: in the
most pure, Crystal and untainted times declare the Doctrine of Angels
Deputation; which Saint Luke also approoved, and judged fit to be conveyed and
handed to us as the Primitive Doctrine: The Scripture no where else
contradicting it, but often consenting thereto: And then certainly this will
amount not only to a probable conjecture, but an infallible Demonstration, That
there is some such thing as a particular and Guardian Angel. Having thus
viewed the circumstantiall attend^nts on this Text, The several Expositions of
the Text.
(which are as Grains of allowance to make our Goulden Truth current) we now
begin to settle on the Marrow and substance of the words:

IT IS HIS ANGEL.

There are five several Expositions (chiefly) of this Text. See Salmeron and
learned Dr. Hamond on the Text.


1. Some understand it of a Messenger which the Disciples supposed Peter had
sent unto them on some Message or errand: But (with the leave of those
Expositors, and after the payment of that Tribute which is due to their
learning) How does this agree with the context? And with Rhodas owning of
Peter's voice? Men are distinguished by their voices, as much as by their Faces.
It Is like his very knock, we known to her, Note. Corbet in a Sermon on 1 Cor.
1.27. P. 11.
but much more his Voice. Act. 12.14. It is said that Rhoda knew Peter's voice:
And at the 15 verse, she constantly affirmed that 'twas even so. It is an
eminent outgoing of Divine Providence to give so many millions of millions a
Distinct Face and Voice; by which the Husband knows his wife, The Father his
child, the Creditor his Debtor and the Magistrate the Delinquent: in a word, by
which we know our friends from our enemies, and without which Treason, Incest,
Parricide, and confusion would overwhelme the World.

Again, Peter was now a close Prisoner, under many Guards bound with Chains,
His Keepers say some, bound in the same chain with him, And this was the Eve
before his intended execution. It Is probable then, He was not in a condition of
sending Servants and Messengers to his friends, or of hearing from them: Such
imprisonments as so suddenly expire in the death of Traitors, seldom give so
much liberty to the Restreyned.

Lastly, although the word ANGEL signifies a Messenger, and so has bin used
when Mat. 11.10. Rev. 2.1.
not applied unto an Angel, yet the Disciples in case they had discented from
this Truth, would have used another word for Messenger: (rather (...) then
(...),) on Purpose to bolt out this Received opinion: Hyeronymits in Isa cap.
6. Roberts Key of the Bible. P. 160.
or at least Saint Luke in relating it would have done it, seeing not only
Saint Hierom on Isaiah, but his very style (say the Learned) do evidence he was
exactly skillfull in the Greek tongue, and says Causabon observed a more pure
Hellenisme then the rest of the Evangelists. I say Saint Luke, so excellent a
Grecian, could have used an other word for Messenger, if the Deputation of
Angels had not suited with his judgment especially considering and well
knowing (as Grotius says) that this opinion was generally received among Jews
and Christians. Grotius in Acts 12.15. p. 314.


A second Interpretation of the Text is this Leighs Treatise of Div. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
Some say the men spoke according to the Vulgar saying and tradition; not
according to the truth, or as themselves believed. As an instance is given
concerning the blind man; when they asked whether he or his Parents had sinned
that he should be born blind? How could he sin Actually before he was born?
What a strange Question was this? But you must know there was an So Beza
Grotius, Diodati, and others tell us. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 9. cap. 11.
Opinion that found general reception, which all the Platonicks held, as also
Origin and others; That the Soul was created before it was put into the Body,
and as it did good or ill, so it was put into a well-tempered or defective
Body: Austin declares that this was the Platonicks Opinion: And Piscator
beleives, that that Question of the Blind man's sinning related to the
Pythagoricall Transmigration of Souls from one body to another after death:

Now unto all this I answer, That although it is very probable that question
touching the blind man, was according to the Vulgar Opinion of Transmigration,
yet it from thence follows not that our Text here was uttered in the like
manner; in regard of the forementioned circumstances of time, place, and manner
of speaking it: For the Disciples being now employed in so solemn Devotions,
could not probably be supposed guilty of so much Freedom, if not Levity, at
such a time and in such a place as we have observed already.

Besides that Vulgar opinion (of the blind man's sinning before he was born) was
checked by Christ himself, Joh. 9.33.
Ezekiel. 18.20.
when he said, that neither he nor his Parents had sinned; that is, He had not
sinned himself, nor his Parents sin should not be charged upon him. Diodati on
John.
Christ did put by this discourse, says one, as vain and frivolous: But this
Doctrine of the Guardian-Angel received no check. 1. Not from any of the Church
there assembled. 2. Not from Peter when he came in; to whom (among other
Congratulations) it is likely this Conception was declared: 3. Not from Luke that
relates it, though the Evangelists relating a thing doubtful or fictitious do
use to put a spoke in the wheel that turns it off, John 11.13. and 21.23.
as in John 21.23. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that
Disciple should not dye; Eccle. 12.7. Luke 23.43. Ezekiel. 18.2, 20.
yet Jesus said not unto him he shall not dye, but if I will that he tarry till
I come, what is that to thee? Nor 4. from any other Text of Scripture, or
rational consequence therfrom: But that opinion of the Transmigration of Souls
is often confuted in Gods word.

A third Interpretation is this; Atetius in Locum.
It Is said that the Disciples concluded, that an Angel by his knocking and voice
came to give notice that Peter's death was at hand: For secret Murders have
been detected by such Revelations and Apparitions as these.

But this Gloss is rugged and unwarrantable; For although the Jews in their
Writings make frequent mention of Samael the Angel of Death, yet they called
him so for inflicting and not foretelling of Death.

4. Calvin Inst. lib. 1. cap. 14. Sect. 7.
Calvin thinks it was an Angel peculiarly destinated to Peter only for that
time of his Imprisonment; But in case it was peculiar to Peter, how or whence
did arise that general Tenent among the Jews and Christians? And if an Angel
was appointed to attend him in the time of his Imprisonment, why not also at
other times, when the Apostle might com into the same or like perils? unless it
can appear that Saint Peter had never need of an Angel but then, Psalm. 91.11.
The Angels are charged to keep us in all our ways; viz. Which way soever we
move or walk in every turn of our life.

5. And lastly, The opinion which the Tertullian. Origin. B^sil T^^^doret
Hi^^^. C^ry^os^om (...).
Ancient Fathers and most Learned Expositors follow, is this, That the
Primitive Christians believed that every Elect Servant of Christ has one
particular Angel to guard and guide him: And they are so many who give this
interpretation, that it would be almost endless to muster them, as all that
have the least acquaintance with Antiquity and the Volumes of the Fathers will
confess. A small Taste you shall find in this Tract, in its proper place.

Having given the Reader the several glosses and chief interpretations of this
Text, we come now to our Doctrinall conclusion from the words.

Every Elect person has his Guardian-angel, Thesis.
who by particular Designation is allotted to be his faithful Keeper, and
Tutor, and vigilant Associat to his lives end.

I say Elect persons, and such only, says Origin, as are Praecogniti a Deo,
Heb. 1.14.
They are to attend the Heirs of Salvation: All such are dear to God, and there
be Angels enough to guard them.

Every Elect person has the presence and tuition of confirmed Angels to shield
him, and to stave off evil Spirits from him.

Every Elect has one particular Angel that watches over him, God has a
general care of the World, but a more particular care of his Saints, who are
his Jewels, the Apple of his eye, the Signet on his hand.

This Angel is allotted and assigned by God to his particular charge, every
Angel knows his Office and his Place: They all act by Commission, for God is
the God of order and not of confusion.

This Angel is to be his Keeper, his wise Counselor, his faithful and strong
Defender; his most loving and friendly Associat.

Moreover, the Angel is not utterly to depart from him, till his Pilgrimage and
Warfare be ended.

Now the main Branch which requires confirmation, and in treating of which the
rest will fall in, is this; That every Elect person has one particular Angel
to guard him.

But first to shut out all Prejudice, three things will by us all be most
easily granted.

1. That many rich Mysteries are locked up in the Nature of Angels, which by
degrees will break out.

2. That we abhor with greatest Detestation the Adoration of Angels.

3. That we must not exclude a multitude of Angels from extraordinary
attendance for our greater consolation in some streights: And these things will
eternally stop the mouth of most Arguments against this Truth.

The first is to satisfy the Ignorant, who will stumble at this Point, because
they are in darkness and never heard it before.

The second is to silence our Adversaries of Romish Interest, who may hope that
the Needle of this discourse inclines to draw in the rotten Thread of Adoration.

The third is to prepare the Godly, Learned, and Orthodox, who chiefly in
opposition to Rome have denied this point; That they would be pleased to
suspend their Objections, and meekly to consider what is here written.

The first Concession is this, Concession.
that many Mysteries are locked up in the Nature of Angels, which by degrees
will break forth. Among all the Creatures that God made in the six days, Moses
does not once mention the Angels of Heaven; shall we therefore be Sadduces and
believe there is no Angel nor Spirit? It Was a long time before those great
Mysteries of the Nature, Offices, and Degrees of Angels did break forth; before
the Headship of Jesus Christ over them, and their happy confirmation by him
(after so many fell as Lightning from Heaven) was the usual talk and discourse
of the church of God: strange things are mentioned of Angels; as their
Languages, Names, Songs, Battles, their converse with one another; visions of
God, their Motions, Number, and Ranks. What means the receiving of the Law by
the Deposition of Angels? Or the Angels striving with the Devil about Moses
his body? Their desire to pry into our Redemption by Christ? and the making
known by the Church somewhat unto them? In a word, the Voice of the Angel at the
last day? All this is hinted unto us in 1 Cor. 13.1. Col. 1.16. Job. 38 7.
Matthew. 18.10. Isa. 6.2, 3. Heb 12.22. Act. 7.53. Judges 9. 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians.
3.10. 1 These. 4.15.
the Scripture; Here are great Deeps wherein the hugest Elephants may swim, and
Leviathans tumble: And in the exposition whereof the most Learned are like
lisping Children; God will peece-meal and in his due time discover all to us,
very much here, and the rest in Heaven: Then all Mists as well as Tears shall
be wiped from our eyes: Now we see darkly, we know but in part: Melius est
dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis; Pliny the younger was
swallowed up of a smoking burning Gulf, approaching too near to find out the
cause of the Eruption. Let us hear what Learned Hiensius says on the
Mysterious Book of the Revelation; Dan. Hiensius in Sacr. Exercitat. ad Nov.
Test. lib. 20 cap. 4. p. 597.
Non quaedam Ignorare tantum, sed and Ignorare quaedam velle, Humilitatis
Christianae Partem non exiguam existimamus; Ne parum reverenter abdita
Scrutemur. This should cool in us the uncomly Itch of Curiosity, in Divine
things: But on the other side, we must be desirous to know what God has
revealed in his word, and in order thereunto to believe that we know nothing; to
be sensible of our darkness and blindness in Spiritual things: 1 Cor. 8.2.
The Lord knows, we have weak Eyes, stammering Tongues, and trembling Quills;
if we go about to speak or write of the deep and sublime things of God; And
such, without all peradventure, is the Doctrine of Angels:

2. Concession.
Whilst we plead for those glorious Creatures, those loving and lovely Spirits,
and their care which is extended toward us; from our Souls we do abhor and
detest as most impious, the Adoration of Angels; with a desire it may be as
heartily, as themselves also do it: For as nothing pleases them more then our
conversion and gracious conversation, Rev. 19.10. and 22.9.
so nothing is more abominable to them, then to be adored: Origin spoke to
fvourably of it; but the Lord has most expressly forbidden it, Psalm. 50.15 Col.
2.18.
Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels: Divine Adoration is neither due nor pleasing unto them,
nor honorable to God, nor any way profitable to our selves. Mendoza in Reg.
Vol. 2. p. 25.
Tertullian in Mendoza observes, that some men, namely Magistrates, are called
Gods; But so are not Angels, who yet are more excellent; and all to hinder our
Adoration of them. Matthew. 4.10. Heb. 1.13.
Take heed therefore Christians, that ye do not so cry up Angels as to derogate
from Christ in the least:

3. Concession.
When I say one Angel chiefly and constantly attends the elect Person in an
ordinary course; It cannot be denied but in an extraordinary way Psalm. 34.7.
Exodus 14.19.
One Angel may attend many Saints, as the Noble General, and Valliant Captain
of the Huge Troop of their particular Angels (as we shall show hereafter.) And
also that many Angels may attend Psalm. 91.11. Luke. 16.23. 2 Reg. 16.17.
One in some Eminent and Arduous Employment, for our greater consolation.

But from hence to conclude that a Believer has not one constant or usual
Guide, carries with it such a kind of Argumentation: Alter Fgo, or Animae
Dimidium, that above all the rest does watch over him, will stick to him, and
dye with or for him, if need require. Have not young Studients, besides their
general Officers, as Chancellor, Vicechancellor, Proctors, President,
Vice President, Bucan. Loc. Com. de Ang. Loc. 6. page 70.
Deanes, particular Tutors to read to them and watch over them? And thus it is
in the Doctrine of Angels; Many Angels look to the Church and belong to each
particular Believer: And yet says Bucan, Call. Instit. lib. 1. cap 14.
one Angel may be his ordinary Tutor, and more especial Guardian: So that
Calvin's, Pro certo Habendum, is still very true: This says he, is to be held
for a certainty, That not only one Angel has care for every one of us, but
that all of them with a common consent do watch over our Salvation and Good.

I have given you the Preparatory Concessions, and am come at last to
demonstrate our Thesis, and to prove that every elect Child of God has one
particular Angel to tutor and defend him. We shall prove this Point by the Dim
Light of Nature, clear Beams of Scripture, and the consent of many Ancient and
Modern Writers, untainted with Popish Leven.

First, this may be proved by the Dim Light of Nature, where I must show you;
1. The Point proved by the dim Light of Nature. 1 That the Light of Nature is
Well to be heeded.
That the light of Nature is well to be heeded though not rested in. 2. What
the light of Nature has taught us in this Point.

For the former, it will appear by these Mediums.

1. It is a Relict or Remnant of the Image of God; Although this Light be not
able to prepare us for Grace, or bring us unto Christ: And although compared
with Faith, it is but as a Gloworm to the Sun; Yet though the Taper be small
and burn very dim See Melanchton de Lege and Peccato. Antony Eurges vindiciae
Legis 7. Lect. p. 67. Romans 1.20. Act. 17.27. Psalm, 19.1. Act. 14.17.
some Light and Irradiation flows from it, enough to leave men without excuse,
and whereby we may guess at our Primitive knowledge in Paradise: Even as the
bigness of Hercules body was gathered by his Foot, of a Lion by the Claw;
Stock of Divine knowledge. p. 11.
And the ruins of some stately Palace do serve to declare its former
Magnificence: Much is read of God by the Light of Nature and in the volume of
the Creatures.

2. The Light of Nature is necessary though not sufficient in civil and moral
things; Burges (ut ante) 72.73.
For reason makes men in a Passive capacity of Grace, of which a Stone or Beast
is not receptive or capable.

3. Many Points in Divinity do not cross the Truth of Nature; as Grotius and
Grotius de ve^^t. Relig. Christianae Mornaeus etiam; and Dr. Hammond of the
reasonableness of Religion. See Tertul. de Carne Christi. lib. 5. cap. 5.
others do abundantly show in diverse particulars, too many here to recite;
Although Bleer-eyed Nature cannot pry into the Trinity, Incarnation, and
Resurrection.

4. The same Object may be known by the Light of Nature and by Faith: I may
know there is a God, and but one, by Nature and Scripture Revelation: And yet
for all that has been said, we dare not affirm (with Socinians) that Reason is
the Rule and Pillar of faith: For in many things, Ideo credendum, Quia
Incredibile.

You see what is taught by the Light of Nature in Religion is not to be
neglected, 2 What the Light of Nature says to our Point
nor rested in.

I am now to show you what the Light of Nature has seen and said to our Point?
I answer, It is well known to the Learned, that Heathens have talked much of
ones good Genius, which waits on every man from his Cradle to his Grave: And
perhaps Plato's Genius differed little from Aristottle intellectus Agens: For
the Peri-pateticks write much of immateriall Substances, Intelligences,
abstracted and separated forms. Servius says, that the Genius was given to be
a Guide and Conductor of those that were born. Camerarius. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Stoici Singulis Cenium and Junonem dederunt. That is, says Lipsius, Viris
Genii attribuebantur; Foeminis Junones. Seneca in Epist. 110. p. 640.
Censorius says, that we have a Genius given to us for a continual Controller
and Assistant, and that he never with-draws a Minute from us, but does always
accompany us from the time we are committed to his charge, which is at our
first coming into the World, to our last Gasp: Socrates, Empedocles, and
Plutarch held the same: In a word, The Heathen Poet? Menander is most express;
Cuique homini simul ac Natus est statim assistit Demon; Ductor vitae bonus.
This Eusebius thinks they learned of the Jews; But others say they read it by
the Light of Nature. In the ancient Coins of Trajan and Adrian; there is seen a
Genius, holding in his right hand a Cup, which he reaches out over an Altar
strewed with flowers; And in his left hand a Whip or such like thing. In the
Coins of Dioclesian there is seen in the left hand of the Genius a Cornucopia,
or Horn of plenty, and in the right hand a Cup, with this Inscription Genius
Populi Romani. Camerarius lib. 4. Plutarch in vit a. M. Ant.
GENESIS P. R. Also Cities and Nations had each of them a special Genius, says
Camerarius in his Learned Historical Meditations. Plutarch says, that an
Egyptian advised Antony not to contend with Augustus any longer, because the
Angel or Spirit that had him in keeping (as he found by casting their Nativity,
if we may believe him) did fear and redoubt the Angel of Caesar; and being
courageous and lofty when he was alone, became Timorous by approaching the
other: This good Genius they called Lares: Apulejus writes much, De Deo
Socratis, Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 14.
of Socrates his God; which, says he, ever attended upon him as his friend,
and forbad him to proceed in any Action that was to be unfortunate in the end:
Now there (says Austin) he plainly affirms, that this is no God but an Aerie
Spirit. Much more might easily be written of this subject, if it were needful:
It Is sufficient that Heathens have this truth from the breast of Nature; From
thence they sucked it; though pulling indeed somewhat hard, they have drawn
blood with the milk; yet who doubts but the good Genius of the Heathen, and the
Christians Angelguardian, are one and the same thing?

Secondly, 2 The point proved by the clear beams of Scripture.
As the Doctrine of Angels Deputation was seen by the dim light of Nature, so
also is it evident by clear beams of Scripture: I say not only by Heathenish
conjecture, but Scripture Revelations: And here I shall premise three things.

1. That all Doctrines must be brought to the beam and balance of the
Sanctuary Trapps Treasury, p. 103. See Doctor Whitaker of the Scripture against
B^llar. And Reynolds, de sacra scriptura and Ecclesia,
: The Chinese use to say of themselves, That all other Nations see but with
one eye, they only with two; so I may say, poor Heathens see but with one dim
eye of R^ason, Christians with two Eagle eyes, The Old and New Testament. Sin
and Death have defaced, and very much blotted the volume of Creation; but the
Bible is a Fountain clear and unmudded: Let the Jew go to his Cabala; The
Mahumetan to his Alchoran, and the Papist to his simple Legend: But Protestants
must go to the Scriptures as a well of Life.

2. That many things are firmly believed which the Scripture does but touch in
a few places; As the creation of Angels, and fall of one moiety of them,
Christ, the believing Jews Savior, and Heaven (as well as Canaan) their
portion after this life, which is seldom mentioned in the Old Testament: The
famous Doctrines of the Trinity, Lords Supper, Infant Baptism, the Christian
Sabbath, and Lotts, but touched in the New: God not once named in the book of
Esther, yet who doubts but it is Canonical Hoc non vult de mo le Librorum, sed
quod spiritus sanctus nostri babuerit Rationem, etc. Aust
? John 21.25. If all the things that Christ did were recorded, how vast a
volume would they make? So if all Truths in the Scripture should be largely
treated of, not the Pocket but a Cart should carry the Books. The Rabbis say,
that on every syllable or tittle of the Law hangs a mountain of sense and holy
Doctrine: And a good servant will mind what his Master once bids him do,
without expecting a second command: The rarity of Pearls and Jewels makes them
the more precious.

3. That which is mentioned in both Testaments, is not only a Truth, but
eminently so: And that which in the New Testament was expressed by the lips of
Christ, the way, truth, and life, you must account written not with Ink, but a
Sunbeam, or in letters of Diamonds.

To apply these Rules to the comfortable Doctrine of Angels Deputation: It is
clearly expressed in Gods word: It is not much or very often mentioned therein,
yet of equal authority and truth as if it were: It is in both Testaments, and
in the New Testament was uttered by Christ Jesus himself, Hunc audite.

Letting pass some others that are urged, we shall chiefly insist on three
Texts of Scripture Genesis 48.16. Mat. 18.10. And our Text, Acts 12.15.

To begin with Genesis 1 Scripturt proof, Genesis 48.16.
48.16. Jacob blessing his son Joseph, speaks thus to him, blessing both him
and his two sons, Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in Laudem Pauli.
Ephraim and Manasseh, The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
Ladds! Chrysostom quotes this very Place for the Deputation of Angels: Basil
contra Eunom. lib 3.
And Basil shows from this Scripture, That an Angel is present with every
one as a Pedagogue and Pastor, ordering and directing his life. Rivius, de
Praesid. Ang. p 720
Loquitur Patriarcha de eo Angelo quem peculiariter ipsi tutorem, and custodem,
comitemque addiderit Deus; so Rivius writing on that place.

Now because some modern Writers are very confident this makes not for our
Turn, let us see and weigh their Objections.

It is said this is spoken of God,

I answer, Genesis 48.15. And he blessed Joseph, and said, God before whom my
Fathers, Abraham and Isaac did walk, the GOD which fed me all my life long to
this day; The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads. Behold
he first mentions God, and after that an Angel; so that it is evident he
speaks not of one and the same person here: In case he had, he would not have
varied the Terms, much less have called Jehovah (God blessed for ever) by the
name of an Angel.

Jacob could distinguish between the Potter and the clay; and put a difference
between God, the Person sending; and an Angel, the creature sent.

If it be replied that Christ is called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. I
answer,

1. Christ is indeed called an Angel in Scripture, but seldom without a note
of Difference; To let you know he is more then all Angels; so he is called the
Head of Angels, and the Angel of the Covenant.

2. Richard Stock on Mal. 3.1. p. 165.
God the Father is never in the Scripture called an Angel; Christ is called an
Angel, because says Austin, he is the Messenger of the New Testament wherein
heavenly blessings are promised. Aug. de Civ. Dei.
Christ was to reveal his Fathers will to his people: But how God the Father
(of whom Jacob speaks) can be called an Angel, I see not, what person is there
to send him.

Again it is objected, Jacob is joined in Blessing with God, therefore it is
Christ, not an Angel: Besides the Angel with whom Jacob wrestled in prayer,
Genesis 31.
it is like was this Angel. I answer,

God blesses and redeemeth efficiently; Angels and Men instrumentally: If this
were spoken of eternal Redemption, it were peculiar to Christ; but Jacob here
speaks of Redemption and Deliverance from temporal Evils, which is confessed
to be a main office of Angels: Ps. 91.11.
Therefore Mercerius says, it was an Angel to whom Jacob ascribes his
Deliverance as to Gods Minister. Who is there that doubts whether Ministers
or Pastors may bless their people, Parents their children? (as old Jacob here
blesses Joseph) If so, then certainly Angels may instrumentally be said to
bless and do us good, as well as men.

But how does it appear that this Angel was he with whom Jacob wrestled long
before? when it is plain that he was prayed to by Jacob, and was called, The
God of Bethel: Genesis 31.13 32.
But this Angel is neither prayed to, nor styled God: Only in blessing Joseph,
he wishes that God and his Angel may also bless them; The one in commanding a
blessing, and the other in the execution of Gods will.

It Is again objected; Jacob, when Jacob wishes that he may bless and help
Joseph, and the Lads, his sonns? I answer,

1. Although that Angel did principally attend Jacob, yet now also he might be
helpful to Joseph and his sons, being locally as well as morally near unto him.

2. At Jacobs death (he being now very old) that Angel of his would wholly be
free, and at liberty to help them.

3. Jacobs Angel by further looking to him, and cherishing him in his old age
and weakness, Secundus in sentent. p. 89.
and in the Dreggs of his time (for old age is Viva mors, Cadaver spirans,
Mobile cadaver) might therein not only do good to him, but also to his
children; that he might have strength to give them a more particular blessing,
as afterward in Genesis 49.22.

Lastly, Jacob met an Host of Angels sent for his defense, and he accordingly
called the place Mahanaim, Genesis 32.1
(that is, two Hosts, or two Camps) Therefore some hastily conclude, Jacob had
not ONE Angel to guard him.

But this is no consequence; For as a King sometimes appears with a vast or
stately Retinue, and at other times is alone with a special Favorite: So it
was with Jacob; in extraordinary cases two hosts of Angels were about him, and
yet he might have one Angel for ordinary and hourly attendance, which was
sufficient; of which more in its place.

So that you see (the Objections being removed) that an Angel was Jacobs
Guardian, for he redeemed him instrumentally and ministerially from those
temporal evils, that otherwise had befaln him.

The second Scripture Proof that I shall urge for this truth, Scripture proof.
Mat. 18.10.
is that illustrious passage of our Saviors, Mat. 18.10. Take heed that ye
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you that in Heaven THEIR
Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.

Observe it.

1. Not their ANGEL, but their ANGELS: Every one has his Angel.

2. Nor the Angels in general, but Their Angels in particular.

3. Christ says not, the Jews and Heathens have such Observations: But I, who
am truth it self (and at the coming of which Sun, all the shadows of Error and
Superstition must fly away) I say unto you, that this doctrine of Angels
Deputation you must receive as an indubitable truth. 4. Then he charge the
world not to go about to molest or trouble his People; because their
particular Angels are not only titular, but tutelar; Their Angels watch over
them, and will protect them.

Grotius, Hugo Grotius in Mat. 18.10. P. 314.
although he be not very zealous for the Deputation of Angels as to particular
persons, yet was forced to write very favorably of it from that clear
Scripture; Probabile admodum est eam sententiam hic a Christo approbatam: It is
very probable says he, that Christ does here approve of that commonly received
opinion. P. Lomb. lib. 2. Did. 11.
The Master of the Sentences does chiefly insist on that place, for the proof
of this Point; Angelos dicit eorum esse, quibus ad custodiam Deputati sunt: And
the place is so clearly for it, Rivius P. 717.
that with Rivius we may demand, Quid clarius? Quid Apertius? Etiamne firmius
aliquod, ad hujusce Rei fidem, Argumentum quaeris? What can be clearer or
plainer? Will you after this seek for any Argument to prove it?

And Bullinger thus; Bullingeri D^cad. 4. sermon. 9.
Clare dicit puellis additos esse Angelos; hand dubie custodes: In a word,
Austin, Chrysostom, and Zanchy say the same from this clear Text of our
Saviors.

But because some endeavor and bend their wits to blunt the edge of this
Scripture also, and unpin the wheel of this Charret, that it may drive the more
heavily, whilst they escape it: I shall answer their Objections and Nicities,
tending to corrupt this Text.

1. It is thus glossed by some:

I answer. 1. were dead, except one, there still remained one Angel to attend
the surviving person: Omne majus continet in se minus, the greater comprehends
the less. We do not affirm that an Elect has never more then one Angel: For
in arduous and difficult cases, a whole troop of those Angels that attend the
Church in general, or such as worship before the Throne, do fly to our
relief; But this we may say, that every Believer has one at least to be near
him.

It is thus also objected by some:

It Is the heaven of Angels to see Gods face who is omni-present, to be doing
and fulfilling his will; This does not eclipse the happiness of Angels: To
retain their Primitive excellency: To attend on the Church which is part of
Christ Mystical: To be free from all distraction sin, and misery: To see,
know, and love God, to do his will readily, faithfully, and cheerfully; Oh this
is an heaven to elect Angels, whilst they are dispersed, busied, and employed
upon earth.

Lastly it is objected,

I answer much every way, in four respects.

1 Offend them not, do not despise or undervalue them: Ab homine mortali
despici vel pro Nihilo duci, quos Deus in tanto pretio habet nimis absurdum
feret. Mart Bucer in Mat. 18.10.
Because each of them, though never so poor and mean in the world, and void of
external pomp and glory, or humane assistance, has an Angel of Light, glorious
in power and wisdom, designed to his particular attendance: For as the
children of Noble men are discerned by this, that each one has particular
Servants, so it is with the people of God. You have no reason to despise or
vilipend them whom God has thus owned and honored.

2 Offend them not in any place, though alone; for in all places God is present
with them, and a Believers Angel is his faithful Associate.

3 Offend them not at any time; For though extraordinary guards may withdraw,
yet their Guardian Angel will not forsake them.

4 These particular Angels are placed by God, and are daily accountable to him
for their charge: They always behold the Id est astare Deo tanquam Regi,
observantes ejus nutum ut capessant ejus Mandata de ipsis emittendis ad
custodiam Puerorum Piscator Annal. and Schol. Mat. 18.10 p. 182, 185
face of my father which is in heaven. So that you see the Doctrine of Angels
designation did most directly advance the scope and design of Christ in this
place, namely, why his little ones should not be despised or offended.

The objections being removed, let us be careful how we despise the Doctrine of
Angels Deputation: For if it be unsafe to despise the Christians so attended,
it will be more dangerous to contemn the Doctrine whereby they are secured: For
in slighting this Doctrine, take heed least ye be found among the slighters of
Christ, who delivered it. Shall the ipse dixit of Aristotle be of force in our
schools? How much more the Ipse dixit of Christ in our hearts. Let these words
of our Savior (I SAY UNTO YOU) be as a clap of Thunder, most hideous for
sound, to awaken and startle the contemners of this Truth: yet so, as that it
may be accompanied with harmless Lightning, and flashes of Divine conviction,
that they may no longer suspect, or question what is here uttered by Truth it
self.

-- I -- who am the King and Lawgiver of the Church; who am Truth it self, and
so cannot lie or countenance the lies and errors of others: Wisdom it self,
and so do not speak rashly: Holiness it self, and so do it not partially:
Power it self, and so am able to punish those that will not believe me. I that
am your Redeemer, and shall seal all my Sermons and sayings with my blood:
Finally, I that am the Head and Captain of Angels, and best know what Orders
and Instructions I have given them.

-- I SAY -- I do not only and inwardly see and know it (who know all things)
but I think it fit to speak and promulgate this truth to you: Heathens and
Jews have ever said it, but now remember Christ the Eternal Son of God has
confirmed it to you: Many things I know that yet ye are not able, nor fit to
hear; but this I will reveal from the Father unto you, as a Doctrine doubted
by some, but of rich consolation to all the Elect.

-- UNTO YOU -- My dear Disciples I speak it, unto you my hearers, as before
many Witnesses, as before those that must record and publish this Truth to the
world, and all its nations and ages: For what is spoken to you in obscure
corners, see that ye trumpet and proclaim it on the house top.

-- THEIR ANGELS DO ALWAYS BEHOLD THE FACE OF MY FATHER WHICH IS IN HEAVEN.
Which words (as you have seen) do most clearly hold forth with both hands, the
particular Deputation of Angels; For he says not, The Angels that attend Gods
Elect, but THEIR Angels. Nor is it said their Angel, as if one were allotted to
many; but their Angels, each of these little ones that belong to me; whether
little in stature as this Child here before you; Or little in grace, parts,
and esteem, as some of my Disciples; Or little in their Qui deposita
altitudine, se ad Modestiam and ultroneam subjectionem composuerint. Marlorat.
in Mat. 18.10
own eyes, as all my Elect, I say each of them is great in the eyes of God, and
has a particular Angel to attend and guard him.

The third Scripture Proof for the Guardian-Angel is this in the Text, 3
Scripture proof, Acts 12.15.
Acts 12.15. Behold what Christ himself taught, the Primitive Christians do
believe and declare, It is his Angel. They were not Heathens that spoke this,
but Christians well instructed in the faith; Not Christians infected with
Errors: But sound Christians in the most pure and Primitive Times: Not spoken
rashly by the Maidservant Rhoda, but by the Church at Jerusalem, and that at a
time, and in a place of worship, for they were assembled to pray for Peter:
Then it was not a conjecturall, Loquantur de petri Angelo, ut de re minime
nova, aut ambigua Beza in Acts 12.15. p. 332.
but positive speech: And the golden quil of St. Luke recorded it among the
grave Acts and sayings of the Apostes and Primitive Christians, without the
addition of any dislike or dissent (as you have seen already); To all which let
me add, that this Doctrine of Angels Deputation was not only believed and
declared by the Church at Jerusalem; but also it was confirmed by St Peter
himself, that great and famous Apostle, one of the Lifeguard of Christ, one of
his bosom Disciples, one that was present at his Transfiguration, and one that
Christ had a very special eye of favor upon; On the doctrine of whose
reasonable and brave confession he resolved to build his Church, and to whom
the Lord did show singular kindness next unto John, Mar. 16.7. Tell his
Disciples (and Peter) that he is risen, and goes before you into Galile: And
lastly, Peter that was chiefly concerned in this affair; For they spoke of his
Angel; If therefore Peter himself will be so far from checking them for this
saying, as to ratify and confirm it; who can any longer demur his sealing of
this point? But Peter did acknowledge the Deputation of Angels. Acts 12.11. Acts
12.11.
When Peter came to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety that the Lord has
sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod.

1. One Angel came to him, shall we question but it was his Angelguardian? 2.
'Twas by deputation and appointment, the Lord has sen^ him. 3. 'Twas to
comfort and deliver him out of prison, and give him in to the prayers of the
Church. 4. That he might be assured it was his Angel, the Angel assumed a
bodily shape, a light shining in the Prison, and he spoke to Peter, and smote
off his chains. 5. He was herein much confirmed in our point: Now I know for a
certain it is so and so: Oh that such as out of zeal against Rome, and in
pangs of mistaken zeal, do oppose with some bitterness this truth, would pause,
ponder, and consider the forementioned Scriptures; Then would we say with
Peter, Now we know for a certain that God sends unto his servants, and to each
of them a tutelar Angel to defend and direct them. Now the objections against
this last Scripture, were answered in the several expositions of this Text,
and therefore here we shall pass them over.

Thirdly and lastly, The Point by consent of ancient and modern Writers.
we come now to give you the confirmation of this point, by the joint assent of
many ancient and modern Writers, untainted with Popish leven: And here we shall
consider two things. 1. That this evidence is not vain. 2. That of these
evidences there are store.

1. That the judgment of Antiquity, viz. of learned, pious, and Orthodox
Writers in several ages, does tend very much to the right understanding of
Scripture-truth: We do not say that See John Daille of the right use of the
Fathers.
Antiquity, the opinion of the Fathers, and humane tradition are infallible
signs and pillars of Truth, or that they are equal with the Scripture, or that
General Councels cannot err; Or finally, that there is not such a thing as
Antiquity of Error: But this we safely may affirm, That the judgment of holy,
learned, and unbyast men is not a little to be heeded, and does exceedingly
conduce to the clearing of Scripture-truth, tending to settle and establish us
in the true meaning of Gods word. 1 Timothy 3.15.
The Church is called The pillar and ground of truth: Not so much a Marble
pillar to support the Truth, as a pillar on which is Pasted the Proclamation of
Divine Truths. That the judgment of the Learned and Orthodox is not to be
neglected, will thus easily appear unto us.

1. The translation of the Bible into several Languages has still been
highly valued in Gods Church: The generality of Gods People have no other Bible
to peruse but that which is clothed in their Mother tongue; on this Bible they
build their salvation: Nay, the most learned Linguists do know the
signification of Greek and Hebrew words only upon credit of their Teachers and
Authors: Therefore also the Exposition of the Scriptures by the same, or
like-learned, or sound men, is not to be suspected or vilipended in Gods Church.

2. They have strong and sollid proofs of the things that they hold, well
backed with Scripture and Reason, and intermixed with fervent exhortations to
Piety.

3. 1 These. 5.20.
If we must regard the Sermons, Expositions, and Writings of the Living, then
surely much more of the Dead, since the Living may recant and depart from their
present persuasions; but the other have conveyed that to us which was their
Belief both in life and death: Surely the experiences of Gods people, whether
here, or in heaven, are of mavelous use and rich benefit to the Saints.

4 Their joint consent, unity and harmony in things fundamental, declares that
they were acted, and assisted by the same spirit.

5. Their difference in lesser things, is so far from abating the weight of
their Testimony, as that on the contrary it adds Jo: Daille of the Fathers,
book 2. p. 186.
rather much unto the same: For this clears their consenting in things
Fundamental from all suspicion of proceeding from Combination, or Mutual
Intelligence, and the thing which is now styled Interest: For when you find
them disagreeing in many lesser things, it is an evident argument that they
have not altogether sucked their knowledge from one another, or combined
together to deceive us: But according to their best understandings they drew
all from the Fountain, hewing out each particular point from the rich quarry
of sacred Scripture, so far as God did reveal his will to them.

6. Many eyes see more then two: But the Orthodox Athanasius had so high an
esteem of Conncels, That writing of the Nycene Council, he says thus: An non
igitur Peccant isti, si vel cogitent tantum contradicere tam celebri totius
orbis Synodo? Athan. De Decret. Nicen. Synod. p. 318.
Councels consisted of many eminent Lights, and a constellation of many
glistering Suns, gathered from Remote parts, earnestly seeking God by Prayer
and Fasting: And so by their Learned and Orderly Disputations (as from the
collision of several flints) many sparkles of Truth and Light did break forth.

7. And lastly, Many did not only Preach, but dispute for, and pen down what
the Lord had revealed unto them; some of them using Red ink, and sealing the
Truth which they attested with their blood; As Ignatius, Policarp, Cyprian,
Origin, Huss, and many others, who amidst all their tortures would not let go
the Truth, as well knowing that the Vine of Gods Church does bravely flourish
after it has been well watered with blood: Persecutors that burned their
bodies, could not utterly consume their Writings.

Thus I have endeavored to prove that the judgment of Learned and sound
Writers is of great use for the clearing up of Scripture-truth.

2. I now proceed to show you that of godly and learned Authors, a multitude
have pleaded for the Guardian Angel; besides such as are tainted with Romish
interest.

Tertullian, Tertul. de Baptism.
who flourished about the year of our Lord 200. in his book of Baptism, does
fully declare himself to be of this persuasion.

Clemens of Alexandria (about the same Time) says thus; Clem. Alex. stromat.
lib. 6.
Per gentes and Civitates sunt distributae Angelorum Praefecturae; Fortasse
autem etiam ex iis sunt Deputati singulis. Nations and Cities have their
Angel-guardian, and it is likely also particular persons.

Origin, about the same time, Origin in Hom. 66. in Numer.
a most stiff Champion for this Truth; and one that levelled some objections
against the same: Adest unicuique Nostrum, etiam minimo, qui sunt in Ecclesia
Dei, Angelus Bonus, Angelus Domini, qui Regat, qui Moneat, Idem. in Lucam.
qui Gubernet, etc. And again thus; Ego non ambigo and in caetu nostro adesse
Angelos, non solum generaliter, sed etiam sigillatim: He says, that not only
particular Churches, but Persons, even the least and meanest in Gods Church
have the presence, warning, and oversight of a good Angel from God: And of
this, says he, I do make no question at all.

Basil the Great, Basil contra Eunom. in Libr. 3.
who lived about 370. thus, Vnaquaeque Anima Angelum habet ad sui custodiam
Designatum; Every Soul has an Angel appointed for his Keeper.

Gregory Nyssen, Greg. Nys. in vita Moseos.
who flourished about 380 says thus, There is given to every man one of the
Angels as an helper and Protector: This is a true speech that has descended
unto us, and the which we believe.

Theodoret, Theodoret. Or^t. 11. p. 715.
who flourished about 390. thus; Vnicuique nostrum unus Designatus est Angelus;
To every one of us is an Angel assigned.

Hierom, Hieronymus in Matthew. 18. Lib. 3.
who lived about the same time, thus, Magna Dignitas Animarum, ut unaquaeque
habeat ab Ortu Nativitatis, in custodiam sui Angelum Delegatum: Full great is
the Dignity of our Souls, when as every one at the first coming into the world
has an Angel deputed to defend him.

And again, Idem in Psalm. 33.
Haud dubium est Timentes Dominum ab Angelis custodiri, sicut ipse Dominus
docet, Mat. 18. It is not to be doubted but the Angels keep such as fear God,
even as our Lord himself teaches.

Chrysostom, Chrysostom in Act. 12.15.
who flourished about the year 400. writing on our Text, says thus, Every
Saint has a particular Angel allotted to attend him; which Position plainly
arises from this place.

The same Father writing on Matthew says thus, Id. Hom. 60. in Mat.
Singuli Sancti suos habent Angelos, Every individual Saint has his Angel.

The most Learned Austin who flourished much about the fame time, Augustinus
lib. 1. Medit. cap. 12.
says thus, Hoc etiam Maximum existimo beneficium; quod ab Ortu Nativitatis
mea, Angelum Pacis ad me custodiendum, nsque ad finem meum, dedit mihi Dominus.
I account this a very great blessing, that the Lord has given me an Angel of
Peace to be my Keeper, from the time of my Birth to the end of my life.

Isidore, Isidor. de Sum. Bono.
who lived about 630. faith thus, Boni Angeli ad Ministerium humanae salutis
Deputati sunt: Singulae Gentes Praepositos Angelos habere ereduntur; Omnes
homines Angelos habere probantur: It Is believed that all Nations, but it is
certain all men have their Angels guardian.

Theophylact, Theophylact. Enar. in Mat. 18. fol. 48.
who flourished about 1070. says thus, Omnes enim Homines, and maxim fideles,
suos Angelos habent: All men, but especially the Faithful have their Angels.

Bernard, Bernard de Consideratione lib. 5.
who flourished about the year 1130. thus, Angeli creduntur singulis Hominibus
dati de quibus salvator Mat. 18. It is believed every man has his Angel; of
which our Savior in the 18. of Matthew; where also he does not barely approve
this Opinion himself, but declares it to be the received Doctrine of the Church
in those days:

John Rivius, Ioha: Rivius in libro de Praesidio Angelico. p. 717.
who wrote about 1540. is of all men the most zealous for our Point, and at
last confirms it thus, In eadem nunc sententia persto, nec deduci inde me
unquam patiar: I am now fully of that judgment, nor will I ever suffer my self
to be withdrawn from that persuasion.

Peter Martyr, about 1562. Peter Martyr. Com. in 1 Cor. 11.4. fol. 151.
wrote thus, Angeli deputantur singulorum Hominum obsequijs; juxta illud
salvatoris, Mat. 18. Every man has an Angel appointed to give him diligent
attendance, as our Savior tells us.

Theodor Beza, in the year 1564. Theodor. Beza in Mat. 18.10. p. 62.
wrote thus, in his Comment on the Testament (...), Id est, Angelos ipsis
peculiariter adhibitos custodes, adversus Satanam, and impuros spiritus; ut ex
Plurimis Veteris Testamenti Testimoniis liquet. Their Angels, says Christ;
that is, the Angels peculiarly designed to be their Guardians against Satan and
all impure Spirits, as is evident by many places of the Old Testament.

And writing on the Text, Beza in Act. 12.15. p. 332.
he says thus, They who think the Speakers of this (it is his Angel) to be
common and ordinary fellows, repeating merely the Vulgar Opinion; I am afraid
least with the Sadduces they should doubt, If there be any Angel or Spirit.

Zanchy, who flourished 1580. H. Zanchius Tom 3.
is firm and zealous for us: Cuique electo ordinare certum propriumque Angelum,
qui perpetuus est ejus Custos and Comes, jam indea Nativitate usque ad finem
Vitae, a Deo Assignari; Extra Ordinem vero plures etiam nonnunquam ad eum pro
Dei beneplacito, Majoris consolationis causa, mitti; vero simile est, and cum
sacris literis consentaneum, etc. Vniversa Ecclesia semper sic sensit. It is
most like to be true, for it agrees with the Scripture, and the whole Church
has in all Ages held it, that God does allow every single Elect ordinarily a
particular Angel to be his Keeper and Companion from his Birth to his Burial,
from the Womb to the Tomb; And in extraordinary cases, he sends many Angels to
his help, and for his richer Consolation as seems good unto him.

Buchan, Gu. Bucan. Loc. Com. De Angelis Loc. 6. p. 70.
who wrote about the year of our Lord God 1600. is expressly also for it:
Ordinary cuique electo certum quendam bonum Angelum a Deo Destinatum esse ad
custodiam colligi potest ex Verbis Christi, Mat. 18.10. Item ex Act. 12.15. It
may be gathered from the Scripture, that every Elect person has some one good
Angel assigned of God for his Preservation.

To these Testimonies let me add some of our latter Writers, Salkelds 44. Chap.
of Angels.
Salkeld in his 44. Chapter of Angels, is very clear for his Guardian-angel.

Mr. Josiah Shute (a late Eminent Preacher in London) writes thus: Josiah Shute
his Hagar. p. 105.
It cannot be denied, but most of the Greek Fathers and many of the Lattine,
and all the Schoolmen; yea, some of the late Writers, and those of the
Protestant Party, have been for the Guardian-angel.

Mr. Fuller thus, Fuller of Christ's Temptations p. 100.
THEIR ANGELS, that is Angels deputed to their Protection: The Pages and
Servants which wait on the young Children of great Persons, are commonly called
the Childrens Servants, although their Parents hired them, and give them Meat,
Drink, and Wages: Angels are Gods Angels as he employes them; OUR Angels as
employed about us.

Mr. Mr. Lawrence, of our Communion and War with Angels. p. 20. Mr. Greenhill
on Ezekiel. 9. p. 207.
Lawrence (writing of Angels) declares for it, saying, It Is probable that every
Elect has his proper and peculiar Angel.

Reverend Greenhill on Ezekiel, supposes that several Angels have the care of
Cities, Kingdoms, and Communities committed to them; for which he urges Dan
10. and Clemens Alexandrinus. And why not by the same reason each Believer his
Angel?

Mr. Mr. Leighs Body of Divinity in 4to. lib. 3. Cap. 7. p. 98.
Leigh therefore (though he doubts this Doctrine) may well Lace his Margent with
this confession: Vnde concludunt tum Patres, tum Scholastici, singulis pueris
atque adultis etiam certos Angelos esse attributos: From whence the Fathers and
Schoolmen do conclude that both Children and men have particular Angels
assigned them.

Thus I have given you a Taste of ancient and modern Writers (untainted with
Popery) who have eminently appeared for the particular Deputation of Angels: So
that you see it is no Novel Opinion, or that which has been only embraced by
the Sea of Rome.

And now having written thus much to free this Persuasion from ever being
clogged with the Imputation of Novelty; A Digression of Novelty in opinions.
I shall by way of Digression say somewhat of Novelty in Opinions before I quit
this Head.

One has laid down these Distinctions of Novelty in Doctrine. Mr. Samael
Bolton of Errors.


1. Things may be said to be new in respect of Gods Prescription, or of man's
Invention, Mat. 15.9.

2. In respect of Institution or Restitution, John 13.34.

3. In respect of Creation or Apparition; So the Moon may be new, though long
since created.

4. In respect of Being or Observation: And so especially this Doctrine of
Angels may happly appear new to the vulgar Reader.

Now from these Distinctions I shall raise two Conclusions.

1. Daille of the Fathers. p. 188.
That all Doctrines coined and invented by men, unwritten in the Scriptures,
and unmentioned by the ancient Fathers, must needs be reputed no better then
Errors. That which the ancient Fathers do not touch, conclude it was never
preached by Christ or his Apostles: For what probability is there that those
holy Doctors of former Ages, from whose hands Christianity has been derived
down to us, should be ignorant of any of those things which had been revealed,
and concern our Salvation? Take heed therefore of Curiosity and inordinate
desires of Novelty in Religion; Brinsley's Sermon on 2 Timothy 3.2. 1 Cor. 4.6.
that cursed Athenian humor and temper, of loving to hear and tell some new
thing. Let us think and speak soberly, and not be wise above that which is
written. He that quits the Bible and goes after unwritten Revelations,
forsakes the Sun to follow an Ignis Fatuus that will lead him into Bogs of
Error; Or at least despising the Fire on Gods Altar, he lies warming his hands
at the Glo-worm of some vain Opinion, that rends not unto Edification or
Consolation. New-lights many times prove to be old Errors; But remember Paul's
Resolution; Though an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Doctrine then
that which you have received, let him be accursed.

2. That Doctrines which are new, not in themselves, but as to Restitution,
Apparition, or Observation, are very precious Truths, that must be embraced by
the Church of God: And such is the Doctrine of Angellicall Deputation; For it
is not new in it self, the Scripture and ancient Fathers have it: But this
Orient Pearl has lien hid in the Rubbish of Roman Errors; Let not any say they
never heard or observed it before; for the brightest Stars of Divine Truth do
often dis-appear: But bless God, this Pearl was not utterly lost, Austins
Doctrine of conversion merely of Grace, and without preparations in the
Creatures: Luthers Doctrine of Justification only by Faith; Calvin's Doctrine of
Predestination only of Grace and not of Faith, or foreseen Works: These Truths
seemed new when deliverd by them; But we know the Scriptures are full of them,
and they are now generally received; except by a few Turbulent Spirits, that
resolve to walk contrary to all men: And hold Arminius by one hand and Socinus
by the other. Well, toward the end of the World, these Truths shall grow more
Refulgent; God will vindicate and discover many things that as yet do seem dark
in the Scriptures; The way of Discipline shall grow plain, and many Prophesies
shall not be fully understood till unveyl'd by fulfilling. In a word, where the
Fathers have seen a little, the Future Ages like a Dwarf upon a Giants
shoulders shall see further; Not into new Truth, but into a clearer and more
ample and bright Discovery of things that have been held and known; For, Hab.
2.14. Isa. 30.26.
Knowledge shall cover the Earth as waters the Sea. The Light of the Moon shall
be as the Light of the Sun; and the Light of the Sun of one day, as the Light
of the Sun of many days.

And so much of the Proof and Confirmation of the Point by Dim Light of Nature,
clear beams of Scripture, and joint Harmony of many ancient and modern Writers,
never charged with Popery.

But that this Point may yet further be enlarged; The Offices of the
Angel-guardian hinted, and no scruple remain unobserved and unanswered. There
are twelve Questions or Objections to be resolved and untyed, that are (or may
be) raised against this Point, of Angellicall Deputation.

First, Some may ask,

Rivius has Learnedly and at large answered this Objection: Rivius de
Praesidio Angelico. lib. page 709. ad 717.
By the same reason (says he) we may say, what need of Magistrates or
Ministers in State, or Church? What need of Food, Fire, Apparel, Sleep, or
Physic for our Preservation? What need of Arms to defend us in time of
danger? Or in sum, of any Secondary means for our good? God is able to
support and help us without all these, etc.

We say therefore with Reverend Dr. Dr. Sibbs Light from Heaven 1. Treat. p. 107.
Sibbs; It is true, the Creatures that God has ordained in their several
Ranks, are not for any Defect in God, or to supply his want of power; But
further to enlarge and demonstrate his Goodness: He is Lord of Hosts, therefore
he will have Hosts of Creatures one under another, and all serviceable to his
end; His end is to bring a company to Salvation; To a supernatural end, to
happiness in Heaven; And he being Lord of all, makes all Creatures to serve
for that end: He could do it of himself, but he uses the Creatures for the
manifestation of his power and of his goodness: He could I say do all by
himself; He could have been content with his own Happiness, and never have made
a World, but he made the World to declare his Attributes to the Creatures: So
he will have Angels to attend us, though he watch over us by his own
Providence. This takes not away from his care; But hereby he declares and
conveys his care and love to us. Quanquam enim per se ipse omnia Potest Deus;
Rivius lib. de Praesid. Angelico. p. 709.
Nec propter praestantissimam Virtutem atque infinitam Potentiam, ullo prorsus
ad agendum instrumento indiget, tamen it a Sanctissimae ejus voluntati visum
est (cujus sunt rations, See Bullengeri Decad. 4. Sermon. 9. fol. 250.
Consiliaque occulta nobis) uti ad ministerium suum, atque ad efficienda ea
quae ipse vult, rebus a se conditis uteretur, says Rivius on this occasion.
Though God is able to do all things by himself, being infinite in power and
needs not the help of instruments, See Nierembergii. Theopolit. part. 1. lib.
2. cap. 28.
yet it seems good unto him (his Reasons and Counsels being unsearchable and
past finding out) to call unto his Service for the accomplishment of his great
and holy ends, the feeble Creatures that himself has made out of nothing. He
will thus far honor the Works of his hands; Magnify his own power in doing
great things by weak and unlikely means, and teach us not to disdain the
service and help of his meanest Creatures.

For a Giant to raise up a weight of Lead with his hand is no mavelous nor
strange thing: 2 Reg. 19.35.
'Twas wonderful for God immediately by one Angel in a night to slay an
hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians in defense of Hezekiah: At this
we very much marvel, because he used the Ministry of a creature; he took up
the weight of Lead by a very small hair.

John 14.12. John 14.12 opened.
You read, that our Savior having done many wonderful Miracles, says, that
his Disciples should yet be enabled to do Greater things. Some may say, can
there be greater things then to cure the Blind, raise the Dead, and cast out
Devils? All this and much more was done by Christ; Yet greater things (says
Christ) shall be done by his Disciples after his Ascension.

1. Calvin says, he spoke of the wonderful conversion of souls upon the
effusion of the Spirit; Calvin in Joan. 14.12.
which is probable, because he adds, I go to the Father, viz. to send the
Spirit unto you: Christ never converted five thousand souls at a Sermon (as
the Apostles did) though he could have done it.

2. Chrysostom. says thus, Chrysostom. apud Grotium.
Maximum signum Gloriae Christi, quod per absentem fierent quae praesens non
effecerat, That Christ being absent, should work so powerfully by weak men;
This it was that so much advanced the glory of Christ. Revel. 6.2
They were the white Horses on which the Lamb rode about the world, conquering,
and to conquer. And thus you have seen why the Omnipotent uses the Ministry of
Angels and other creatures, to accomplish his own blessed and glorious ends.

Secondly, I will give my Angels charge concerning thee: Psalm. 91.11. Genesis 32.1
2 King. 6.17.
One Jacob met an Host; And the mountain was full of Horses and Chariots about
Elisha. I answer.

This Objection has been touched at already: Zanchy and Bucan declare that this
Doctrine excludes not the extraordinary attendance of many Angels, if need
require: But is it probable that each single Believer has always an whole
troop of Angels about him, that yield most particular attendance, I mean that
so attend on him, as not to attend on another, nor ever to withdraw from him?
If so, yet notwithstanding it is a comfort, Luke 2.13.
that one is eminently placed as the Captain of the rest, to dispose, conduct,
lead, and trayn them about us in Martial and most exquisite order, the better
to oppose evil spirits that shall assault us.

I shall lay down seven particulars that may give light to this Discourse, and
make it probable that many Angels do not ordinarily attend and inviron one
Believer: And that in case they do, yet ONE of them may most especially heed
and mind us, place and lead forth the rest for our preservation.

1. The nature of Angels is such, that although they be Spirits, yet they are
not, cannot be Omnipresent, or in more places then one at once: Aquinas.
Sic sunt in uno Loco ut non sint in Alio, say the Schoolmen: They are
undoubtedly so in one place, as not to be in another. Angeli sunt in loco, non
circumsrciptive, quia non commensurantur loco; sed definitive, etc. Non sunt
ubique Bucan. loc. com. de Ang. loc. 6. sect. 17.
That the Angels are in a place is certain out of Scripture; They are said
sometimes to be in Heaven, and sometimes to be on Earth: Gabriel was sent into
a City of Galilee, Luke 1.26. Therefore when Gabriel was in Nazareth, he could
not be said to be in Jerusalem, or any other City. Angels are not in a place as
bodies by circumscription, or contiguity; For a Legion was in one man, yet they
are so here, that they are not there; The same Angels cannot be in many places
at once, their motion indeed is very speedy and quick, and therefore they are
pictured with wings, but their motion cannot be in an instant: And does not
this make against the ordinary attendance of many Troops of Angels (much more
of all the Angels) upon one single Person? seeing all Believers are promised
the presence of Angels; And if so many (or all) be present with one, what shall
become of the rest? shall one have many Troops, and another far distant have
none? Gods elect are not all in a cluster, but scattered and dispersed over the
world; One in a Family, two in a Tribe, in all Nations God has some that fear
and serve him.

2. Let us consider (not only the distance, but) the great number of Believers:
In the days of Iezabel, when the Church was under sore persecution, there were
seven thousand left that had not bowed the knee to Baal; 1 Reg. 19.18.
How great then is the number of Believers since the Gospel, when the silken
Drag-net is said to draw in five thousand at a draught? Act^ 4.4.
And the number of those that shall rejoice at Antichrists ruin is said to be
an hundred forty and four thousand? Apoc. 14.3. and 11.15
In a word, it is said that all Nations shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and his Christ. From all which we gather, that though few be saved, in respect
of that vast throng and innumerable spawn of the wicked that crowd into Hell,
yet the quantity of Believers is in it self very considerable and glorious:
Heb. 11.12, 13.
Such as dye in the faith are as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the
sand which is by the Sea-shoar innumerable; Such a Progeny had Abraham, Heb.
11. Well, the number of Believers on earth being so considerable as to pass
all the known rules of Arithmatick to tell them; From hence let us gather,
whether it bear a face of probability that each one of so great a company have
many troops of Angels still to attend him?

3. Add to this, the number of Reprobate and fallen Angels, that kept not their
station, whereby the society of Angels is much maimed and lessned. You read
that in one man there was a legion of Devils, Luke 8:30. Vegetius de Re Milit.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
Isidore says, a legion among the Romans was six thousand armed Soldiers; but
Vegetius says, 6100. Footmen, and 726 Hors-men: but here a certain number I
suppose, is put for an uncertain; A legion of Devils in him, that is, very
many: Our Savior compares them to the Fowls of the Air in the parable of the
Sower; Luke 8.5.
To show us there be not so many birds flying in the Air, (although sometimes
the Air will be black with them) as wicked spirits in the world: Satan is the
Prince of the Air, and Beelzebub the chief of Devils, to show us the
greatness of his Train, and multitude of his Subjects. Beelzebub signifies the
Lord of Flies, there be not so many Flies in the world as there be Devils.

If then the number of fallen Angels be so great, it must needs follow, that the
society of Angels is very much broken and maimed, and therefore it is not
probable that whole troops are allotted to each particular Believer.

4. One is often mentioned in Scripture to attend one man; There are threescore
Places, where mention is made of one Angel having to do with one Believer (too
many here to be inserted) sometimes named, as Michael, and Gabriel: Dan. 10.13.
Luke 1.19
On the other side it is a rare thing, and in very extraordinary cases that
many Angels are recorded to be about one man, or one woman; shall not these
things be carefully heeded? When the Lord says, One Angel, shall we say many
Angels? Let us acquiesce in his word, and take heed of adding to, or
diminishing from it.

5. One Angel suffices for ordinary Attendance; The body is actedby One soul
which gives it a Natural life; The soul of a Believer by one spirit which
gives it a Divine life: And one Angel will suffice to guard and defend one man.
2 King. 19
What havoc did one Angel make in defense of Hezekiah? 'Twas one Angel that
shut the Lions mouths, insomuch that they touched not Daniel. Dan. 6.22 and
3.^5.
One Angel hindered the violence of the flames, that they could not hurt the
three Children: And one Angel smote off the Chains of Peter, and made the
prison doors and iron gates to open unto him.

One Angel says a Writer, Master Leighs body of Divinity in 4 to. lib. 3. cap.
7. p. 90.
is able to destroy all the Men, Beasts, Birds and Fishes, and all the
Creatures that be in the world, by overturning the whole course of Nature, if
God should permit it: One Angel is able to drown the Earth again, and cause the
waters to overflow it; To pull the Sun, Moon, and Stars out of their places,
and make all a Chaos: Angels can move and stir the earth; Mat. 28.2.
Nay one Angel did it, Mat: 28.2. And behold there was a great Earthquake, For
the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven.

Lastly, the very voice of an Archangel is so loud and terribie, that at last
it shall awaken all that are dead, 1 These. 4.16. Psalm. 103.20.
1 These. 4.16. Thus you see an Angel is of incredible power; The Angels says
the Psalmist, do excel in strength. I might say as much of their admirable
wisdom, Agility, and Fidelity: But I refer you to those that write of the
Nature of Angels, See Aquinas, Zanchy, and Saikeld.
and to the subtle and large Tracts of the Schoolmen thereupon. By this time
you see, that one Angel suffices for our daily and ordinary attendance, seeing
one Angel has done, and can do such great and wonderful things.

6. Yet further to show, Principio serviunt ipsi Deo, eundem concelebrant
laudibus sempiternis, Adorantes, Glorificantes, and exultantes in Ipso.
Bullingeri decad 4. Ser. 9. fol. 251.
that multitudes of Angels do not in an ordinary course attend one Believer; It
is evident from the Scripture, That the mayn Host, or chief body of the Angels
are in Heaven above, waiting before the Throne, yielding personal attendance on
their Head and our Husband Christ Jesus, continually lauding and praising God;
skreening their faces with their wings, and crying Holy, Holy, Holy, standing
ready pressed to execute his Will; Therefore there is in Mat. 22.30. 2 These. 1.7.
Scripture so frequent mention of the Angels of Heaven: Heaven is the Palace
and Throne of God, Angels are his guards; Elect Angels do continue there,
unless they be sent and otherwise employed by God to execute his will upon
Earth, or in the Air, or in the deep waters. Jacob in a vision saw a Ladder
reaching up to Heaven, and Angels continually ascending and descending on it:
That Heaven is a PLACE we need not doubt, for the body of Christ is there; And
that the main host and corporation of Angels in that place will evidently appear
from the sacred Text, Dan. 7.10
Dan. 7.10. The Ancient of days did sit, his throne was like the fiery flame; A
fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; Thousand, thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. It
seems that Daniel in a Vision saw the glory of God in Heaven, and his full
Court of Angels about his Throne. The like expressions are in Rev. 5.11. And I
beheld and heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, etc. Now if
the main knot and corporation of Angels be in Heaven, then it is not probable
that each Believer should have Troops upon earth; Or that all the blessed
Angels watch over every Believer, as some have affirmed.

7. Rev. 12.7 opened.
And lastly, let us grant that many Angels attend each particular Saint; Yet it
would not be a vain or fruitless Doctrine, that one of them is chiefly
entrusted with his preservation, to place, conduct, and excite the rest as need
shall require; for it is certain the good Angels fight with the evil in our
behalf. Rev. 12.7. Aug. Hom. 9. in Apoc.
Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon and his angels.

1. Austin, Tertullian, Tertul. de carne Christi.
and our Modern Writers do by Michael understand Christ Jesus, the head of all
Principalities and Powers, The Noble Captain of our salvation.

2. Brightman and Trap on Rev. 12.7.
Some by Michael and his Angels understand Constantine and his Armies, as
learned Brightman and others.

3. Others affirm that Michael is to be taken literally; For Michael the
Archangel being commanded of the rest in the vision, which is not altogether
improbable.

1. Because Michael is styled an Archangel in the ninth verse of St. Iudes
Epistle.

2. It Is likely an Angel there was called an Archangel, as being Captain in
the skirmish with Satan: So says Basil very fully to our purpose; Basil.
advers. Eunemium, lib. 3.
A celestial spirit is called an Arch-Angell, when being accompanied with many
other Angels in the work of the Lord: he is guide and leader to the rest; for
inter Angelos est Ordo; among the Angels (and especially in Battle) there is
very great Order.

3. Mark well the opposition; Michael and his Angels against the Dragon and his
Angels: Who questions but the DRAGON is Beelzebub, the chief, the Prince of
Devils? Therefore also by MICHAEL may be meant an Archangel; since it is
plain there are Degrees among the blessed Spirits: And if there be Order in
Hell, sure there is no confusion in Heaven.

I might mention other places where an Angel in chief is mentioned, Josh. 5.14
and other good Angels with him; see only two places, Josh. 5.14, 15. There you
see the Captain of the Lords Host appeared and spoke to Ioshuah. Gods host of
Angels that came to the relief of Joshua, had over them a Commander or
Chieftain, and this Captain appeared and spoke to Joshua. See also Luke 2. Luke
2.9.13.
at the ninth verse, The Angel of the Lord appeared unto the Shepherds, to
convey unto them the news of a Savior: Now observe, when the message of this
chief Angel or Ambassador was ended, Then suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and singing, ver. 13. One Angel
sang of Christ as the chief Musician, and a full Quire bore the burden of the
Song, Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will toward men.
Luke 2.16.
It is said that the Angels went into Heaven; that is, the Quire of them went,
but it is likely the first Angel continued with one of the Shepherds, to
conduct them to the place where the babe lay.

So then, if a man have many Angels about him, it is a comfort that one (who is
chief) will be his guardian to guide, counsel, and order the Angels that are
sent, and to abide with him when the rest are disbanded, and depart; Perhaps
for some other expedition, as Providence shall dispose; or else to join in the
Halelujahs above.

I have been the larger in answering the second doubt, because I find that it
is generally urged against our point by the Antagonists thereof; A believer
has many Angels, has all the Angels; what need we confine his safety to One?

Thirdly,

To this we answer. Our enemies themselves being Judges: They have the main
body of truth, so are called Christians, only the pearl of divine Truth is hid
in the endless rubbish of humane Traditions: But whilst we have their
Blindness, Idolatry, and Superstition, let us not extend our hatred to their
persons (but pity and pray for them) nor to the many Truths which they hold,
but cleave to them still.

A man will not reject a piece of Gold though he find it on the Dunghill; and a
Mother will love and take up her Child, although bemired in the street among
rude Play-fellows: So it must be here, we must love and embrace the truth
whersoever we find it.

2. Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin (and many others) who approved of
the Guardian Angel, and breathed in the three first Centuries after Christ,
could not be infected with Popery, which then had no being: For as we prove
the Sabbath to be more then Ceremonial for being constituted and observed from
the beginning, Genesis 2.2. Exodus 16.23, 30.
before the promulgation of the Law: So it is as easy to prove that the
Doctrine of Angels Deputation is not Popish, because it was maintained by the
Primitive Christians, as the Text declares: And by the ancient Fathers that
breathed in the purest air of Primitive times, before the plague of Popery
brake out.

3. It has been, and is maintained by diverse of the Orthodox since the man of
Sin was revealed: Not only Chrysostom, Austin, Bernard, and others of the
Fathers, but also by our Modern Divines and soundest Protestants, as Bullinger,
Peter Martyr, Beza, Zanchy, Bucan, and by diverse yet living. Let not this
Doctrine therefore any longer be clogged and branded with the odious name of
Popery: It Is the subtlety of Satan thus to disfigure the Truth, and beget a
prejudice in us: For as Errors do often pass when they have the trimming of
Truth, so Truth is often pelted under the Vizard of error.

Fourthly, Adam in the state of Innocence had an Angel Guardian?

Here are two questions. 1. Whether Adam had a tutelar Angel. 2. If so, whether
before or after his Fall?

To the first, Adam was elected and saved, Dr. Willet on Genesis 3.47.
because the Promise was made to him concerning Christ. Genesis 3.15. That the
seed of the woman should break the Serpents head. From whence Dr. Willet
concludes, That though our first Parents finned, yet they were restored and
saved by faith in the Messiah, and not utterly condemned Danaeus super Aug. de
Haeresibus, cap. 25. p. 107.
, which was the uncharitable heresy of the Tatianes, says Danaeus: concerning
whom thus he writes, Primus and eorum Maximus proprius error, Quod Adamum,
Primum Hominem Damnatum; Nec exlapsu suo saluti restitutum putant and Docent.

But Irenaeus has Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 39. Resutat Tacianos.
well confuted them: And generally the Ancient Fathers do think more
charitably of our first Parents, hoping and affirming that they were saved,
from three Texts of Scripture, viz.

Genesis 3.15. That there should be enmity between the seed of the Woman and the
Serpent.

Luke 3.38. Adam is called the Son of God; but surely after his fall and before
faith, he was the child of Hell and Perdition.

2 Cor. 15.45. The first Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a
quickening Spirit.

We may here mention (as an humane testimony) Wisdom 10.1. Where it is said,
See Coll. of Doway's Annota^ions. Tom 2. p. 356.
that Wisdom preserved the first Father of the World, and brought him out of
his Offense. So then, if Adam was elected and saved as it is probable by that
which has been said; what should hinder but that he (as well as others) had a
Guardian-Angell?

To the second part of the Querie, Aquinas is for the Affirmative; Tho: Aquinas
Part prima Qust. 113. p. 239.
Homo, in statu Innocentiae, non patiebatur aliquod Pereculum ab interiori quia
interius erant Omnia Ordinata; Sed imminebat periculum ei ab exteriori, propter
insidias Daemonum (ut rei probavit eventus) and ideo indigebat custodia
Angelorum. Though there was an Harmony within yet there were Tempters without:
Though he stood he might fall; He had a Posse non Mori, but never a Non posse
Mori: His danger was great because many Angels were become Apostates, and would
still be laying snares for him, as the issue declared. This Guardian-Angel
peradventure counseled him when he had sinned to hide and cloth himself:
Glorious was the Communion between man in Innocence and Elect Angels.

Fifthly, Tho: Aquinas ut ante in Artic. 4.
Christus Ratione Passibilitatis erat Victor and secundum hoc non debebatur ei
Angelus custos tanquam superior, sed magis minister tanquam inferior: Christ in
regard of his Humanity and sufferings was a Pilgrim upon earth; yet the Angel
that therefore attended him was not his Superior, or Ruler, Hugo Cardin. Tom. 6.
and fol. 262.
but merely his obedient Vassal, trusty Squire, and diligent Servant. Therefore
when the Angel is said to strengthen him, Hugo does thus expound it; Confortans
eum; id est, Ad modum confortantis se habens; Forte aliqua verba consolatoria
dicendo: after a manner he is said to strengthen him, perhaps by speaking
comfortable words to him.

Now here we shall endeavor to prove two things unto you: 1. That the Angels
were much about Christ. 2. That one Angel especially did belong to him.

1. Mat. 4.11. and 26.53. John. 20.12. Mat. 13.41. 1 Timothy 3.16.
For the former, it is evident, Elect Angels were very busy about Christ in
the days of his Pilgrimage; their Ministrations was used upon all occasions:
They did comfort him in the Desert after his Temptations, in the Garden after
his Agony; They were busy about the Sepulcher, and gave attendance at his
Resurrection: They treated with diverse about Christ, they brought news of his
Birth to the Shepherds, of his Resurrection to the Women, and of his Ascension
to the Disciples. Upon all occasions the Heavenly Host came and ministered unto
him; of which diverse Reasons may be given.

1. Jesus Christ is their Head and General; all Angels, Archangels,
Seraphins, and Cherubins are subject unto Christ.

2. Where the King, is there is the Court kept, though in the meanest Village.

3. By attending on Christ in the Flesh, they declared his Divinity: From the
greatest abasements of Christ, certain sparkles of Glory and Divinity flew out.

4. They came to comfort and strengthen his Humanity, when the Divinity was hid
and ecclipst in his Sufferings which were very great, not only from men but
God. See Luke 22.43. It Was the Humane Nature that received strengthening here
from an Angel; The Fuller of Christ's Temptations.
Angel (says one) being in a Calm, and Christ in the Tempest of an Agony; no
wonder if the Meaner give support to the Superior.

5. The Angels attend Christ Col. 1.20. and 2.10. Ephesians. 1.10. and 3.10. 1 Pet.
1.12.
because of their Interest in his Mediation, for in that Glass they read their
confirmation in grace and happiness; So that now there is no fear nor
possibility of their Apostasy and falling: This makes them to pry into the
Mysteries of Christ's Mediation.

6. By Christ's Incarnato Christo Angeli Deum laudaverunt, quia viderunt Numerum
little impleri. Hugo Cord. Tom. 1 p. 447. Col. 2.
Redemption; The vacant and empty Rooms of fallen Angels will be supplied by
Saints, says Hugo, to make their maimed Society complete; For Christ says,
that Believers shall be as the Angels of Heaven: So the order of Angels will be
replenished, and the Gap filled up, not with Thorns and Rubbish, but very
precious Jewels. You see there are many reasons why the Angels were so
officious about Christ Jesus.

2. For the latter, that one Angel did especially belong to Christ, may appear
probable to us. Luke 22.43.
It is said, Luke 22. That there appeared an ANGEL unto him from Heaven
strengthening him. It Is probable his name was GABRIEL: For even the Servants of
Emperors and great Monarchs are renowned, and their names Recorded, Luke 1:
Luke 1.26.30. and 2.21.
The Angel Gabriel came to Mary and told her she should conceive a Child: Then
Luke 2.21. His name was called JESUS, which was so named of the Angel, before
he was conceived in the Womb. It Is likely that this Angel upon Conception was
peculiar to Christ; Coming here as his Harbinger to take up Quarters for him;
and declaring from God what his Name should be, and how his great Master should
be called. The people also conceived that Christ had an Angel belonging to him,
John 12.29. When they heard a voice the people that stood by said, it thundered,
others said an Angel spoke to him.

Lastly, This Angel for a while forsook his dead body, attending his Soul into
Paradise, and again returned with his Soul at the Resurrection, Matt. 28.2. And
behold the Non Christi causa venit Angelus tanquam sine illo non posset exire
Sepulchro; sed ut fides fieret mulieribus and Apostolis, Christum resurrexisse,
says Calvin.
Angel of the Lord (that is of the Lord Christ) descended from Heaven and came
and rolled back the Stone from the door, and sat upon it, his Countenance was
like Lightning, and his Raiment white as Snow, and for fear of him the Keepers
did shake and became as dead men. I suppose that this was still the first Angel
Gabriel, that gave attendance at his Conception, strengthened him in that
Garden-Agony; and leaving his Body at Death, returned again at his
Resurrection; still it runs in the singular number, the Angel, and the Angel of
the Lord.

This I suppose, will also appear probable to others who shall weigh it in the
Balance of Reason without casting in the black Grain of Carping Prejudice into
the contrary Scale. But however if any one can prove that Christ had every
moment upon Earth many Legions of Angels about him (which he said he could
call, for but did not.) We still say, this does not weaken our Assertion, that
each Believer has an Angel; For Christ being an extraordinary Person might
have extraordinary attendance.

6.

1. Origin. Tract. 5. in Mat.
Some think at the time of Conversion: Cum fuerint per Regenerationem renati;
Tutores dati sunt conversis, says Origin on this occasion; of which two
Reasons are given.

1. Because the Angels know not the Decrees, nor who are elected and chosen of
God; Before that Election be declared in Conversion: But we answer God can soon
reveal it unto thme.

2. Because, In tempore Infidelitatis Homo est sub Angelis Satanae. In the
state of Nature a man is under the wrath of God, and is vexed with evil
Spirits that hurry him to sin, and rule in the Children of disobedience. I
answer, Although this cannot be denied, and that Elect Angels do not delight in
men's sins, nor in communion with the wicked; yet God is resolved that all his
Elect shall have invisible supports against Satan, to preserve them charily as
chosen Vessels, against the time that he shall manifest himself unto them: And
then it is sufficient to Angels that God wills their attendance, and that
hereafter they shall discern some fruit of their care, when they come to
rejoice at the conversion of those whom they attend: And in the mean time as
the Sun is not polluted by looking into Sinks; so Angels are not polluted or
disquieted with the sin of men.

2. Others think the Guardian Angel is placed at Baptism: Origin recounting
many opinions does mention this, which is very improbable: For then the
Penitent Thief who never was Baptized had no Guardian Angel to watch over him:
And besides it is then in the discretion of Parents (who set the time of
Baptism) when the Angel shall begin his Office over the Child. The Elect are
precious and dear to God before as after that Ordinance, which is a Seal but no
cause of Gods love: The contempt of it is dangerous, but the observation of it,
is not meritorious. Away then with that egregious mistake of Austin, that
Children dying unbaptized do perish eternally. Baptism is either Flaminis or
Fluminis; of the Flame or Flood, of the Water, or its Author: Elect Infants
cannot want the Baptism of Fire, and of the Spirit. Out of Christ's side came
water and blood; and he that has Christ, has both Sacraments.

Lastly, Millions are baptized with water that neither have Angel here, nor
Heaven hereafter.

3. Most think it is done at the Birth of an Elect; God revealing to the Angels
who are such, by requiring their attendance on them that are his. Of this
opinion Origin speaks among others. The Rhemists say, Aquin. Sum Part 1.
Quest. 113. p. 240. Drex. Horolog. Hora. 7. cap. 1. p. 165. Aug. Medit. lib. 1.
cap. 12.
that the Angels charge begins at our Nativity; Zanchy says the same, Aquinas
says, Statim a Nativitate, Drexelius says, Angelus Tutelaris nascentes nos in
suam Fidem recipit: And Austin says expressly, It is done; Abortu Nativitatis:
At the first coming into the world.

This also is mentioned in two places of Scripture, Genesis 48.15.16. The God
which fed me all my life long unto this day, Genesis 48.15.16.
the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless (or keep) the Lads: So he
mentions Gods feeding him from the Womb, and so the Angels keeping him from his
Nativity; for otherwise it had not been linkt to it. Mat. 18.2.5.10.
And in his Infancy he was freed from many dangers as well as in his Manhood:
But he says, That Angel redeemed, or instrumentally kept him from all evil.
The other place is that of our Saviors, Mat. 18. Jesus called a little Child
to him and set him in the midst of them, saying, whosoever shall receive one
such little Child in my name receives me. Take heed that you despise not one
of these little Ones; For I say unto you that in Heaven their Angels do always
behold the face of my Father. Dr. Prideaux and Perkins on Mat. 18.10.
Expositors agree that by Children our Savior means, not only his Disciples
little in Gifts, or in the eye of the World; But also little Children, even
Babes and Sucklings: Such a little Go-by-ground as he set before them: Leigh in
Nov. Test.
Even Infants have their Angels; Angels says one, are their Rockers, and Kings
Sons must have their Guard, says Dyke,: Some think that Angels do help them to
speak and go: Elect Infants are in Covenant with God; he has not denied them
his Angels, and shall we deny them his Seal? Infants were received under the
Law, and shall they be rejected under the Gospel? When Christ himself says,
suffer little Children to come unto me and forbid them not? The Gospel came to
Ephesians. 2.14. This expression convinced an Officer of the Army.
break down partition Walls, then surely not to build up new ones: But of old,
under the Law there was no partition wall between beleiving Parents and their
Children, to exclude them from Circumcision; See Mr. Marshall Sermon of this
Subject: And Mr. Halls Font-guarded.
Woe be to those that shall now build up a Wall to shut out Children from
Baptism, coming in its room: And can we suppose that under the Gospel, whole
Households, nay, whole Nations were without Children? The Apostles are often
said to baptize the Former, and are empowered to baptize the latter: One Gospel
says, teach and baptize, and another says, baptize and teach.

This only by the way: (To return to our business) Even poor little Infants
have their Guardian-Angels: Were it not so, into how many dangers would they
fall? They would be disfigured and lamed with bruises, and fearful
miscarriages; cutting and burning themselves as opportunity is offered. Angels
are very diligent and handy to look to them and keep them out of harms way: We
may well say with David, Psalm. 22.9.10.
Thou O Lord art he that took us out of the Womb, thou did make us to hope
when we hung upon our Mothers breasts; We were cast upon thee from the Womb,
thou have been our God from our Mothers belly. And herein especially does his
goodness appear, in appointing Angels to watch over us when we would not watch
over our selves. When you pass through fire and water I will be with you, says
the Lord. Poor Children would soon perish by those Elements, but that Angels
are so handy to catch them up. When Father and Mother forsake you, the Lord
takes you up! This methinks is the Voice of God to Infants dear to him: When
Parents are without natural affection, when Nurses and Tenders are careless,
and Children of restless, stirring and climbing dispositions: Then does the
Guardianship of Angels especially appear; for how many dangers do they escape
that others know not of, when alas, there is but an hairs-breadth between them
and the Grave? Let us hear Chemnitius on this Subject: Chemnitius in Hamm.
Evan. cap. 92. page
Maxim autem quoad Infantes res ipsa testatur; illos tot and tantis periculis
obnoxies esse, ut nulla Parentum solicitudo, nulla famulorum cura ipsis
servandis sufficere posset, nisi Angeli custodes adessent. Children are
obnoxious to very many and great dangers; so that no Anxiety of Parents, or
diligence of servants can secure them without the Tuition of Angels. This is
the third thing that the charge of Angels begins at our Nativity, or in our
childhood.

4. And lastly, Lawrence of Angels. p. 21.
some go further yet, and say this is done at the conception of elect Infants;
immediately upon the infusion of a Rational soul; And it is then very probable
that Angels do begin the execution of their charge. For although the child be
a part of the Mother, yet has it a distinct being of its own, consisting of
soul and body. And it may be the Mother is not Elect, and so has no Angel to
look to her. Some think that the presence of an Angel with John, Luke 1.41.44.
made him leap in Elizabeth's womb at Mary's salutation; an Angel making of that
little Embrio to rejoice and leap, that otherwise had been incapable of such
affections and motions, according to the course of Nature: Who questions but
many have gone to heaven dying in the womb? and surely such are guarded by
Angels into Abraham's bosom.

What hinders then but an Angel may attend upon a Child unborn? Dr. Boys his
works, p. 878.
Psalm. 8.4. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained (or
founded) praise. The Translation of Abenezra, initium fecisti, Thou have begun
praise, cannot be so good as that of our Saviors, Perfecisti, Thou have
perfected (or finished) praise, Mat. 21.16. For as Martin Bucer very well
observes, Almighty God begins his power and providence toward Infants in the
Mothers womb, and when they be Sucklings their praise is perfected; for then
they quickly cry Ab. Ba. and so call the Lord Abba, Father, in their innocent
Language. How strong a consolation is this to godly women bearing of children,
to consider, that holy Angels attend them, and those little pieces and pictures
of themselves, their little children? So that a Believer bearing Twins may
possibly have three Angels to attend her Motions and all Occurrences for the
safety and preservation of Root and Branches.

Seventhly,

I answer, either 1. Attend on that vast Quire that worship at the Throne,
Revel. 5.11. Or 2. Michaels host that resist the Dragon. Or 3. Attend on some
other person as Providence shall dispose: For as Lombard says, one Angel may
be Guardian to many successively coming, and dying off: Pet. Lombard, lib. 2
Did. 11.
Angels can never want employment, that have such a God to worship, such a
Christ to follow, such a Bride to attend, and such a host of Dragons to subdue.
Finally, though we do not with Pythagoras hold a (...), Piscator in Joan 9. p.
654.
or transanimation of souls; yet nothing hinders, but with Lombard we may
believe a Transmigration of guardian Angels, from one man dying off, to another
conceiving in the womb:

Eighthly,

I answer, speak unto us with a high hand in the Scripture phrase; that is, so
to speak as to speed, to charm, turn, or captivate a soul: It Is he that can
effectually inlighten the understanding, and determine the will, he can melt,
and bend, and form, and turn it which way he pleases, and put a new Bias on
the heart, that it shall run and wind heavenward. He has a Throne in every
man's soul, he can tame, and rule, and govern the whole Man, till it stoop and
buckle to his work; Angels are but Ministering spirits, and cannot prevail
without his blessing, as all other helps, and ordinances, and means cannot of
themselves do us good.

2. By way of affirmation; Lawrence of Angels, p. 49.
we say that Angels, although invisibly and insensibly, do guard and counsel
the soul; They are of wonderful use to us, and the things communicated to our
inward man are ordinarily the administration of Angels; The evil Angels have
not so much power to hurt the soul, as good Angels to support, defend, and do
it good: The Sun and Stars produce their effects upon the earth, and the
Minerals and deepest bowels thereof; Why should not the blessed Angels have
effects upon our hearts? Psalm. 104.4.
Psalm. 104 Who makes his Angels spirits, his Ministers a flaming fire. This
say some, is in relation to their working on us by some measure of enlightening
and warming the heart.

But how far does the Ministration of Angels relate and reach unto the soul?

1. Dr. Goodwins Child of light walking in darkness, Chap. 8.
In general, they do guess very much at our thoughts, affections, and
desires. Counsel in the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of
understanding will draw it out, says Solomon, Prove. 20.5. Now all those
methods and Advantages which one man has of knowing another, Angels have over
us most eminently, they can go one room nearer to the soul, because they are
spirits, and they do very much consider and study us. To some men is given
discerning of spirits; That is, the discovery and finding out the sincerity or
hollowness of the heart: How much more is this given unto Angels? If the Wise
that has been forty years in thy bosom is able in great measure to know thee,
to guess at thy thoughts, and trace thee in thy ways: And know when thy tongue
and heart do not agree, how much more thy Angel Guardian that has ever been
with thee? Angels do hear our Vocal confessions in private Prayers, eying us
when most retired; observing us in all Places, Postures, Companies, and
Employments, which no other Friend or Foe can do. Our nearest Relations are
sometimes distant from us; The Angels can soon collect by observation, and
laying things together what passion is prevalent and stirring in us: And if men
by a slight cast or Si quis corporis oculos consideret, eos admodum csse
Garrulos quamvis sine voce comperiet; Affectus evulgant. Drexelius de Recta
Intention, lib. 2. cap. 9
glaunce of our eye, throw off the Arm, or other bodily Gesture, do soon
understand us before in words we uncase our mind, and unmask our Thoughts;
question not but Angels are much quicker in reading of us, and spying out the
design of our hearts: Angels may know our thoughts or affections either
certainly by divine Revelation, or probably and conjecturally (which seldom
misseth) by external signs; They are extremely ingenuous in guessing; Great
is their natural wisdom, Lawrence of Angels, p. 32.
long and vast also their experience: If Physicians by the pulse and temper can
spell your affections and passions, and tell you that you are in Love, or take
care; the Angels knowing so much by Nature, and having the kernel of all Arts
and Sciences, after more then five thousand years experience, cannot but
easily pierce into things that men (who are but of yesterday, and full of
infirmities) understand not. Angels d^ pry into our bodily humors, and view
(as by a glass) the interior senses: As for instance.

Anger is thus defined, Ebullitio sanguinis circa Cor. Anger is blood perplexed
into a Froth, whilst malice is the wisdom of a Wrath. Anger then is easily
espied by Angels; malice not so unless by the effects: Men read our Faces, and
by sudden Paleness do judge of our Anger; they understand the Language of our
sighs and blushes: But Angels can trace us much further; they see the most
secret boylings of the blood in Lust, anger, or fear, although the Countenance
bewray us not, but be clothed with a contrary Temper: Where men smile and
laugh very loud; Solomon says, in Laughter the heart may be sad) Because
though they do not absolutely know our hearts, yet our Thoughts do soon make
impressions on the body, which Angels presently discern: And if our Angel
Guardian could not thus guess at us, how could he apply himself to us in a
suitable way? We say when Diseases are known, they are half cured.

2: Angels cannot only read, but coin impressions on our fancy and imagination:
They have secret ways of treating and dealing with us; No time is free, waking
and sleeping they have the key, and can come to us when the senses are locked
and barrd, as appears by our dreams; They need not (says one) go about, and
fetch the compass of our ears and eyes, as we are fain to do: Therefore our
communion is exceeding great with the Angels. Do we not waking and sleeping see
impressions in our Fancy, of things that we thought we had forgotten? This is
done by the Angels good and evil, who can make Composition rare and wonderful
of what they find in us; Though they cannot (say the Schoolmen) put in any
thing that is purely De novo, yet they strangely and strongly work on the
matter which they find.

3. The good Angels do often obstruct and impede evil actions; as our good
endeavors are often hindered by Satan, so are our evil by the Angels elect,
else were not our protection equal to our danger: A good Angel opposed Balaam
in an evil way, and spoke in the mouth of an Ass, to resist the madness of
his Master. If an heavenly spirit says Bishop Halls Contemplat.
one, obstruct the courses of the evil, and stand in the way of a Sorcerers
sin: how much more ready are all those spiritual Powers to stop Miscarriages
of Gods dearest children? When thou art going (Remigiis Dedalis) to dishonor
the Lord, and have a full gale of opportunity to sin, thy Angel Guardian does
often prove a Remora invisibly to stop thy design: How often would the Saints
relaps and fall into mischief, if their Angels did not pull them back, hedge,
and block up their way unto evil by withholding the occasions of sin? Traps
Decad of Angels.
Michael opposed Satan about the body of Moses, so do the Angels still oppose
the Kingdom of Darkness about the bodies and souls of the Saints, Rivius de
Praesidio Angelico, p. 723.
whilst they live, and after death. When Satan has besieged us, our guardian
Angel, vim oppugnantis repulit, vires debilitavit, patefecit insidias, fraudem
detexit, says Rivius. He has revealed their slight, and repel'd their
might. The Angels do watch over us, says Greenham, yet all see it not;
Greenhams Works, p. 3.
and when they see it, it is by the effect of their Ministry. They watch over us
and preserve us from many dangers of soul and body.

4. The Angels have been used to declare and trumpet out the will of God to his
People: The Angel reveased to Mary the Incarnation of Christ: an Angel
admonished Hagar of her duty: an Angel instructed John that God only is to be
worshipped; The name Angel signifies Messenger, because God has by their
Ministration conveyed many Messages to Men. Nay,

5. The Angels do not only declare what is good, Dr. Sibbs Mystery of
Godliness, p. 108.
but they advise us to it: So Dr. Sibbs, if the Devils can suggest sin;
Angels are stronger and wiser then Devils, whatsoever they can do in evil, the
elect Angels can in good; therefore they suggest many thoughts that are good.

Lombard says of the guardian Angel, Lombard, lib. 2. did. 11.
Hortatur ad Bonum; He does admonish and persuade us on all occasions to that
which is good. The way how this is done is very mysterious, let us not pry into
that.

6. They encourage and comfort us in doing our duty: So an Angel comforted
Hagar, another comforted Paul in the storm at Sea, 2 R^g. 1.3
and an Angel encouraged and strengthened Eliah to his work; And although now
they do not appear in bodily shapes, yet the same offices are by them
(although more spiritually and mysteriously) performed to us: Mendoza in Reg.
vel. 1 cap. 1. sect. 2. p. 244.
Nay Mendoza says, they further excite and quicken the soul in Prayer; But we
shall not proceed so far, least we think of them above that which is written.

7. The Angel guardian helps us in our sufferings, and afflictions: Thus the
Angels have appeared unto the Martyrs a little before their death, to cheer and
encourage them; When Christ was in an Agony (just before he was betrayed) the
presence of an Angel did strengthen him: Lu 22.43.
And Peter's Angel appeared to him in the prison, and delivered him: When the
child Moses was laid among the flags, and Joseph put into a pit, then did their
guardian Angel stand them in good stead, or else the one had been destroyed of
Water, and the other starved to death, or made a prey to wild Beasts.

8. And lastly, at Death, the Angel guardian conveys the believing Hoc munus
non frustra Angelis assignat Christus, quos scimus datos esse fidelibus
Ministros; ut eorum saluti sua studia operasque impendant Calvin in Luc. 16.22
soul into Abraham's bosom, through the Devils Territories, and in spite of
him; for he is the Prince of the Air: Some think that to the Angel guardian
are joined certain other Angels to scour and clear the passage for us; They are
our convoy to Bliss: And in this march they are continually fighting for us,
and thus with much speed and triumph they convey us into our Fathers house,
which is the last office this Angel shall do for us, unles it be to call, and
gather our very bodies to Judgment at the last day: And in heaven we shall have
perfect knowledge of that Angel that was our keeper, as also of all other Angels
and Saints there.

Some may say, unto God, and the holy spirit of Grace?

We leave unto God all in all,

Ninthly, with us? Mourn with them that mourn? Are they touched and grieved
when we fall into sin, or when trouble falls upon us?

I answ. Hugo, Hugo Cardinalis, Tom. 7. p. 246.
Angelus scire potest infirma nostra sed non compati quia nec Pati; The Angel
may know our infirmities, but cannot suffer with us, because he cannot suffer
at all. The Schoolmen therefore do upon good grounds deny the fellow-feeling of
Angels, by suffering and grieving with us in our trials: For though they
unfeignedly desire our good, yet they cannot dis-roab themselves of their own
happiness. Rev. 21.4.
When we come to Heaven, there is no more death nor wayling, Revel. 21. No man
in heaven shall mourn or sigh for the damnation of his dearest friends: So also
the Angels (instated in so much happiness) are not capable of grief and
sorrow: Tho: Aquinas, Prima part Quest. 113. Artic. 7.
The Reason, says Thomas is this, They are brimfull of happiness, and their
wills are so clearly wheel^d about by the supreme will of God, without which
nothing comes to pass, that they cannot grieve or mourn for that, which God is
resolved shall work together for the good of Believers. It Is sufficient they
earnestly wish and desire our good, and do rejoice at our conversion, let us
not be troubled that they grieve not at our Deviation: Touched with the feeling
of our infirmities: Nay in all our afflictions he is afflicted. Not that he can
suffer or mourn in heaven; but that such is our Union with him, and his
Remembrance of our frailty, because he has our flesh, that he is ready to own
and help us in our streights: In this respect Angels also may be said to
sympathize with us, for they will stand by us and support us in a time of need.

10. Mephibosheth a child of five years old, son to a good Father, and
afterward a good man himself, was lamed by a fall from his fleeing Nurse;
Innumerable examples might be brought of the same kind; Are the Angels of
Believers absent, impotent, or sullen and careless, when Believers do thus
miscarry under their hands? and such mischances befalls them?

One answers, Fuller of Christ's Temptations, p. 100 101.
Not chances, because all things are ordered by divine Providence. Nor
mischances, because all things work for their good. Therefore we say.

1. The promise of Angels protection, Mat. 4.6.
Mat. 4. (as all temporal promises) runs with this tacit Reservation and
condition, Always provided, that God in his infinite wisdom, for Reasons best
known to himself, do not judge the contrary more conducing to his glory, and
our inward good: He sees, that many times Afflictions humble us, awaken us,
and do us good, Schola crucis schola lucis.
teaching us his will, and our duty.

2. Angels are to keep us in all our ways, Psalm 91.11. It is not said Our
wanderings: And who in this wilderness-condition is free from wandering? Who can
say, I have made my heart clean? Sin must have sorrow here or for ever; Your
sins have hindered good things from you.

3. God is above the Angels, and they all move and act by Divine Appointment:
As the Primum mobile moves all the other Spears, so Angels and all creatures
are swayed, moved, and ordered by the Lord: Job and Paul, Satan was permitted
to destroy the goods, children, and health of the one, and to buffet the mind
and conscience of the other, and give him a thorn in the flesh. 4. When
believers do thus lie under the lash of a Father, Angelical attendance does
mitigate the evil, that they do not succumbere, despair and utterly miscarry:
As if a Limb be bruised, that the Life be spared: Let us hear the Apostle, 2
Cor. 4.8, 9.
We are troubled on every side yet not distressed, we are perplexed but not in
despair; Persecuted but not forsaken, 1 Cor. 6.9.
cast down but not destroyed; and elsewhere, as dying yet behold we live.
Angels are not always to keep us from, Primum ac praecipuum genus
consolationis est Animum tristem consolari, etiamsi Res Adversae adhuc durent.
Musculus in Psalm. 94.19 p. 729.
but sometimes in troubles; which says Musculus is the chiefest Point of
consolation: So 2 Cor. 1.3. Romans 5.5.
Saint Paul. He comfort us in all our tribulations; and again, As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us so our consolations also abound in Christ.
Now these Cordials and Consolations in and under sufferings, are chiefly
administered by God the holy Spirit; Instrumentally also by Angels: Christ could
have prayed that many Legions of Angels should have kept him from suffering;
this he did not, yet the Angels Ministered unto him in the Wilderness, in the
Agony and other sufferings of his from time to time.

5. Believers are so defended by God and Elect Angels, that whatsoever
temporal things they suffer they shall not eternally miscarry; though the
miseries and crosses of this life prevail against them, yet the Gates of Hell
shall not. Though the Lions do roar, God will not cast them his Children to
feed them; that Tormenting Flame shall not touch one hair of their head. Is
this all their Consolation, that the Oven of Hell is heating but not for them?
No, Heaven is preparing and perfuming for them: Though thy Angel therefore do
suffer thee to trip, he will support and raise thee up again; He is not to
leave thee till thou art safe within Heavens Gate.

6. And lastly, This objection, that Believers have not their Guardian Angels,
because of their sinnings and sufferings is not so considerable, if you
remember that each Believer also is acted by the holy Ghost, who is intempled
in the Saints, and yet the people of God have many failings and infirmities;
sin in them is dejected but not ejected. The body is acted by a Raitionall
Soul, yet in the time of fancy and sleep it cannot counsel and watch over us.
The Sun is ever in the Heavens, yet sometimes his face is ecclipst, or muffled
with Clouds. Though our Angel be never so wise, faithful and Potent, yet the
Lord of Angels and men may suspend and eclipse his Protection for a time, that
we may the more depend upon himself;

Eleventhly. Peter's Angel, Acts 12.10.
when the Iron Gate was opened and one street passed, That forthwith the Angel
departed from him.

I answer, down that bodily shape that was assumed: Mat. ult. ult.
So Christ is said to leave and not to leave the World. We affirm therefore that
good Angels are our constant Associates till death: Though their Influence may
be susspended, yet their presence is continued; and they never throughout our
life do utterly and totally sorsake us. Mat. 18.10. Their Angels do always
behold my Fathers face. They are their Angels not for a spirit, or in a good
Mood, but always theirs; always expecting new commands for their good: And
Psalm 91.11. They are charged to keep us and be with us in all our ways. As a
shadow follows the body without leaving it or lagging behind, so do the
Angels accompany Believers in all their walks and ways. Oats on Jude 9. p.
216.
Oats in his Comment on Jude writes thus, The Angels attend on us, ride and
journey with us. It Is most necessary and evident that they never totally forsake
us in our Pilgrimage, in this wayfaring and warfaring condition: Satan goes
about seeking whom to devour; If therefore he should find us alone, and without
the tuition of Angels, we were but one morsel for him; He spares the wicked
because they are his and must do him service: As God is said to leave us for a
time when sins and afflictions overtake us: So the Angels (his Messengers and
Ministers) may be said to withdraw, when some hurt befalls us, to return again
for our greater advantage; but it is certain Heb. 13.5. Psalm. 27.10.
that God never leaves nor forsakes us, therefore nor the Angels really or
totally: But says one, they are often with us as Physicians are with those
that have filthy Ulcers,

If it be objected that the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14.
and an evil Spirit from the Lord came and troubled him. Spirit that departed,
you must either understand, the holy Spirit of God in his common (not
sanctifying) gifts and graces; Or a good Angel that for a time was sent to him,
but not to abide. Good Angels may be sent unto the bad, as to Saul and Baalam,
but they abide only with the good; Heb. 1.14.
The Heirs of Salvation: Such, says Origin as are Praecogniti a Deo, foreknown
of God.

Then by the evil Angel that succeeded and seized on him, is meant Satan taking
fuller possession, as he is said to enter into Judas after the Sop, who had a
litter of Devils in his heart before. So says Christ, the Devil may seem to
depart, and takes with him many other Spirits worse then himself to repossess a
man, that his latter end shall be doleful, and the very Map of all misery and
desperation: And on the other side, if good Angels seem to withdraw from the
Saints, it is that they may return with the greater Triumph and Consolation.

The twelfth and last Question is this, in Heaven, if they be thus dispersed and
busied and employed on Earth?

To this I answer. Answer which is confuted.


First, Some affirm that Heaven is not at any distance from us, but consists in
the fruition of God, so that Heaven may be on Earth: Chemnit. Harmon. Evangel.
cap. 92. p. 1741.
Thus Chemnitius in his Harmony resolves this doubt; Observandum est quod
Angeli qui pusillis ministrant, Haec officia omnia in Terris expediunt; and
nihlominus Faciem Patris in Coelis videre dicuntur: Vnde manifestissimum est,
Coelum, in quo Deus cum Majestate sua residet, non per tot Myriadas Milliarum,
ultra supremum hoc aspectabile Coelum abesse; sicut Calviniani de co Nugantur.
That because the Angels of little Children on Earth behold the face of God in
Heaven, therefore Heaven is not a place at such distance from us as Calvinists
imagine. Coelum itaque Terra and In fernus non locorum intercapedinibus, sed
Beatituditudiuis and tius Ibid. Infoelicitatis Respectu, distinguuntur. Chemni^
And that therefore it is most manifest, that Heaven, Earth, and Hell are only
distinguished by a greater degree of happiness or misery; not Locally or any
distance of place.

But that Gods Throne and the Seat of Elect Angels and glorified Saints is a
Place and at a great distance from us, will full easily appear. And that
therefore Angels cannot be here and in Heav^n at the same time, I mean the same
Numerical Angels.

First, I will prove unto you that Heaven i^ not only happiness or content, but
a place, which will ^hu^ ^ppear: (I refer the Reader to the Scriptures in the
Margent.)

1. By Ephesians. ^.3. ^ohn 14.2.3.
plain and positive Scriptures.

2. By Names and Titles given to Heaven Heb. ^.^6. Mat 5.8.
a Kingdom an John 14.2. Isa. 63.15
House, an Luke 23.43. Rev. 2.7.
Eden, or Garden of Pleasure.

3. By the Inhabitants that dwell in Heaven. 1. Spiritual as Mat. 6.9. Ioh.
3.13. 1 Ioh. 5.7.
God, ^at. 2 25.
Angels, Luke. 23.43.
the Soul of just men made perfect. 2. Corporeal; There is the body of Genesis 5
24.
Enoch 2. Reg. 2 11.
Elias and Mark. 16.19. Ep. 1.20.
Christ; and as his body went thither, so there it 1. Acts 3.21.
abides; whereupon Austin says thus, Vbi corpus ibi locum esse necesse est,
where there is a body, there must of necessity be a place. It is evident then
that there is a Local Heaven.

Secondly, Nam quum assumptus in Coelum dicitur Christus; Certe aperte notatur
Locorum Distantia, says Brentius.
Heaven is at a great distance from us, which Brentius concludes from Christ's
being taken up out of sight; they followed him with their eyes so long as ever
they could. It Is at least an 160 Millions of Greenhill on Ezekiel. Vol. 1. p. 104.
miles high from Earth to Heaven; So far it is by the Rules of Astronomers: If
this ascending Line could be drawn right-forward, some that have calculated
curiously have found it five hundred years journey unto the Starry-heaven for
an ordinary Traveller.

Ob. How could the Soul of the converted Thief trace and travel it then in one
day? This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, said Christ.

Sol. Leighs Body of Div. in 4to. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 28.
This was done by the conduct and celerity of Angels that conveyed it. A Bullet
from a Musket flies very swiftly; it will fly an 180. miles an hour, according
to its motion: But the Sun moves swifter, 1160000. miles in one hour. Now the
Throne of God is very much above the visible Heavens; therefore certainly the
Seat of Angels and blessed Souls is at an huge distance from us, It Is in the
Psalm. 104.3.
highest Heavens. Ephesians. 4.10.
Christ is ascended far above all Heavens, says St. Paul. Magirus lib. 2. cap.
2. p. 120.
From the height of the Stars you may guess at the vast distance of Coelum
Empiraeum, which is seeds Beatorum, according to that of Eliphaz; Is not God in
the height of Heaven? and behold the height of the Stars how high they are,
Job. 22.12. Compare now the judgment of Eliphaz with that of Chemnitius.

The second Answer to the Question then is this, which is confirmed.
That whilst Angels are on Earth, Heaven is still their Country, their Home,
their Inheritance: And that a main part of Heaven which is the fruition and
vision of God, Elect Angels may and do enjoy whilst they are on Earth with us;
This is our conclusion, for seeing Heaven is at such a distance, and Angels are
not Omni-present; Damascen. lib. 2. Orth. Fidei cap. 3.
We must say with Damascen, Angeli cum sunt hic Nobiscum, non sunt in Coelo:
Angels cannot be in Heaven and on Earth together; That they are sometimes on
Earth who denies, for here they have appeared by Assumption of humane bodies?
Angels do not then suffer by withdrawing from Heaven, for here they enjoy the
presence and favor of God, which supplies the want of Heaven unto them. Their
condition is so happy here that figuratively they are said to be in Heaven,
Mat. 18.10. The Angels of Christ's little Ones are said to behold the face of
God in Heaven; viz. Their communion with God is not eclipst, God fille^h every
place with his presence: This made Mount Tabor so glorious at the
Transfiguration of Christ. We say then that Elect Angels (not only sometimes,
when they be in Heaven, but always says Christ, namely when on Earth also)
THEIR Angels (by reason of particular attendance) do still continue to behold
the face of God: Elect Angels even whilst they are on Earth with us, have a
fullness of Gods presence and joy, some way Leighs Body of Divin. lib. 3. cap. 7.
answerable to that in heaven which makes them no loosers by this Employment:
Seeing it is an Heaven to Angels to be doing the Dr. Gouge his Guide to God. p.
79.
will of God, and seeing his face, and rejoicing in his Service. For although
they go up and down in their Ministry here below, yet this they perform without
Regret or Distraction; and their happiness is not thereby obstructed: As the
Souls in Heaven are not hindered from happiness by desiring their bodies again,
so Angels continue happy though they be a while from Heaven, their usual home:
Et si foris exeunt, internis contemplationis gaudiis non Privantur, Gregory.
says Gregory most truly: Although for a time they leave their own home, they
want not the inward joys of contemplation. Luke 2.13.
A full Quire of Angels sang Carols over a few ragged Shepherds and their
Flocks; which declares that their absence from Heaven and their attending poor
Worms upon Earth, does not cut them off from their heavenly contemplations and
sweet rejoycings in God. As a General rejoices to be in the Field, retire home
with renewed satisfaction: So Angels short excursions on Earth, do but set out
unto them the Glory of those Celestial Habitations.

Having answered all the Objections that I ever yet met withal, or can
possibly think of; The way is now sufficiently laid out, that we may pass unto
the profitable Inferences of this Discourse, for our further instruction and
edification.

First, Conradus Vorstius in his Index errorum Ecclesiae Romanae; Or Amesius in
his Bellarminus enervatus, do touch at the Errors of the Romish Synagogue in
relation to Angels or their Deputation, yet Dr. Dr. Andr. Willet. Vis Synapsis
Papismi.
Willet (who omits nothing) in his Synopsis Paptismi does write particularly of
them, although so smartly and vehemently, as withal to reject the Guardianship
of Angels; the Romish Errors wherabout are these four.

1. The Papists say that Michael is the Pr^tector and Keeper of the whole
Church of Christ: This we reject for Jesus Christ is the HEAD of Angels* the
Protector and Defender of his Spouse, the Church: All power is given unto him
in Heaven and Earth; He is the Crowned King of aints: It Is true, there are
Degrees among Angels, some are Angels, and others Archangels, but Christ (not
Michael) is the Head of them all, and sole Savior and King of his Church.

2. Romanists do hold that every man has his Guardian-Angel from God; So
Clictoveus, Cuique Hominum sigillatim, and Designatus est Angelus: Doway.
Expos. Genesis 18.16.
And our Doway men affirm the very same; We believe (say they) that this
Privilege belongs not to Gods Elect only. But Heb. 1 14. it is most expressly
affirmed that Angels are to attend the Heirs of Salvation. Scil. Such
Positively, and exclusively; Such and no other, not Reprobate Heirs of
Perdition. Good Angels may have treated with evil men (as with Baalam) And so
the holy Spirit does often suggest good things to them; but all this is for
their conviction and greater confusion at the last: We cannot from hence affirm
that either the holy Spirit, or elect Angels do abide with and watch over them.

3. The Pontificians hold that each man has two Angels allot^ed him by God,
one to vex and punish him, Bucan Loc. Com. de Angelis Loc. 6. Sect. 35. p. 74.
the other to guard and comfort him: But this is absurd, God appoints not an
evil Angel constantly to attend his Elect, and if Satan Depute him, the Elect
Angel set by God will continually expel and vanquish him; So that though the
evil Angels do very often assault the Righteous, yet no one evil Angel can
quietly and constantly be near unto him that fears God: Therefore Satan bad
particular Commission to molest Job for a time; and to give a BUFFET to Saint
Paul: Now a Buffet is a sudden blow or surprise; No evil Angel can long be near
Gods Elect, because Michael is stronger then the Dragon: There is no communion
between Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, Elect Angels and Reprobate; and
there is not a syllable in the Book of God, that speaks of two Angels the one
good the other bad, about a Child of Light.

4. And lastly, most of them hold Invocation and Adoration to be due unto the
Guardian-Angel; and many Arguments they urge to this end, here take the chief.

First, Joshuah fell down before the Angel and worshipped. Josh. 5.14.

We say, Origin. 6. Homil. in Josh.
he Worshipped non an Angel but Christ their Captain: But Origin thus expounds
it, Joshua non adorasset nisi Agnovisset Deum, He would not have Adored, if he
had not known him to be God.

Secondly, Baalam adored the Angel, Numb. 22.31.

1. We say, this might be an exceeding great Reverence, and no Adoration, 1
Reg. 1.23.
as Nathan bowed down to David, where the same word, Shacha, is used.

2. It Is but a weak Argument that is taken from the example of a false Prophet
and Sorcerer, that was accustomed to prostrat himself before his evil Spirits

Thirdly, they urge Rev. 8.3. Dr. Willets Synop. Pap. in the 8. Genesis Cantr.
Quest. 3. p. 395.
I saw another Angel that came and stood before the Altar, and much Odors were
given unto him, to offer with the Prayers of the Saints, upon the Golden Altar.
We answer.

1. Though the Angels should present our Prayers to God, yet it is not in their
own name, but Christ's. Much Odors were mingled with the Prayers, i. e. Christ's
Merits. It follows not that therefore we may Invocate Angels, For the Saints on
Earth may and do invocate God for us, yet are not to be Invocated by us.

2. This place is better expounded of Christ himself, the Angel of the
Covenant, who offers up our Prayers unto God; which is Austins judgment on that
Text.

Fourthly, Genesis 48.16.
They say Jacob seems to pray unto the Angel, Genesis 48. But we answer, He is not
there praying at all, but blessing his Children, and wishing all good unto
them: And in case his Blessing comprehend Invocation, he prays only to God to
bless them, and that his Angel may instrumentally be employed to do them good.

These be the Arguments of Romanists which they sharpen and boast of: For the
Adoration and Invocation of our Guardian-Angel.

We Protestants have many weighty reasons against it, as,

1. Divine Worship is due only to Psalm. 50.15. Mat. 4.10.
God.

2. Heb. 1.^. Aug. de Ver. Relig. Cap. 55.
Angels do worship God; Quod ergo colit summus angelus, id colendum etiam est
ab Homine ultimo, says Austin truly: That therefore which is worshipped of the
highest Angel, the man of lowest degree ought also to worship.

3. Christ is our 1 John 2.2.
Only and Allsufficient Advocate, no need of other Mediators.

4. John fell down to the Rev. 19.10. and 22.9.
Angel, but the Angel suffered him not, saying, See thou do it not, I am thy
fellow Servant, worship God.

5. It Is most expressly forbidden of God: A man would bless himself to think how
Romanists can swallow and digest that Text, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you
of your reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, etc.

Sine Authoritate Scripturaram Garrulitas non habet fidem. Hieronan cap. 1. ad
Titum
Observe first, It Is Voluntary or Will Worship, no where appointed in Gods word;
for which Christ will not thank you at the day of Judgment, but say, Isa. 8.20.
Who required this at your hands?

2. It has in it a show or pretense of humility: No Hook is c^st among the
Fishes without a Bait: It Is common for Vice to go clad in the Robe of humility.

3. It is flatly forbidden; Let not any man (not he in the Porphiry Chair in
his triple Crown, nor any one else) beguile and deceive you in this Point.

4. The Punishment is hinted if you do it, you loose your reward. If you
worship Angels here you shall not sing with them in Heaven. The Papists do know
that this Scripture cuts Davenant Expos. Colos. 2.18 p. 238.
very deeply, and they would fain either evade it quite, or blunt the edge if
they could: To that end,

1. Caranza unworthily reads it, De ijs qui Angulos colunt (instead of Angelos)
that prize and meet in Corners, not in Public Assemblies, well knowing how
much this prace makes against him.

2. Rhemish Annot. on Col. 2.18. Vol 3. p. 540.
The Rhemists say, that the Apostle speaks here against the wicked Doctrine of
Simon-Magus, who affirmed that the Angels both ill and good were Mediators for
us unto God. We answer, Theodoret sufficiently declares, that in that place,
all Wilworship is forbidden, and the Worship of good Angels as well as bad,
what fear or likelihood was there, that the Primitive Christians should be so
unreasonably sottish as to worship the Devil? This therefore is a very Cobwebb
excuse, a very slender and pitiful evasion for such Learned men to offer unto
the World.

I conclude this Point with a Golden Saying of Austin, and an humble confession
of Cajetan, no small one among them.

Honoramus Angelos Charitate non Servitute, Augustinus de vera Relig. cap. 55.
says Austin: We Honor the Angels with sincere love, not servile Adoration.
What shall I say more? Cajetan himself confessing, Certa ratione nescimus an
nostra vota cognoscant: We cannot certainly say, that the Angels know or hear
our prayers: And so far of the necessary confutation of Romish Additions and
Errors about this Point.

Secondly,

1. The great number of Angels.

2. The goodness of God in allottingus such Associates and Tutors.

3. That hence it will follow (as a most probable truth) that Cities, Counties,
Isles, Provinces, and Kingdoms have their particular Angels.

And 4. by the rule of contraries, That perhaps wicked men have their evil
Angels to follow them.

First, It informs us in the vast. number of Angels. Mat. 26:53. Revel. 5.11.
It may serve to inform us in the vast number of elect Angels, seeing every
Believer has one at least to defend him, and upon extraordinary occasions many
troops to guard him, besides those that look to Cities and Provinces, and the
main body all this while is resident in heaven, before the Lamb, Revel. 5. and
Jude 14. do express their multitudes by the greatest and roundest numbers in
use among men: Dan. 7.10
so also Dan. 7. Thousand thousands minister unto him, and ten thousand
thousands stand before him. Heb. 12.12 Pauperis est numerare pecus.
But the Author to the Hebrews ascends higher yet; The innumerable company of
Angels. How surpassing glorious will the Throne of Christ be, when he shall come
riding in the clouds of heaven, Mat. 25.31
and all his holy Angels with him. Not an Angel shall be left in heaven that
shall not attend him. This Doctrine of the multitude of Angels does
marvellously tend to the Churches comfort and terror of her enemies: For how
truly may we say, There be more with us then against us! Thou that have few
friends on Earth, may have many friends in Heaven. Job 38.7.
Job 38. when the morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
for joy. The Angels are there called Stars for their great number and
glistering perfections; They all sing with one mouth, and Nightingale throats,
their Halelujas to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne for ever.

Secondly, 2 In the goodness of God.
it may serve to inform us in the goodness of our gracious God toward us, for
allowing us (who are worms, and no men) the society and tuition of Angels. Lord
what is Man that thou art mindful of him! Tigers and Dragons might deservedly
be our companions, when lo! Angels come and minister unto us, (But of this
subject something In my Spiritual ^ast, on Psalm. 34 8. p. 11, 12.
I have spoken else where): So then briefly the free grace of God does
eminently shine in the guardianship of Angels.

1. In regard of our meannesse and sinfulness, that God should pass over
that, send his Son to bleed for us; and charge all his Servants in heaven and
earth to show tender love and respect to us. Romans 5.10.


2. In regard of Angelical excellency; Psalm. 104 Creat ministros flammam
^g^is; Quia Diaphaenia, Pulchritudine, incorruptibilitateque, Agilitate item,
Celeritate, puritateque, sunt Ornatissimae and Praestantissimae creaturae.
Bullingeri. Deead. 4. Sermon '9 fol. 249.
Angels are in Christ's School of an higher form then man: So when Angels attend
us, it is as if Men (perhaps) should be sent to wait upon the Beasts. Man in his
greatest honor, nour, and advanced on the highest pinnacle of happiness, was,
and shall be very much below the blessed Angels; For even Christ (in respect of
his humanity) was made a little lower then the Angels, Heb. 2.7.

3. In regard of the freeness of this life, it was bestowed on Man unmerited,
undesired; placed on him in the Infancy, yea in the dark womb.

4. The constancy of this favor; Angels must not leave us till Death; We shall
be sure of one Angel at least till we launch into the harmony of millions.

5. This gift is an earnest of further kindness: If one of the Nobility place
Officers and servants of all kinds about a Child of mean birth, it presages he
will breed him up, and make him Heir of all that he has. And thus the Lord
deals with his Elect (as in that notable place Heb. 1.14.) The Angels do
minister to the HEIRS of salvation. Isa. 65.24
The Saints then are joyntheyrs, Coheirs with Christ, Heaven is indeed their
Inheritance; This is the time of their minority: And he that considers this,
that God has sent his Angels to attend and tutor them, must needs conclude,
That certainly God has some further Design, then that his Saints should be
born (and thus bred) only to be under hatches, to be hated and vilified in this
world.

6. And lastly, this is a singular kindness and privilege, that belongs only
to the Elect; He has not dealt thus with all Adams children.

In these respects the glorious free grace of God does appear in the
Guardianship of Angels over us.

Thirdly, 3 That Communities have their Angels. Angeli sunt Principes and
Moderatores hujus Mundi, non futuri. Gerhard. Notae in Heb. 2.5. p. 48.
It may inform us that Communities also (where there be any belonging to the
election of Grace) have their Angels guardian placed by God over them. Has the
Lord care of Oxen, and not Pastors? is the reasoning of the holy Ghost: So say
I, has the Lord care of particular persons (to allot them their Angels) then
much more of all Christian communities and Religious Societies: It is therefore
most probable, that Cities, Shires, Provinces, Islands, Churches and Kingdoms
have particular Angels to be presidential over them, and that each Republic
has an Angel to be its protector: some say that Angels are set over the
several Rev. 14.18. and 16.5.
Elements, for which Scriptures are urged; but Pareus will none of it. Learned
Mede thinks, Medes Diatribae. p. 172.
that there be seven Archangels that rule and govern the whole world, which
also he proves Zech 4.10. Rev. 5.6.
out of Scripture. One thing you may observe, that diverse who do question the
Deputation of Angels over particular persons, do yet believe that Communities
have their Angels that are allotted them. The Scripture is not altogether
silent in this point: Mr. Lawrence of Angels, p. 22, 23.
That place of the tenth of Daniel is famous, where mention is made of the
Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, and of the Prince of Greece; and of Michael
their Prince. So Dan. 10.13.20, 21. verse. The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia
withstood him, and Michael their Prince came to help him. The same may be said
of CHURCHES, which are Communities very dear to God, They have their Angels:
Some of the Fathers were of this mind, and bring those places of the
Revelation, Apoc. 2.1.8.12.18.
To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, etc. which they understood to be
mentioned of the Guardian Angel, much cannot be said against it: And that
place, 1 Cor. 10.11. may as probably be urged, where the women were to have
Power over their heads, because of the Angels. And we may frame an argument
from the less to the greater; Does the Lord take care of Kingdoms, and not
for Churches? If civil Communities have their particular Angels, then much
more, Religious.

Now here that you may see this is no Novel or Heterodox opinion, I shall
spread before the Reader the judgment and assent of very learned Men:

Clemens Alexandrinus says thus, Clem. Alexand in. Stromatum lib. 6.
Per gentes and Civitates sunt distributae Angelorum Praefecturae; The
guardianship of Angels is distributed by Nations and Cities.

Theodoret thus; Theod. 11. Orat. p. 715.
Sicut unicuique nostrum designatus est Angelus; Sic unieuique Provinciae unus
praesertim est Archangelus: As every one of us has (by designation) his Angel,
so every Province his Archangel.

Jerome writing on Dan. Hier onymus apud, Lawrence of Angels, p. 22. Chemnit.
Harm. Evang. cap. 92. p. 1740
10. says thus; Hence it appears that Angels are deputed to the care of
Provinces and Countries.

Chemnitius says thus, Sufficit nobis in hac Regione mortalium hoc ex
Scriptura novisse, quod non tantum Regionibus and Populis, Angeli a Deo sunt
custodes and Tutatores constituti; sed etiam Pii de Praesidio Angelorum, sive
Vnius, sive plurium, certi esse possunt. He says that several Nations and
People have their Angels, as also particular Believers one or more.

Peter Martyr on 1 Cor. 11.10. Pet. Mart. Com. in 1 Cor. 11.10. fol. 151
says thus; Nec vetat quidpiam, ut per Angelos bonos spiritus accipiamus, quos
ex Daniele scimuus Provinciis ac Regnis praefici; quin and Ecclesia illos habet
se tuentes, suique Defensores: Nothing hinders, but that by Angels we may
understand good spirits, who as we know out of Daniel, are placed over
Provinces and Kingdoms; yea Churches also have them for their Guardians.

Bullinger thus; Dominationes, Bullingeri Decad. 4. Sermon. 9. and Fol. 250. and
252.
Principatus and Potestates nuncupari videntur, quod Deus Imperium suum per
Angelorum Ministerium in mundo administrat, suamque potentiam exercet. And
again thus; Apud Danielem inducuntur Angeli Regnorum Principes aut Praesides;
Vt Michael cum Gabriele, Regni Israeliti; Alius autem quidam Regni Persici, and
alius quidam Regni Graecorum. Angels are called Dominions, Principalities and
Powers, because God does rule the world by the Ministry of Angels: In Daniel
the Angels are brought in as having the government of Kingdoms, etc.

Calvin thus; Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 14. Sect. 7. fol. 47.
Caeterum an singulis Fidelibus singuli Angeli sunt Attributi ad eorum
Defensionem, pro certo Asserere non ausim: Certe quum Daniel Angelum Persarum,
and Graecorum Angelum inducit, significat certos Angelos Regnis ac Provinciis
quasi Praesides Destinari. He will not be confident that each Believer has his
Angel; But he says, for certain Daniel declares, that Kingdoms and Provinces
have Angels set over them, as Presidents or Rulers.

Grotius, Hugo Grotius in Annot. Mat. 18.10. p. 314.
who writing of particular Believers, says only, Singulos donare videtur
custode Angelo, writing of humane Societies and Commonwealths, he says thus:
His autem singulis suos attributos esse Angelos ex Daniele, Magno consensu and
Judai and Christiani veteres, colligebant; Illud vero extra omnem Controversiam
ponit Clemens Alexandrinus.

The Ancients, both Jews and Christians gather out of Daniel by joint consent,
that to every one of these certain Angels do belong, and it is put out of
question by Clemens Alexandriuus.

Bucan having declared that each Believer has his Angel-keeper, Bucani Loc
Com. de Angelis, loc. 6 p. 71.
does add this: Idem de singulis Provinciis sentiendum: The very same is to be
thought of Provinces, which he there proves out of Daniel.

Let me add to this some late English Authors.

Paul Bain says, Paul Bain on the Ephesians. page 374.
That Angels have a great stroke in swaying these earthly kingdoms in which we
live: God dothuse the ministry of Angels, and give them a Pre-eminence under
him, and a power in ordering these inferior things: Dan. 10.12. Isa. 37.36
The Angels are therefore called great Princes, Dan. 10. Angels rescued
Jerusalem from the force of the Assyrians, Isa. 37. And an Angel created, led
the people into Canaan, as is gathered by comparing the 20. and 21. of Exodus

Wilson says, Wilson in Christian Dict.
that Angels are present with, and president over, as countries, so Churches.

Mr. Lawrence says, Lawrence of Angels, p. 22.
that Provinces, Communities and Churches have their Angels-guardian, that
clear place of Dan. 10. may suffice to confirm it. I will conclude with the
Testimony of Reverend Mr. Greenhill; Mr. Greenhils 2 vol. on Ezekiel. 9. p. 207.
Angels (says he) have the care of Cities, Kingdoms, and Communities committed
unto them; Angels were employed in the government of the world. Deuteronomy. 32.8. He
set bounds according to the number of the children of Israel. The Septuagint
has it, According to the number of the Angels of God; As if they had the Land
first divided among them, and then the people were settled according to those
divisions: That in Dan. 10. is more clear and full, where the Angel tells Daniel
that he would fight with the Prince of Persia, he would prevent his hindering
their return to Jerusalem: And when he should go forth and leave the care of
that Country, the Prince of Grecia should come, namely Alexander the Great, and
overthrow that Monarchy: Epiphanius says, Five deductious.
Regna and Gentes sub Angelis positae sunt; Thus far Mr. Greenhill. Well, if it
be thus, that Cities, Kingdoms, and Republics have Angels to Protect them,
then five things will follow.

1. That we owe much to them that are dear to God; It is for their sakes that
God assigned Angels to defend any Nation: Believers are the marble Pillars of a
State. The whole ship, and all the wicked Saylors in it were preserved for St.
Paul's sake; If there had been a few righteous men in Sodom, it had not been
destroyed.

2. This consideration may serve to comfort us; If at any time we see the
foundations of the earth out of course, the pillars of Kingdoms to be shaken,
and the wicked striving to bear sway, and trample Religion, Order, and
Government (according to Law) under foot. There are yet in such Kingdoms more
and greater with, then against the Lords People.

3. P. Bain on Ephesians. p. 374.
We must acknowledge then says Bain, That when things are tollerably carried in
these evil Times, that it is not effected without the Ministry of Gods Angels.

4. We must pray to God, that he would cause his celestial Principalities and
Powers to encircle those who sit at the stern, to keep them from lawless
liberty and Libertines, and to incline them to act faithfully and vigorously
for the use of Church and State.

5. And lastly, This may quiet us in the many great mutations and changes in
the frame of civil Administrations: Let us hope the Lord is yet bringing great
and good things to pass for us. Let not any repine and murmr, and hanker
after the Garlic and Fleshpots of Egypt, and turn arrant Unbelievers and
Apostates, as do too many, the more is the pity; Mistrust not the continuation
of Divine Providence over us; God is emptying the Nation from vessel to
vessel, till our filthy dregs be purged out: If the motions of a little
Sparrow be ordered by Providence, then much more the mighty turnings of Nations
and Kingdoms are disposed and overruled by Christ and his holy Angels. In the
tenth of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 10.10.12. Greenhill in Locum, p. 305. and 311.
you read of a wheel within a wheel, and that the wheels were full of eyes
round about. The workings of Providence are very mysterious: By wheels you may
understand all the motions and Turnings here below; And the four wheels are all
the four parts of the world. All things in the world have dependency on higher
causes: The wheels are by the Cherubims; That is, the Angels do move and order
them, next under God: Things may seem to be confused, but the Cherubims are
near unto the wheels, and the Angels have no small influence upon them. The
Lord is Methodicall in disposing the affayrs of the world, for each one of the
Angels has his wheel to govern. (God is the God of Order) each wheel has his
Cherubim; They act methodically, and look to their wheels in their several
quarters. Man is not able to judge of Gods works and ways, which are past
finding out. There is a wheel within a wheel: Ezekiel saw one wheel entangled
in another: Or thus, A wheel within a wheel; one change follows upon the neck
of another; There may be a succession and concatenation of puzling Providence
in the world: Bees make a confused humming, and a thousand cross motions when
they swarm: The little Ants run confusedly up and down and over one another,
yet every Be in the Hive, every Ant on the Mole-hil has his place and work;
There is a sweet harmony in those Commonwealths: So it is among the Nations,
in the midst of confusion, quoad nos, there is exact order as to God: Observe,
These wheels were full of eyes round about. The motions of all causes and
creatures here below is not casual or disorderly as to God: Both the wheels and
Cherubims are full of eyes, they see and know their way, and the work they have
to do: The glorious eye of Divine Providence that never slumbers: And the eyes
of Deus enim per Angelos Regit and Moderatur Orbem; Sicut Dominus per aurigam
Regit and Moderatur Equos and Currum. Corn. A. Lapide ad Apoc. 7.1. p. 143.
Angels are over and in all creatures and all Motions; and in all the sudden
windings and mysterious turnings of the wheels: Things appear to us to be
casual and disorderly, but, There be eyes in the wheels: No motion is
injudicious or out of course to God. These eyes of Angels do sparkle with Divine
luster, they are clear, open, and intent, nothing escapes their observation.
Lastly, see the beauty of Divine providence; All the wheels and Cherubims were
full of eyes; The bodies, backs, hands, and wings of the Cherubims are said to
be full of eyes: So also Rev. 4.8. They are full of eyes within. Man's eyes add
not so much glory and beauty to his face, as these eyes do to Angels and the
wheels: The Peacocks Train (which is full of eyes) how beautiful and glorious
is it when expanded and shaken in the Sun? It is far short of the beauty and
glory of elect Angels, who (as it was feigned of Argus) are full of eyes,
glistering like stars: And the same is affirmed of the wheels, viz. the Acts of
Divine Providence in the world: How blind then, and sottishly perverse are we,
that have not an eye to see these eyes, and patiently to wait and hope, and
expect great things from God, when his set time is come? Well, let the serious
belief of this Truth, that Republics and Kingdoms are overruled and disposed
by Angels, silence and hush all our peevish and mutinous complaints amidst all
our changes, and after all our sufferings: By considering there have been eyes
in the wheels, and that all the cross and rugged providence of our God shall
work together for the good of his Church and People.

As for Cities, that they also have their Angels, why should we doubt, when
Jerusalem was destroying, a voice was heard, Fly to Pella, Fly to Pella! Who
doubts but this was the last summons of her Guardian Angel, calling and bidding
the faithful to depart with him? See Paul Bain on Ephesians. page 374.
Let us see, Isa. 37.35, 36. I will defend this City Jerusalem to save it for
my own Names sake: Then the Angel of the Lord went forth and smote the
Assyrians: Mark, The Angel; It was one Angel, and he went forth, namely out of
Jerusalem, to slay her Enemies: This then was the Angel Guardian of that City
Jerusalem, as is most probable. Great and populous Cities are as it were the
eyes of the earth (as Athens and Sparta were said to be of Greece) and there is
no question but Divine Providence has a special eye upon them for their
preservation, and that Angels take care for them: Witness that excellent
Government, and exact order that is in those gallant Cities, which else would
crumble into confusion and desolation in one hour.

Let London therefore lift up her head, and not be cast down at the foolish
Prophesies of her Astrologers; But know and follow the things that belong to
our peace: The Lord has much honored that City, and made it an Asylum, and
City of Jam Seges est ubi Troia fuit.
Refuge to his persecuted Ministers and People in our late Troubles; many
thousands are therein to God as the Aple of his eye; And therefore we have reason
to hope that the Lord will not remove her good Angel from her.

Indeed Magnificent Cities rebelling against God have been brought to
desolation; As in the case of Jam Seges est ubi Troia fuit.
Troy, Theater of Gods Judgments. cap. 50. p. 407.408.
Niniveh, Babylon, and Carthage; Yea, that great and everlasting City of Rome
(as one calls it) shall become as other Presumptious Cities; A dwelling for
Hedghogs, an habitation of Owls and Vultures; Thorns shall grow in her Palaces,
and Nettles in her strong Holds: The voice of Harpers and Musicians shall no
more be heard in those dwellings.

But as Rome was not built, so neither will it be pulled down in a day; The
Lord is now (as it were) undermining the Walls of that Idolatrous City and Nest
of Images: And our Song shortly will be this, Babylon is fallen, is fallen;
Amen Halelujah! Those evil Angels that are in and over Rome, shall not be able
to shield her from the wrath of God, and the power of his Angels. And so much
of the third thing, that it is very probable that not only Persons but
Communities have their Angels.

Fourthly, That wicked men have their evil Angels. Tertullian says, That
those Lemures were Daemones.
It may inform us, that wicked men have their evil Angels to draw them (on all
occasions) into sin and mischief; For Eadem Ratio contrariorum, If good men are
under the Tuition of Angels, Reprobates are under the power of Devils. The
Heathen did not only speak of Lares, that were good Angels, but also of the
Lemures, or evil Spirits, that vexed and pursued men, and stirred them up unto
evil: Satan is evermore Gods Ape, and in Imitation of his Providence over the
Elect; In a suitable way will he apply himself to his Vassals and Vessels of
Wrath. This evil Angel is permitted by God, but placed by Satan the Prince of
Devils; And I shall easily confess (with Bucan) that as one evil Angel has
molested and plagued many men, and many evil Angels (even a Legion) have
tormented one Bucan de Angel. Loc. 6. p. 71.
. So it is not absolutely expressed in the word, that every evil man has an
evil Angel set over him; And yet it is probable that Satan possessing the
Castle of a wicked heart, will never utterly and willingly withdraw, but leave
(at least) one evil Spirit to secure it: 1 Samuel 16.
Thus a Devil entered into Judas, and Saul was often vexed with an unclean
Spirit. You shall hear what a late Mr. Lawrence of Angels. p. 80.81.
Writer says to this discourse; Some distinguish the Ministry of Devils as to
Vices; Therefore you read of an unclean, a lying, a dumb, and a seducing Devil:
others divide their Ministry according to the Object of it, Persons, Families,
Societies, and States, and therefore Dan. 8.20.21.
quote those places in Daniel, where mention is made of the Kings of Persia and
Grecia, which opposed Michael their Prince; And so also they take that place of
Saint 2 Cor. 12.7.
Paul, There was given to me a Messenger of Satan to buffet me; And that curse
of the Psalm. 109.6.
Psalmist, Let Satan stand at his right hand! There is no doubt of Satan's will
for this Method (which he sees so advantageous for the Saints in the other
Ministry, of which we have treated.) If his power fail him not, if God permit
it, he wants not Diligence, Malice Wisdom, and Instruments for that Work.

Wicked men and Reprobates are Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Cor. 4.4 2. Tim. 2.26.
then in a very sad condition, void of the favor of God and presence of his
holy Angels, but grievously molested and captivated by evil Spirits: The Devil
works in them mightily, they are hood-winkt and besotted and blinded by the God
of this World, led captive by his will, having no power so much as to groan or
wish for deliverance. But now if Satan direct his Angels to Believers, they
dare not, they cannot long abide with them; Their good Angel expels and chases
them away, they soon retire routed and confounded. Here also I might declare
how wicked men have been hanted with evil spirits in most strange and fearful
See Baxters Rest. Edit 2. p. 271.
Apparitions: Sozomen writes of Apelles, a famous Egyptian Smith who was
tempted to uncleanness by a Devil in the shape of a woman. Ludovicus Vives
says, among the Indians in America, nothing is more common then to see and
hear Spirits in bodily shapes day and night: And Sleidan tells of a Popes Legate
that was feared into a deadly sickness, by a strange Apparition in his Chamber.
We read also in the Scriptures of diverse that have been actually possessed of
Devils: Zanchius 3. Tom. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Zanchy thinks it was the very substance of Devils that entered men. Camerarius
and others do show us, that in See Theater of Gods Judgments. 431. to 437.
former times of darkness these things were very usual, although now (blessed
be God) the very Camerarius his Historical observat. lib. 4. cap. 15. p. 288.
Relation thereof is so terrible unto us. The Devil makes a secret compact with
a World, but an open one with Witches and such as have familiar Spirits but
especially some one resorts to them: A Witch gives an Angel of Darkness full
power over Body and Soul for ever; Satan does not thirst for a few drops of
blood from the body, but hereby does contrive and seal the ruin of the Soul:
He does not only (as Porphiry imagined) aim at Honor and Principality, and to
have some to worship him in the world, but he undermines the Salvation of many
Souls: And every Witch is a sworn Vassal and Factor of Hell. And so much of the
second Use.

Thirdly,

First, Banish all slavish and base fears.
Let the people of God be admonished to banish all slavish, improfitable and
sinful fears, seeing Elect Angels are their Keepers. Alexander the Great, was
observed to sleep very soundly one night, when the Enemy was near him, and
being asked how he could do it, he answered, Weems of the Cerem. Law. cap. 9.
p. 39.
because Parmenio waked: So may the people of God lay them down in peace and
safety, because the Vigilant Angels that keep them are still awake; None sleep
so soundly and securely as the people of God. King Solomon slept with sixty
valliant men by his side, having Swords because of fear in the night. But one
Angel is stronger then such a Guard: Angels keep the Elect from Genesis 19.16.
and. 18.12. and 25.7. and 32.1, 2. Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. 1 Reg. 19.7. 2 Reg.
6.16. Exodus 26.1. and 34.24.
many dangers of Soul and body, both in the Curtains of the Tabernacle, and
Wall of the Temple, Cherubins were painted up and down; To signify what
Protection we may expect in Gods Service from the blessed Angels: If the
Pestilence rage in the City. Angels often keep it from the Tabernacles of the
Righteous; yea, the Angels and Stars in their courses do sight for us against
the Churches Enemies: Fear not men, Diseases, Poverty, Death or Devils: But
learn to fear the mighty Jehovah, Let him be your Dread, Timor, Timore, ut
clavus clavo pellitur: Fear is expelled by fear, as one Nail is driven out by
another. Mat. 10.28.
Fear not man whose breath is in his Nostrils, and who can but kill the Body
with Permission; not touch an hair of your head without leave from Heaven; But
fear him, who is able the next Moment, To cast thy body and soul into
Hell-flames, Away then with idle, pannick, and unprofitable fears to which many
are prone. Zeno, Diog. Laert.
being asked why he feared the barking of a Dog? returned this answer,
Perdifficile est hominem prorsus exuere: No man is so stout, but sometimes he
shows himself to be a man in weakness: There are more things says Saepius
opinione laboramus quam Re. Seneca in Epist. 13. Psalm. 56. 2 Reg. 6.16.
Seneca that do affright then assault us. What David said to Abiathar, that,
thy Angel-Guardian says to thee, Abide thou with me and fear not, for with me
thou shall be in safeguard! Hear the Psalmist, I trust in the Lord and fear
not what man can do unto me! Fear not thou Worm Jacob, I will help thee,
says the Lord. All his attributes, all his Angels are engaged for our good:
When Elisha prayed, and saw the Mountain full of Horses and Charriots of fire,
he soon revived his Servants by saying, Fear not, for they that are with us are
more then those that are against us. So then the presence and tuition of Angels
should banish and discard all unworthy and degenerate fears, which shrivel up
the sinews of good Endeavors to secure our selves.

Secondly, Despise not the meanest Saint. Mat. 18.10.
Despise not the poorest and meanest of Gods Children; So our Savior applies
this Doctrine of Angellical Deputation, Mat. 18. Despise not one of these
little ones, for in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my
Father. q. d. Take heed that you do not slight and undervalue the blessed Heirs
of Salvation, on whom the Lord has cast so much honor as to send Angels to be
their Tutors, and on whom Elect Angels do not disdain to attend. Despise not
then the little ones of Christ: Not such as are little in years and stature,
scornfully to think them unworthy of the Seal; Not such as are little in the
world, love Grace in Russet before Vice in Velver; God is no Respecter of
persons: Nor lastly such as are little in gifts and graces; You may not despise
the day of small things, The very filings of Gold are precious; And besides
true Grace cannot be at a stand.

O despise not these little Ones of Christ; Dr. Sibbs Fountain opened. p.
110.111. Vossius Institut. Orat. lib. 4. cag. 7. p. 166.
Why? Because Angels more Glorious Creatures then you do not, dare not; and
Christ more Glorious then they, will not. Angels are willing to tend the
meanest Saint, to provide things needful for us: Therefore says Vossius is
Manna called Angels food, Quia Angelorum Ministerio fuerit Productum: Angels
had a hand in the Production. Well to comfort, and feed, and relieve one
another is the work of an Angel: Shall any one think himself too good to hear
or help any poor Christian? or to settle and resolve his doubts? O the pride of
our Nature! When Angels disdain not to tend and rock little Babes; To visit and
cherish Job full of Sores: What Devilish qualities are Pride and Envy? They
make us to neglect others, advance our selves; we know it was the speech of
wicked Cain, Am I my brothers Keeper? Shall I stoop to him; Flesh and blood
begins to take state upon it: Let us blush and be ashamed of this churlish
Humor, when we see Angels attending poor Beggars and Orphans; and Christ
himself, washing and wiping his Disciples feet! When the great God became MAN,
shall we wonder that Angels should attend the Nature that God had so honored?
rather let us suppose that the Devils left their first Stations, being proud
Spirits and disdaining their Calling; For the good Angels do humble themselves
to this work: What Devilish sins then are Pride, Envy, and Disdain, that stand
a Tiptoe and overlook the poor Members of Christ? The Angels rejoice in the
Salvation of Souls, shall we slight the Image of God? Shall the welfare of
others and their thriving spiritually, or outwardly be cause of joy to the
Angels, and yet matter of trouble and grief to us? Shall we envy the
prosperity of Gods people, and look a squint on their enjoyments? and shall we
dare to scorn and trample on those who are cast down? This be far from us: Let
us rather honor those whom God has so loved, and reverence those whom Angels
attend, You value men for external Pomp, the glory of their Apparel, Chariots,
and Retinue; The Number and Gallantry of their Pages and Servants: O consider
this, that Believers have Elect Angels for their Servitors and daily
Attendants. 2 Kings 6.16.
Poor Elisha had a Mountain full of Horses and Chariots of fire.

Thirdly, Make use of Christ.
make sure of Jesus Christ, who is the LORD and head of the Angels; Him they
worship, and at his disposal are they, Col. 2.10.
Col. 2. The head of all Principality and Power. There is a vast difference
says Lactantius between this Son and other Angels; Magna inter hunc filium
caeterosque Angelos, differentia est. Lactant: Instit. lib. 4. cap. 8.
You must chiefly apply your selves unto Christ, He was that Jacobs Ladder
which touched Earth and Heaven, and joined them both together by his Mediation;
And on him Elect Angels descend upon us, because of our Relation to him: They
attend us as the Kings Daughter, and as the Royal and Loyal Spouse of Christ
Jesus. Clear up then your Ingrafture into Christ and blessed interest in his
Propitiatory Mediation and Merits, if you desire to be assured of Angelical
Attendance. Vt Angeli nostri sint, Calvin. Angeli sine Dei ipsius irradiatione
obire per se Proprium munus intelligentiae nequeant. Pi^rius in Hieroglyph.
lib. 33. cap. 6. Calvin Harmon. Evang.
Christi Membra nos esse oportet, says Calvin: That Angels may be ours, it
concerns us that we be Members of Christ; Which way the Messiah goes that way
go all the Promises and Angels: If Christ be ours, we need not to question the
love of his Servants: Angels says Pierius without a new Irradiation of God
upon them can do nothing: And Calvin in his Harmony says thus; That Promise,
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, does indeed appertain to all the
faithful, but especially to Christ, who as he is the head of the whole Church,
so in his own right he governs the Angels, giving them chargeover us. Let it
therefore be our particular care to get a part in Christ, to be able to say,
Christ is mine; is beter then a Mine of the Gold of Ophir.

Fourthly, 4 Admire and trust chiefly in God.
Let us chiefly admire and trust in God: As Angels can do nothing without him,
so he can do all without them: In the midst of their encampings, eye Jesus
Christ their Lord and Captain, who has all power given him in Heaven and
Earth. If Angels be so strong, so wise, so beautiful, how glorious is God that
made and maintains them? Oh, if these stars of the morning be so bright and
glistering, how full of light and splendour is the Sun of Righteousness? Job
38.7. Mal. 4.2.
All that has or can be said about Angels, should serve as a glass to discover
unto us the glory of God: We do not go about to extol the creature, and
derogate from the Creator; God forbid! Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 14. sect.
10.
Let us hear Calvin; Videmus Christi gloriam superioribus aliquot seculis
fuisse multis modis obscuratam, quam immodicis elogijs Angeli Praeter Dei
verbum cumularentur. We see (says he) that Christ's glory was many ways
darkened in former Ages, by reason of those high praises heaped upon Angels
besides the Word. Therefore St. Paul declared against worshipping Angels, Colos.
2. A sin, it should seem, that some in those purest times were leaning unto:
Now God forbid that this Fly should fall into our box of Ointment! Let us
rather climb up to God by the ladder of his creatures, the uppermost round
whereof is the Doctrine of Angels: How should we join in that Angelical
employment of praising, adoring, and admiring for ever that God whom we love
and honor, and in comparison of whom we must vilify and nullify all things
that we may magnify, omnifie Christ Jesus? Oh that this might be the fruit of
our Meditations on this subject; Trust not in Man, no nor in Princes, says the
Psalmist: So may I go on, Trust not in Princes, no nor in Angels, or
Archangels absolutely, but still in subordination to God: Look not so much on
the Angel Gabriel, as on the glad tidings that he brought: Look not on the
Archangel Michael, so much as Christ his Master. In a word, Look not on any
Angel so much, as Christ the Angel of the Covenant. As a Stranger that comes
to the Courts of Princes, observes the Nobility, the Favorites, and all the
Followers; but yet chiefly enquires for the Prince, and still looks through
them all, to receive a fuller Idea of the King. So it must be here; we may look
upon the Angels and Saints, and admire the image and graces of God in them; but
we must chiefly look at Christ the King of his Church, before whom the Angels
fall down and worship, the 24. Elders piling up their Crowns at his feet. Thus
God in Christ by the Spirit must be all in all with us.

Fifthly, 5 Grieve not your Guardian Angel.
grieve not, offend not your Angel by doing any thing unworthy of his presence:
As it is wondrous humility that Angels will stoop to us, being of a meaner and
inferior nature: so it is mavelous patience, that after so many sins and
miscarriages, they will continue their presence with us. Theophilact speaking
on that Text, Their Angels behold the face of God, Theoph. Enar. in Mat. 18.
has this Observation, Peccatorum tamen Angeli, quasi propter nos confusi,
minus fidentes sunt; neque ipsi possunt tam libere videre Faciem Dei. The
Angels (says he) of them that do sin do even blush, and are ashamed to look
in the face of God, Namely, that they can give no better account of their
charge.

Would you not grieve your Guardian Angel? Chemnit. Harm. cap. 92. p. 1741
then you must do five things, viz.

1. Cavendum est ne tam fidelem custodem, tam amantem nostri Paedagogum nostris
delietis atque inver^cunda pos candi libidine a nobis alienemus. (...) de
Praesidio Angelico, p 724.
Beware of inordinate and libidinous affections, as of Lust, Envy, and Wrath,
that give place to the Devil: Caveamus ne vel sermonibus obscaenis, vel vitae
impuritate hosce sanctos custodes a Nobis abigamus: We must beware, least by
obscenity of speech, and impurity of life, we chase away these holy keepers
from us, says Chemnitius: And we must take heed, says Rivius, least by our
sins and lusts we breed a kind of strangeness in our Angel-keeper and Tutor
toward us: Let us not live as the Sadduces that denied the Resurrection, and
would not believe there was any Angel or Spirit.

2. Take heed not only of open and scandalous sin, but even such as be secret,
and under the view of men: say, Drexel.
Vnus mihi Angelus, unica conscientia, Deus unus; Pro urbe pro orb toto, pro
omnium oculis and auribus. There is one Angel, one Conscience, one God that
sees, and that is as much as if an whole City, or the whole world beheld me.
When thou art alone, or in the dark, and no eye of man can discern thee, know
God and the Angels are spectators and witnesses of thy carriage. Thy most
secret sins are as irksome to the Angels, as smoke to Bees. Vt fugat apes
fumus, and abigit columbas fae tor; Ita Angelum vitae nostrae se gregat Faetens
Peccatum. Basil. Chemnitij Har. cap. 92.
How should these Meditations awe us, when solicited secretly to sin against
God? Cavendum ne coram his custodibus dicamus vel faciamus, quod coram
hominibus honestis pudere posset, says Chemnitius: Let us forbear to speak or
do that before our Angels, that we would not be found doing in the sight of
honest and grave men: A wall may preserve from the eyes of men says another;
Rivius de Praesid, Ang. p. 724.
But whither can thou flee from the piercing eyes of God and his Angels? This
should make us to abhor secret sins, and never to neglect Closet duties.

3. Be not irreverent and remiss in the public Assemblies of Gods people,
seeing many Angels eyes are then and there upon you: Medes Reverence of Gods
House, Sect. 2. p. 18.
Not only your own Angels, but the Angels of others there assembled, besides
the Angels that belong to the whole Congregation. Learned Mede thinks that Gods
extraordinary presence in the public Assembles does consist in his Train or
Retinue of Angels. Psalm. 138. 1. I will praise thee in the presence of the
Gods. The seventy read it thus, (...), In conspectu Angelorum psallam; I will
sing unto thee in the presence of the Angels. The apprehension of Angels
presence will make us sing, and pray, and hear with Devotion. 1 Cor. 11.10. The
woman ought to have power on her head ( viz. to be modestly veyled) Because of
the Angels. Elect Angels are exact and careful observers, and eyewitnesses of
our Behavior and Deportment in the public Ordinances. This was shadowed of
old; for you read in Exodus 31. That the Curtains of the Tabernacle were
pictured full of Cherubims: To signify, that about our solemn meetings, whole
troops of Angels take notice of our carriage. Therefore look to your feet,
when you come into Gods house, I mean your Affections, for there you set your
selves in the presence of the great God and his mighty Angels. Surely if this
were considered, we should be a little more serious in Gods worship; Not sit
unconcerned under the Word, nor casting our selves into variety of sluggish and
irreverend postures as do too many, unbecoming the presence, of Angels shall I
say? Nay even of Men, Ministers, and Fellow Christians.

4. See Bullinger decad. 4. ser. 9 f^o. 252
Let us not grieve our good Angels by thinking of them above that which we
ought: See thou do it not, said the Angel to John, I am thy fellow servant,
worship God. How was Paul troubled, when the Heathen came and would have
sacrificed unto him? Cannot Angels be loved, but they must be grieved? Nothing
is so grievous unto them as to be adored.

5. and solemn Deputation thereto, may be attained. Laetantur Angeli Caelestes
quod vident custodiam suam, quam impendunt in eos qui hereditatem capiunt
salutis, non male esse collocatam; Et quod in Coelo, loco deficientium
Diabolorum, plures recipient sodales, says Chemnitius sweetly: When you reap
good by Angelical attendance, then those blessed Spirits rejoice; for that
their Vacant seats out of which the fall en Angels were cast, are like to be
replenisht with new associates: And so much of the fifth admonition, not to
grieve your Angels.

6. Let us imitate the Angels, 6 Let us imitate Angels.
as in other things, so principally this, of guarding and regarding the people
of God. This speaks to all, but chiefly to Magistrates and Ministers, who are
to be a Fence and wall to the Church.

First, this speaks to all, 1 This speaks to all.
that we should endeavor to imitate the Angels, In Angels service there is, 1.
Sincerity. 2. Integrity. 3. Alacrity. 4. Sedulity. 5. Ardency. 6. Humility, and
7. Constancy. Dr. Gouge his guide, 89, 90.
as in their swift, constant, and most cheerful obedience, so especially in
comforting and protecting the Saints. Angli tanquam Angeli, was the old
Observation; Oh that it might be verified of this Nation! Let all our delight
be in them that excel in virtue: And let us do good to all, but especially to
the household of Faith. Oh let us aspire to Angelical work! We have Angels to
guard us, why should we not be guardians of one another? How should we instruct
the ignorant, reduce the Erroneous, confirm the Weak, comfort the
feeble-minded, and relieve the necessities of the Saints? In a word, on all
occasions take part with them against the violence and oppression of wicked
men? But chiefly,

Let every Christian have one particular faithful friend to watch over his
soul, Two is better then one; Let us consider and observe one another; Let us
watch over one another, and provoke to good works. Inestimable is the fruit of
this course as the experience of Saints can witness. Austin had his Alypius,
Bernard his Gervasius, Basil his Nazianzen, Jerome his Heliodorus, Eusebius his
Pamphilius. David his Jonathan, and Paul his Barnabas, for this end. Among the
properties of a special bosom friend this is the chief; To imitate our
Guardian Angel in watching over us, and not suffer sin to pass unreprooved;
This is true, durable and profitable Friendship. Lastly as good Angels take
part with us against the evil, so we must side and take part with the Church
against all her Enemies: When the wolf comes, all the sheep run together: We
must own the Righteous not only in prosperity, but in their Troubles and
Oppressions from men: Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur, says Tully.
Many use their Friend like a Dial, they pass by him if the Sun of Prosperity
do not shine upon him. Amicos res opimae parant, adversae probant, A friend is
born for Adversity, and to stand by when others forsake one: Such a friend may
be nearer then a brother. Secundus, p. 89
Res inventu difficilis; but being found, he is Angustiarum Solatium,
miseriarum fomentum; a choice support in the time of trouble.

Secondly, 2 To Magistrates.
this speaks to Magistrates; That they especially do imitate the blessed
Angels, and be Defenders of the Faith, and Protectors of the Faithful: Here I
shall declare, 1. That the Godly and Orthodox must by them be protected and
cherished in Gods ways. 2. That the blasphemous and Heretical, (though they
call themselves Saints and People of an high Administration) must not be
protected in usurping the Ephod, dispersing and divulging their damnable
Opinions.

1. The godly, Orthodox, and Peaceable must be protected, encouraged, and
cherished by the Civil Magistrate in well-doing: Magistrates must feed, and
defend, and provide for the flock of God, and be a wall and fence to the godly;
If any do injure them, they with the Angels must take their part. The
Magistrate must provide for their souls, by setting up lights in the dark
corners of the Land, by building and causing to be well repaired the places of
Public worship; By setting up a convenient maintenance for the Dispencers of
the word, by contending for the Sabbath, and subduing all known Prophanations,
by their causing all of all sorts somewhere to hear the word; By defending and
encouraging the public Assemblies of Gods people; by providing for
Provincial and National Councels to be called and held for the preservation
of Truth, Order, and Peace. In a word, by suppressing houses of Rioting, and
all kind of wickedness and profaneness, which gets the upper hand. Then, as
the Magistrates must look to the Souls, so also to the Bodis, Estates, and
properties of men: That Righteousness run down as a stream: That the poor be
employed and maintained: That Corn in plenty be laid up against a time of
dearth: That superfluous Commodities be sent abroad in Ships, and other needful
things brought home in their room: By setting up Judges and Magistrates as at
the first: Exodus 18.21, 22, 23.
That justice may run down by our doors: Finally, that the Nation be able to
defend it self from invasion, or intestine Mutiny: Hear what Dr. Featly his
Sermon, p. 817
one has said to this point; Angels are our Guardians, Magistrates, Parents,
Tutors, and Masters, Keepers in a time of Peace; Generals, Captains, and
Soldiers in a time of War: but if you ask with the Poet, Quis custodes
custodiet ipsos? We answer, Custos Israelis: Isa. 49.23
That God which has said, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
nursing Mothers, will certainly stand by his Ordinance of Magistracy. 'Twas one
of the seditious Laws enacted at Munster; Magistratibus ac Principibus nullus
subjiciatur: Let no man be subject to Magistrates and Princes. There are a
world of these Caterpillars now abroad upon every green leaf, and therefore it
concerns us to be the more vigilant and unanimous against them.

2. See twenty Reasons in Dr. Cheynell of the Trinity, 461. and 480.
Heretics must not by Magistrates be protected in usurping the Ephod, running
unsent, divulging and dispersing their damnable Errors, which will easily appear
by Scripture and sound Reason.

1. By Scripture. Rev. 2.20. 'Twas Thyatira's sin to suffer Iezabel to teach
and seduce the people. Jobs Wife bid him curse God and dye; Job 2.9.
intimating that if he did curse God, he should soon be put to death for his
pains. Under the Law the Blasphemer was stoned to death; And the Gospel says
his mouth must be stopped, Tit. 1.11.

First by sollid Reasons and Arguments.

Secondly (if that will not serve the turn) by Banishment or Imprisonment.

Thirdly, in some extraordinary cases by Death; If the Magistrate shall judge
the blasphemy so heinous. Gal. 5.12. I would they were cut off that trouble
you; A corpore Christi, says Piscator; But Peter Martyr compares with it,
Psalm. 55.15. Let Death seize on them, and let them go quick down into hell.

2. This also may be cleared by sound reason, grounded on the word of God, and
experiences of the Church.

1. No Heresy can thrive, well hatched, but under the wing of pretended piety;
Therefore that must not be a cover to the monstrous brood of error.

2. Qui non vetat, jubet: He that having power forbids not evils, commands
them. Tacit. Hist.
Othoni nondum authoritas inerat ad prohibendum scelus, jubere jam poterat,
says Tacitus; He had not yet full power to forbid an evil, command it he
could. Let fire fall into tinder it needs not blowing; Not hindering an evil
is sufficient Approbation.

3. Deuteronomy. 22.10, 11.
nor to wear a garment of diverse colors, or one made of linen and woolen; all
this God forbad in relation to diversities of worship, and to declare how he
hates an impure medly and mixture in Religion; Zeph. 1.5.
He will cut off those that swear by the Lord and by Malcham.

4. Solomon and most of the succeeding Kings of Judah, 1 Reg. 15.14.
That the high places were not remooved: But it is recorded to the everlasting
honor of good Josiah, That he brake down the Altars and Images of Baalim. 2 Chronicles. 34.


5. The Mr. high ways and hedges, Luke 14.
and compelled men to come in to the Feast: So should Magistrates constrain men
to come to the Word, and give an account where they hear: August. in Luc. 14.
Find not fault (says Austin) that they be haled, but see whether they be
haled into the Sheepfold of Christ.

6. Cant. 2.15.
To catch the little Foxes that nibble the Vine: For pessimi canis ne catulus
relinquendus.

7. Athenians banished Protagoras, and put Socrates to death for dishonouring
and changing their Religion: And Nebuchadnezzar who had newly punished those
that would not worship his Goulden Abomination, being at last convinced about
the true God, Dan. 3.16
Enacted, That if any Man did speak against That God, himself should be cut in
Pieces, and his house be made a Dunghill.

8. The Renowned Examples of Godly and zealous Magistrates, who have opposed
the Inundation of Heresies and Atheism, are very many: Hezekiah and Asa
demolish Idols and stamped them to Powder: Constantine the Great defaced all the
Temples of Heretics, and would not let them Assemble in Public or Private;
Theodosius fined the Lord Deputy an hundred pound if he permitted Heretics to
meet any where, day or night.

9. A boundless toleration would be the occasion of many evils, and a World
of mischiefs in the Church of God; as Atheism, Profaneness, Rebellion, and all
confusion. Tolleration of diverse Religions; like Pandora's Box, is full of
deadly Poisons; From thence, (like the Trojan horse) innumerable and incurable
evils, have issued on the Church of God; Tearing and mangling the Seamelesse
Coat of Christ, and treading under Foot all that is sacred.

You may observe that Heretics go three steps before they come to be Devils
incarnat. 1. They make all callings common; by declaring first against the
Ministry, and next the Magistracy.

2. They proceed and make all days common; by saying every day (which in
effect is no day) a Sabbath.

3. They go on to make all Books common, by Undervaluing the very Charter of
eternal life; And whilst they be taken up with unwritten Revelations, all
sober men are styled Litterists, and Vowalists.

Principiis obsta; crush the Cockatrices Eggs, before they break out to be
flying and stinging Serpents.

10. And lastly, Magistrates must uphold Peace, and Order; But there can be
neither, in a General tolleration. Jerome says, Because Arrius (who was but a
spark of fire in Alexandria) was not quenched, but suffered to Run and spread
in the Tinder of the multitude; he kindled such a fire as devoured almost the
whole Christian world.

Therefore Mecoenas advised Augustus to punish innovators in Religion not only
in regard of Piety, but for reasons of state, and to settle the Foundations of
Civil Government, that else would be shaken.

But here let me adjoyn two necessary cautions.

1. Circumstances in the true Religion may be borne withal: They say, Discords
in Music (binding wise) do increase the Harmony; A Garden is rendered beautiful
by Variety of flours and colors; so in things circumstantiall and that do not
raze the foundation, some latitude must be given to Peaceable souls: Jud.
22.23. ver.
Of some making a difference, says Jude. Call not every Dissent in Doctrine or
Schism in Discipline, by the ougly Name of Haeresie; He is blinder then
Midnight, that cannot put a difference between the Foundation and Tyling or
Painting of the house; between the Garment and the Lace, or Fring.

Therefore if foundationall stones be secured, and all necessary truths
maintained; both Magistrates and Ministers must wink at all Lesser dissentings;
waiting until the Lord shall reveal the rest unto them: Else we shall be of a
Rigid and Ungospell spirit. I have heard of a certain Tyrant,

2. pain of death, either 1. Openly blaspheame Jesus Christ: Nor 2. Suffer
Christians to come unto their Worship, unless such as are Authorized by the
Magistrate to see it: See Weems 1. Vol. 2. Book. Traps treasury cap. 7. Sect. 2
Hildersham on John Lect 38.
Nor 3. So Privately to seduce any Christian from the Faith; to which may be
added, in the fourth place; That if any Christian turn Jew he shall be put to
death.

These Provisos cast in; why may not the poor Jews (that have a veil ore the
head and heart) be permitted to live among us? considering,

1. They were formerly Gnammi, My people, Therefore now Ruchama, A people to be
pitied.

2. They carefully preserved the Scriptures uncorrupted for us; To them first
were committed those lively Oracles; and by them they were transmitted and
brought safe to us.

3. They have bin grievous See Josephus de Bello Judaico. lib. 6. and 7.
sufferers sixteen hundred years, and have groaned under unspeakable miseries;
being Vagabonds over the Face of the Earth to this day.

4: They wonderfully enrich the Places where they are suffered to live, As
Holland, Portugal, etc.

5. They shall undoubtedly be Romans 11.25, 26.
Restored and converted in Gods due time:

6. The same shall be effected, not by Miracles which are ce^sed; Theod. Beza's
Prayer for the Jews.
but by ordinary means; looking upon Jesus (whom they peirced) in the Word.
Lord said Beza. Remember thy covenant, and look upon those wretches for thy
Names sake; Let not us be Instruments of thy wrath against them, But rather
grant that by the Knowledge of thy Word, and our good Conversation, they may at
last be brought home unto thee.

7. They wished our conversion and prayed for it. Cant. 8.8.
We have a little Sister that has no breast, (a plain description of the
Gentiles that had no Ordinance) What shall we do for our Sister in the day that
she shall be spoken for?

8. And lastly. Their conversion will tend very much to the Glory of God and
comfort of his Church; To the completing of Christ Mystical, and the
unveyling of many Truths; God shall then be more purely worshipped; The fullness
of the Gentiles shall come in and so all Israel shall be saved.

Thus you have seen that though Magistrates must protect the Good, and therein
imitate our Guardian-Angels, yet they must not give like Protectiont to Wolves
and Foxes; where yet we have showed, that Dissenters in things circumstantiall;
And the poor Jews should be considered, in order to their conversion.

Thirdly, To Ministers.
This speaks to Ministers, who are Rev. 2. and 3. chap. See Laurentii Homil. 8.
in Apoc. p. 76.
called Angels of the Churches; They are like unto Angels in name and
employment, for they carry Messages from Heaven and Glad-tidings to men; They
ought therefore to shine and sparkle as Angels in sound Doctrine and holy
conversation, and carefully look unto the Flock over which God has made them
Overseers. He that is properly a Pastor has a particular Flock to attend: It Is
likely when the Apostles had command and commission from Christ to preach the
Gospel to the whole World; They accordingly divided their walks, not at all
adventures, but according to the four parts of Heaven; Each Apostle had his
walk, and so each Pastor must have his Flock; It is said the Galathians
received Paul as an Angel of Christ. Gal. 4.14.
Every City and Town must have one Pastor at least to deal out unto them the
bread of life: Angels keep close unto their charge, and so must Ministers unto
their people. If Mothers (being able) do not nurse and suckle their Children;
They are judged proud and unnatural: And much more are those Ministers to be
blamed, that neglect their people and live far from them, committing them to
any one, perhaps a dry Breast. Let our stately and covetous Non-residents look
upon the Angels, who attend their charge as a shadow the body: And oh that we
might see the day, that as every Province, City, and Town has its Angel: So
every golden Candle-stick might have a bright burning Tapor in it; And every
leaden Candle-stick be made a Golden One by additionall means; That every
Gloomy corner may not only have a Minister, but one that is faithful and
watchful. Israel cry aloud, lift up their Voice as a Trumpet, To tell Judah of
her sin.

See Mr. Fenner of Christ's Alarm to drouzy Saints. p. 7. ad 20
Let Ministers be like Angels set over the Churches of Christ, in twelve things.

1. The name Angel, signifies Messenger; God the sender. Let Preacher be sure
of Mission from Joh. 1.6.
God and Commission from men.

2. Angels are Psalm. 104.4.
Spirits, their nature, Communion, Food, Delights are Spiritual Gal. 6.1.
Ministri Ecclesiae dicuntur Angeli, quia ad mandata Dei annuncianda ab co
legantur, and Debent in eodem statu Iustitiae stare, and conversatiouem in
caelo habere Gerhard. Not. ad Apoc. 1.20. p. 13.
every Christian and much more every Minister should be spiritual; A formal and
dead Ministry, is like a Carcass without a Soul.

3. Angels are the highest Rank of Creatures, and the Ministry is (of all
other) the most honorable Function: Such are worthy of double honor as labor
in the word and Doctrine. What ever some do speak in Derogation, and
Vituperation of so high a Function, of old the same man was King and Priest.

4. Angels are Creatures of another World, though they move up and down in
this: So Ministers should not be delving and rooting in this, nor entangled in
the Thicket of Secular Affairs; But their hearts and minds should be in Heaven,
and at leisure for Divine Contemplations.

5. The Angels stand before God, and so should Ministers, to enquire and know
his will, Jer. 15.19. Jer. 15.19.
They must be very much in Prayer, every Sermon should smell of Heaven; And look
like a Child of Prayer: John wept and the Book was opened.

6. Angels are very Mat. 25.31.
holy Creatures; Psalm. 50.16, 17.
unholy Ministers pull down in stead of building up; They make the offering of
God to be abhorred. It is said of Christ, our Type, Caepit facere and docere.
Act. 1. So the Minister must first Do, then Teach, being unreproveable.

7. Angels are winged in Gods Service, and Ministers must be ready pressed to
every good word and work.

8. 2. Tim. 4.16.
Angels are to gather the Elect, and is not this also the work of Ministers?
It Is better to convert one, then civilize a thousand: Ministers are Christ's
Paranymphs, who must not speak two words for him, and ten for themselves.

9. 1 These. 2.19, 20.
Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner; So Pastors in the seal of their
Ministry: Ye are, says Paul, Our glory and joy.

10. The chief charge of Angels is over the Psalm. ^1.11.
Elect, and so the Ministers of the Gospel are chiefly sent to call home, and
build up Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 2 Timothy 2.10.
the Elect of God, and for the perfecting of the Saints; It Is then a very
dreadful thing if any Ministers shall count such the worst of their Flock, as
do too many.

11. Angels do mainly heed their Deputation, Wolves in sheeps clothing enter
the Fold, weary and worry Christ's Lambs. Of all things they abhor idleness,
and the people shall not only have their presence, but pains and sweat, and
tears. The Angels on Jacobs Ladder were some ascending, others descending,
none standing or sitting still: So faithful Pastors are ever stirring,
watching, and contriving (by all means public and private) the peoples good;
I say desiring their good, rather then their goods.

12. And lastly, the Messages of Angels have still been heeded, and so should
the Sermons of faithful Ministers, for such should be received, As an Angel of
God, Gal. 4.14
yea even as Christ himself. They are Ambassadors, and must be heard; of good
tidings, and so should the rather be heeded.

We shall end all with a use of consolation to the Saints; See Dr. Sibs Light
from Heaven, of the mystery of godliness, p. 103.
this Angel moves, marches after thee, ready to counsel and comfort thee,
resolved to stay by thee in the greatest extreamities: Perhaps the time may
come that the world will desert you, and friends may forsake you: You may come
into streights, and no body near you; yet a true Christian is never alone, for
God and his are with him: Kings are never without their Guard, nor Believers
without their Angels. Here is rich comfort for you in health and sickness, in
Life and at Death; For then Angels are most busy to be our convoy to Christ,
and to lodge us in Abraham's bosom; Therefore let us never be disconsolate, let
us never despair, whatsoever our estate or condition may prove; Though our
Carcasses be tumbled and crumbled into Earth, be not dismayed, Angels shall
gather up our bones and dust, not any part shall be missing at that day. Sweet
and mysterious is our communion with elect Angels here, glorious and eternal
shall it be with them in heaven, lauding and praising God so long as the circle
of Eternity shall last.

To wrap up all, here is comfort for you, for your Children, and for the Nation.

1. For your selves, your whole Man shall be shielded from Defendunt nos
adversus Diabolos and impios homines. VVendelin. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 8.
many Dangers; There is a daily conflict between good and evil Angels about
you, but Michael is sure to prevail against the Dragon.

2. For your Children, if they belong to God: Dr. Sibbs ut ante.
In our Infancy, in our tender years (says Doctor Sibbs) we are committed to
the custody of Angels.

3. For the Nation, God has hitherto wonderfully appeared, witness our Peace
and great plenty, That a stranger cannot find the footsteps of War; We trust
a stop is set to that Confusion (in things sacred) which was overflowing the
Land; Therefore let us still trust and wait upon our gracious Father for the
perfecting of our mercies for us, that our good Angels may not depart from us,
and that England Diu desiderata, dulcius obtinentur.
at last may be made a most glorious Church.

FINIS.
The Errata.
IN the Catalogue of Authors, read Ludovicus Vives.

Page 21. for Locos, read Loquutos. p. 25. l. 16. r. Learning and Wisdom. p.
62. l. 25. r. seasonable. p. 84. l. 9. r. mediatly. p 94. l. 2. r. is in. p.
95. l. 17. r. commander. p 98. l. 24. for have r. hate. p. 148. l. 28. dele and.


