A DIALOGVE, OR, Rather a Parley between Prince Ruperts Dog whose name is
PVDDLE, and Tobies Dog whose name is PEPPER etc.

Whereunto is added the Challeng which Prince Griffins Dog called Towzer,
has sent to Prince Ruperts Dog Puddle, in the behalf of honest Pepper Tobies
Dog.

Moreover the said Prince Griffin is newly gone to Oxford to lay the wager, and
to make up the MATCH.

depiction of Roundheads and Cavaliers, setting their dogs on each other
Roudhead cuirr
Roundhead dog To him pudel.


Cauilier Dog
Cavalier dog Bite him* peper




Printed at London for I. Smith, 1643.

A Dialogue or rather a Parley between Prince Ruperts Dog whose name is Puddle,
and Tobies Dog whose name is Pepper, etc.
Prince RVPERTS Dog. WHat yelping whindling Puppy Dog art thou?

Tobies Dog. What bauling Shag-haird Cavalliers Dog art thou?


Pr. Rob: Dog. Thou ar a dogged sir or Cur, grumble no more, but tell me thy
name.


Tob: Dog. I was called Tobies house-dog, the Dog which Walker the Iron-monger
so often commends for a mannerly and well bred Dog in his several
sub-lectures; my name is Pepper.


Pr. Rob: Dog. Though your zeal be never so hot, you shall not bite me Pepper.


Tob. Dog. He bark before I bite, and talk before I fight, I hear you are
Prince Ruperts white Boy.


P. Rub: Dog. I am none of his white Boy, my name is Puddle.


Tob. Dog. A dirty name indeed, you are not pure enough for my company, besides
I hear on both sides of my ^ares that you are a Lap-lander or Fin-land Dog, or
truly no better then a witch in the shape of a white Dog.


Pr. Rob: Dog. And thou art a Round-headed puppy, a foolish snarling Cur, that
does baule and rail wheresoever thou come: do thou presume to confront me
with thy ignorant spirit and prick-eares?


Tob. Dog. Thou art a prosane Annimall; Tobies Dog is of a better, and more
reformed condition.


Pr. Rob: Dog. A halter would reform thee exceeding well, for thou art a cur
that wilt bark against all people, nay thou art a rebellious dog, and wilt
bark against the King, thou do make a stir and a stink wheresoever thou
come, thou art Walkers Dog rather then Tobies Dog, thou and thy Masters
deserve nothing but a halter.


Tob. Dog. Puddle; Come not near me; for I can grin and bite and that boldly,
though thou look like a Lion with long shag hair, yet I fear thee not bragging
Courtier, thou popish profane Dog, thou art more then half a devil, a kind of
a spirit that does help Colleges to their lost. spoons and two-eard pots,
when they are lost or stolen.


Pr. Rob. Dog. Thou art a kind of spirit too, do thou not bewitch the
Sectaries to bring in Salts, Whistle, and Bodkine into Religious Lotteries,
from whence I fear they shall draw nothing but blankes for their zealous
affection toward the cause.


Tob. Dog. Thou do belie the zealous brethren who being provoked and stirred
up by the Spirit, thou would needs make me the perswader to this religious
liberty: alas I know nothing of City affairs, I trouble not my head with such
matters, nor do I speak Heathen languages as you can do.


Pr. Rob. Dog. Sirrah, I am none of your litter nor kind; I scorn to come in
composition with such a baso dog as thou art;


Tob. Dog. You are of Brackley breed, better to hang then to keep.


Pr. Rob. Dog. No Sirrah, I am of a high Germain breed;


Tob. Dog. Thou art a Reprobate, and a lying Curre; you were either whelpt in
Lap-land, or else in Fin-land; where there is none but devils and Sorcerers
live.


Pr. Rob. Dog. But thou have been a friend to Tub Lecturers, there is a number
of Fellows that will expound by private spirit, and think the best color for
their knavery is Green, and yet they have no more languages or learning then
thou have, but they are dogged duntes that will bark and baule in a Pulpit,
did not thou infect Hunt the Prophet and made him rave and talk, I will not
say preach, until the Roast-beefe be burnt upon the Cooks spits and be almost
one a clock.


Tob. Dog. I deny thy words, for while he is preaching I am in the chimney
corner sleeping, I hear not a word nor care for hearing any: but it is well
known that when the Kings Counsel are persuading His Majesty to an
Accommodation with his Parliament, thou being an enemy to peace and all the
Parliaments good purposes, comst in, and presently they speak of blood and
war, and the destruction of London, as if they were bewitched by thy presence.


Pr. Rob. Dog. Nay if you talk of bewitching, who made the Apprentices and
that great dogged tumult that hurried to West minster grinning and snarling at
all they met, and barking aloud, no Bishops, no Bishops? which put the King at
White Hall into such a fright, that he presently left the City full of nothing
but zealous Tobies and factions Sectaries, and so went to York to be more safe
and secure from the rude company of pricke-eares: did not thy dogged spirit
transmigrate into their plump fat bodies, and made them run like a kennell of
hounds upon a hot sent crying they knew not what.


Tob. Dog. I was ignorant of their purposes, and staid behind, for had I been
willing to have been seen in the action, I would have run before them as
dogs use to do, but I remember I kept house all that day so melancholy, and
was very sorry to see my masters so mad: But since you cast dirt at me, I
will fling you a bone to know, it is known that at Edghill you walk invisible,
and directed the bullets who they should hit, and who they should miss, and
made your Mr. Prince Rupert shott-free, and it is known that you would rather
hear Mass at Oxford, then come to any private prayers or conscionable
Sermons: And at the delivery of the City Petition, you showed your self a very
malignant Dog, and trod on the Kings Majestys toe, and your Mr. Prince Rupert
so earnestly, as if you would have said that you like not that the King should
return to London without his Army, and thus thou have proved thy self a
Cavalliers Dog.


Pr. Rob. Dog. Sirrah lick-dish, incense me no more, for though my shaggy hair
be white, it is not silvered ever with age, it is my natural color, and I am
strong enough to tear thee in pieces, but I Will bite thee deep with true words,
If I should as thee how thou live, should I not find that thou art the
Sectaries familiar Dog, and what are thy Master, but necessitous and full of
debts, thou pickest up crumbs under them, and they gain all under the service
of the cause and Commonwealth.


Tob. Dog. Sirrah Dog: I serve good honest men, such as be Colonells,
Captains, and chief Commanders.


P.R. Dog I think you are any bodies Dog you lick up crumbs under any round
table, you have privilege to come to the house of any of the princes of the
Militin, and there to know bonee and get scraps, Some of your Masters were not
worth to my knowledge three years since, no above 5. l. if all their debts were
paid, that now have 3. l. a day, others 40. s. a day, others 20. s. and some
15. s. a day; how many of them before this business broke in a morning, and
compounded within a month for a noble in the pound: and do thou poor silly
Dog think that these noble Princes will once hearken or conclude to a peace; if
they can have such pay and such gains for nothing: many of them not worth a
dog; and now who but they and their wives, that appear in their several and
changeable suites of apparel, and shine like Jove and Juno.


Tob. Dog. Sirrah, let my brave Masters alone; tell me not what they were, but
what they are: They are now brave Gentlemen: leave your railing, or else I will
send but a word of my mouth and I will have a Regiment of Red-coats, and a
Troop of horse, that shall quallifie your dogged humor, and make you speak
better words of them.


Pr. Rob. Dog. I care not for your leather troops of horse, nor for your
red-cotten fouldiers; I can match your best Troops when you dare and where you
dare; I would have thee know that I serve and attend upon a noble King, four
Princes, three Dukes, two Marquesses, fifty Earls, 200. Lords and Vicounts,
300. Barons, 700. Knights, and 1100 Esquires and Gentlemen, besides common
Soul^iers: These are no broken Lords, nor cracked Citizens; they serve in person
and without pay, nay they bear their own charges, all out of love and loyalty
to their K. and Country: But few of your Masters durst ever show their faces
till this reformed time; but held down their heads like bul-rushes; and walked
up and down by night: how many hundred do you think, Mr. dog, that his Majesty
has now in a list or a catalogue of their names of such stout Finsbury field
soldiers, and weak conditioned men in estates, above 300 of them I will assure
you; whom his Majesty will one day remember.


Toby Dog. Good Puddle, be not so envious and so malicious, thus to r^ile of
them you do not know, be not still of that dogged mungrell disposition good
Puddle.


Pr. Rob: Dog. Thou have a good memory, though thou have but short hair, to
remember my name: yet some call me Boy, but my name is Puddle: And I can do
strange things, and change my self into many shapes: I come into your City
diverse times, and hear the common votes of the vulgar, then I go to the
Ordinaries and take notice what news passes there for current, any one may
almost discover me if they do but touch me, I do to grumble and am of the
dogged disposition, and if any one observe or hear a Gentleman call for a dish
of broth, and his Ordinary of Rumps and Kidneyes, they may be assured it is I;
The other night for giving of two pence to a red bearded fellow one Mr. P^a^es
who was made Corporal for that night, who then stood near the Exchang, I had
the word given me by him, and I past freely: Another time I past by the watch
like a Fiddler, and was never examined; and so likewise for a small matter at
your Court of Guards, for all your vigilant Sentinells.


Toby Dog. O intolerable; if the City be not looked too better, we shall be
all betrayed.


Pr. Rup. Dog. Nay more then this can I do, and have done, at the Iast
general meeting at Guild Hall, I hired Arthur Shuttle a Procters Clerk to go
into Long-lane and procure an Aldermans gown, and come to Guild Hall, though
it was so narrowly looked to, to get in, and there by his means to beget a
faction, and so a tumult, and at length to have fallen to blows amongst your
selves, that our Army in the mean time might have come in and played their part
to the purpose. It was I that caused that mercinary fellow Robert Blague to
write letters of intelligence between both Armies, and for his reward he had
50. pound a month from each Army: I persuaded Blague to give intelligence to
the Earl of Essex in what part of the army the Kings best Regiment was placed,
and in what place the Lord General would be at the fight, and where the Kings
Standard would be placed. Then on the other side I put it into the heart of the
Kings soldiers after the first fireing to fall to pillaging and plundering the
Earl of Essex his Coach and Wagons where all his treasure was to pay his
soldiers, which the did, and in plundering the Coach, there was the miscreant
Blagues letter found with his name at it of the former intelligence, which was
taken and carried to the King, which the King saw and read, for which Blague
had his just reward, even a rope; with chains to boot.

I advised Mr. Maston who is the Earl of Carnarvans Chaplain to make that book
which our army do so hug and laugh at, called the Complaint to the House of
Commons: I put it into some of the malignant Citizens heads, as your Masters
call them, to surprise the Tower, and to get all the Ordnance into their
possession: but that failing, I have showed them another stratagem how to be
revenged on the City for their Robellion; you may see Pepper what power and
skill I have in magic Spells; Nay though the Gentleman did preach not above a
week before the House of Commons, but his Sermon being not liked, and he little
or no thanks bestowed on him, I wished him to write that invective book: I have
done diverse of these exploits, and have many more plots yet undiscovered.


Toby Dog. Learned Mr. Puddle do but reveal some of these plots to me and I
will ever be your creature.


Pr. Rup. Dog. Pepper, take but your oath that you will not discover it till
such a time, and I will:


Toby Dog. I will swear any thing you will have me to do.


Pr. Rup. Dog. You shall take the new oath which our Cavalliers do give to all
the prisoners which they took at Cicester, before they go away from Oxford
which if you do, I will then reveal the plot.


Toby Dog. I have taken i^, and sworn to the oath.


Pr. Rup. Dog. Then this is the plot. The next high or spring tide, when the
moon is at the full, will your City be drowned, and I will tell you how vand
which way: The City malignants do intend to under-mine the Rider of Thames, and
it is to be begun on Seuthwark side, and when it is undermined, to lay in 1000.
barrells of Gunpowder, 500. bars of Iron, and 600. tun of Stones; and when
the tide or water is at the highest, then to set fire on the Gunpowder and
blow up the River and so drown the City and all the Roundheads; and for the
Malignants they shall have all notice of it before; and shall be known by their
white tybonds about their rists; only I have given John Tailor the Water-Poet
notice of it, to save himself by his boat, or be in some other place at that
time and season, because he is my Masters Uncles ancient servant, and a good
Fellow.


Toby Dog. I begin to halt in my opinion, and would be willingly converted, I
get nothing here but at great men's houses, and now Lent is coming I shall lose
my fat, amongst the Roundheads; for they cate up all, and leave me nothing
unless I can fill my belly with the smell of meat, they are expounders and
Teachers, but I desire to be better sedd then taught.


P. Rup. Dog. Then follow my counsel, change your affections, and when you see
a Roundhead, bark at him as he walks along the streets.


Toby Dog. So I may have by brains beat out.


P. Rup. Dog. Then convey your self down to Oxford, but first you must do as I
instruct you, and recant your errors, and both say and do as I instruct you;
and I will give you an invisible shape, so that none shall see you if you
please.


Toby Dog. I am your servant to run at your command.


P. Rup. Dog. First you must deny all Roundheads.


Toby Dog. I deny and defy all Roundheads.


P. Rup. Dog. I defy all Tub-lecturers.


Toby Dog. All Tub-lecturers I defy.


Pr. Rup. Dog. I will bark against all Conventicles, and never love any
Brownist or any of the zealous Brethren, but from the teeth outward.


Toby Dog. I will always be Inapping and snarling at them.


P. Ruperts Dog. Now confirm it with an Oath in blowing your nose backewards,
and letting a fart, and say a fart for all Sectaries.


Toby Dog. I will strain hard but I will do it, there is a fart for them all.


Pr. Rup. Dog. But I gave you no command to stink.


Toby Dog. That makes the Obligation the stronger: is there any thing more to
make me a perfect Cavallier.


Pr. Rup. Dog. Yes, you must be beholding to a disguise, for if you be a
Cavallier you must wear long hair, I can help you to the wool of a
Sheepeshead which will serve you very well for a Perewigg, and then I will
present thee to my Master for a new and round, sound Cavallier.


Toby Do. Get me my disguise, my mind is changed already, let us be friends,
For now old Tobies Dog does think it better,
To change himself to Cavallier Pepper.

The Challenge which Prince Griffins Dog called Towzer, has sent to Prince
Ruperts dog whose name is Puddle, daring him to meet him at the Parish Garden
this present Lent to try a combat before the Worshipful the Bears, who are
appointed to be their Judges in that Case.
THou worm of Wickedness, fritter of Folly, spawn of doggednesse, and piece
of mungrell stuff; in regard of thy base grumbling words and bawling against
thy betters. Besides that, is honest Pepper Tobies Dog your match, no, he is
too mild for thee; thou should have given notice of your Treaty and discourse
to me who am thy equal, thou should have found enough of me, for I will have
thee know, that I eat as good Rumps and Kidneyes as ever thou, base cur do:
when I have you at the place appointed, I will so rump you, and so frump you,
that I will leave you never a rumpe nor yet a kidney, no not with a heart as
big as a hen or chickins: I do now with open mouth defy thee and all thy
proceedings, and do challenge thee to meet me at the place before mentioned,
there will I fight, tug, and tear thee in a single combat, where I mean to
read thee in pieces, and be revenged on thee base cur. And although I hear thou
art impenitrable and likewise besmeared over with inchaunted oil, so that no
weapon, buller, nor sword can enter thee to make thee bleed; yet I have teeth
which I have newly whetted shall so festen and tear your German or Fin-land
hide limb-meale, and then flea thy skin and hang it on the hedge, and give thy
pomperd flesh to those Judges which we are to fight before (namely the
Worshipful the Bears,) to satisfy their hungry mawes this Lent; let me hear
your dogged answer, or else I will proclaim thee coward in print, and set thy
name upon every whipping post and pissing place, for all the dogs in the Town
to lift up their legs to piss against: Expect no favor from me, nor will I
from you: I will end the difference, I will have no Outlandish cur domineer in
our Land. So says your surley foe Towzer, and servant to Primes Crissin.

FINIS.

