THE RIGHT AND LEGAL CHVRCH-WARDEN.

Declaring and expressing their lawful admittance unto the said office by the
choice and appointment of the Lord Major and Aldermen of London, the Majors,
and Bailiffs of Cities and Corporations and by the Justices of peace in each
County through England, so that they may be legally authorized without any
future dependence on the Prelates.

In a Petition exhibited with all due respect unto the right Honorable the
Lord Major and Aldermen of London.

By Rich. Dey Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill at the Sign of the Bible in Wood-street,
1643.

The right and legal CHURCHWARDEN.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Major of the City of London, and the right
worshipful his Brethren the Aldermen of the same. The Petition of Richard Dey
Clerk, etc.
WHereas the long abuse of some ecclesiastical laws (the remedy whereof we
find to be difficult, especially the same being managed by corrupt persons,
whose abusive practices are so much the worse by how much the more power and
authority such persons have to disburden their Malignant disposition either in
Church or Commonwealth) by the discords and distractions of the Church have
produced many distempers and disturbances in the Commonwealth (which tend to
destructive effects, if not warily and timely prevented;) so that the abuse of
such Laws by such abusive persons, having already effected so much evil, is
very likely to produce much more (which thoughts are sufficient instigations to
stir-up every good Subject in his place to use his utmost endeavor to hinder
the growth of so great mischief.) And forasmuch as we find it so exceedingly
difficult not only to rectify old bad Laws degenerated into worse customs,
but also to obtain any better new, we have the more reason to reflect our
thoughts upon the persons who are to have the management thereof, which by
custom and constitution of some offices may be more changeable from bad to
better persons, who like good Bees may gather the honey from those flowers of
Law now in force, where formerly Spiders have gathered poison, that so the
venom of every bad custom may be mollified by the dexterity of those that
have the guidance. And whereas there is an happy concurrence in the civil
government of this City by the blessing of God and special care of good
Citizens, in their late more then ordinary regard, according to their right and
privilege to choose good and well-affected Aldermen and Common Council men,
so not only the said Common Council and other Governors will be much
strengthened and well assisted, but also the general unity and unanimous
concurrence of this whole body politic will be marvellously augmented, if the
like industry and special care be had, that none but such as are very well
known to be solidly discreet and well affected m^n be chosen and nominated to
that ancient, commendable and very useful office of Churchwarden; an office
which as it is much countenanced both by the common Statute and Ecclesiastical
Laws yet in being; so has it exceeding much influence upon the publick-weal,
as relating both to Church and Commonwealth and concerning all men's Religion,
persons and estates, whether rich or poor in every Parish.

To this end therefore your Petitioner is submissively bold to present unto your
grave wisdoms his desire, that the good Statute enacted by Parli^ment in the 43
year of Q. Eliz^beth of happy memory, 43. Eliz. c. 2.
entitled, An Act for the relief of the poor, may be put in due execution, as
concerning the nomination of Church warden^ and Overseers, who are to be
nominated yearly in Easter-week or within one mon^ after Easter, under the hand
and Seal of two or more Justices of Peace in the same County, whereof one to
be of the Quorum dwelling in or near the same Parish or division where the
same Parish does lie, and under the hands and Seals of the Majors, The
subtilty and audacious boldness of Prelates to make a Canon against a Sta^ute
contrary to 2^. H. 8 c 1^ and to take that opportunity the Kingdom being full
of business and the Parliament unwilling to offend and dis^lease the new King o^
wrangle with the Clergy, and to make it so plausible that ^e would willingly
obey it.
Bailiffes or other Head-officers of every Town and place corporate, and City
within this Realm, being Justice or Justices of Peace, and likewise under the
hand and Seal of every Alderman of the City of London within his ward, as by
the said Act more at large may appear (though it have bin much neglected, and
in that point long disused, by the subtle practices of the Prelates, who
within a year or two after the making thereof, viz. in the first year of K.
James of famous memory, made and ordained a Canon in their Synod or Convocation
at London 1603. That all Churchwardens or Questmen in every Parish shall be
chosen by the joint consent of the Minister and Parishioners if it may be, but
if they cannot agree upon such a choice, then the Minister shall choose one,
and the Parishioners another, and without such a joint or several choice none
shall take upon them to be Churchwardens, etc. Can. 89. by which crossing
Canon the practice and custom of the said Statute is nullified, and therefore
the Petitioners desire is, that the said Act may be so put in due execution in
point of nomination of the said Churchwardens and Overseers, that whether they
be chosen by the major or minor part of Parishion^rs or other wise by the
Minister, yet by the advice and assistance of the Common Council men of the
several Parishes they may be approved and nominated as aforesaid by each
Alderman in his ward under hand and Seal according to the tenor of the said
Statute, and that none may be so nominated, who are not known to be of sound
discretion and well-affected.

And your Petitioner shall be the more engaged to pray for a blessed success,
both of this, and other your pious endeavors for the good of Christ's Church
and people, etc.

Now concerning the ground of this Petition two things are very considerable,
1. Whether this Statute be in force. 2. Whether this be the true sense and
meaning of it.


1. This Statute being apparently the same in substance (only amended, enlarged
and explained, but very little changed) with another of the same title and
nature, made the 39 year of her reign, and made only to endure till the end
of the next Session of Parliament, which was in the 43. year of her reign, at
which time instead of reviving it again, this was made out of the other, and
made likewise to endure no longer then to the end of the next Session of
Parliament, which was in the first year of King James of happy memory, at
which time the Prelates made the 89 Canon, and the Parliament, cap. 25.
continued this Statute with an addition to the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament, and the third of King James, being but the second Session of
the same Parliament in the first year, so the next was in the seventh year,
and in the 21. year it was (with an addition made 10. Jacobi. and another then
added further) adjudged ever since the Session of Parliament in the seventh
year, to have bin of such force and effect as the same was the last day of
that Session, and from thence forth until the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament, which was in the first year of King Charles, and so after so
often continuing it was lastly revived in the third year of his Majesty King
Charles that now is, and whom God long preserve and so remains in force (or
also a great number of other Statutes are out of force, which together with
this were revived, 3. Caroli cap. 4.) to the end of this Parliament, which God
of his goodness bless and prosper to the stablishing of many more good Laws.

2. Now as touching the sense, the only doubt that is or can be taken
concerning nomination is whether the meaning of the first full period be that
the Church wardens, and four, three or two householders to be nominated
yearly, etc. shall be called Overseers, or that the four, three or two
householders only to be nominated, as aforesaid, shall be called Overseers,
now if the words should be taken this latter way, the sentence would be
nonsense, leaving out the Churchwardens from any construction with any verb,
and so the words following, They or the greater part of them would only have
relation to the four, three or two Householders, whereas they must needs relate
unto the Churchwardens and Householders both, and therefore it must needs mean
that the Churchwardens and Householders, etc. to be nominated, etc. by two
Justices, etc. shall be called Overseers, etc. And they or the greater part of
them shall take order, etc. and so it follows accordingly, by the said
Churchwardens and Overseers, or the greater part of them; but a little
further in the Statute it makes all clear and undeniable, that the nomination
is meant of Churchwardens, as well as Over seers particularly so called, i^
these words, which said Churchwardens and Overseers so to be nominated, or
such of them as shall not be l^^ by sickness, etc. shall meet together at
least once every month in the Church, etc. And again a little further it
follows as plainly; Shall pay and deliver over to the said Churchwardens and
Overseers newly nominated and appointed, as aforesaid; and yet further in the
said Statute, it follows more plainly and express^ly thus; And every of them
respectively within their several limits, wards and jurisdictions to execute
the ordinances before mentioned concerning the nomination of Overseers, the
consent to binding Prentises, the giving warrant to levy taxations unpaid, the
taking account of Church wardens and Overseers, etc. So that this being so
plain and manifest, that no man can deny it who has out 5. whole senses I
shall not need to add a word more for this, but only that which follows in
the Statute (which I hope will be a motive to the granting of this Petition)
That if in any place within this Realm there happen to be hereafter no such
nomination of Overseers, as is before appointed, that then every Justice of
Peace, etc. and every Major, Alderman and Head Officer, etc. where such default
shall happen shall loose and forfeit for every such default five ^u^i^^ to be
employed to the relief of the poor of the said Parish, etc.

A short touch of the nature and office of Churchwardens.
IF w^ would truly understand what a Churchwarden should and ought to do, are
must consider them ^uch and ^^ture of his office, he is now called guardianus
^^cclesi^, ^^^den, neither and defender of the Church and Church-goods, (...)
aedituus qui saor^ adibu^ praeest, one that has the rule, oversight and care
of the public place a pointed for Gods worship, and such things as pertain
ther^^, and although the Arch-Prelat^^^. York B^ Williams would persuade us,
that he is only the Bishops proper Officer, Holy Table, page 78. (as indeed,
they have lately under the tyranny of the Prelates been shamefully abused
rather, as if they were their swornely ^^ff^s then any authorized
Church Governors*) and that as the Archdeacon is the Bishops eye (no marvel
then if the Bishops be blinkand^^ so the Churchwarden is only the hand of the
Bishop to put all his mandaies in execution, Holy Table, page 80. yet it should
seem that his office is of far more excellency, as entrusted by the people
with all the Church and Church-^oods, and the Ministry thereof, and to stand
for them and their right in the ministry and ordinances of Christ against the
Pope, the Prelates, the false Patrons, and the lewd Priests, and that even by
paction or covenant and agreement with the very first founders of Churches, who
(as appears in the Canon Law) sometimes would not build Churches, except they
and their successors (whom in charity they hoped would prove as godly and
religious as themselves to withstand the incroaching Prelates who fois^ed in so
many lewd Priests) might have the nomination and putting in of one Minister or
Rector so called, and the very Popes Canons allowing in every Church small or
great Rector and religiosi, a Parson and other Clergy men, and elerici duo ad
minus in Ecclesia esse delent, that at least two Clergy men ought to be in
every Church, Gratian^ deeres. par. 3. a^ confecr. did. 1. fol. 424. ad marg.
And likewise our own Service book (which I know our la^so^^ love so well, that
for it they would hazard all their benefices in England, not out of truth and
devotion, but that thereby they may keep under in bondage and drudgery their
five-pound journy-men) even i^ (which they say is stablished by Parliament)
allows in all Churches in England (for the book is generally imposed) Pastors
and Curates, R^^n. to Priv. Bapt. and the Curat of every Parish (besides whom
the Patron will f^^d a Rector) shall diligently upon Sundays instruct and
examine so many children of this Parish, Pubr. of Confirm. and yet be cannot be
the Parson, (who in all law and in common speech is another title, and another
power and privilege) So I by these Gardians or Wardens, who are in every
Parish at least two, with consort of the people should nominate the other upon
every lawful vacation, which is only 1. by ^^ath. 2. By legal deprivation. Or
3. By voluntary resignation or departure to another living, although indeed the
Bishops from the peoples commendation had the legal approbation and
admittance, as to whom it belonged to see that no ignorant, unable, unworthy,
or unfit person should through the peoples ignorance be brought-in by
friendship, Churchwardens may keep out any Parsons journy-man, for not the
Parson, but the Bish. has power to put in or put out a Minister, eve the ^urat
should n^^ come in by the Parson.
flattery or any sinister me^res: and therefore the nature of this office being
such, as likewise to be a Warden in t^me of the vacancy of a Rector: I find it
committed to the care of these Wardens by Archbishop Parker, and the Synod at
London, 1571 Aeditui nulit n^ nec Rectorem, nec Vicarium reciptent ad
ministerium Ecclesiae suae nisi quem Episcopus institutione sua approbaverit
and in possessionem illius Ecclesiae mandato suo miserit, nec Parochum
recipient nisi literis and sigillo Episcopi nominatim i^i Ecclesiae
commendatum. page 18. That the Churchwardens shall receive no man, neither
Parson nor Vicar to the ministry of their Church, but whom the Bishop by his
institution shall approve, and by his mandate put into possession of that
Church, neither shall they receive any Curat, except he be commended to that
Church by name under the hand and Seal of the bishop, nay even the Prelates
own chief Canons at their Synod at London, 1603. (For I hope I may be allowed
to cut off Goliahs head with his own Sword) do not only give leave, but
express command, That neither Every beneficed reacher being enjoined by the 45
Cano^ to preach one Sermon every Sund. and more they will not do except they
be paid the rest of the day the Churchwardens have power to admit another even
by this Canon, for if they may reject they may admit.
the Minister, Churchwardens nor any other Officers of the Church shall suffer
any man to preach within their Churches or Chapels, but such as shall appear
unto them to be sufficiently authorized thereunto. Canon 50. These grounds
considered and compared, seem to agree much with that name and office
mentioned in the new Testament (...), Princeps Sinagogae, the Arch-sinagoguist
or chiefe-Congregationer or Ruler of the Sinagogue; the word is mentioned at
least 7. or 8. times in the new Testament, viz. Mark. 5.22, 35, 38. Luk 8.41,
49. and Luke 13.14. Act. 13.15. and 18.8, 17. where two are mentioned Crispus
and Sosthenes in one Congregation for ought appears contrary, but Act. 13.15.
it is manifest that in one Sinagogue there were 3, 4. or more, for the word is
not the duall, but the plural number (...), The Rulers of the Sinagogue sent
unto them to preach, whence it is evident they were many, and jointly had power
to admit a Preacher after their ordinary duties ended, in that Congregation
where the Apostles themselves were both heater^ and Preachers, so that here
seems as good ground for this office rightly rectified, as for (...), Elders
of the lay people, mentioned, Mat. 21.23, and other places, where the
consequence seems to admit thereof, but of these, as also of our Parsons,
Vicars, Curates and Lecturers their right and standing divine or humane with
the intolerable As now at this present Mr. V. does most shamefully tyrannize
over ^^e, who have ever respected ^im in all things.
tyranny of some over others, I shall have occasion to speak more at large
hereafter with Gods assistance, and in the mean time, I shall bid the Christian
Reader heartily to farewell. London April 3. 1643.

FINIS.

