AN ORATION OF AGRIPPA TO Octavius Caesar Augustus, AGAINST MONARCHY.

Taken out of the LII. Book of Dion the Philosopher, Caelius, S. C. being the
Interpreter. Printed at Basil after the End of Nichol. Machiavels Prince, Anno
M.D.XXC.

And now put into English by A. R.

Habb. 2.9. Woe to him that coveteth an evil coveteousness to his house, that
he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil.
Verse. 12. Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and establish a City by
Iniquity. Verse. 8. The Remnant of the People shall spoil thee, because of men's
blood, and for the violence of the land of the City, and of all that dwell
therein. LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-Ally.
1658.

To the Reader.
THis Discourse coming by an unexpected providence into my hands; after
perusal, I had many impulses within me to make it speak in the English
Dialect: At last, I obeyed and intend it for the good of this Commonwealth, as
the Author did for his. He was an intimate friend to Octavius Augustus, with
whom he communicated in all his counsels; and this Octavius was the Adopted Son
and Heir of Julius Caesar, the great and Victorious General of the Romans,
who (after his many Conquestes) affecting the Government, and to be a King, was
miserably stub'd to death, with twenty three wounds by the Senators, as the
Reward of his Usurpation. I am pained to the very heart, to think how the plain
heartedness, fidelity and honesty of this Roman Heathen (who scorned for his
own private lucre, to betray the cause of his Country and the truth) shall one
day rise up in judgment against the Treachery, Perjury and Corruption of high
professing Christians in this Generation, and condemn them.

I have dealt faithfully in the Translation, not varying from the honest
Authors sense at all, if at any time from his words: If it may be of any
service to my Country, I shall rejoice therein; That being the great desire of
him, who is devoted thereunto,

A. R.

The Discourse of Agrippa to Augustus Caesar against MONARCHY.
Do not wonder Caesar, that I who may have so many benefits heaped upon me by
thy Kingship, should dissuade thee from it; who (if it were likely to become
profitable to thee) should rather persuade thee to it: But since there is no
similitude betwixt the condition of Princes and their friends, because the
blessings they receive by them are taken without envy or danger, when all the
hatred and loss redounds upon the Prince himself: I have thought it my duty,
as in other things, so also in this, not to have respect to my own profit and
gain, but to thine and the common good of all: Let us therefore with an
unprejuced mind consider of all things, which are contained in this Kingship.

And first of all, let us turn our eyes upon that, to which reason it self does
lead us; for no man will say, Sect. 1.
that this Dominion is to be desired, unless it may become profitable;
otherwise, we shall seem either lifted up with prosperity, or blown up with our
victories, to have affected the kingdom long before: or that the Senate and
the People of Rome had propounded to us, not that we should deliver them from
their Enemies, but that we should bring them into bondage; both which are to be
discommended: For who finding one thing to be professed in words, and another
thing intended by us, can forbear to be in indignation against us? Who would
not now prosecute us with greater hatred, than if we had manifested our desire
from the first, and had openly aspired to the Throne? For it is believed,
agreeable to the nature of man, to dare to attempt such a thing by force,
although it seem unjust; for whoever studies to excel or go before another in
any thing, he desires also to obtain better things than he whom he desires to
excel: which if it succeed prosperously is attributed to the power of Fortune,
and the contrary to its inconstancy: But now whoever Imagines by deceit and
fraud to compass such a thing, he is first of all accounted a deceitful,
inconstant, and wicked man, with which vices I persuade my self thou would
not willing be taxed, though thou might gain the Empire of the whole world;
and then if the thing succeed, he seems to have gotten but an unjust gain; but
if otherwise, all mortal men will think, that all evils are deservedly fallen
upon thee: which although they should not happen, yet this must be needs
imputed as a Crime, that whilst at first we had thought nothing of a Throne,
yet now at last we should desire it; for he is much more worthy to be reproved,
who is overcome by his present Fortune, not being able to contain himself and
moderately use his prosperity, than he that in adversity is injurious to
others. For some men are very often thrust upon sin, and the prosecution of
their own advantages, by their miseries and not by their own will, but these on
purpose and design are contriving against common good: And who can think that
such can govern well, or be constant in adversity, who are neither endued with
any simplicity of heart, nor can rightly use the gifts that have been bestowed
upon them.

Let me deal freely with thee, nor can I indeed speak any otherwise, Sect. 2.
for I know thee to be a person who art not taken with lies or flattery.
Equality and Right, are things of greatest reverence; and is it not just and
right that they who are of the same nature and Nation, educated under the same
laws and customs, and have contributed by the same use of Heads and Hands, for
the good of their Country, should have other things in common likewise? Neither
is it fit that one be preferred above another, unless it be, because he excels
in virtue; for the like condition requires a like distribution, which if men
obtain, they are pleased, if not disgusted: And since mankind has drawn his
original from above, and must again return thither, he looks upward, and w^ll
not always be subject to one man below, nor can endure that whilst he is a
partner in the Travels, Dangers and Expenses of his country, he should be
ex^luded from the profit thereof: And although he may be compelled to suffer
such things, he always hates him who is the Author of that force, and is ready
to take vengeance on him upon all occasions: For all men are desirous of Rule
or Government, and upon that account are willing to endure it, yet will not
suffer themselves to be oppressed, but rejoice in such Honors as are given them
by their equals, and likewise commend those punishments which are inflicted
according to the Laws. Therefore in this state of things, knowing both good and
evil to be common, they desire the hurt of none, but wish well to every one.
And if any be endued with any singular virtue, he both willingly does manifest,
and and cheerfully does exercise the same; and if he perceive the same to
appear in any other, he undauntedly does encourage it, studies to increase it,
and speaks honorably thereof: But if any be wicked and dishonest, he is hated
by all good men, but he that is afflicted by sufferings, all men do pity, and
the injury and reproach which is suffered, is held to be in common: This is the
nature of a Popular State.

But now in Tyrany all things are found contrary: Sect. 3.
but what need we speak more, in a word, there is none that is willing to have
any excellent thing appear in him, because all the great ones are his enemies
upon that account: All men do make the Princes manners the rule of their own
life, and what they think they can effect without danger, that they labor in,
whereby almost all do study nothing but their own particular advantages. All
other men they hate, reckoning the happiness of such to be their misery, and
the calamity of such to be their gain: And since things are so, why thou
should be moved to desire the Throne, I know not; for beside that, that its
trouble some to the People, it is like to prove much more troublesome to thy
self: Do thou not see the nation and the affairs thereof yet troubled and
unquiet? and how difficult it will be to reduce our people who have so long
tasted liberty, and no less difficult to bring into bondage our fellows and
companions, of which, some use their own laws, and others have been made free
by us, especially since we have so many enemies round about us?

And that I may begin with that which is to be accounted the first and
chiefest; Sect. 4.
much money is upon every occasion to be found out by thee, for which thy
present estate (as well for other things, but especially to maintain the
Armies) is never able to suffice: which difficulty, although it arise in a
popular State also because no commonwealth can be without expense; yet in that
State most men do willing contribute much, because they do it aiming to arise
at greater honors, and do receive from thence worthy rewards; And if by Pole,
necessary Tributes be required, they do it not unwillingly, satisfying
themselves herein, that they do it for their own benefit and advantage: But in
Monarchy, all hold it equal, that the Prince abounding in wealth should
undergo the charge, inquiring diligently into his Incomes, but not so readily
into the occasions of his expenses: And therefore particular persons do by
private ways contribute against their wills, and do not readily assent unto
the common Taxes; for the first no man would do, lest he should betray himself
to be rich; nor would it be profitable to the Prince if he should, because by
this means he might get a popular opinion, and being so heightened, might
attempt some new commotions. And for the second (to wit) to pay a common Tax,
is very grievous and burdensome unto many; especially since they receive the
detriment and others the profit thereof; For in a popular State, they which pay
the Tax, for the most part have to do with the Camp, by which their money some
way or other returns back again into their hands; But in the Government of One,
there are one sort of persons which Till the Land, Trade and play the
Merchants, from whom the greatest part of the money is extorted; and another
sort, who follow the Wars, and do receive Sallaries: And this is one of those
things which is like to breed thee trouble.

There is a second thing which I shall open: Sect. 5.
who ever commits any wickedness, it behooves that he be punished; now a great
part of men can neither be chastized by chidings, nor examples, but are
altogether to be punished by disgrace, banishment, or death; which thing, in so
great an Empire, and so great a multitude of men, and especial in the change
of a Commonwealth, are wont to happen: Now these guilty ones, if thou commit
their judgment unto others shall be absolved, if they be such as are reputed to
be thy enemies, for then the Judges think themselves mighty, when they give
judgment against the opinion of the Prince: And if at any time they be
condemned, they will seem to bear their punishment at thy instigation. But if
thy self be Judge, thou must needs punish many that are thy equals, which thing
will make thy life unhappy, and thou will seem altogether to inflict thy
punishments in wrath, rather than in equity: For such in whose power it is to
offer violence, are thought by no man to decree righteous judgment: For all
men think them only to hold forth the color and shadow of a Commonwealth, and
by the pretense of legal judgments to satisfy their unlawful lusts: Those
things fall out in the Dominion of a single-Person, but in a Popular
administration, if any do transgress, Judges are proposed of persons like unto
himself, by which it comes to pass, that what ever happens, it is more easily
born, because men think themselves not forced to suffer any thing from the
Judge, either by power or favor.

Again, beside, such who offer injury to others, very many being heightened
either by blood or riches, Sect. 6.
or some other way, who although they live inoffensive toward others, yet are
they against the power of a single Person, who if he suffers such to thrive,
cannot live safe, and if he would suppress them, he cannot justly do it: Now
which way will thou handle these men, how will thou behave thy self toward
them? For if thou will cut off their stock, if thou will diminish their riches,
or depress their growth, thou will get no reputation amongst thy People: For
how can thou be beloved, when it is not lawful for any man to be nobly
descended, or to get riches, to become valiant, magnanimous, or wise? And if
thou suffer such to increase, thou must not easily afterward put them upon
service. Now if thou could Govern the Commonwealth, and do all that pertains
unto the Wars alone, and had no need of any Colleague or helper in any thing,
the matter would be otherwise: But since thou have altogether need of many
Associates in Administration of thy affairs, especially in such a portion of
the World; and it is altogether reason that they should be wise and valiant:
Therefore if thou shall put the Government and Army into such hands, do thou
not cast thy self and People into extreme hazard? for it cannot be, that any
man should be excellent and great, but that he also should be bold; nor can any
man of a base and low condition scarce become magnanimous; and if at any time
such a one become bold, by and by springs up in him, a true love to liberty and
an hatred of Kingship: But if now thou shall have no confidence in such as
these, but wilt rather make use of common men, thou presently incurrest the
hatred of those gallant men because thou seem no way to repose thy
confidence in them: Beside, in doing this, thou errest in thy greatest affairs
of State, for what can an unexperienced person, and a man of an abject fortune
do? What enemy is there, that will not despise such a person? Which of his
companions will obey him? What true Soldier, but will with indignation scorn
to be under his command? But there is no need for me to enumerate all these
evils, which thou thy self know right-well; this only I must say, that if
such persons manage not thy affairs well, they being more detriment to thee
than to the enemy; and if they do, by reason of their ignorance, they are blown
up with pride, which may afterward prove terror to thee.

But in a Commonwealth none of these things do happen; Sect. 7.
but the richer and more valiant men are, the more are they desirous of honor,
and therefore by all good ways labor for the prosperity of the State, and so,
profit with joy and cheerfulness comes in both upon themselves and upon the
whole: Unless any one amongst them make a step toward Tyranny, and then they
severely mark his paths and punish him accordingly. That these things are so in
truth, and that the Government of a Commonwealth is to be preferred far before
that of a single Person, is most demonstrable from the examples of Greece: For
whilst all things were Governed by the will of One, they never did any great
matter; but after that they fell into the form of a Commonwealth, they became
most famous. The same thing is also manifest from the examples of other places,
of which some living under Tyrants, are always slaves, and so always
treacherous to their Lords: Others having often change of their chief
Magistrates, using their own laws, continue in their Liberties But why do I
seek examples from abroad, when we abound with enough at home? For we Romans
our selves, after we had been broken to pieces, and suffered very hard things
by our Monarchical Lords, a desire of liberty sprang up in us, which when we
had attained, relying only upon the good ways of a Commonwealth, we are
arrived at the greatness which you see. For the Senate (or grand Council) first
of all proposes, after that the people decrees and commande^h, then is the
Army ready to obey, and their Commanders desirous of Honor in the execution,
of which there has not been found the like in the Domination of a single
person: And for these causes our Ancestors so exceedingly hated that kind of
Government, that they established it execrable by a law, and for ever to be
detested.

But to pass by these things, Sect. 8.
and speak of what concerns thy own person, how can thou endure the
management of these affairs day and night; especially if thou enjoyest not thy
perfect health? And if thou be deprived thereof, what content can thou
receive? And wherewithal can thou be delighted? And when art thou like to be
without the greatest trouble? For it is impossible, but he that has so large
an Empire, must have both the care and fear of many things, but the sense of
very few which do delight, and always and in every place must both hear and
see, do and suffer things that are most grievous: For which cause I suppose,
certain both of the Greeks and Barbarians have refused such principalities when
they were offered to them: These things being foreseen, consider well before
thou do attempt, for being once entered thou can not easily go back; beware
lest the greatness of the Power, the largness of thy possessions, the multitude
of thy guards, and the throng of thy servants do deceive thee, for they which
can do much, have also much business to do; and they which possess much,
have also many expenses: The troops of guards were invented by reason of the
many treacheries Princes are subject too; yet these flatterers are often the
causers of their destruction, more than of their safety. And for these reasons
no man that is truly wise, can desire to be made a King: But if any think it is
to be desired, because he finds riches there, and that he has power to
preserve some, and that he may do many good things (and some evil too) if it
seem good unto him; this man doubtless does mistake the truth; for to be
wicked, and to hurt other persons, how hateful is it both to God and men, and
how dangerous it is I need not speak, because thou art not such a one, neither
to effect such things would thou desire to be a Prince.

Neither is it my purpose at present, Sect. 9.
to tell how great evils he must do, who covets not most earnestly ^o reign
righteously; but rather what things are to be done and suffered also, even by
such who use their power best. And to that which is said, that by such power
great benefits may be conferred upon poor Mortal Creatures, this I confess is
most desirable: [but since this thing in a private person is both Honest,
Commendable, Glorious and Secure, but in the Government of a single-person,
that good is not comparable to the other evils that attend; and that for this
good those evils must be chosen: for the fruits of this Bounty shall redound
most of all to others, but the grief of all the Evil must return upon himself.
Besides, it is not so easy a matter as some think, that one person should
suffice to supply the necessities of so many; for, those that account
themselves worthy to receive a Benefit, are (in a manner) all sorts of men,
although they have deserved nothing from him; for, even every man by nature is
apt to be well conceited of himself, and is willing to receive a benefit from
him who is able to bestow it: But now those things that can be given (viz)
Honors, Preferments and sometime Monie's also, are but a very few being
compared to so great a multitude, of men; which thing since it is most true,
more hatred will arise from such who cannot obtain the things which they
desire, than good will from those which do receive them. For these reckon
themselves to have received but their due, and so believe they are not much
engaged to him, that has conferred the Benefit, having nothing given, but what
they did expect: beside, they are slow in rendering thanks, lest hereby they
may seem unworthy of that which is bestowed upon them: but now in those who
shall not obtain the things which they desired, are troubled upon two accounts;
first, because they are deprived of that which is their own, for all men reckon
that to be theirs, which they have deserved, and then, if they bear patiently
the repulse, they seem to him to acknowledge themselves unworthy of such a
benefit: Again, he who justly distributes those favors, appears to have
diligently considered the merrits of each person, and to have rewarded some,
and disregarded others: whereupon pride springs up in the Conscience of the
one, but grief and vexation in the other. And if any fearing this, would
therefore distribute his favors without choice, he would not mend the matter
at all; because wicked men and undeserving, being honored, do become the
worse, thinking themselves either praisworthy, because they are good, or
flattered because formidable: but now the good men being no more valued than
the worst, and seeing these to be made equal with them, would rather grieve
for this under-valuing, than rejoice in the benefits received: whereupon they
would leave off the prosecution of better things, and by degrees become as bad
as they: Therefore that which is most desirable in King-ship, you see is the
hardest to be put in practice.

These things and what else I have here mentioned, consider well, Sect. 10.
whilst there is yet an opportunity; and being wise, Restore again to the
People their Militia, their Territories, their Government, and their Monys,
which if thou shall now willingly and of thine own accord perform, thou will
excel all mortal men in fame and honor, and wilt be in thy Person most
secure; but if thou shall Defer till some power shall compel, thou will
doubtless with disgrace and shame sustain some evil. Thou may take
examples from Marius and Sylla, Metellus and Pompey, who when they might, would
not King it amongst the People; by which they did receive no damage: But Cinna
and Strabo, the other Marius, Sertorius and Pompey himself, after they were
once inflamed with a desire of Reigning, did perish basely: It will be
difficult to make this people (who have so many years been free, and ruled over
others) subject to the will of One: Camillus, who triumphed gloriously was
banished by our Ancestors: And they spoiled Scipio, when they perceived him to
grow too big: And remember thy own Father, who but for suspicion to affect the
Kingdom, was miserably destroyed by them: And there were never any that were
better than these men.

Yet do I not persuade thee so speedily to lay aside the Government, that thou
should not provide for the blessings of the people, and after the example of
Sylla, take care for what shall be convenient by good constitutions, for
although many of them were afterward abbrogated, yet a great and the better
part of them remain: Neither would I have thee object and say, that new
troubles and tumuls will arise; for I must answer, that the people oppressed with
Tyranny, will much sooner attempt new matters; and if we will rightly consider
things, the fears of discords, which we think are wont to arise from a Popular
Government, rather than from the government of a single Person, are without any
show of reason at all; of the greatness of which troubles, I shall not speak at
all, lest I should seem to be desirous to make that appear evil, which is so
evil in it self. And that this Government by One is such, this one thing is
sufficient to convince, that the very nature of it, is to turn honest men into
Knaves.

FINIS.

