A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A HORSE of WAR, and a MILL-HORSE; Wherein the content and
safety of an humble and painful life, is preferred above all the Noise, the
Tumults, and Trophies of the War.

depiction of a war-horse and a mill-horse

Full of harmless Mirth, and variety.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, And published according to Order, 1645.

A discourse between the Cavalliers Warre-Horse, and the Country-mans
Mill-Horse.
Cav. horse. WEll met old Mill-Horse or indeed an Ass,
I must instruct thee before we do pass
How to live bravely; look on me and view
My Bridle and my Saddle fair and new;
War does exalt me, and by it I get
Honor, while that my picture is forth set
Cut out in Brass, while on my back I bear
Some Noble Earl or valiant Cavallier.
Come therefore to the Wars, and do not still
Subject thy self to bear Sacks to the Mill.

Mil-hors. Despise me not thou Cavalliers War-Horse
For thouogh to live I take an idle course,
Yet for the commonwealth I always stand,
And am employed for it, though I Am named
A Mill-Horse, I am free and seem not under
Malignants that do towns and houses plunder,
Transported on thy back, while thou must be
Half guilty of their wrong, and injury.
Done to their country, while without just cause,
Thou fightest for the King against the Laws.
Against Religion, Parliament and all,
And least the Pope and Bishops down should fall.
Thou art exposed to battle, but no thanks,
Thou have at all when thou do break the Ranks
Of our stout Musketeers, whose bullets fly
In showers, as in the fight at Newbery,
And force thee to retreat with wounds, or lame,
To this the glory of thy halting fame.
Whereof thou do so brag? beside thy fault
Of fighting for them who have always fought,
Against the commonwealth, is such a sin,
That does stick closer to thee then thy skin.
What though upon my back I carry sacks?
Thy meat is plunderd out of barnes and stacks;
While thou do feed on stolen Oats and Hay
The wronged Farmers curse the strength away
Of all thy Diet, often wishing that
Diseases may consume thy ill-got fat,
Therefore recant and never more appear
In field a Champion for the Cavallier;
Let not his spur nor false fame prick thee on
To fight in unjust wars as thou have done*

Cav. horse. Fame is not that I aim at, but the known
Right of the King, the trumpet that is blown
Unto the Battle does not give me more
Courage, then what I had in him before,
As if we did partake of more then sense
And far exceeded man's intelligence,
In stooping unto Kings, and do prove thus
Our selves descended from Bucephalus,
That Horse who did no loyal duty lack
But kneeling down received on his back
Great Alexander, while men kick and fling
Against the power of so good a King
As time has blessed us with, O let this force
A change in thee who art a dull Mill-horse.
Thou art no Papist being without merit,
Nor zealous Brownist, for thou do want spirit.
But with a Halter tied to block or pale,
Do penance, while thy master drinks his Ale
In some poor Village; such a poor thing art thou
Who Gentry scorn, bear till thy ribs do bow
Burdens of corn or meal, while that Kings are
My Royal Masters both in Peace and War.

Mil-hors. Boast not of happy fortune, since time brings
A change to settled States and greatest Kings,
England was happy; peace and plenty too
Did make their rich abode here, but now view
The alteration, War has brought in woe,
And sad destruction does this land overflow;
Now thou art proud, but if this war in peace
Should end thy high ambition would then cease;
Thy strength and courage would find no regard,
Thy plundering service should get no reward,
Although in war thou trample down and kill
Thy foe, in age thou shall bear sacks to Mill,
As I do now, and when thy skin is grizzle
Groan underneath thy burden, fart, and fizzle
Like an old horse, a soldier of the Kings,
"Ill employed valor sad repentance brings,
When thou art lame, and wounded in a fight
Not knowing whether thou do wrong or right,
Or what is the true ground of this sad war
Where King and subjects both engaged are;
Both do pretend the justness of their cause.
One for Religion, Liberty, and Laws;
Does stand, while that the King does strive again
His Right and due Prerogative to maintain;
The King keeps close to this, while subjects be
Grown mad to eclipse the son of Majesty
By enterposing differences; how can thou judge
Where the fault is? both at each other grudge,
I know that this discourse is far too high
For us, yet now to talk of Majesty;
In boldest manner is a common thing
While every cobbler will condemn a King,
And be so politic in their discourse,
Yet know no more then I a poor Mill-horse;
Who for the commonwealth do stand and go,
Would every commonwealths-man did do so.

Cav horse. Mill-horse in this thy space and speech agree.
Both wanting spirit dull and tedious be;
The King and commonwealth are vexed theames
Writ on by many; prithee think on Beans
And Oats well ground, what need have thou to care
How the deplored commonwealth does fare;
For policy this rule in mind does keep,
"Laugh when thou have made others grieve and weep,
What care we how the State of things do go?
"While thou art well, let others feel the woe.
If I have store of provender I care not,
Let Cavalliers still plunder on and spare not,
When Ockingham was burned I stood by
And like rich widows wept at never an eye;
When the town burnt a fellow said in leather
"He loved to see a good fire in cold weather;
And with the simple clown I do say still
"If I do well I care not who does ill;
For with the Cavalliers I keep one course,
And have no more Religion then a Horse.
I not for the Liberty not Laws.
Not privilege of Subjects, nor the cause,
Let us stand well affected to good Oats,
While that the ship of State and Kingdom floates
On bloody waves, the staved rack shall be
Crammed with hey, a commonwealth to me.

Mill-hors. Alas I pity thee thou great war-horse
Who art like Cavalliers without remorse:
The sad affliction which the Kingdom feels,
Regarding not, thou casts it at thy heels;
And so do prove that horses have no brain,
Or if they have they little wit contain.
Unto the Kingdoms tale thy prick-eares lend
Whose grief I will describe, and right defend.

Cav-hors. Thou defend right, thy right to the high way
Is lost, as sure as thou do live by hey,
In telling of a tale without all doubt
Thou needs must stumble, and wilt soon run out
Of breath and sense, good Mill-horse, therefore prithee
Leave tales, there are too many tales already,
That weekly fly with more lies without fail
Then there be hairs within a horses tail;
And if the writers angry be I wish,
You would the Cavalliers horse arse both kiss,
Not as the Miller thy back does kiss with whip,
But as a Lover does his Mistress lip;
For know the Cavalliers brave-warlick horse
Scorns vulgar Jades, and bids them kiss his arse.

Mill-hors. Thou pamperd Jade that liv'st by plunderd oats,
My skin's as good as thine and worth ten groates,
Though slow of foot, I come of a good kind,
Of Racers, gotten by the boistrous wind
When the Mare turned her backside in the mouth
Of Boreas, being Northern breed not South,
The Millers-horse before the wars began,
Would take the way of Lord or Gentleman;
And when Peace shall Malignants keep in aw,
I shall see thee in Coach or Dung-cart draw,

Cav. horse. I scorn thy motion, after this sad War,
Perhaps I may draw in some Coach or Carre;
And which does grieve me, Cavaliers most highborn
I may be forced to draw on to Tiburne:
In time of Peace my blood shall not be spilt,
But like to Noble Beer, shall run at Tilt.
In Peace I serve for Triumphs, more then that
I shall be made a Bishop, and grow fat,
As Archey said, when Bishops ruled 'twas worse,
That had no more Religion then a Horse.
But thou shall wear thy self out, and be still
An everlasting Drudge unto some Mill.

Mil-hors. No matter, I will spend my life and health,
Both for my Country and the commonwealth,
And it is Prince-like (if well understood)
To be ill-spoken off for doing good,
And if a horse may show his good intent,
Some Asses rail thus at the Parliament.
Scorn is a burden laid on good men still,
Which they must bear, as I do Sackes to Mill:
But thou delightest to hear trumpets rattle,
An animal rushing into lawless^ battle;
If thou could think of those are slain and dead,
Thy skin would blush, and all thy hayres look red
With blood of men, but I do wish for peace,
On that condition Dogs might eat thy flesh.
Then should the Mil-horse meal both fetch and bring,
Towns brew good Ale, and drink healths to the King.

Cav. h^^s. Base Mill-horse have I broke my bridle, where
I was tied by my Master Cavaliere
To come and pratlle with thee, and do thou
Wish Dogs might eat my flesh? I scorn thee now.
My angry sense a great desire now feels,
To kick thee into manners with my heels.
But for the present I will curb my will.
If thou will tell me some news from the mill.

Mil-hors. If thou will tell me news from Camp and Court,
I Will tell thee Mill-newes that shall make thee sport.

Cav. horse. If Country news thou will relate and show me,
Halters of love shall bind me fast unto thee,

Mil-hors. It chanced that I carried a young Maid
To Mill, and was to stumble much afraid,
She rid in handsome manner on my back,
And seemed more heavy then the long meal sack
On which she sat, when she alighted, I
Perceived her belly was grown plump and high;
I carried many others, and all were
Gotten with child still by the Cavaleer,
So that this news for truth I may set down,
There Is scarce a Maid left in a Market town;
An woman old with Mufler on her chin,
Did tell the Miller she had plundered been
Thrice by the Cavaliers, and they had taken,
Her featherb^ds, her brass, and all her bacon,
And eke her daughter Bridget that should wed
Clods son, was plundered of her maidenhead,
Besides I hear your Cavaliers do still,
Drink sack like water that runs from the Mill;
We hear of Irish Rebels coming over,
Which was a plot that I dare not discover.
And that the malignant Army of the King,
Into this Land blind Popery would bring.

Cav. horse. Peace, peace, I see thou do know nothing now,
Thy fleering jests I cannot well allow;
And there are Mercuries abroad that will,
Tell better news then a horse of the Mill;
But I will answer thee, and tell thee thus,
Thou lie as bad as ere did Aulicus.
Who though he writ Court-newes i will tell you what,
Heel lie as fast as both of us can trot.
You tell of Maidens that have been beguild,
And by the Cavaleers are got with child,
And have not thou when thou wast fat and idle,
Often times broke thy halter and thy bridle,
And rambled over hedge and ditch to come,
Unto some Mare, whom thou have quickly won
To thy desire, and leapt her in the place,
Of dull Mill-horses to beget a race;
While that the Cavaliers when they do fall
To work, will get a race of soldiers all.
It had been news whereat I would have smilde,
If the maids had ^ot the Cavalliers with child.

Mill-hors. I ramble over hedge, thou meanst indeed
The Cavalliers, who were compelled with spead
Both over dedge and ditch away to fly,
When they were lately beat at Newbery.
The Proverb to be true is proved by thee,
That servants like unto their masters be;
Those plundering devils on thy back do ride.
Have filled thee with a pampered spirit of pride,
And thou have eaten so much Popish Oats,
That in thy belly thou have got three Popes;
Thy great Grandfather of that race did come
That bore Pope Joane in triumph thorough Rome
I bear to Mill of corn a plump long sack,
Thou carriest a great Pluto on thy back.
Or Cavallier, and who can then abide thee,
When that malignant Fools and Knaves do ride thee.
From town to town, and plunder where they come,
The country is by Cavalliers undone.
And these thy masters are, who fight and kill
And seek the blood of Protestants to spill;
For thus the news abroad does always run,
That the Kings forces are in horse most strong.
Whereby it does appear the VVar-horse are
Guilty of bloodshed, in this cruel war;
And yet the Cavalliers horse as I hear
At Kenton field beshit themselves for fear.
And the Cavalliers being killed, they run about
The field to seek another master out,
Therefore love war, and have of wounds thy fill.
While I in Peace do walk unto the Mill;
I will be always true unto my self,
And love the Kingdom and the Commonwealth.

Cav. horse. Mill-horse, because thou show thy railing wits,
I Will give thee a round answer with some kicks,
Which I Will bestow upon thee, but I Am undone,
Yonder my master Cavallier does come
To fetch me back, and Yonder too I see
The Miller coming for to take up thee;
If thou like not my discourse very well,
Mill-horse take up my tail, and so farewell.

FINIS.

