The Royal Apology: OR, AN ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS,
the 11. of February, 1647.

In which they express the Reasons for their Resolutions for making no more
Addresses, nor receiving any from HIS MAJESTY.

AT PARIS, Imprinted in the Year, 1648.

TO MY GOOD COUNTRYMEN of ENGLAND, and Fellow Subjects of SCOTLAND, and
IRELAND.
I Shall not in this Epistle tell you, that by the Word of God, he that
resists the Powers ordained over us, shall receive to himself Damnation; nor
that by the Law of the Land, it is High Treason to levy War against the King,
to depose Him from the Government, to imprison Him, to adhere to His Enemies,
to reform Him by force, or to do any thing with intention to alienate the
Hearts and affections of the People from Him; neither shall I tell you that it
is Perjury, and against our solemn Oaths and Protestations, not to bear unto
the King true Faith and Allegiance, and not to defend His Person and Honor,
and not to maintain all His just Rights. I shall only put you in mind of
that, which, if we were no Christians but Heathens, if we had no regard of
Laws or Oaths, yet as Men, would bind us, which is the Law of Nature, by
which we are taught, to do as we would be done unto. Let every man in his own
particular consider, that if he were accused of Tyranny and Oppression, of all
sorts of cruelties, of intending bloody Massacres, of mercylesse Torturings, of
Perjury, of a continued Track of Falsehood, and breach of Vows and Promises
through his whole life, of conniving at his Fathers death, and dishonouring of
his Mother, and in them all, not one word of truth; would he not think it a
most barbarous, irrational, and inhumane proceeding, that he should not only
be used as if he were guilty of them all, but that he should be rendered odious
to the world, and infamous to posterity, without ever being heard or admitted
to the means of making any Answer, whereby to clear his Innocence and Honor?
This is your Kings case, who notwithstanding this libellous Declaration, and
His great misfortunes, is one of the most pious, temperate, courageous, and
just Princes that our Nation ever had. If He may be afforded no other right,
let Him not be denied that natural Justice which every man would think due
unto himself, of not being condemned unheard and undefended; for whatsoever is
set down in this Answer, is but one private man's knowledge and information; But
when you shall see the Kings own perfect Answer, I am most confident your
hearts will be on fire to see so good a King so ill used.

IN regard that some particulars relating to the same matter, are spoken of in
several places of this Declaration, for the avoiding of confusion in the
Answer, they are answered together; so that in some things the place of them is
not exactly kept, but sometimes that which is before in the Declaration, is
after in the Answer, therefore in this Index each particular is set down, and
in what page the answer to it shall be found.

THe Introduction. Page 1, 2 That their former Addresses to the King have been
fruitless. 3 They could have no confidence that words should be more
persuasive with the King, then sighs and groans, etc. 4 That they have made
seven Addresses to the King. ibid. In what sort the Scotch Commissioners joined
with them; and the Reasons why they conceal the Scots present dissent from
them. 5, 6 That the King never made any offer fit for them to accept. 7 They
say, they cannot expect that new engagements should prevail more with the King
then His Oath of Coronation, and several other Vows which He has frequently
broken. 8 That the King in His Speeches and Declarations has laid a fit maxim
for all Tyranny, by avowing that He owes account of His Actions to none but
God. 9 The match with Spain. 10 The Kings having an Agent at Rome. ibid. The
passages concerning the death of King James. 10, 11, 12, 13 Touching the
betraying of Rochell. 13, 14 The bringing in of German Horse. 15 Torturing of
our bodies with rackes and pillories, etc. 15, 16 The Lording over men's souls.
17 Searching of Cabinets. ibid. Monopolies and Ship Money. 18 The Kings
summoning this present Parliament to have assistance against the Scots. 19 The
King so passionately affected to His malignant Counselors, that He would
rather desert His Parliament and Kingdom, then deliver them to Law and
Justice. 19, 20, 21 The bringing up of the Northern Army. 21, 22 The Rebellion
of Ireland answered together. 23, 24, 25, 26 The Kings denying of Commissions
to the Lord Wharton, and Lord Brook. 26 They say they need not tell the world
how the Scots entered the Kingdom. ib. The Lord Digby's attempting the Country
with armed Troops. 26 The Lord Digby's man hiring a Skipper to be Pilot to a
Fleet preparing in Denmark. 27 The Kings Letters to the K. of Denmark touching
the Queen his Mother. ib. That the King sent away with the Qu. the ancient
Jewels of the Crown. ib. The King sent a specious Message of renewing a Treaty,
but His Messenger was to have managed a bloody Massacre. page 27, 28 Touching
the Kings march to Brainford. page 28 The Kings denying to receive their
Petitions. ibid. All things concerning the Queen answered together. page 28, 29
Touching the Letters written to the Pope. page 30 The Kings offer of the
plunder of London, and four Northern Counties to the Scots. page 30, 31 Fire
works found in Papists houses. page 31 Of putting the Tower into such hands at
the City could not confide in. ib. The Track of open force begun in the Kings
coming to the House, and charging some Members of Treason. 32 That the King
entered into the Councel-booke, that the calling of them a Parliament did not
make them so. 33 Their standing amazed at the Kings solemn Protestation of
having no thought to make War against his Parliament, etc. ibid. That the King
endeavored to get Powder and Cannon out of Hull. ib. That the King proclaimed
them Traitors and Rebels, and set up his Standard against his Parliament. 34
That the King called a Mock-Parliament at Oxford. ib. The Kings breach of Trust
with the Protestants of France, Scotland, Ireland, etc. and His endeavors to
enslave them by German, Spanish, French, Danish, etc. 35 That the King having
protested that He would never consent to a Toleration of the Popish Religion,
nor taking away the Laws against Recusants, did yet by His Letters signify
His consent to the taking of them away. ib. That notwithstanding that the
Houses and Scotch Commissioners did declare that they held a Personal Treaty
not safe, yet the Houses yielded to it. 36 That they intimate that the signing
of the four Bills was only for their security during the Treaty. ib. Of the
justness, honourablenesse, and necessity of the four Bills. 37, 38 That in
refusing this their last Application, the King has forgot His duty to the
Kingdom. 39 That for these reasons they have taken these resolutions and
votes, to have no more to do with His Majesty, and to settle the Kingdom
without Him. 40 The Conclusion, setting down the falsehood, fraud, and malice of
all that is said in this Declaration. 40, 41, 42
The Royal Apology.
OR, An ANSWER to the DECLARATION of the House of Commons of the 11. of Feb.
1647. in which they express the Reasons of their Resolutions for making no
more Addresses, nor receiving any, From His Majesty.
WHen the Son of Croesus who had never spoken (being borne dumb) saw his
father ready to be destroyed, nature brake open all those ligaments that had
formerly tied up his tongue, and he cried out, That his Father might be saved:
The King that ought to be the common Father of us all, and is still of his
Loyal Subjects, is upon the point of being destroyed; He is deposed from his
right of Governing, close imprisoned, and no Addresses either to Him, or from
Him is admitted; and which is more, His honor and Innocence which are dearer
to him then his Life, are endeavored by this wicked and false Declaration
(made by the House of Commons) to be blasted, and Himself rendered to His people
and to Posterity, the most odious and detestable of Men, and the most
tyrannical of Kings, whilst He himself is detained in close prison, and in
likelihood kept ignorant of what is said, or working against Him; Or if He (for
His further vexation) have notice of what He is accused, all means of clearing
Himself, and vindicating. His honor are debarred Him; His Papers of the
Transaction of Affairs kept from Him; the access of any of His Secretaries,
or His Privy Counsel, or Counsel of Law not admitted.

The Houses when they impeach the most capital Offenders even of high Treason,
in such Cases the supposed Delinquents are allowed Transcripts of their
Accusations, Counsel in the point of Law, and a convenient time for the
publishing of their Answer; and this was afforded unto the Earl of Strafford,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and is now to the six Lords impeached of high
Treason; and is a Justice not denied to Traitors and Murderers? But how it can
be afforded to the King, I cannot see, since He himself can make no address
whereby to obtain it, and no man else may upon Pain of death make any Address
unto him to receive his directions.

This certainly may be a sufficient motive to any man, nay to all men, as it
has been to me, in this distress and oppression of the King, to set down what
is in their knowledge and reason toward the confuting of those malicious
Aspersions cast upon him by this Declaration, until God shall give the King
means by his own full and perfect Answer to blow back the poisonous and
infectious vapors into the faces of that prevalent Party (that with Art and
Terror carried this Declaration) to their perpetual infamy and shame: And in
the interim, I shall desire that this may be received but only as a
preparative to keep the minds of men from being too much carried away with one
story until the other Tale be told.

THe Scope of this Declaration is expressed to be, to set down the Reasons for
these ensuing Resolutions.

1. That they will make no farther Addresses nor Applications to the King. 2.
That no Application nor Addresses be made to the King by any Person whatsoever,
without the leave of both Houses. 3. That they will receive no more any Message
from the King, and do enjoin that to Person whatsoever do presume to receive,
or bring any Message from the King to both or either House of Parliament, or to
any other Person. 4. That the Person or Persons that shall make breach of this
Order, shall incur the Penalties of high Treason.
So that it may be justly expected that this Declaration shall lay down unto
the people whom they intend to satisfy, such Reasons as may justify the said
Votes, with the Consequences and proceedings thereupon.

And the way to make plain the strength of their Argument, is, to set it down
plainly, which must run thus;

A King having committed those crimes which are set down in this Declaration,
the Houses may remove from the Government, imprison Him, and debar all
Addresses to him and from him, as they have done.

But King CHARLES has committed these crimes; and so the Houses may proceed
against Him, as they have done.

When a clear Answer shall be made unto this Argument, the debate will be
brought unto a shorter issue, and the people before whom the seen now lies,
will have an easy way to frame a Judgment, whether they ought to be satisfied
with the proceeding of the Houses, [as is pretended by this Declaration,] or
whether they shall not have just cause to detest and abominate both their
Declaration and their Proceedings.

The Answer briefly is, That both Propositions are false; The first, that a
King doing those things laid down in this Declaration may be removed from the
Government, imprisoned, etc. by the Houses.

The second is, That King Charles has done the things alleged in this
Declaration; But because the second Proposition is that which this Declaration
endeavors chiefly to infer and make good, This Answer shall first insist upon
the truth or falsehood of the matters of fact; viz. Whether the King have done
the things suggested? And afterward show briefly, the Impiety, danger, and
Treasonablenesse of the first; viz. That subjects may upon Suggestions, if true
as they are false, depose their King.

THE entrance into this Declaration is in these Words; How fruitless our
former Addresses have been to the King, is well known unto the World. It is
willingly left unto the Judgment of the World to whom they appeal, whether the
Addresses of the Houses [whilst their Addresses were made unto the King in such
dutiful and sober manner as Subjects, yea even the Houses themselves ought to
address themselves unto their King] were fruitless, when so many things have
by the King been this Parliament condescended unto, as have enforced them to
acknowledge in some of their Public Declarations, That the King has granted
more for the liberty and ease of his people, then had been granted by any of
his Predecessors; I think with truth it might have been said, then all of them;
and it will not be amiss to set down some of them; The high Court of
Star Chamber; The high Commission, and five Courts more of Justice, all
established by Law (pretended to be for the ease of the people, but apparently
much to the lessening of the Authority of the Crown) have been wholly
abolished; an Act for a trienniall Parliament; another for the taking away of
the Kings undoubted Power of dissolving this, without the Consent of the
Houses; an Act for regulating the power of the Council Table, according to
their own desires; an Act for the taking away the Bishops Votes in Parliament;
an Act for the bounding and limiting of Forests; others for the restraining of
the King to lay Impositions, to levy Tonnage and Poundage, or to Press
Soldiers without consent of Parliament. All these with many more have been the
fruits of their former addresses unto the King; And now if they find any stop
or refusal in what they propound, it is not for that the Kings inclination and
readiness to gratify his people is lessened or altered; but it is that they
have altered their mannerly and dutiful ways of their Addresses, and now will
force by Arms and Victories what they had wont to petition for. And for the
matters desired, whereas before there was in them a pretense of the Kings
honor and safety, and of the Subjects ease and liberty, in the Propositions
now insisted upon, it is clearly apparent, That the King is by them unthroned;
The Sovereignty taken from Him, and placed in themselves; And the Subject
(which if they would have contented themselves with the above specified
Concessions, should have been the happiest and freest people of all the
Subjects in Christendom) shall (if the King should condescend to their late
demands) become Slaves in their Liberties, Lives, and Properties, by being left
to the arbitrary and lawless Power of them, their fellow Subjects; and this is
so believed by all men but themselves and their Adherents, even by their
brethren of Scotland, which has administered unto them just grounds of their
dissenting from them; as shall be made apparent before this discourse be ended.

Whereas they say next, That they could not have confidence that words should
prevail more with Him then Sighs and Groans, etc.

Let the world judge whether these men at ease and invested with all Power and
Authority, are more likely to be moved with sighs and groans, cries of Fathers,
and Mothers, and Children, etc. or the King who is debarred the society of the
Queen his most dear Wife; his Children banished or under restraint; His Friends
ruined, destroyed, and persecuted; and some for their love and Loyalty to His
Person, hanged, drawn, and quartered; and all in danger of it, that shall in
any sort endeavor to serve him; Himself divested of all manner of comfort
either for His body or Soul; besides the tender sense that he must needs have
of the miseries of his people: must not the World conclude the King not only to
be void of all natural affections, and all bowels of compassion, both toward
Himself, and all that are nearest and dearest unto Him, but to want also common
sense and understanding, if He should not embrace all means that with honor
and conscience He might, for the speediest settlement of the distracted and
miserable condition of himself, and His Kingdoms?

It is then said, that they were never forced to any Treaty, and yet they have
made seven times application to the King, notwithstanding their great success
in overthrowing all His forces, so that he fled in disguise to the Scots.

It is true, that they so well laid their business, that at the first they
possessed themselves of the power of all the Kingdom both by sea and land; of
the City of London; and of the Kings Customs; of his Revenue; of His Magazins;
and of the abused hearts of his people; whereas the King wanting every thing
but a good cause, has from the beginning only struggled to subsist: But let
not Success against the King be vanted of; Success is not always a Proof of
a good Cause, God has often punished his Church by the power of Infidels, and
made wicked men the Scourge wherewith he has chastised his Children, and then
cast the rod into the fire, and lifted up the heads of his afflicted Servants.

Whereas they say, That they have made 7. times applications unto the King for
Peace, Their own consciences (I mean so many of them as have been behind the
Curtain) do tell them, That so many times they have offended God, and abused
the World with detestable Hypocrisy, by making show of that which was never in
their thoughts: And all the said Treaties which they speak of, were ever with
those unreasonable, unconscionable, and dishonorable Propositions, that they
well knew that their Intentions of continuing of a War could run no hazard by
such Proposals for Peace; yet whosoever shall peruse all those several
Treaties which are with great exactness set down in their own Books (and
printed by their own Order) of Exact Collections, will to be able judge of the
difference of Spirits then walking; In them instead of Reasons, it will be
found that improbable future fears and jealousies, and the advantage of their
present Condition, have been the ground of their Proposals; And on His
Majesty's part there will be clearly seen, a bowing and stretching to a
Compliance with them, to the utmost that could stand with his Conscience,
Safety, and Honor: To these Volumes of theirs, I refer the Reader, that seeing
both sides, he may frame unto himself a Judgment where the fault lies, if
their Addresses have been fruitless.

To countenance no more their former Treaties, and the Conditions proposed in
them, they further say, That in all their former Addresses the Commissioners of
Scotland agreed with them, and joined with their Commissioners in attending the
King.

In which Affirmation they do not use the ingenuity and clearness which the
House has in former Parliaments used to do, in that which they published unto
the Kingdom; for although it be true, that the Commissioners of Scotland agreed
to the sending of the Propositions unto the King at Newcastle, yet in their
public printed Declaration of their said consent, bearing date the 25. of June
1646. they declare their want of satisfaction in many particulars; in so much
as they say, That some of the particulars are inconsistent with the word of
God, and others wherein they remain unsatisfied: yet notwithstanding so great
was their desire to see an end of this bloody war, and the easing of those
heavy pressures under which both the Kingdoms groaned, that upon those
Considerations they consented to many material parts of those Propositions;
and to make no let, but to give way to the sending of such other particulars,
as they were still unsatisfied in the matter, for the reasons formerly
presented in their Papers unto the Houses. And this their Assent they declare
to be with several proviso's, as will appear by their said Answer; The last of
which, is, that it is not their Judgment that every particular of these
Propositions is of so great importance to the Kingdoms, that Peace and War
should depend thereupon.

Now let it be impartially judged, whether it be an ingenious manner of
proceeding, to set down a perfect consent, and to conceal the conditions, and
proviso's, upon the which the Scots declare their consent, is grounded.

But that which is most remarkable concerning the Scots, is, that having thus
artificially insinuated to the people their former concurrence with them, now
when they make their Declaration to the Kingdom, for the stating truly of the
whole business, and the reason for having no more to do with the King,
grounded upon the Kings last Answer concerning the four Bills, they remember not
in this their final Declaration, the dissent of the Scots; nor their
unanswerable Reasons for their said dissent; nor the Protestations of the said
Commissioners delivered unto the King in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland,
declaring their dissent to those Propositions; for the not yiedling whereunto,
the King is not only by these Votes deposed in effect, and another government
without Him set up by themselves, but His Royal Person used with greater
severity, and inhumanity, then thieves, and murderers are in the common gaols;
for to them it is permitted to have the comfort of Physicians for the body, and
of Divines for their souls, whereas to the King there is no means left to ask
them.

The reason why they conceal this dissent of the Scots, is, for that they would
have the Kings refusal of the Bills, to be ascribed only to his wilfulness,
and to his persisting in his wonted ways (as they call it;) but would not have
the people think that the King had many of his mind; whereas if the truth
might appear, it would be found, that few besides that prevalent party in the
lower House, and Army, with the Sectaries depending on them, that hold not
their Propositions most unreasonable, and their usage of the King most
detestable.

Further, if the former assent, and concurrence of the Scots with them, be used
as an argument for the countenancing, and better justifying of their former
Treatise and Propositions; their present dissent, and their unanswerable
reasons set down in their Declaration against the four Bills, against their
denial of the King a Personal Treaty, and against his want of freedom,
together with their solemn Protestation grounded upon them, in the name of the
whole Kingdom, ought in reason at least to put a stand upon men's judgments
until all tales be told; and not be carried away by a Declaration of the
single House of Commons, without the concurrance of the Peers; and not passed
unanimously in that House, but by the power of a prevalent party.

For whosoever shall consider the former brotherhood, and strict union betwixt
the Houses and the Scots; and how subservient they have been unto them, and
their affairs; how they have twice entered this Kingdom, The first time by
their invitement, The second time by their most earnest solicitation and hire;
and how the Scots choose rather the adherence to them, then unto their own
native King; how far they gratify them by delivery of him into their hands;
and how they were become brothers in Interests, in Arms, in Covenant;
whosoever shall consider this strict conjunction, cannot but think that the
Scots have some great reason of Conscience, Interest, and Honor, for their
present deserting of them in these their new demands, and rigorous way of
proceeding with the King.

The nation has seldom been charged with want of prudence or dexterity in
their actions; and the Houses have found (as to them) great justness, and
punctuality in their proceedings; by coming in according to agreement, and by
going out according to promise; but now finding not only their Covenants and
Agreements cluded, but the very grounds and true ends for which they say they
entered into Covenant, and jointly took up Arms, viz. The reformation and
conformity in Religion, the defense of the Kings Person, honor, and just
greatness, with the Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, etc. If they now find
that the ways which the now prevalent party do pursue, are destructive to them
all, and diametricall opposite to these settlements which they have always
declared to intend; as if instead of conformity in Religion there shall be
brought in, and tolerated a multitude of Heresies and Sects; If instead of the
Kings honor, safety, and greatness, they that have had more then a hundred
Kings, shall see Monarchy intended to be levelled, and the person of their
native King, worse used then a thief, or murderer in a Jail; If they shall
see all Law, Liberty, and property of the Subject, endeavored to be settled
under the arbitrary tyrannical Power of a prevalent party, and an over-awing
Army; If all these things be, who can wonder if the Scots have changed their
way, and concurrence, when they find all those Principles upon which they were
engaged, to be totally changed.

It has therefore been wisdom in this Declaration, to mention the Scots former
concurrence, and to pass by their present dissent, the cause whereof they knew
will not endure the searching.

They then say, the King never made any offer fit for them to accept: It seems
the Scots are of another mind, who declare their judgments to be, that his
offers from Carisbrooke-Castle might have given satisfaction. But since they
will never remember any thing, but that which is for their advantage, it will
be fit to put them in mind of some petty slight offers, that by the King have
been made unto them, leaving aside his general Request unto them. That they
would set down together all such means as would give them satisfaction,
whereunto they should recive a gracious and satisfactory answer, to all that
they could justly or reasonably desire; but this being in January, 1642. time
may have worn it out of memory: But they may remember his offers from
Holdenby, from Hampton Court, and from Carisbrooke-Castle, In them He offered
the settling of Religion in the Presbyterian way (which was that which
themselves had Voted) for three years, and then to be fully settled as should
be agreed on by their own assembly of Divines, only with the addition of
twenty to be nominated by Himself, to the end that before a full and final
settlement all reasons might be heard, yet no doubt might be raised of carrying
any thing by plurality of Votes, since those nominated by themselves, were four
times the number.

He has offered, to put the whole power of the Kingdom both by sea and land
into their hands, during the whole term of His Reign.

And for the civil Government, he has offered them, the nomination of all
those Ministers by whom the Kingdom is to be governed.

He has offered, a general pardon and an Act of oblivion; which is an
important point, if that be true which Sir Edw. Cook, Judge Jenkins, and all
the books of Law do tell us; or that the Army have not changed their minds, who
a few months since did declare, that no Indemnity could be safe without the
Royal assent, and that they would not be satisfied with any other.

He has offered 400000. Pounds, to be paid in the space of one year and an
half, for the payment of the arrears of the Army: But all these trifles are
not worthy to be remembered, although their memory does serve them better, when
they come to make up the Catalogue of these false and scandalous reproaches,
wherewith they revile their King, the Lords Anointed.

But whereas they say, That the Kings offers are not fit for them to accept; in
that certainly they declare the truth, if they make their own unlimited aims,
and ambitions, the measure of what is fit for them; for they will no ways
content themselves, with such a narrow and unlimited Sovereignty as our former
Kings have had, restrained in our Laws, in our liberties, and in our
proprieties; but they pro arbitrio will levy what forces they please, without
limitation of number, or distinction of persons, or quality; raise what moneys
they please, for the support of this their military dominion; and make what
laws they list, without any other assent but their own, and remain
everlastingly a representative of the people, whether they will or not; so that
really making their aims and intentions the measure of what is fit for them to
accept, no offers or conditions can be fit for them, that shall not establish
them in a more absolute power and dominion then ever any King of England had;
or any King of Christendom has; or the Grand Seignior himself does practice.

They then say, They cannot see how it should be expected, that a new
engagement could prevail on Him, or engage Him more, then the solemn Oath at
His Coronation, with several other vows, protestations, and imprecations, so
frequently broken by Him, during His whole Reign.

Let it be calmly considered of, whether this be a modest, and decent way of a
House of Commons, thus upon generals to charge their King as a perjured man,
whom they have ever professed they would make a glorious King; especially when
their said charge is as false in the matter, as shameful in the manner; for
they are not able to fix upon the King any one particular, wherein He has
broken His Oath or Protestation, when the truth of the fact, and circumstances,
shall be truly set down on the behalf of the King, as well as their false
relations of the said fact, with their inferences, strains, and malicious
glosses thereupon, and doubtless if the King were not highly punctual, and
religious in the observance of the said Oath, He would not suffer those
miseries and hazards which He does, rather then infringe it.

But let the breaking of Oaths and Protestations, be with equality looked upon;
let the obligation of their natural Allegiance, the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, without taking whereof they cannot be Members of their House; Let
the solemn Protestation taken by them at the beginning of this Parliament, in
which they did promise, vow, and protest in the presence of God, with their
life, power, and estate, according to the duty of their Allegiance, to
maintain, and defend His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; which, how
well it has been performed, let their own consciences tell them. Let their
Solemn League and Covenant taken with their hands lifted up to God never to
depart from that blessed union and conjunction, as they shall answer it in the
presence of God, the Searcher of all hearts, at the dreadful day of judgment,
how they have kept it, let their brethren of Scotland tell them; and M. Martin
who styles it, an Almanac of the last year, and out of date; and the Answer of
the Scots Declaration, that terms it absurd, and hypocritical; humane, and
so alterable.

Let them remember all these, and their often repeated Protestations of making
the King a glorious King, and consider their present usage of His Person, and
their endeavors by this Declaration, of rendering Him infamous to the world,
and to all posterity.

Let them likewise consider that their present animosity against the King, is
chiefly because they cannot make Him consent to be perjured. He has sworn to
maintain the Laws; to protect His Subjects; to defend the Church; to maintain
the Religion established by the Laws; to uphold the just rights inherent in the
Crown, or legally thereunto annexed; and because He will not consent to be
perjured in them all, (which He must be, if He should consent to their demands)
He must be declared unworthy to govern; and (as has been said by some among
them) not worthy to live; be close imprisoned, and debarred of all comforts of
life. God in his due time will be Judge between them and the King, and so will
be all sober and disinterested men.

Then they say, That the King in His public Speeches and Declarations, has
laid a fit foundation for all tyranny, by this most destructive maxim or
principle, which He says He must avow, That HE OWES AN ACCOUNT OF HIS ACTIONS
TO NONE BUT GOD ALONE; AND THAT THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT JOINT OR SEPARATR HAVE
NO POWER TO MAKE OR DECLARE ANY LAW.

For the first part of this Maxim, the King avoweth but that which the Law of
God and the Law of England avoweth; and what all the Monarchs and States of
Christendom, that have Sovereign and Supreme power will avow; and would punish
as high and capital offenders, any that should avow the contrary. As for the
second clause, the King has often declared, That He does not pretend to the
making of Laws singly of Himself, but by the advice and consent of the two
Houses: neither can the Houses joint or separate, nor He with the consent of
either House alone, make a Law, but there must be a concurrence of all three:
The two Houses first to consent and pray, and then the King makes it a Law, by
his declaring the Royal assent by Le Roy le veut. As for the declaring of the
Law, that it is the interpreting of the Law in dubiis and obscuris, vel si
aliqua dictio duos contineat intellectus: If the words of the Law be doubtful
and obscure, or may bear two senses; the Judges in their Courts may interpret
and declare the meaning of the Law, and the same is done in Parliament upon
Writs of Error; but that is in the high Court of Parliament before the King and
the Lords, and not before the Commons, who are no Court: But this Declaration
must not be understood of plain and clear cases, nor to the overthrowing of the
literal sense, nor of the equity of the Law; otherwise to declare and to make
a Law, were all one in effect.

But not to enter upon any moot Case, or contestation of a Law point, Let it be
judged, whether upon this Maxim, it be a sober or dutiful expression, that
the King has laid a foundation for all tyranny; but especially whether from
this charge any just or colorable ground may be laid, for the justifying of
their Votes, or their present proceeding with the King.

They then speak of the Articles for the intended match with Spain, which were
treated of 25 years since by King James; And likewise of the Articles of the
match with France, which certainly should be without their cognizance, for the
Houses of Parliament have declared often, the the making of peace and war, and
the marriage of the Kings Children, belong wholly to the King; And it is well
known that Queen Elizabeth inprisoned a Member of the House of commons, for
presuming to speak in that House concerning Her marriage. And the Articles of
the marriage with France, were likewise agreed by King James before His death;
but howsoever, it is a great audacity in the House of Commons, singly, (after
more then 20. years, and many intervenient Parliaments that would never presume
to meddle with the Kings marriage, nor the treaty thereupon) now to draw
arguments from thence, whereby to dis-affect the people to the King; but that
they will leave no corner unswept, nor action unstrained, whereby they may
render the King less beloved.

And as for keeping a continued correspondency with Rome, or having an Agent of
His there (as is alleged in this Declaration;) it is most false. The Queen
perhaps may have had and maintained some person there, for such things as she
held necessary for Her, in point of Her devotion; and it is well-known, that
concerning the affairs of the Princes of Christendom, from no place so perfect
knowledge and intelligence could be got as from Rome; and Q. Elizabeth, and
King James (that were wise Princes, and no Papists) were of that mind, and
were at no small charge to hold correspondency from time to time with every
eminent person of that Court, without the leave of the House of Commons, being
a body not well modeled for secrecy, consisting of near five hundred persons;
But the hatred to the Pope and Rome is such, that it was thought the very
naming of them, would reflect with some hatred upon the King, which was that
which was only aimed at.

Then they come to plant their maine piece of battery, or indeed rather to
work in their Mine, whereby they would blow up the Honor of His Majesty, in
order to the making of Him a glorious King; by calling to mind, and reviving
the pastages in the Parliament, the second year of His Reign, concerning the
death of his Royal Father as they term it; whereas in all their impeachment
against the Duke of Buckingham, they did never so, much as accuse him, or lay
to his charge the death of King James; but only called that which he had done,
an audacious Action; and voted that he should be accused only of a misdemeanor
of so high a nature, as might justly be called, and so was deemed by the said
Commons to be, an Act of a transcendent presumption, and dangerous consequence;
and for such, transmitted it to the Lords. But now conceiving it would be much
for their turn, to have it insinuated and let into the people, that amongst the
Articles of their Declaration against the King, one was touching the death of
His Father, for so they style it, viz. The proceeding and passages of
Parliament concerning the death of His Royal Father, the passages whereof
shall be truly related in the subsequent Narration.

King James fell sick in the spring 1625. and His sickness began with an
ordinary tertian intermittant Ague, which is not held mortal, especially in
the Spring; but the King having a full body, and hard to be ruled or governed
by his Physicians in His sickness, His tertian turned into a continual
fever, whereof he dyed.

In the time of His sickness, certain plasters and posset-drinks were applied
and given to Him, such as are ordinarily used to be given by women in the
country; for that men seldom apply themselves to Physicians in ordinary Agues,
but to such received and known medicines as are commonly used; and these were
said to be given by the Duke of Buckinghams procurement, and prepared in his
lodgings, without the direction or knowledge of the Physicians, until after
they had been administered unto the King: After almost two years (there having
been in the interim a Parliament, and nothing stirred in the business) the
Duke of Bukingham having much distasted the Houses, and they being highly
incensed against him, a ready ear was given to all complaints, that might
afford any probability of questioning of him and his actions; And there were
several Articles by way of impeachment exhibited against him to the House of
Peers; and among them, one was touching the Dukes administering of drinks and
plasters, without the consent or knowledge of the Physicians; and many
Physicians and others were examined, and it was with great vehemence pressed,
that there might have been an accusation of Treason drawn up against him
thereupon.

But when the said Article came to be Voted in the House of Commons, and the
case and evidence had been truly stated before them by Sir Dudley Diggs, who,
with Master Wansford and others, had the managing of that Article of their
charge, the House did hold it fit that he should not be impeached of Treason
(the evidence indeed not bearing it) but only of a transcendent presumption, as
is truly set down in their Declaration; but if there had been any the least
ground, or evidence of any wicked intention in the Duke to destroy the King, or
any Symptoms that the Kings death had been caused or hastened by those things
that were given; or that the said drinks and plasters had been of any
noxious or hurtful quality; it is well known, that the detestation against the
Duke at that time was such, that He would not have been forborne, if the
evidence would have born an impeachment of Treason; and many pressed it far,
alleging that without an accusation of Treason, they could neither remove the
Duke from about the Kings Person, nor from sitting in the Houses of Peers,
without which it was thought they would hardly prevail against the Duke; but
the evidence falling short, it was carried in the House for an impeachment only
of Misdemeanor, and a transcendent Presumption, and not of Treason; And of
these particulars some now sitting among them, (if they had had so much
ingenuity, or had not been restrained with fear) might have informed them; And
they might have been likewise pleased to remember, that it was proved before
them, that the King was embowel'd and embaumed publicly, and no Symptoms
appeared, but that He dyed naturally of His Sickness.

And this their Declaration (although it be set out with some strains and
aggravations) contains little more then is here declared; concluding in these
words: That it is an offense and misdemeanor of so high a nature, as may be
justly called, and is by the said Commons deemed to be, an Act of transcendent
presumption and of dangerous consequence. So that by their own charge nothing
is laid down against the Duke, but a misdemeanor and an adventurous Act, unto
which they confess in this Declaration, that he put in His Answer the 8. of
June; and the said Answer does yet remain upon record in the Journall book of
the House of Peers: And certainly it had been much more fair and ingenious, to
have likewise set down the Answer, and not to have published only the
Accusation, and concealed from the world the Dukes Answer, since they do
acknowledge that they knew of the Answer; but it should seem that made not for
their purpose; If the Answer had been weak and impertinent, doubtless they
would not have passed by that which would have added strength to their own
suggestion; but finding the Answer such as formerly had discouraged them any
further to stir in the business, they have judged it fitter to pass it by;
for it must be known, that after the Parliament which they speak of to be
dissolved, and in which this impeachment was exhibited against the Duke, there
was (before the Duke was slain) another Parliament, in the which the Duke fat
in the House of Peers; but the House having seen the Dukes Answer, thought it
not fit to revive their former accusation, but have let it lie asleep almost
this 20. years, until their malice, and desire to blast their King, has
awakened it.

In all their Declaration there is not one word reflecting upon the King, but
that He caused not (as they say) the Dukes presupposed misdemeanor (which they,
to make the story seem more odious, call the Kings death) to be legally
persecuted; in which many amongst them must needs conceal their knowledge, that
upon the breaking up of the Parliament, there was by the Kings then Attorney
General, a Bill exhibited in the Star Chamber (which is the supreme Court
where all high crimes and misdemeanors are judged) and that at the instance of
the said Duke, who said he would not have that cause which so highly concerned
him, to lie buried, but that he would acquit himself of that foul Aspersion,
though it should be with hazard of his life; But his employments to the Isle of
Re, and death following not long after, gave an end to any further prosecution.

So that having in their own Declaration not charged any thing against the Duke
of Buckingham, more then misdemeanor and high presumption; nor the least
reflection upon the King, but only of not causing the said misdemeanor of the
Duke to have been legally prosecuted, which was hindered by the Dukes death, and
the impediments formerly set down; the sole end and scope of inserting this
particular in their Declaration is evident to be, to make the King odious, as
judging that nothing could more incense the world against Him, or make His
sufferings less commiserable, then to have it insinuated unto the people, that
among many Articles against Him, one is concerning the death of His Father;
which how groundless soever, yet they think that it may in the interim amuse
the people, and possess them with prejudice against the King, and not make
them have that sense and compassion of Him, and detestation of His wicked
usage, as otherwise they would have.

And certainly amongst all those artifices which have been used against Him, to
alienate the hearts of His people from Him, and to render Him odious to the
world, this is one of the most false, malicious, and subtle; and which can have
no other drift, but by the detestableness of this aspersion, to allay the
detestablenesse of their proceeding toward Him, which certainly no age can
parrallel of Subjects toward their King.

Touching the business of Rochell, it is true that the King was persuaded to
lend some of His Ships to the French King; He was newly Married unto that Kings
Sister, and entered into a new strict League and Alliance with that Crown, being
then at difference with Spain; and certainly there might be many secret reasons
of State, for the Kings obliging the French King at that time, which may be
altogether unknown unto the Houses of Parliament, for that it was the doctrine
of those times, that all things belonging to peace or war, or the marriage of
his Childdren, did solely and singly belong unto the King; neither need He
consult with His people therein, unless He craved their assistance in
Parliament by way of Subsidy, or supply; and it is strange they should now
interpose by way of charge, in business passed more then 20. years since; but
that they leave no corner unsought, from whence it may be conceived any think
may be raked to make the King odious, as the aim in this particular is to do
in two kinds; first, by adding strength unto that false and wicked aspersion of
the Kings unfirmnesse in the Protestant Religion: secondly, by nourishing that
distaste which they have with great industry and artifice raised in those of the
Reformed Religion in France, and other places against Him.

It is true, that Counsel pleased not many; and the use that was made of those
ships was distasteful; which the King, and the Duke of Buckingham (on whom the
council of that action, and the blame was chiefly cast) to show that there was
no intention by the loan of those ships, to lend a hand to the destruction of
the Protestants; endeavored to redeem that mishap, by actually entering into a
war with the Crown of France, for which one of the chief reasons was (although
there were likewise other distasts) the wrong employing of those Ships (which
the King had lent) contrary to the Kings intention, and the intimation of the
French, how they intended to make use of the said Ships; and it is fit likewise
to be known, that this business was first treated in King James his time.

And that it was contrary to the Kings intention, may appear by his subsequent
actions: for He avowedly sent a fleet, and an Army to the Isle of Re, under the
command of the Duke of Buckingham, and to be advised by Mr. de Soubize, how
those forces might be best employed for the releif of Rochell, and those of the
Reformed Religion: And although the expedition to the Isle of Re proved not
successful; yet the intention and not the success, is to be looked upon; and
the Duke of Buckingham pursued this intention of relieving Rochell, and the
Protestants; and to that end a new Army, and a new Fleet was prepared, and he
in person was gone to Portsmouth, ready to set sail for the said enterprise,
when by the hands of Felton he was suddenly slain; and thereby those succors
were retarded; whereby leisure was given to the French so to fortify and block
up all the accesses to Rochell, that the relief thereof was rendered impossible;
which yet notwithstanding was attempted by the Kings said Fleet and Army, under
the Conduct of the Earl of Lindsey, though without success.

So that certainly no good argument can be drawn from hence, either of the
Kings disaffection to those of the Reformed Religion, or to have willingly
intended their hurt; much less can there well be drawn from hence any thing to
justify them in their present proceedings against the King, which they
themselves set down to be the scope and intent of this their Declaration.

Let it be judged of by any sober man, if it be not an audacious expression of
Subjects toward their King, to say, we can fully show how by Him Rochell was
betrayed; besides that it is most false, for how could the King betray Rochell,
which was not in His Power? Or can it be believed, that they that have forborne
nothing that they could imagine might turn to His dishonor, would conceal any
thing that might cast any Aspersion upon Him in this of Rochell?

As for that plot presupposed to be many years since designed, of bringing in
an Army of German Horse, to have compelled the Subjects to have submitted to an
arbitrary Government; they might have remembered, that thinking thereby to have
raised a hatred against the King, they have published this Aspersion in
several of their Papers, and Declarations; and particularly upon the breach of
the Treaty at Oxford May 18. 164^. whereunto His Majesty made answer, as
appears by His Declaration printed and published by their own Order, in the
second volume of their Orders and Ordinances, Page 109. wherein He says, That
he esteems his condition more miserable then any of his Subjects, when he sees
a few factious persons have obtained that power, as to publish to all his
people in the name of both Houses of Parliament, a charge, which coming forth
with a semblance of such Authority, may much work with them against Him; and
yet do not (which is certainly because they cannot) tell any one proof or
particular, either whence, whether, or when, or by whom, or by whose design
those horse should have been brought; they confess it is many years since, and
it seems it is so many, that these particulars are worn out of the memory of
man.

Now what a strange Impudency and malice must it appear to all equal men, that
being challenged, and provoked by the King, even with scorn and derision, to
instance in any one of the above specified particulars if they could, they do
now again revive the same aspertions, without giving satisfaction, by the
producing of any one proof, or giving instance in any one particular;
especially when it is well known unto the world, that such persons as they
themselves had whispered to be the men that were employed in the said design,
have been highly employed in their service, and nothing would have been kept
from them, if any thing might have been found to the Kings prejudice; but it
was thought fit by them, that this should be now concealed, since it is
apparent, that the chief end of this Declaration, is, to accumulate all things
that they conceive may asperse the King, or make Him odious; for those men
might have told them the mystery of that business; for that the Parliament
having Declared a war for the recovery of the Palatinate, and given way for the
raising of 10000. foot in England to serve Count Mansfeild in that employment,
it was in discourse how to furnish them likewise with horse; which was thought
could no where fittingly be done but in Germany; but the King of France denying
passage to Count Mansfeid, all that business came to nothing.

Then they speak of the torturing of our bodies by cruel whippings, cutting
off ears, racks and pillories, etc. They might have added hanging, drawing,
and quartering, and hanging in chains; for all these have been done in the
Kings Reign, but executed upon Traitors, thieves, seditious and impious
libellers, by established Courts of Justice, and according to the known course
of the Laws which were made by former Kings (his Predecessors) with the consent
of Parliament; for they are not able to produce any one Law made in the Kings
reign, tending to blood or cruelty: how many have been made for the ease and
enlargement of the Liberty of the people, they have often themselves confessed
them to be more then by any of his Predecessors: And shall the doing of Justice
according to the Laws, by his Judges and Ministers of Justice, be charged upon
him as acts of cruelty? shall the burning of thieves in the hand, or rogues in
the forehead or shoulder, or what Mr. Gregory does at Tyburn, in the due
execution of legal sentences, be styled cruelty? for such have been all these
whippings, rackes, and pillories, which they speak of; And they are challenged
to instance in one drop of blood drawn by his Majesty, or any one Act of
cruelty committed by Him in his whole reign, or by his Judges or Ministers whom
He has not left to the Justice of the Law.

For it will not be denied, that from the 3. of November 1640. until the 12.
of Jan. 1641. when he was driven from London, all His Judges were wholly left
unto them; many of them being impeached of Treason; and Judge Berkley, whom
they thought the most criminal, arraigned for Treason, who made a defense so
honest, and so able, that they were forced to wave their legal Trial of him,
and to pick his purse by their arbitrary power. Was there ever so strained a
malice, especially if they look how themselves have proceeded? not to speak
of those multitudes that have been slain in the War, how many of the Kings
honest loyal Subjects have they murdered in cold blood, by no Law but their
own arbitrary power? with how many new Treasons have they ensnared the
subject, by the single authority of some hasty and angry Ordinances,
notwithstanding that the Law tells us, what shall be Treason and nothing
else, but by Act of Parliament? what cruelty has been used in point of
imprisonments, where many have dyed for want, or ill usage? and how many
persons of quality, both Divines and others, has been by them sent a
shipboard, and kept under deck? and seeing a person of quality, and a Judge of
great years and reverence, out of heat and indignation, sent to Newgate, a
prison for Rogues, Thieves, and Cutpurses? how many Gentlemen and Peers did
they Vote to death, and loss of their whole estates, and to be excepted from
pardon and mercy, without summons, hearing, trial, or conviction? how many
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Judges, and diverse of great age, have they forced out of
England to beg their bread in strange Countries, not allowing them one penny
out of great estates (which they have seized) to keep them from contemptible
poverty, notwithstanding that the Law allows to the highest Traitors, a
convenience for food and raiment for themselves and family? And yet these men
have had the face to fix upon their King these odious marks of cruelty, when
they cannot deny, but in his reign there has been less blood by attainder,
and fewer confiscations, then in any such space of time since the Conquest.

As for the lording over men's souls. The Laws for the government of the Church
(not established by this King, but by his Father and Queen Elizabeth) were put
in execution with so much mildness and moderation, that they can scarcely
instance in the punishment of any Separatists or Sectary, if his Recusancy (for
the Law makes them Recusants as well as Papists) has not been accompanied
with some crime, or some scandalous or seditious preaching, or writing against
the present government; whereas they may remember, and see in the new book of
entries, 5. Paschae, 35. Eliz. fol. 252. that Pendry for publishing two
scandalous books against the Church Government, was indicted, arraigned,
attainted, and executed at Tyburn: And let their present lording over men's
souls be considered; their sending so many learned and pious men a begging, by
depriving them of their livings; imprisoning their persons; their lording over
their consciences, by new, illegal, and traiterous Oaths; by forcing of the
Covenant, to the ruin of many hundreds, who otherwise were without exception,
both Ministers and Laymen; being conscientious men; men of parts, and great
learning, as is set down in the preceding words of the Answer to the Scotch
Declaration of the 4. of Jan. 1648. But nothing can by them be done amiss:
that Axiom of the Law le Roy ne fait tort, is now with the Crown and
Sovereignty, (which they have usurped) applicable only to them. But all the
Kings actions, though never so legal, just, and gracious, must by them have
the appellations of tyranny, cruelty, and oppression.

They then say that they were worse then slaves, for they were prohibited by
Proclamation to speak or hope for another Parliament. They should have done
well to have specified the year and date of the said Proclamation, and to have
set down the very words contained therein; for it is so unlikely a thing, that
the people should be forbidden by Proclamation, to hops, that no rational man
can choose but suspect it to be that which civility is loath to term it, how
foul soever their pen be against their King.

As for the searching of cabinents, closets, etc. It is set down to be after
the dissolution of the Parliament; so that that sin against the Holy Ghost
(never to be forgiven) of breaking the Privileges of Parliament, is not
charged, and any other sin will not be found; for it is lawful and usual
for the Justice or Council of the King, to search the closets, and cabinets of
such as they have good cause to suspect of practices, and correspondency, to
the prejudice of the King or Kingdom; neither have the Kings or Queens letters
or cabinets, nor the dispatches of Ambassadors, and foreign States, been free
from their inquisition and search; nay some such searches have been made by
them for Letters and Jewels upon women not of the meanest rank, as is indecent
to put them in mind of.

They then reckon up a long list of Monopolies, and Patents of Soap, Pins,
Leather, Sugar, etc. Whether the said Patents were legal, or illegal, there
can from thence no just fault be laid upon the King; He is in point of Law to
be advised by His Attorney, and His learned Council; And there cannot in all
the particulars specified, any one be instanced in, which He did of Himself,
without the Certificate of the Referrees, of the legallity of such Grants,
wherein never Prince was so punctual as He has been, and it is conceived that
it may be with truth averred, that in His whole Reign He has not passed by
Patent any one Monopoly, without reference, and certificate in writing, that it
might be granted by Law.

But besides, upon complaint this Parliament, all grievances have been
redressed; all doubtful Patents cancelled; care had for the preventing of the
like for the future; all referrees and patentees left to justice; and all
punished, but such as the injustice of the Houses have protected.

Then they come to that which they call the compendium of all oppression and
cruelty, viz. The Ship Money: When Princes are involved in great wants and
necessities, they are forced to those things which at other times they
willingly forbear to press; So it was here; The King by His Wars with Spain
and France, was brought into great necessitys; and consulting how He might by
lawful ways relieve Himself. He was advised to this course of Ship Money by
His Attorney General Noy, (as is said) who was by all men esteemed a great
Lawyer, and had been a great propugner of the Subjects liberty: The King herein
asked the opinion of His Judges, and learned Council; And both the Judges (the
major part of them) and His Council, did set it under their hands to be
lawful; these are the Kings proper council with whom he is to consult in point
of Law, and are sworn to advise Him faithfully; But some, and particularly Mr.
John Hamden, not satisfied with the extrajudiciall opinion of the Judges, came
to a legal trial upon the Case in the Exchequer Chamber; and after a fair
hearing and learned arguments on both sides, Judgment passed for the King. If
the said Judges and learned Council (who are sworn to do equal justice betwixt
the King and the Subjects, and to Council the King faithfully) have erred and
done amiss in both, the greater has been their fault and offense; But herein
where lies the Kings transgression? For did he not leave the Judges upon
complaint of the Houses, to their Justice? and were not the said Judges many of
them impeached of high Treason? and Judge Berkley arraigned thereupon for high
Treason? and made so learned and able a defense, that they were forced to
withdraw any further prosecution of their impeachment against him. It seems
they forget that which they declared for Law at the beginning of this
Parliament, (viz. that the King can do no wrong, Le Roy ne fait tort) upon the
very ground of this Case; And that the reason why the Law supposed that the
King could do no wrong, was, for that the Judges and Ministers that did the
wrong, were responsable for the wrong doing; and the persons wronged, were from
them to be repaired in point of their damages: But it seems they are of old
Ployden's mind, that when the business concerns themselves, the Case is
altered.

They then say, The King summoned this present Parliament, in hope to have
Assistance against the Scots.

He had little reason to hope for any assistance against the Scots, knowing as
he did, who had called them in; and that from some Scots themselves from
Newcastle, whilst he was at York, He had gotten notice of the particulars,
wherewith diverse Lords of the English with the King being startled, they sent
to the Scottish Lords at Newcastle; to have right done them upon a Secretary of
theirs, who had said to some English prisoners whom the Scots had taken at
Newborn, That their coming in had not been, but by the invitation of the
English; and had spoken a little too boldly of some truths that should have
been concealed, and this diverse at Westminster cannot but remember.

They then say, that it was impossible to quash those pernicious Councels
without questioning the Authors; Whereupon the King showed Himself so
passionately affected to such malignant Councellers and their Council, that he
would sooner desert or forcc his Parliament, and Kingdom, then alter His
course, or deliver up his wicked Counselors to Law and Justice.

Our passions (especially that of revenge and malice) do not only deprive us of
our senses and reason, but often bereave us of shame and honesty: For besides
that they know that the King has more then thrice in his public printed
Answers declared, That He would except no man of what quality or nearness
soever unto Him, from any legal Trial according to the Law; He did leave unto
their Justice the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford, all the
Judges, and whomsoever they would accuse; insomuch that they examined and
committed the Queens Confessor; and examined the Ladies of Her bedchamber.
And their Sergeant at Arms presumed so far, as to come into the Kings
withdrawing-roome next unto His Bedchamber, to cite and summon Persous of
greatest quality and nearness unto Himself; insomuch that out of shame the
King has bin forced to withdraw Himself into his bedchamber, notwithstanding
that the Law says, that a Lord cannot in the Kings, presence seize his slave
or villian that has rnn from him. And from the third of November 1640 until
the 10. of January 1641. when the King was driven out of London, then was no
man, Counselor, Judge, or Person of what quality soever, exempt from their
Justice.

And to show how willing He was to satisfy them; that He would not interrupt
or hinder the course of Justice, He gave way to that which some Princes would
rather have adventured a War then have condescended unto; which was his giving
leave to His privy Counsel (that had bin sworn to keep secret whatsoever
passed in Council) to be examined upon Oath of what had passed in his own
Presence and most secret cabinet Counsel, against one of their own fellows in
a capital Cause; which is likely hereafter to cause him to be served with
caution; when men shall not know how soon they may be questioned for that which
they do advise, which is in effect against themselves; for if one shall be
accused of Treason, the rest likewise may be questioned for Concealment.

They speak of some that fled fearing to be questioned; certainly they had
great reason so to do, when their proceeding was such, as not to be guilty but
only to be accused, was certain ruin, or imprisonment for many years, diverse
having languished two or three years in Prison; and the Arch bishop of
Canterbury was almost fonr years in prison before he was put to death And such
as observed the proceedings with the earl of Strafford would not willingly (how
innocent soever) fall into their hands, if it were to be avoided; for they may
remember how by the procurement of some amongst them, tumults and multitudes
surrounded the House of Peers, crying Justice, justice, and they would have the
Traitors head.

They may remember their posting up of 59. Members of the honse of Commons,
that would not give their Votes to the Bill of Attainder of the Earl: If they
have forgotten it, their own Historiographer Mr. May may put them in mind of
it; They may likewise remember that at the same time upon an empty Tun rolled
from a Tavern door, a list of the Lords names whom they called Malignants, was
read in the midst of that rabble in the Palace yard; and although the House of
Peers then represented these violences to the House of Commons, they could
never obtein their assistance to suppress them, or to declare against them;
and they may remember whether it was not said amongst them, that they should
do ill to discountenance their friends.

On the other side, let it be remembered how many Counselors who have bin
Actors in all the pretended Exorbitancies of the Star Chamber, Councel-table,
and high Co^missiion, being once become persons in whom they might confide,
were left unquestioned; Let them remember that when they expelled all such
Monopolers as they judged affectionate to the King, whether they left not some
others of their favorites sitting amongst them until this day? But for that it
would be too long to instance in many things of this kind, as having employed
the most infamous Projectors and Catchpoles in their service: they shall only
be put in mind of one particular of an eminent Member of their House, who
would have presented a Petition against a great Counselor, who was much
favored by Mr. Pym and others, who having gotten notice of the Contents
thereof, would never permit it to be read in the House; but the said party
having worn out three Copies in his pocket, engrossed it in parchment; but ever
when he stood up to speak, Mr. Pym or some other appointed to watch him,
interrupted him with speaking to the Orders of the House (which are always to
have the precedence;) and this for many months together, insomuch as the said
petition could never be read.

As for the Kings deserting of His Parliament, it has bin so often answered,
that it is a shame to repeat it; only this shall be added, that the King did
not desert his Parliament, but was forced in great haste to fly for the safety
of his Person, which would the next day have bin in great hazard of being
seized. And although this present house of commons be not charged with any such
intention (such resolutions passing few hands, and that there are very few left
there now that were trusted with that secret) yet it has bin confessed, and is
under the hand of a person that has bin very active in their service, and who
should have bin a principal Actor in it.

Then follows that threadbare business of bringing up of the Northern Army,
so often objected, and so often scorned by those that knew the mystery of it;
which if the King had endeavored to have won to His service, and full
adherence, He had done like a wise and prudent Prince; neither had there bin
any cause for the concealing, or not avowing of any such endeavor, if it had
bin so; For it is well known by whom that army was endeavored to be seduced
from the kings service and from the Earl of Strafford who was their General;
nor was the Earl ignorant thereof, neither would he have fai'ld in his proofs,
having it in his thoughts speedily to have impeached several persons of high
Treason, for tampering with the said Army; as is well known not to a few
sitting still amongst them at Westminster; but they by their diligence got it
by the hand, by impeaching him a day or two before his impeachment against them
was ready, which cost him his life.

Besides, they know the person that started this hare among them has often
cleared the king, that it was impossible that the K. should know of the
proposition of the bringing up the Army, which was his own motion, and was by
some rejected as a thing too high, and not liked by others, for that he would
have the chief command of the Action, which would not be condescended unto;
whereupon out of discontent, he went immediately and made his discovery to the
lower house, without ever seeing the king; but there had been some speech
before of a petition to be procured from the Army (which was published) and
what knowledge the King might have of preferring such a petition, is not known
to the writer of this answer: but the party that first gave the houses notice
of this business has often sworn, that all he said concerning the King in this
business, was in relation to the said petition; but that the King could never
have nor had notice of the proposition of bringing up the Northern Amy; for
that being his own motion, he presently (seeing it disapproved, especially his
having the chief Command and Conduct of the Action) revealed it, before the
King could possibly have knowledge of it, which party is yet living, and
certainly will avow as much.

But presupposing the King should have gotten knowledge of the motion (which
does in nothing appear, (the King seeing the great tumults, and the great
hazard that his own person was in, as well as the freedom of Parliament; might
He not have reason by His own Army, raised by Himself, and paid by His own
moneys. (as it had bin for many months) endeavored to have secured His own
safety, and the freedom of Parliament, without committing any such crime, as
meriteth to be deposed, or used as now He is?

Let it be compared with that which the now prevalent Party in the houses have
don, who seeing themselves like to be overawed by the presbyterian party, and
finding no other means not to be overborne, thought it fit to have recourse
unto the present Army of Independents and although the then house of Commons
had voted a petition of the said Army to be burnt, and such to be enemies of
the State, as should adhere thereunto; yet the army was drawn up toward
London, and the house forced to sequester eleven of their most eminent members;
and when the City or Apprentices had restored the said 11 Members, (as they had
in former times don the five Members) the Speaker, and all such as had deserted
the parliament, and had fled to the army, were by force again reestablished;
and the new Speaker M. Pelham was unchaired, and all that party were driven
away, some forced to fly, others were impeached; and the now prevalent party
possessed themselves again of the houses, and the power they now have of
deposing the King, and keeping of Him Prisoner. There is a great dfference
betwixt what they have really don by this army, for the turning upside down the
Parliament; and what was ever spoken of, of the Northern Army. But Success and
Power will make the same things (though acted) commendable in those that
prevail, which they will have capital in those who never passed further then
discourse.

They then begin to speak of the tyrany toward Scotl. and Ireland etc. For
that of Scotland ( which is formerly answered) I shall only ad the full
satisfaction which the Kingdom of Scotland received by their own
acknowledgment, expressed by a petition made since the Kings last coming from
Scotl. viz.: That Whereas The Kings most sacred Majesty's royal zeal, and
constant resolution of maintaining the true Religion and preserving the laws
and liberties of these kingdoms is so undoubted, that to call it in que- etc.
could not be construed in any, but an unchristian distrustfulnes and in us his
Ma. Subjests of this His aucient and native kingdom the height of disloyalty
and ingratitude, if we should harbor any scruple or thought to the contrary
having so many real and recent evidences of his Royal goodness, justice and
Wisdom, in settling and establishing the trne Religion and the Laws and
Liberties of this His kingdom, to the full satisfaction of all his good
subjects. And nevertheles prerceiving by his Ma'. Declarations and other
printed papers, that foul and malicious aspersions are cast on his Ma. tending
to be and his sacred person, and deprave his royal Govern', etc. we conceive
our selves bound in duty to almighty God (by whom we have sworn to defeud and
maintain the person greatness, and authority of our dread Sovereign, Gods
vicegerent, to the utmost with our means and lives, in every cause which may
concern his honor, as may apear by that which by the warrant of the Act of the
general Assembly, we have all sworn and signed) and to our king and country,
and to that we ow to our honor and reputation, to represent to your Lps. the
desires we have to express, and make known to his Ma. and all the world, that
we are fully satisfied, and persuaded of his Majesty's royal zeal and
resolution, and that malice and detraction cannot prevail to make the least
impression in our loyal hearts, of jealousy, or distrust: And therefore we have
taken the boldness humbly to petition your Lps. That as his Majesty has
graciously condescended (in his letter to your Lps. printed by your warrant)
for satisfaction of his good subjects, to express his Royal goodness, and
desire, that all grounds of jealousy may be kept and removed out of the hearts
of his good Subjects of this Kingdom: So it may please your Lordships to think
upon some course, that his Majesty reciprocally may be cleared, and assured of
our constant affection, etc. and that we are not so unthankefull to God, or to
his Vicegerent, nor so little tender of our own honor and credit, as to forget
so soon that duty, incumbent to us by so many obligations, and so often
promised by us in our foresaid solemn Oaths, which are published to the view
of the whole World, etc.

As for the Rebellion in Ireland they make use of this to the same end they do
of all things else in their Declaration. That knowing that horrid rebellion to
be so detestable to all men (as it justly deserves) they would fain draw part
of the hatred of it on the king, although it be with never so improbable or
false pretext* And they think in the mean time that it will serve the present
turn, of making the king odious, till He may have means to clear it by His
answer (which they never intend to afford Him, until they have established
their tyranny) and then they will not care to be fought against with papers.
But their Declaration in this point of Ingland [besides that the points
contained in it have been so often answered in print] does so confound all
times, all actions, either in the War, or whilst there was a Cessation; and
all the circumstances and reasons, which may justify such actions at one time,
as might be blameable at another; that the answer must be applied to the
general Scope of the Declaration, which is, to insinuate unto the world, that
the King did abet and favor the Rebellion; which not only the Kings many
Declarations, but his real and effectual actions do evince of falsehood, and
detestable malice; For He did wholly put the Irish business, and the
prosecution of the business, into the hands and management of the two Houses;
and consented to an act of parliament, giving them power to raise men and money,
and all other necessary provision for that war, notwithstanding that they had
subtly inserted into the preamble of the said Act, a clause debatring Him and
His successors from the power of levying men by way of press, without consent
of Parliament; although it had been always used by His Predecessors. But such
was their art by the inserting of the said Clause, that they would either gain
the disclaiming of that power to press men or else would render the King
odious, by publishing his refusal to do that, which by the Houses was thought
necessary for the suppressing of that horrid Rebellion: This artifice has been
since used by clogging most Bills (which would be plausible to the people) with
some clause or parenthesis of great prejudice unto the King which He has been
often forced to pass by, to avoid the distaste which the denying of those
plausible Bills would have brought upon Him; and so He did in this.

Besides this his concurrence in all that was desired of him; being at York,
and having some beginning of power he offered to have passed in person into
Ireland, for the subduing of those Rebels; and to let the world see, that He
desired rathet to employ those forces against the Rebels in Ireland, then by
them to raise the least jealousy of raising a war in England; But this His
Majestyes offer was by the Houses rejected; and the King did then see that the
forces and the moneys that were levied by his consent, and Commission, were in
part employed against Himself, to strengthen and pay the forces that were
designed to march against Him; whereby the War of Ireland, (which had been
most prosperous under the wise and faithful Conduct of the Marq. of Ormond,
for which the Houses sent him public thanks, and a present) began to be very
dubious by their neglect, and their applying of the moneys and forces pretended
for Ireland, against the King; and so by degrees the English Armies in Ireland,
were reduced to those great streights for want of pay and provision, by the ill
Conduct of the Houses; that after many solicitations both to the King and
Parliament, by which little or no releife was obtained; there was a necessity
of coming to a cessation of Arms for one year; which was done by the advice
of the Council of Ireland; and at the earnest petition of the Lords, and of
the chief Officers of the Army, (of whom the Lord Inchiquin was one) as
appears by their own book of Exact Collect. page. 344. To. 2. where likewise
the necessity of the said cessation is at large set down: And the King seeing
Himself much overpowered, and like to be overborne by the Rebels in England,
was enforced to make use of the forces offered Him from Ireland, who were there
ready to sterve; which certainly would have been a great imprudence in Him not
to have done; and is as great an impudence in them to charge this as a fault or
crime upon the King, to assist Himself of His own Subjects for His defense:
when they (at so great an expense to the kingdom) have hired in a foreign
Nation (the Scots) to subdue Him.

Next they alleag concerning the proclamations, That though they declared that
the Rebels in Ireland styled themselves, the King and Queens Army, yet they
could not obtain a proclamation against them in diverse months; and then also
but 40 Copies might be printed etc. The first perfect advertisement of the
Rebellion of Ireland, came to his Majesty and Counsel in England from the
Lords Justices (Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Burlace) and Council of
Ireland; wherewith they sent the draught of such a Proclamation as they
conceived best for the suppressing thereof; and because those Rebels did
pretend that what they had done was for the service of the King, and not
without some authority from him, it was by the said Lord Justices Letters
desired, that 20 copies of those Proclamations might be sent over, signed by
the Kings own hand, (whereas the usual course was to send over only one so
signed) that (besides those which they were there to print, and publish after
the usual manner) they might send some of the Originals so signed, to some of
the chief of the Rebels to manifest the falsehood of the said traitorous
pretense.

And though Proclamations which the King Signs either for England or Ireland
never use to be printed, yet it was now for better expedition held fit by his
Majesty, and the Lords of his Council, (whereof diverse of those now sitting in
the house of peers at Westminst. were then present) that those 20 proclamations
his Majesty was to sign, should be printed; and the Secretary being directed
to cause it to be forthwith dispatched, did accordingly presently send a
warrant to the Kings Printer, to print about 40 Copies, and to send them to him
for his Majesty's service; and to deliver out none to any other, for that those
were to be Originals for the Kings signature only, and to be by them reprinted
in Ireland, according to the usual course. And to have any copies of them
dispersed in England before they were proclaimed in Ireland, (where they were
principally of use) as it was never practiced, so it was conceived it might
have bin of some prejudice; for that the said Irish Rebels (who had forged the
former false pretense) might (if they had gotten any Copy thereof before they
had bin proclaimed in Ireland) have divulged some other traitorous fiction, to
have rendered the Proclamation of less credit with their party; and so have
frustrated the good which His Majesty and his council of both Kingdoms did
hope that proclamation would have effected. And whereas it is alleged as a
fault, that there were but 40 of those Proclamations sent into Ireland; it is
well known to the Lords of the Council now sitting at Westminster, that it was
twice as many as was desired.

And whereas they say, that the Irish Rebels called themselves the King and
Queens Army; It is the constant practice of all Rebels at the beginning, to
countenance their Rebellion with the pretense of the Kings service; and that
they take Arms against the oppressions of evil Councillors, and Ministers
that seduce the King: The like was done by themselves at the beginning; who
only pretended to remove Malignants and evil Counselors and to bring
Delinquents to punishment; and then their war was in the name of King and
Parliament, as some of their own have not of late forbore to put them in mind.
But now it is to remove the King from the government, and to settle another of
their own making, without the King or against Him.

For the disbanding the Irish Army, although the King had great reason to demur
upon it; yet such was his desire to gratify them, that He condescended unto it;
and themselves consented that they should take any foreign imploiment
whatsoever; but afterward would not give way to the transporting of them; and
by that means much strength was added to the Irish Rebellion; all which they
themselves cannot deny. And upon such malicious false inferences as these,
depend all or most of their instanced Accusations in this their Declaration.

They say, the king refused to give Commissions (though often asked by the
Houses) to the Lord Brook, and the Lord Wharton. The king knew well how little
reason he had to trust either of them. The Lord Brook was often so indiscreet,
as to profess openly and often, that he was wholly Antimonarchicall, and once
in the hearing of seven or eight,) for which he was reproved by some of his
discreeter friends yet sitting among them) and it may be easily reduced to
their memories; besides his other faults, which shall not be remembered, because
he has given an account of them. For the Lord Wharton; the King was not then
ignorant of his seditious and mutinous ways against him, after so many
obligations of the Kings put upon him and his friends, which he has ill repaid
by his actions; and has since had a more profitable and gainful Trade at
Westminster, then he could have had in any martial employment, to which it
should seem his natural disposition does not much incline him.

They then say, that they need not tell the world how the Scots entered this
Kingdom with a powerful Army. It were indeed much to their honor and loyalty
to have it concealed; for it was by their invitations and negotiations; and
upon so hard terms and conditions, that the Answer to the Scottish declarati^
set out the 4 of Ja. 1647 says, that their Commisioners would by no means
have brought them, but that they could get no better.

They then spoke of the L. Digby's attempting the Country with unusual
arguments of armed troops: It was conceived that they had long since bin
ashamed of that ridiculous tale of the L. Digby's raising war against the King
(for so their impeachment runs) with a Coach and six Horses. Next they say,
he advised the King to retire Himself to some safe place. If he had done so,
it had been good and honest Council; but it was not any advice to the King,
but his opinion only written in a private lettter to his brother Sir Lewis
Dives what he judged safest for the King, being forced to fly out of London for
fear of M. Skippon's great march, which was to be the next day to convoy the
accused Members to Westminster.

Now follows the Negotiations with Denmark, and the story of a servant of the
Lord Digby's hiring of a Skipper to be pilot to a fleet preparing in Denmark;
which fleet proved to be the Cow-fleet that uses to bring cattle out of
those parts into Holland, And for the Lord Digby's man, as he never had any
name, so the truth is that he had no man with him at that time, going out of
England only with a Dutch Gentleman in his company; neither is their own word
of Truth in the whole story. And for the Kings soliciting for Ammunition and
Succors from his Uncle of Denmark, it were to have bin wished that His
solicitations had bin as successful as they are justifiable.

And touching the letter said to be written unto the King of Denmark; it is
very likely indeed, that the King would have invented such a scandal to His
own shame, and the reproach of His Mother if he had not had some grounds for
it; And yet it is true that they may say in the name of the House, that it
never entered into their thoughts; Businesses of that nature are secretly laid,
and carried on by a few: But there are some at Westminster that know what
passed in that business, and by whose loyalty the motion of it was quashed in
the bud: And when his Majesty may be heard, or His Accusations may be admitted
of, He will be easily drawn to give them and the world satisfaction in this
point; it were to be wished that they would give as good satisfaction for their
malice in inserting this particular in their Declaration, in so unmannerly and
undecent terms toward their King, stiling it a false and scandalous charge,
and such an Act as they believe was never a more unworthy one done by any
Prince, to the shame of His own Mother.

They then add another breach of Trust, That the King had sent away with the
Queen the anciene Jewels of the Crown, Our Savior says, may I not dispose
of my own as I please? The jewels were His own, bought with His own money, or
with the moneys of His Ancestors, and not with the moneys of the Crown;
neither do they produce any entaile of them upon the Crown; And certainly in
the present condition whereunto they had reduced Him, He could never have
juster cause to sell or pawn them, then that which they themselves set down,
for Arms and Ammunition for His own defense and preservation.

The King, they say, once sent a specious Message of renewing a Treaty, but his
messenger was instructed to manage a bloody massacre in London, which was
designed by virtue of a Commission of the Kings since published.

Hereof they give us no more proof but that they say it; and for the bloody
massacre intended, it is a most false and malicious slander; there being no
other Design but to protect His own Loyal Subjects in London; and to reduce
His Rebels; which certainly was more justifiable for Him to do, either as
their King, or as an Enemy in open War, then their barbarous murdering of
Tomkins, and the rest, only for endeavoring of their duties.

And for the Commission they speak of, it was such a one as not only in time
of war He might think fit to do, but might legally have done it in time of
Peace.

Touching the Kings march to Brainford, the Reasons thereof have been often
declared in print, to the satisfaction of all indifferent Readers.

But those barbarous cruelties they speak of to be committed by the King, are
most false; for there was not one man slain but in the heat of War, and the
King gave to all his Prisoners their lives and liberties, only upon engagement
not to take Arms against Him for the future; which engagement they traitrously
and falsely broke, being thereof absolved by some of their wicked Ministers, as
some of the said Prisoners (being afterward taken again) confessed.

The reason why the King changed His mind from staying at Windsor, and
advanced to Brainford, was for that whilst their Commissioners were sent to
him to Colebrooke, that very night information was brought, that they were
advanced with their Army and Ordinance toward Him, and they take it very ill
that He would not stay at Windsor till they came to take Him.

For the denying to receive their Petitions, they give no instance of it in
any, neither will it be proved I believe, that ever it was done, unless the
Petition were to be delivered with an Army at the heels of it, or by such a
person as the King, by name, had declared Traitor, and excepted from Pardon.

They then begin to speak of the Queen, upon whom (if they could) they would
willingly cast some aspersion, as well as upon the King. But because there are
many particulars scatteredly set down in this Declaration concerning her
Majesty, they shall in this Answer be set down here together, that the cleerer
Judgment may be made of them.

They say first, That by that time the queens pious Design to advance Popery
was ready for the Birth. That Design was most industriously examined by them,
and they had before them in the House of Commons Sir Kenelme Digby, Mr.
Montague, and diverse others; and upon the narrowest sifting of that Business,
they thought it then fit to proceed no farther in it; But now they make use of
it to cast Aspersions upon the king and queen, when they could find no cause
to punish the chief Actors in the said Business.

Secondly, they say, That there was a great Design amongst the Papists for a
general massacre in Ireland and England, and that a great Royal Person had a
hand in it.

It is to be wondered at, that they should on a sudden become so modest, as
not in plain words to name (the Queen, whom they had formerly impeached by name
(with all Her titles) of high Treason, and sought Her life; And now they would
slily insinuate into the people, that she had a hand in so execrable a Design,
as to massacre all the Protestants of two Kingdoms; And that upon information
given unto the late Lord of Canterbury, without a telling by whom the said
information was given, or when; neither set they down by whom the said massacre
should have bin acted, or by what Plot; It is to be thought that it should have
bin performed by the same hands that so many of the Peers, and of the House of
Commons should have bin slain, had it not bin prevented by the Tailors
discovery in Moorefeilds.

Thirdly, they say That the king confesses He had sent the Queen to Holland.
It seems that she was an obedient Wife, and He a careful Husband of Her,
when He saw that most barbarous and inhumane usage of Her, that Her very
Bedchamber could not be privileged, but her Nurse, and her Confessor must be
examined against Her.

They add, That with the Queen He sent the Jewels of the Crown. In whose hands
could He better trust His own goods, which He saw likely to be taken from him,
as his Houses, Furniture, and whole Revenue, and that of the Queen and Prince
had bin by them? Neither could He expect that His Jewels should have bin safer
then his liveries for His Guards have bin of late; And certainly his Jewels
were better disposed of, if they were pawned for Powder and Ammunition, then
His Guard's Coats that are ordered to be sold outright for fire and candles for
Soldiers at Whitehall.

Then they say, the Queen many months before Her voyage to Holland, was going
beyond the Seas, had not their Motion to the King stayed Her, It seems then
that the King was willing to gratify them, although it were with the crossing
of the queen's desires; and that the King's sending of Her afterward into
Holland, was not until she could not remain any longer amongst them with
Safety or Honor; For they themselves do believe that the King could have bin
very well pleased to have enjoyed Her Company.

These are the particulars that they set down concerning the queen, in which
there is little remarkable but their detestable malice; for were it to be
expected that the queen; bred up a Roman Catholic, and by Capitulations and
the Kings Oath, to enjoy the use of her Religion in such sort as was agreed,
should not look to enjoy it? Especially her carriage ever since her coming
into England having been with that Prudence and Moderation, that the great
Officers of her Court, and most of the Ladies of her Bedchamber, have been
Protestants, enjoying daily the use of their Religion in Her Court, without
being pressed by her to the least Act, in waiting upon Her or otherwise, that
might offend or strain their Consciences. But that a Princess of so high
Extraction as the blood of France, and Daughter of the great Henry the fourth,
and their Kings Wife, that never had done any person wrong, but obliged all
whenever it was in Her way, should find such usage from Subjects; as to have
all malicious false Libels countenanced against Her; to be questioned for Her
life, only for the assisting of Her Hnsband; to be forced to fly the Kingdom;
to have all Her Revenue taken from Her; and now as though she had intended a
general massacre, to be rendered odious by this malicious Libell, authorized by
the name of the House of Commons, it cannot but be held a most inhumane and
barbarous proceeding, as indeed it is, by all the World but themselves.

Touching the Letters written to the Pope, King James sent His Son (then
Prince) into Spain, being about 20. years of age; and instructed Him, and the
Duke of Buckingham that waited upon Him, in all things touching the Negotiation
of the Prince's marriage, which was then in Treaty for a Daughter of Spain. And
of all that passed, the Prince gave the King His Father almost daily
advertisment by expresses; and He received from Him likewise directions upon
all emergent occasion, neither sent He any Letter to the Pope, without His
Fathers privity and allowance. King James likewise Himself at the same time
did write Letters to the Pope, which He publicly avowed, saying, The Pope was
a Temporal Prince, and He would write unto Him upon any occasion in secular
Affairs, as freely as He did to the great Magor, or to the great Turk, when He
wrote against him in point of controversies in Religion, He would then (He said
give him those Appellations that the Cause required, but in His letters
missive, He would give Him those Respects and Civilities that befitted one
temporal Prince toward another. And certainly King James was no Papist,
although He were no friend to Sectaries and Separatists but had written more in
the defense of the Reformed Religion, and to the displeasing of the Pope, then
all the Princes of Christendom had done since the Reformation, and when He
dyed, scarcely left a wiser man behind Him. But they are brought to great
streights, when they are driven to take in the Fathers grave (dead 25. years
past) to find matters for their malice against the Son.

For the Letters spoken of to be written to the Pope, on the behalf of the
Duke of Lorraign, I must confess I want Information in the point of the fact,
But if it were so, He could not have written for a Prince that was nearer
allied to Him. And whereas it is said, that in requital an Army to invade
England must be raised by Him, It is a very unlikely Story, that the Duke of
Lorraign should be in condition to raise an Army to invade England, But if He
could afford His Kinsman Auxiliaries, or any other supplies, He should he much
to blame if He did it not.

For the Kings offer to the Scots of the plunder of London, if they would
advance, or of 300000. pounds, and four Northern Counties only to stand
neuters: Besides the ridiculousnesse to conceive any such offers could be made,
they do not so much as offer at any kind of proof but follow their rule held
throughout in all this their Declaration; audacter accusare, aliquid haeret,
accuse boldly, somewhat will stick. They have all the Kings Letters and
Cabinets; and it is not likely that any so great transaction could only have
been verbal: But if the King should have made this impossible offer, or any
other, should He not have done like a prudent and good Prince, to have called
His own Subjects from the adherence to His Rebels, to their own Loyalty and
Duties, though it should have bin by out-bidding of them?

After the Kings return from Scotland, the great quantity of fire works found
in Papists houses: No naming where, nor when, nor by whom the Papists should
have subdued the kingdom, only with grenades and fireworks without any foot
or horse, but those that about that time they had discovered to be kept under
ground; O how contemptible is it for a House of Commons to abuse the kingdom
with such squibs?

Then they say, Morters with great pieces of Battery were mounted against the
City; and such Officers placed in the Tower, as were not only suspected by
them, but by the whole City, who durst not abide in their houses, as by their
several Petitions is manifest.

They do not say that one gun was ever shot, and they know that no one man did
for fear forsake his house: nor any one Act of injury or Hostility committed
toward them. As for the Lieutenant of the Tower, they would confide in none
but such as a few factious men of the House (who had conspired with a great
party in the City) did appoint; The King to give them satisfaction removed Sir
Tho. Lunsford; then put in a Gentleman of remarkable honesty and worth, and of
great fortune ( Sir John Byron) against whom no exception could be taken, but
that he was not of their party; against him (when no other pretense could be
found) they alleged, that if a Person were not put into the Tower, in whom the
Merchants might confide, there would be no more money brought into the Mint:
And although a hundred thousand pounds caution were offered on the behalf of
Sir John Byron, yet nothing would satisfy, unless the Tower were put into
such hands as they pleased to nominate, and it was publicly avowed that if it
were not speedily done, they would seize it by force; and to that purpose they
caused multitudes every day to come to the House whilst that business was in
agitation.

And as for the Petitions, they know that they were all of their own making;
and whosoever Petitioned without their Order, or not suitable to their sense,
were severely punished; as in the Petition of Kent, and many others, only such
as they had ordered to be delivered to the Houses; and when they had no reason
to uphold their demands, they then made use of tumults, and seditious and
threatening Petitions in stead of other Arguments; these they ever countenanced
and supported; as they did in this case of the Tower, when they caused
Petitions to be delivered, desiring to know the names of the Malignant Lords
that obstructed the business of the Kingdom, and refused to assent to the
Votes of the Commons, and they would right themselves by the remedy next at
hand (by which they meant their swords and clubs in their hands) and thereby
forced the Votes of the Lords, as it is pretended was done by the Apprentices
at Pelham's Parliament; insomuch that that which had bin voted by 42. Lords,
for the not removing of Sir John Byron from his Lievetenancy of the Tower, was
now carried by 16. or 17. votes only; (contrary to the orders of the house,
that such things as upon the question had been once settled, might not again
that Sessions be put to the question) And by the threats of their Petitions;
the noise and tumults at the doors by the multitudes; the intimation of danger
from the House of Commons, and from the enraged People, which they feared would
not be in their power to prevent: and by the Lords of the Party, who most
boldly (contrary to the essential freedom of Parliament, relying upon their
friends at the door) voted all such as should continue to dissent from the
House of Commons, to be Enemies of the State; whereupon most of the Bishops and
Lords (fearing to be reformed by the remedies next at hand) held it wisdom to
withdraw themselves: only 14. of above forty (that had formerly voted the
contrary) withdrew themselves; and so the Lords of the Party overruled it; And
this narration will appear to be true by the Book of the House of Peers, if
they have not since thought fit to expunge it. So that it is thought very
strange, that the wisdom of the House of Commons (by calling to mind the use
that they have made of Petitions) should give cause to have the memory of such
shameful proceedings to be revived.

They then say that from this time the track of open force began to appear.
They first instance the Kings charging some of both Houses of Treason; the
Kings desiring to have some tried by due course of Justice (never before denied
to any King, and in their own remembrance practiced, and by the House of
Peers allowed) must now be accounted a Crime, and an Act of open force in the
King: but forget how many of their Members the Army has impeached and forced
to fly.

They then speak of the bloody Tragedy intended by the Kings coming to the
House of Commons, if the affections of the City had not prevented it. If there
had been any bloody tragedy intended by the Kings coming to the House. it would
have been the same day put in execution, before the City could have prevented
it. But they may remember if they please, the testimony of Cap. Ashley, taken
be fore a Committee of both Houses at Grocers-Hall, if it be not suppressed;
wherein he declared, That the King at the upper end of Westminster Hall,
before he went up the stayres to the House of Commons, charged all those that
accompanied Him (except some few ordinary Servants) not so much as to come to
the stairs, nor to offer violence or injury to any Person upon pain of their
lives. Further, the King in that point did let himself down so low to give
them satisfaction, as was never done by any King toward His Subjects; but
nothing but the dis-throning of Himself, and leaving the Sovereignty, is fit
for them to accept.

They say, that the King entered a Protestation into the Council book, that
His calling of them a Parliament, did not make them so; And therein He said
very true, that His calling of them a Parliament does not make them a
Parliament, (that can be only done by His Writ) no more then His calling them
no Parliament, does make them to be no Parliament. But it is true, before His
restraining of himself, he could when he pleased have dissolved them; But if
they have committed Treason or Felony; and that that which their Oracle Sir
Edw. Cook, Mr. Solicitor, and that reverend old Eleazar Judge Jenkins do say,
be true, That Treason and Felony do supersede all privileges of Parliament;
And although a Corporation cannot commit Treason, yet every person of the
Corporation may; and if one, then ten, if ten, then a hundred, and so all: And
if that House have had the ill luck to commit Treason or Felony, (although the
King by reason of His restraint should not dissolve it) yet it may become Felo
de se, and may destroy it self: And it is much doubted whether the King can
raise them from the dead.

Then they come to their standing amazed at the Kings solemn Protestation of
having never any thought of bringing up the Northern Army; or levying of forces
to wage war against his Parliament; or to invade the rights of his Subjects; or
bringing in of foreign forces. They should have done well to have set down
the date of the said Declaration; as likewise the particulars wherein He has
satisfied His said Protestations; and not to have kept themselves still upon
the fraud of generals; nor confounded the times before they had entered into
Arms, with the times after the King had proclaimed them Traitors and Rebels;
times and circumstances, do often justly alter Counsels, and make those
Actions necessary and good, which without them might have appearance of blame:
But if the particulars shall be set down with the times and circumstances, the
falsehood, as well as the malice will appear, of their so often reiterated
reproaching their King, with breach of Oaths and protestations.

They do farther then charge the King, that He endeavored to get out Cannon,
Powder, and Shot out of his own stores; and they have a letter to that effect
to Sir John Heyden: They say likewise that He did attempt to have forced Hull
in an hustile manner. Two such faults in the King as do marvailously justify
their resolutions and usages of him, which they set down to be the Scope of
this Declaration: In the one, the King would have imbezel'd His own proper
goods; and in the other, He would have come into his own Town, had not the
Traitor Hotham kept him out for which they have given him such a reward, as
others may justly expect, if their repentance and the Kings goodness do not
prevent it.

It was not long ( they say) before the King proclaimed them Traitors and
Rebels, and set up his Standard against the Parliament, which never King of
England did before Himself.

Herein they are mistaken, for the King did not set up his Standard against His
Parliament; His Parliament was never named at the setting up of His Standard;
but it was set up against those whom He had first proclaimed Traitors and
Rebels, which has bin often done by the Kings of England; And so did His
Majesty now against an Army marching toward Him, to surprise His Person; and
that within few days after gave Him a battle, and did their best to have
slain Him under the command of the Earl of Essex, with whom they had all
sworn and protested to live and dye.

But that which they say, that never any King before set up His Standard
against his Parliament; it is true, for no King ever needed a Standard against
His Parliament; for that at their pleasures they could dissolve it with a
breath; and so might his Majesty have done now, had not His goodness and
unprovident desire of gratifying them restrained Him, by assenting unto that
Act for the continuance of this present Parliament: which they themselves
protested in one of their Declarations, they would never make use of to the
Kings disservice, but only to the ends for which it was granted, viz. to be a
security for the raising and paying of moneys; which how they have performed
let the world judge.

it is then said, the King called a mock-Parliament at Oxford; It is true that
the King having declared the Members sitting at Westminster to be Traitors and
Rebels; and Treason, as themselves have often acknowledged, discharging all
Privileges, Qualifications, Capacity, or abilities to act as a Parliament;
the King was enforced to call to His Council and Assistance, His loyal
Members of both Houses, that had bin wrongfully, or by force and tumults driven
from the Houses at Westminster; and to require of them in His so great
distress their help and advice: but it is conceived that they will not be
able to show, that the King ever styled it his Parliament, but an Assembly of
the Members of the Lords and Commons convened at Oxford. And for that which
they instance of private letter, intended only for the sight of the Queen His
Wife, they will fail of the end for which they produce it, which is, to
withdraw the affections of His faithful Servants (which they call His own
Party) from Him by telling them, that they may perceive what reward they may
expect, when they have done their utmost, and ship wrack't their faith and
consciences to His will and tyranny: But his party (as they term it) which are
His faithful and loyal Subjects, as they have already most of them lost their
Estates and Fortunes for their Conscience and Loyalty to Him; so they will
sacrifice their lives willingly for His service and restitution. And as for
that by-name of a mock-Parliament, which they give unto that Assembly; They may
remember that there was double the number of Peers more then remained at
Westminster; and for the Members of the House of Commons, they much exceeded in
their Estates and Fortunes all those that were left behind them. They may
likewise remember that they have not wanted their by-names in print; as the
Jugles, and Hocas-pocuses at Westminster; and by some who have ever adhered to
them, have been styled a Linsey-wolsoy-Parliament* and their own Army in their
Declaration, have called them a Parliament swayed by a factious prevolent
party, that governed by an arbitrary tyrannical Power. These things I must
confess are set down by me (that have been a Member of the House of Commons)
with great grief, remembering the respect and reverence which in former times
was born unto that House, and now changed into so great Scorn and Derision as
weekly comes forth in print.

They then add, His often breach of trust with the Protestants of France,
Scotland, Ireland, and England, with all other His unjust oppressions; and His
often endeavors to enslave them by German, Spanish, Lorraign, Irish, and
Danish, and other foreign forces. Those other forces must certainly be of
Turks, Swedes, or Polands; for they have particularly recited almost all other
Nations, when now in all this their Declaration, (except such from Ireland who
were His own Subjects, and who were bound in duty to come to the succor of
their King, being invaded by a foreign Nation, called in by them to conquer
Him) they have not been able to instance in so much as one Company of Foot, or
Troup of Horse of foreigners, that He has called in, but they hope by this
great noise of reciting so many Nations, to fill the ears of the People, and to
abuse them; as they did by the speaking of the death of His Father; of the
reproaching of His Mother: of His bloody Cruelties, His oppressions, and
Tyranny; His breach of Trust, of Oaths, and Protestations; and with those
odious names, and a bold Accusation, (to which He should not have means to
answer) to make something stick with the people, whereby to alienate their
Hearts from Him; and to allay the detestablenesse of their most inhumane and
barbarous proceeding with Him.

They then say, neither do we wonder He should forget His Vows and
Protestations, that He would never consent to a toleration of the Popish
Religion, or abolition of the Laws then in force against Recusants, yet about
the same time He wrote Letters to the Queen, and the E. of Ormond, that He
would consent to the taking away of all penal Laws against Papists both in
England and Ireland.

Touching the Letters to the Queen, and the Marquess of Ormond, they are all
printed by their Order; and according to the information I have credibly
received, by those Letters it will appear, that the penal Laws touching
Recusants were not to be taken away; and the favors intended to the Papists
were with such limitation, as they think fit to conceal.

Besides, there is a wide difference betwixt a toleration of Popery, and the
not putting in execution the penal Laws; and so there is betwixt the
abolishing of the penal Laws, and a temporary forbearance of the rigor of
them, which has been practiced by Queen Eliz. King James, and His Majesty; but
never in so high a degree, as by themselves toward the Sectaries and
Separatists (who by the Law are Recusants as well as Papists;) yet they have
made use of them in their service, without distinction of any Sect, Schism, or
Heresy; insomuch that at Plymouth they made use of some Turks in their service
out of the Jail, that had been condemned as Pirates. And let them remember of
what a composition their new modeled Army is, by whom they have carried through
their Rebellion; and how careful they are now to uphold the liberty and
freedom of them, under the name of tender Consciences. Yet it must be a Crime
in the King, for the saving of His Crown, to encourage His own Subjects to be
loyal unto Him; and to assist Him against his Rebels, by promising them some
favor against the rigor and extremity of the Laws. There is no Religion, or
Nation, English, Welsh, Irish, Scottish, French, Hollanders, Dutch, Germans,
Turks, whose service they have not used to depose their Sovereign, as it is now
apparent, although at first they all fought for the King and Parliament: And if
He should have made use of them for His just defense, or shall do for His just
restitution, His doing so, would be much more justifiable before God and man
then what they have done.

They then say, that notwithstanding that both Houses, and the Scotch
Commissioners did declare, that they did hold a personal Treaty was not safe,
yet the Houses now yielded to that; that is, to a personal Treaty.

They might have remembered that the Scots in their Papers do set down why at
that time they held a personal Treaty at London not safe; viz. because the
King had several Armies on foot, and many strong garrisons then; neither was it
known what party, or correspondency He might have in London; all which
considerations were now ceased; and that therefore at present they held a
personal Treaty (and that to be with the Houses themselves, and at Westminster)
most necessary. And thus with their Art in confounding of Times, they labor to
abuse the World; and to make show as if they had yielded to all that which the
Scots now desired; whereas they would not treat with the King but in the Isle
of Wight, and not with the Houses, as the Scots Commissioners desired, but with
their Commissioners; And whereas the Scots desired that the King might be free
and at liberty, they would have Him still their Prisoner.

They further say, that all this was yielded unto, upon condition that the King
would sign but four Bills, which they judged not only just and honorable, but
necessary even for the present Peace and Safety during such a Treaty. Hereby
they would insinuate that they desired the four Bills but for security during
the Treaty; whereas they know that those Bills were to be made Acts of
Parliament, and so perpetual Laws; unless they intended that the Treaty
should be everlasting.

As for the justness, honourableness, and necessity of the said four Bills; If
they have vouchsafed to read the Kings Answer (which was not of such importance
whether they did or no, their resolution being taken before; that if the King
would not undo Himself, they must undo Him, which is said to have been the
speech of a Member of that House) if they had read the Kings Answers, they
would have found that the King had convincingly made it appear, that this their
way of proceeding (besides the unreasonablenesse of the Bills themselves) was
irrational, impossible, and must be ineffectuall to the making of Peace, for
which this Treaty was pretended to be; To which might be added, that it would
have been invalid.

It was irrational; for that it is contrary to the nature of a Treaty, that
the chief Subject matters of the Treaty should be first assumed.

It was impossible; because the King was desired to pass these Acts by
Commission under the great Seal, and not by His presence in Parliament,
whereas there is no such thing as a great Seal, but a mock-Seale of their own
making, of which Sir Edw. Cook, Mr. Solicitor, and the abovenamed reverent
Judge, as well as three Statutes, have likewise delivered their opinion.

It must of necessity be ineffectuall; for no Peace could be concluded without
the Consent of the Scots; and they in the name of that Kingdom protested
against their Bills, and manner of proceeding; and like rational men they
declared, that they could not but wonder, that it could be supposed that the
King having so often refused the said Bills, for the procuring of a Peace,
should now condescend unto them, only for the procuring of a Treaty.

Invalid it must needs be; for it is well known, that imprisoned Princes
(especially by their own Subjects) can do no valid Act to the prejudice of
themselves, much less of their Successors; besides it is well known what the
doctrine of the above specified Authors and the Law is, touching constraining
of the King by force. There shall no more be said of the manner of their
condescending to such a conditioned Treaty (which they insinuate to have been a
gracious proceeding) only I will set down what a sober man said of it, and then
speak to the matter of the Bills by them desired: That the King was used like a
man that had had his horse, moneys, sword, cloak, and cloak-bagge violently
taken from him; and the men that had robbed him (so that he would promise not
afterward to prosecute them) were content to treat with him about restoring him
some part of his goods; but he should first give his consent that they might
keep his horse, his money, his sword, and his cloak; but for his cloak-bagge,
his nightcap, his slippers, and his shirts, they would treat with him; And
because he would not yield to those conditions, they stripped him of his clothes,
bound him, and cast him into a ditch.

For the matter of the Bills they say nothing, not so much as to insinuate what
they were, and of them there will be a Tract apart; only two or three words
shall be said to let the world see, that there were never so shameful
proposals made by any Subjects to their King; especially upon His refusal to
yield unto them, to lay the ground for His deposing, and imprisoning.

1. If the King should have condescended to the settling of the Militia
according to the Bill offered by them, He should have divested himself and the
Crown for ever, of the means of protecting his Subjects, the Law, or the
Church, and thereby have been absolutely perjured, by breaking His Oath of
Coronation; he should have left his Subjects mere Slaves to their absolute
power, by giving way that they might levy what men they pleased, without
distinction of Persons, Quality, or limitation of Numbers; and under the
pretext of paying the men so levied, might raise what moneys they pleased,
without restraint either in the manner or proportion. And having already (as
they pretend) the Legistative power in their hands without the King; it is much
wonderd that they should press for any more Bills then this; for hereby alone
they should be the most absolute Princes in Christendom, their Wills being the
only Laws, and a settled Power to uphold their Will.

2. But it should seem being hereby become Princes, they would not want that
noble Power of Sovereignty, of conferring of Honors; They had once this
Parliament nominated a list of Persons whom they intended to have made Dukes,
Earls, and Barons; and now they would hook in that Power by a Bill. It may be
said they intend it not without the King: That is but an illusion, for if they
shall by Bil make such Persons Peers, as they will pretend have by their fidelity
and courage preserved the State; they have already declared, that the King
ought to give His Consent to such Bills as the two Houses offer unto him; and in
this rewarding of such Heroes, as have been the preservers of their Country,
they will not take a Denial. And for their supplying their new Lords with
Estates and Revenues for their new callings, that is but giving the Estates of
some of the loyal Lords (whom they call Delinquents) to those their new Lords;
which is done in a morning by an Ordinance, as firmly as if it were by Act of
Parliament.

3. In their third Bil, of having all Declarations and Proclamations of their
Treason and Rebellion to be revoked, they do not pretend a general Pardon or
Act of Oblivion; but they will have a Justification of all their Actions and
proceedings; and all the blame and blood of the War to rest upon the Kings
head, and his Adherents; and that they as Traitors and Rebels have forfeited
their Lives and Estates, wherewith they will enrich themselves. So that the
King must not only pardon, but justify them whom He has so often declared to
have been Traitors, and in his conscience believes them to be so (although he
be willing to forgive and forget all that is by past) but must leave in the
hands of their merciless Enemies, those that His conscience tells Him have
been and are innocent loyal Subjects; and can be charged with no Crime, but
that they have served Him faithfully according to their Obligations by the Law
of God, the Law of the Land, their Oaths, and natural Allegiance. Insomuch
that they are not content that the King should be poor, and without any Power
or Authority; but as they labor in this Declaration to render Him odious to
His people, so they would make Him infamous to all Posterity, by delivering His
faithful true servants and Friends (that have suffered so much for Him) to
total ruin and destruction.

4. Their fourth Bill, is, for the further Declaration of the Act for the
continuance of this Parliament, as is pretended; but in effect it is a further
settling and confirming of it; And certainly if there did any shame remain,
they would blush to move the King in any thing concerning this Bill;
considering upon what grounds the King was induced, or rather constrained to
grant it; and how they have solemnly protested by their Declaration of the 19.
of May 1642. That they would do nothing by virtue of that gracious Act, which
otherwise had not been fit to have been done. But what use have been made, and
still is, of the said Act, (beyond the Intention in the preamble of the said
Bill expressed) to the disservice of the King, and destruction of the Kingdom,
let the world judge.

Now since the Kings not condescending to these four Bills, is that which they
themselves set down in this Declaration to be the formal and real Cause of
their making these Votes, and consequently of deposing and imprisoning the
King, (For all the other particulars are but Aggravations and Accumulations of
faults, which they say they have hitherto borne) but this the Kings present
denial of their Bills, is that which without Scorn and Contempt to themselves,
and ruin to the Kingdom, they may not suffer; and therefore have taken their
present resolutions, to have no more to do with the King, but to settle the
Kingdoms without Him.

The case lies then plainly before the indifferent Reader, whether the
refusing of four such Bills, so destructive in the matter to Monarchy; so
enthrawling of the People to all sorts of Slavery; and in the manner so
compulsory, so irrational, and so impossible, be a justifiable Cause for
Subjects to depose their King, to imprison His Person, to defame Him to the
World, and to deny Him all means of Vindicating His Innocence and Honor.

But now they say, having made this last so just and honorable application,
they cannot but conclude, that by not assenting unto it, He has forgotten not
only His duty to the Kingdom, but also the care and respect which He owes to,
Himself and His own Family.

How just and honorable the said Application has been, has been formerly
showed, of which it may be with truth averred, that leaving aside the
wickedness in the matter, no story ancient or modern can parallel it (for the
undutifulnesse and impudence of it) in Subjects toward their King.

To conclude, they say, that for these few of many reasons, they cannot repose
any more trust in Him; but have made those former resolutions. Certainly they
have done ill to pass by their many reasons; for these few have been much too
weak to support so great a weight, as the wickedness of their deposing their
King, and the using of Him as they do: and it is to be believed, that they
would make use of the best of those reasons, having so great store out of which
to make their choice.

In the next place they say, They will notwithstanding endeavor to settle the
present Government, as may best stand with the Peace of the Kingdom. It is
likely indeed to be a righteous Government, and to last long, that a prevalent
party in the House of Commons shall settle without the King, and against all
Law.

WHAT has been hitherto said, has been to show how free the King is from the
Aspersions endeavored to be cast upon him by this Declaration; together with
the great malice and falsehood of it. First, many things in matter of fact are
most untrue; as that the King should have a hand in the Irish Rebellion; That
there was a Design of a general Massacre of all the Protestants in England;
That the Spanish fleet that came into the Downs 1629. was to enslave the
Subjects, etc. with many more such ridiculous falsehoods.

Other things are perverted by false application of the facts, as that the
Horse that were spoken to be raised in Germany, were for the enslaving of
England; whereas the truth is, that if that design had gone forward, (as it
did not) it had been to recover the Palatinate.

In other things were the facts untrue, by concealing part of the truth and the
circumstances, which do clearly justify the said fact; The Malice and Fraud of
the Declaration is made most apparent; as when they speak of slitting of noses,
branding of faces, cutting off ears, the facts were true; But they conceal
that all these things were done by course of Justice against notorious
Malefactors; And so that which they should have called Justice, they now bring
for an instance of Cruelty.

Fourthly, it is remarkable that all the greivances complained of throughout
the Kings whole Reign, though wholly redressed according to their own desires;
yet they are recharged, and the redresses not spoken of. So likewise are all
the Objections which they have formerly made, either of the passages of the
War, or concerning the Treaties; although they have by the King been formerly
fully answered, yet they obtrude upon the people all the said objections, and
conceal from them the Kings satisfactory Answers; and all this in so venomous
and spiteful a language, that it is plainly to be seen, that their end is to
make differences irreconcilable, and the King odious, that they may have the
more color to destroy Him.

It will now be necessary to speak a few words of their other Proposition, viz.
that a King that should be culpable of those Crimes suggested in this their
Declaration, may be proceeded against, as they do now proceed with the King;
for to that end they have written this Declaration, as containing the reason of
their Resolutions and Proceedings.

This position is worse and more dangerous then their present Rebellion, for
that by Gods goodness may soon have an end, but this Position is a source, a
seed-plot and nurcery of perpetual Rebellions. So much has been written by
all sorts of Christians against this damned Maxim, that here it shall be very
briefly spoken of, and only showed, that it is full of Impiety, Perjury, and
Treason.

Impiety, toward God, who has in his holy word so often commanded obedience
to the Powers by him ordained over us, and has prohibited Resistance upon pain
of Damnation; and that to Heathens, Tyrants, and Persecutors of his Church,
even to that monster of mankind, Nero.

Perjury, by breaking so many Oaths, Protestations, and Covenants, of bearing
unto the King true faith and allegiance, of defending His Person and Honor,
with all His just Rights and Dignities.

Treason, the levying War against the King, the adhering to His enemies, the
endeavoring to alienate the hearts of the Subject from the King, to remove the
King from the Government, or to imprison His Person, to subvert the Laws, to
endeavor to change the government either Ecclesiastical or Civil, to reform
the King by force, and many other things are by the Laws, and Acts of
Parliament (and not by Ordinances) declared to be Treason, and most of them so
confessed by themselves this Parliament to be so; and for the pretense of some
of them, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Strafford lost their
lives. And here I shall leave that damned Position, that Subjects may depose
their lawful hereditary King, (for so the King is in effect) upon suggestions
of His failings, or any other cause whatsoever.

It remains yet to speak something of the Scope of their so bitter railing, and
reviling of the King with so foul a pen, as Tyranny, Cruelty, betraying, breach
of Oaths, etc. which is to make Him odious; for answer whereunto there shall be
only offered unto the world and them, such truths of the King and his
Deportments, as the fiercest of His enemies shall not deny. He is known to be a
Prince of a most pious life, which He daily shows by His constant practice of
all Acts of devotion, as Prayers, Sermons, and frequent receiving of the holy
Sacrament. No blood has been drawn by his Anger or Revenge; no noble Family
dishonored by His Lust; no Debauchery or Excess has received encouragement
by His Example; no Oaths or Profanesse have been heard to come out of His
mouth; His prudence, ability and invincible courage and industry, are not
unknown to themselves; nor His patience and composedness of mind, in the
highest afflictions and wrongs that have ever almost befallen any King; and
lastly, his goodness and clemency in desiring to put all bypast Injuries into
perpetual oblivion.

Let these His known and undeniable virtues, besides His Royal De^^^^, and
undoubted Title for six hundred years in England, and of 108 Kings in Scotland,
be put into the balance, against all those malicious and (...) Aspersions that
have been raked together against Him; and then let it be judged, whether it
will not be an ill change for the people, to leave the subjection and
Government of such a Prince, to put themselves under the Tyranny and Arbitrary
Power of such a Parliament, and such an Army.

One thing more shall only be offered to the consideration of the People;
whether if the Houses should condescend to a Peace, upon no more then what the
King offers, besides all the Concessions He has granted this Parliament, and
what He has offered from Holdenby, from Hampton Court, and Carisbrook Castle
(before cited,) the English Nation should not be the freest and happiest
Subjects in Europe. And whether if they continue under the present usurped
Power of the House of Commons, and the Army, (for the Lords serve now only to
be subservient unto them) they shall not be the most miserable of all people;
by having their Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Laws changed, and to be
disposed of by the Wills and Arbitrary Power of their Fellow Subjects.

It is again desired (as it has been in the beginning of this Answer) that
what is herein set down, may only stay men's judgments, and put them into a
deliberation; until the King (who has perfect knowledge and information of
all the particulars, which in many things are wanting to the Writer hereof)
shall Himself set forth His full Answer; which is not likely to be long; for
that those who have the worst opinion of the Proceedings of the House of
Commons, cannot suppose them to be so irrational and barbarous, as not to let
the King have a sight of this their Declaration; and to afford Him all
necessary means of making and publishing His Answer.

FINIS.

