depiction of the ghost of King Charles I of England depiction of the ghost of
Oliver Cromwell

A DIALOGUE Betwixt the GHOSTS OF CHARLES the I, Late King of England: AND
OLIVER The late Usurping PROTECTOR.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1659.

A DIALOGUE BETWIXT The GHOSTS of CHARLES late King of England, and Oliver the
late Protector.
Charles. TEll me who thou art that thus presumest to disturb the Ashes of one
that has been at rest this ten years.


Oliver. It is he that sent thee to that Rest, who now would fain be at rest
himself, but cannot.


Charles. Ha! what does mine eyes behold, that grand Rebel and Traitor which
was he destruction of me and my Family, I command thee to be gone; Was it not
enough that in my life time by thy open force, and thy cunning and secret
Plots, thou and thy Emissaries took away mi life, and extirpated my Family, and
the Lord knows what ruin thou have brought upon the poor Kingdoms, that I
once happily Governed, but that thou must now pursue me after Death.


Oliver. O Sir, Pray forgive me, for you cannot imagine the tortures of
conscience that I indute, when I call to mind all my ambitious and damnable
Plots, to ruin you and yours, and to set my self in your ste^^; It was I that
laid the Plot to draw your Subjects obedience from you, under pretense of
Religion and Liberty; It was I that after we had Routed your Army in the
Fields, j^gled you into the Isle of Wight; Knowing that the^ I had you safe
enough, and far enough from your Friends and then when there was a Treaty
there, and almost all agreed betwixt you and the Commissioners, I by my damned
Policy and Power, broke off the Treaty, and all to get the Government my self.


Charles. Who, thee the Government, why how could thou expect the Government,
did thou think that such a free born people a they of England would be come
subject to such a mean born Traitor as thee; besides (if you swords must carry
it) you were but Lieut. Genesis Fairfax was your Bru^ish General, (as in my life
time I once styled him.)


Oliver. Alas Sir, see how far your honesty misleads you; I had no sooner
caused your head to be taken off, but I was sens over into Ireland, where I was
made Lord Deputy.


Charles. Oh! Name Ireland and Deputy no more, for that puts me in mind of my
weakness in subscribing to that wicked Bill, for putting Stafford to death, but
go on with thy Discourse.


Oliver. So having brought that Kingdom^ under obedience to the Parliament (as
I then pretended) thy ^on being owned by thy Native Countrymen the Scots;
There was an Army to be sent against them which Fairfaxes tender judgment would
not admit off. The which I presently accepted off; and Jehu like run over all
Scotland, and took all their Garrisons, and in two Field Fights, the one at
Dunbar in Scotland, the other at Worcester in England, overthrew thy Son
Charles.


Charles. My Son Charles, and have thou Murdered him too, or prithee Traitor
tell me how he escaped thy bloody Thirsty hands, or how came it to pass that
treacherous Nation did not sell him to thee, as well as they did sell me.


Oliver. They would have delivered him to me; but he was too wise for them, for
after the field was lost at Worcester, he with the help of one or two, of his
choice friends in a disguise miraculously made an escape to London, and from
thence beyond the Seas, where I did use all the Plots, and Stratagems to
destroy him, but all in vain.


Charles. Oh how merciful is the Almighty God, (that although he was pleased
in order to these mutations and changes which have since fallen upon these
three Nations) to let me fall into thy wicked and bloody hand, that he should
be so gracious, to let my Son escape thee, and thy implacable cruely: Surely he
has reserved him for a further Work, for the good of these Nations; but go on.


Oliver. So having subdued all the Enemies of the Commonwealth, (as I called
them) but the greatest, which was my Self; I disposed of my force, for my
advantage throughout the three Nations; and then that which was, accounted a
high breach of Parliament in thee, to desire but five Members of Parliament, to
be brought to a Legal Trial (in me was nothing at one time to turn out
fifty, and then afterward all of them, and so made my self, with the help of
two or three corrupt Judges, and the power of my sword, Protector over the
three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland.


Charles. Oh horror! them Nations surely were well protected by thee; But it is
strange to me my Subjects the English (for I know the other two Nations would
quickly be brought to any Government) thy Tyranny would impose on them should
endure o^e of so low a Birth as thee to rule over them; They being wholly
addicted to Kingly Government, and their Ancient Nobles.


Oliver. Alas Sir, see your goodness and mild disposition, What I got by my
Tyranny, that I held by oppression; not sparing any that did in the least seem
to oppose me; Let them either be such as had been of your side, or them that
were for the Parliament; but them of your side it were too long to tell the
horrid and damnable contrivances I had against them, to the ruin of all or
most of them and their families; Making Plots my self, and fathering them upon
them, that so I might have occasion to take away their lives, or at least to
get their Estates. And I never wanted my Engines to swear and to forswear, or
Act what I had a mind too. But oh the Sting of Conscience that troubles me, now
too late I find the horridness of my Crimes, by oppressing the righteous, and
spilling the blood of the innocent; Oh Sir little do you think what I feel for
now I find the reward of all my evil doings.


Charles. But prithee tell me how came thee hither; Did the people call thee
to an account, and put thee to death by the hand of Justice, or did some free
born subject of England stab thee or take away thy life some other way; for
surely such a Rebel, Traitor, and Tyrant, could never dye in peace, withou an
open punishment for such offenses as thou have committed.


Oliver. Sir, I believe you had cause to know me better in my life time, then
to think that I would be destroyed by any private hand; I had read too much of
Machivil for that, my Guards were strong and all my own Creatures; And to tell
you the truth my Reign was, (as all Usurpers must be) more like to a Hell then
a Heaven, my Palace being a Prison to me; I not daring to stir out of it,
without a guard sufficient to storm a City, and if I had had not Enemies, my
own thoughts had been enough; for if I looked one way me thought I see you
without a Head bleeding afresh, as if there had been a Deluge, to drowned me
and all my Crew in blood. If I looked another way me thought I see your Sons and
Friends all with their swords drawn and Armed Cap-a-Pee, to take Vengeance on
me, for destroying of so good a King. Thus having Tyrannized as Protector over
the people for almost six years, it pleased the Lord in his wisdom and Justice
at last to Visit me with two or three strong diseases which (as I was always
Violent) at last Violently hurried me out of that world wherein I had Acted so
many Tragedies, whereof your self was witness of some, and to tell you the rest
would fill a volume; but hold my pains come on me I must leave you, and repair
to my Station. Farewell.


FINIS.

