A Sincere Believer, COMFORTED, AND ENCOVRAGED.

OR, A Practical Treatise, discovering the goodness of God to a sinful soul, in
the enjoyment of Christ. With the great benefit and comfort he has thereby.

Whereby as through a prospective, a true Christian may plainly see how to fit
and prepare himself in such a manner, as his endeavors may not be in vain.

By R. D. M. A. and Minister of the Gospel in the Isle of WIGHT.

Recommended to the serious perusal of all true Christians.

By Thomas Goodwin, D. D. and Will Strong, M. A. Deceased.

Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? LONDON, Printed by M. S.
and are to be sold by Austin Rice, at the Sign of the Three Hearts in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the Westend 1656.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable HENRY Earl of Kent, Lord Hastings, Weisford, and Lord
Gray of Ruthin, and to his truly Noble and Religious Lady.
My much honored Lord and Lady,
GOD has said, He will honor those that honor him 1 Samuel 2.30.
. This is made good concerning you: The Lord has shed much honor upon you,
that you may the more honor him Th. Gataker his parley with Princes, p. 76.
. It is matter of equity you should honor God more then others, seeing Quid
aequius, quid justius quam ut vos honorantem honoret is ipsi.
above others he has honored you; and this is true and lasting policy: For
the Lord can make great, Quod illo dint^ sit nostrum nobis superbientibus sit
alienum. Aug. Hom. 14.
and unmake at pleasure; it is in Him to set up, or pull down. True Nobilitas
summa est atque unica virtus. Juven. Sat. 8.
Nobility has Virtue and Grace for its chief ingredients. Acts 17.11.
It Was this made the Bereans noble. Isai. 43.4.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee (says the Lord to his poor Church.) But as the Lapwing has a
crown upon his head, and yet feeds on dung: so many who are invested with the
Robe of Honor, live u^worthily: faults are not only sooner espied, but are
Monstrosa res est seeds prima vita ima. Bern.
more odious in great ones then in others. Again, Nobilis genere, nobilior
sanctitate. Aug. Epist. 179.
how beautiful is Grace hanging in the bosom of Honor? What opportunities
have such for well-doing? How will their example win others? How glorious is it
to be honorable in the eyes of God and good men? 1 Cor. 1.26.
Not many Noble are called, and therefore how do the graces of the Spirit
shine out in such? Be persuaded to count this your greatest honor to study the
things of et^rnity, to countenance Religion more and more, and to l Minime Deus
est acceptor personarum, nescio tamen quo pacto virt^s in nobili plus placet,
an forte quia plus claret? etc. Bern. ad Sophi^m. virg.
lay forth your selves for the kingdom of Christ, that so you may move in the
highest Sphere of your power for GOD and his people, and then your Name shall
be sweet to posterity, and the foundation of your House shall be laid sure.

But pardon me (Right Honorable) why do I persuade you to that which I know
is the great design of your hearts, and the business of your lives? You are
precious in Gods eyes, you are zea^ous for his glory; and I wish that ^ll our
Nobility and Gentry were ^uch as you are. You have appeared ^or God in the
worst of times The true Diamond shines best in the dark.
, ^ou have been for God in tempests ^s well as calmes, in foul weather ^s well
as fair: you have stood up ^or the truth when others have ^ood up against it
Non tam vos quam Christum in vobis persequuntur. Salvian de Prove. lib. 8.
, and you see (...) is not in vain to side with God. that wonders, what
miracles ^ath God wrought in our days? our comfort lies here, that you have
acted cordially and unweariedly in the work: you have stood for the truth, and
the truth has stood for you. Now the Lord root you in the truth, and in the
love of it, that you Matthew. 7.25.
may be bottomed on the Rock Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.50
and so be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord.
O taste and see how good the Lord is to you, and his people that trust in him.
Endeavor Origo fontium omnium mire, bonorum omnium Deus. Bern. in Cant
to taste God in your mercies, and to get a spiritual Relish of that Divine
sweetness that is in Christ: It is my humble desire to assist your honors in
this great work, by these rude Notes which I here present unto you, wherein the
Spiritual taste is opened and applied, beseeching your Honors to vouchsafe
the perusal, acceptance and protection of this book. Three things command and
encourage me to lay these Notes at your feet. 1. That experience which you have
in Spiritual things, whereby you can judge of Divine truths, and delight in
them. 2. That earnest desire which I have of making some public
acknowledgements of your great and undeserved favors to me, seeing it is not
in my power to retaliate. 3. That confidence I have of your pardon for this my
boldness, and acceptance of these poor endeavors; because Goodness and
Greatness, Clemency and Eminency do meet in your bosoms and kiss each other.
And thus commending you to God, Acts 20.38.
and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an
inheritance among them that are sanctified, I rest,

November. 14. 1648. Your Honors to be commanded by you in the Lord, ROBERT
DINGLEY.

To the spiritual Reader of this BOOK.
HAving had acquaintance with the worthy Author, I was desired by him to peruse
this ensuing work, which I have done with much quickening to my own heart;
Rejoicing to find in these times, (when the streams of men's thoughts both
Ministers and others are too much diverted to other Channells) a pious soul
taken up with, and pursuing after the sweet and gracious Goodness that is in
God, and the incomparable Beauty in Jesus Christ, and that of a free sight and
taste of either, setting out the same to others; Unto which he was incited by
the very Scripture he had chosen, as a foundation to his more private
Meditations about this Goodness: He could not look upon the first words, Taste
and see, but he found himself called upon thereby to invite others to the
Participation of it, and to that end to make it public; being led on herein
to follow him, whose speech this was, David; (who is set before us as the
Pattern of Affectionate Piety in the Old Testament, as Paul is in the new);
Thus by his practice making good his own Comment on the Text, and without which
it had been defective; And with Philip, (the same that having been taken with
the beauty of the Sun, cried out with vehement and unsatisfied longings, Show
us the Father, and it suffices), He inviteth all true Nathanaells to come and
see the glory of that Messiah has shined into his own soul; And what in the
one Treatise, and then in the other, he has held forth both this Goodness (so
desired) of the Father; and this Glory (so desirable) of the Son. That God
who has commanded Light to shine out of darkness, shine (graciously) into our
hearts, to give (us) the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ; And to this end Bless This, and all other Glimpses and
Discoveries of himself in the mouths and writings of all his servants,
enamoured with him. Amen.

Tho: Goodwin.

CHRISTIAN READR,
HEre is presented to thy view a Treatise, Cum de Trinitate loquitur sapit
Arrium, cum de gratia, sapit Pelagium; cum de persona Christi, sapit Nestorium.
Bern. de quodam Petro Magistro Epist. Guidoni. 192.
which will lead thee to the power of Godliness; and the holiness of the
inward man; which in this age I fear few study and set their hearts upon, men
generally being taken up either with notions or novelties, in nothing more
placing their Religion then in a taste of every new opinion; a confluence of
which water (an unclean Spirit in judgment being sent forth) has made up that
flood with which so many in our time have been swept away.

It has been a comfort to me in many endless and inextricable questions,
Zach. 13.2.
that the Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, Romans 12.15.
but in righteousness, and peace, In absoluto ac facili est aeternitas. Hilar.
de Trin. l. 10.
and joy in the Holy Ghost; not in doubtful disputations, and unpracticall
curiosity, but the Doctrine of the free grace of God, Romans 14.17.
and the fullness of the righteousness of Christ, are plain to him that will
understand, and that in the true and saving knowledge of these, is eternal
life to be had. John 17.3.


And it has been a Rule to me, that the more holy and spiritual any man is,
the more fully his heart is in these things. For the Word being a mould, (...).
Romans 6.17.
and these being the great things thereof, they must needs make the deepest
impression upon the heart that is rightly cast into it. And it is observed of
the Saints of old; Vincent. Lirinens. advers. haeres. cap. 9.
Mos iste semper in Ecclesia viguit, ut quo quisque foret religiosior, eo
promptius novellis adinventionibus contrairet.

Scientia visus and gustus.
Of spiritual Truths there is a twofold knowledge held forth in Scripture, a
seeing and tasting knowledge (for the new man has his senses as well as the
old) and both are conjoined in this Text and Tract. Heb. 5.14.


1. Seeing knowledge, Joh. 6.40. which proceeds from a spirit of renovation,
spiritualizing the faculty, giving an understanding to know him that is true, 1 John 5.20. and from a spirit of Revelation discovering by a divine light
spiritual objects; not only to the speculative, but also to the practical
judgment; and in these the teaching of God, and the demonstration of the
Spirit, Exportatio vini, olei, lignaminis, lege Imperiali interdicta fuit, ne
Barbari gustu illecti promptius invaderent fines Romanoru^. Leg. 1. God: quae
res exportari non debeant.
do consist.

2. Tasting knowledge, 1 Pet. 2.3. when a relish of the goodness is brought
with the Truth into the whole heart, that it becomes to a man sweeter then
honey and the honeycombe; which sweetness does effectually draw and inflame
the soul after the things thus tasted, Accipe speculum concavum, quod vocatur
^ncendens, and illud pone ex opposito solis, and accendetur quod opponitur in
puncto reflexionis.
to obtain a further and full enjoyment; the earnest of the Spirit, and the
grapes of Eshcol, which leaves in the soul such a taste, that it can never be
satisfied, till he drink out of the rivers of his pleasure.

There is indeed a sight that unregenerate men may have of things spiritual,
Sic etiam contingit spiritualiter, cum spiritus illuminatur simplici claraque
notitia, accenditur and in aeternum amorem collabitur ^imer sus si^i mor^ens
and in D^o v^vens. Hen. Harphius. theolog. Mystic. l. 2. c. 63.
and a taste answerable to this sight, Heb. 6.4, 5. (which are the highest
works of the Spirit in a temporary believer, not evil in themselves, nor to be
lightly esteemed; so men neither rest in them, nor fall from them) as the one
is but a form, so is the other also, as being only from a supposed sweetness,
and does produce only a false joy, proceeding only from the Spirit ^^^varing
nature, So^^o^ ^mnes qui^^^ ^^^et ca^juci^. Sic sap^^tia mu^^as quas (...), non
conti^^^ etr^^^ acce^^it. Bern. in Cant. ser. 23 Odi ^oros meo^ and s^^ e o^io
cos interire, quod me^uo ne more^tur lectores (...) ^bducan^ e ^ctione ips^^s
scripturae quae sola sapientiae fons est, ac terreor ex^^plo s^^crio^is aetat^.
etc. Luth. i^ Genesis 19.
and not renewing it; the Spirit working upon a man, and not dwelling in him:
And ena^^^ing a man to taste the goodness that comes by spiritual things, and
not the good that is in them.

The Author of this Treatise has taken very good and profitable pains in
opening these mysteries and secrets of God, which I do commend unto thee; with
this Caution, which I desire may be taken in the Reading of all the writings of
men, that they do not take thee off from the holy Scriptures of God. And that
the Lord may have glory, and the Church edification by all the Labors of his
servants, is the hearty prayer of him who subscribes himself,

Thy servant in the Gospel, WILL: STRONG.

A Table of the principal Heads contained in this Book; scil.
In the first part the nature of the Spiritual Taste.
OF the Book of Psalms, Page 1, 2 Of this 34 Psalm, and the occasion of it,
whence four things are observed, page 2. to 5 Of the coherence of the Text,
whence 3 points are raised, viz. page 5. to 26 1. The presence of Angels
encamping round about us, should occasion us to taste and see Divine goodness.
Three Reasons and three Uses of that point. page 6. to 13 2. Such as by sweet
experience have once tasted Divine goodness themselves, cannot but stir up
others to partake with them. Ten Reasons of the point, and two uses, page 12.
to 22 3. They that have tasted Divine goodness, are truly blessed, and should
at once trust in God and fear him. page 22 to 26
The Text divided, and Doctrines raised, page 26 1. Doct. All that undertake to
exhort others, must endeavor to work on the affections. Why? The reasons
three. How? The means four. page 28. to 33 The uses two, where six directions
how we may so hear as to be affected under the Word, page 33. to 37
2. Doct. All sinners should be induced to taste and try God and his ways.
Where 1. What this tasting is? page 37 Answ. 1. There is a corporal taste, and
hereby occasionally we may taste God, page 37, 38
2. There is a mystical or spiritual taste, and we may be said thus to taste
God five ways page 38 to 48 1. In Divine ordinances which God has appointed
as conduit pipes to convey somewhat of himself to us, viz. 1. the Word. 2.
Prayer. 3. Seals. 4. Conference. 5. Meditation. page 38. to 45 2. By Faith and
particular Applications of Christ to the soul; for where there is tasting
there must be touching, page 45, 46 3. By partaking of Divine influences from
the spirit of Christ, scil. the adorning gifts and renewing graces of the holy
Ghost, page 46, 47 4. In outw^rd behavior and reformation, and turning our
feet into his testimonies, to make trial of his ways, page 47, 48 5. In
experimental and actual discoveries of sweetness and fulness^ in God, page 48

2. Whether unregenerate men may have these tastes of God, and still continue
in the old Adam? page 49 Answ. 1. They may seem to go far, w^^re Heb. 6.4,
5. is opened. They go 8 long s^^ps in religion, page 49. to 51 2. And yet they
are void of spiritual life and senses, and so come short of true believers in
many things. page 51 to 53 3. Why we should labor for experimental tastes of
God. page 53 1. Because God and his good ways are undeservedly evil spoken
of, and it is not wisdom to go by hearsay. page 53, 54 2. We shall never
know the true worth and sweetness of God and religion, till we taste and try
them. page 54 3. We are much encouraged by the comfortable experiences of ad
Saints, who never repented their so doing. page 54, 55 4. Either we must taste
of Divine goodness or fury. page 55, 56 5. If you taste Divine good^esse here,
you shall have your fill and will of God hereafter. page 56, 57 1 Use. Matter
of reproof, 1. to such as (...) ^^t* will not taste God and his (...). Where six
reasons are given why millions to ^^i^ ^^ry day never tasted God in (...) m^rcy
they (...) received, or duty they have performed, page 57. to 64 2. To su^^ as
seek for sweetness and satisfaction in the creature out of God, page 63, 64
3. Such as are ever and anon tasting sin; these nibble at Satan's baits. page 64
to 67 4. To such as binder others from tasting and trying how good the Lord and
his ways are, page 67, 68
2 Use of information in the true reason of all that rage and fury that boyles
up in men's spirits against the ways of God. They never tasted nor tried them.
page 68, 69 3. Use of trial and examination, whether ever we savingly tasted
God, page 99


This is tried by the effects, which are three, 1. Regeneration, 2. Estimation,
3. Exultation. page 69 to 71 A diversion consolatory to sincere hearts, that
mourn for want of the sense of Gods love in Christ. page 72, 73 4 Use of
Exhortation, to unregenerate men and women to taste and try God, page 73 The
Inducements five. page 73 to 77 1. The pleasure of bodily tasting is short and
vanishing, of spiritual endless. page 74 2. God invites and allures you to
taste of his marrow and good things, page 75. 3. Kings have their Tasters, and
so have you; you may safely venture. page 75 4. Consider what the damned would
give to be capable of this happiness, page 75, 76 5. Christ tasted gall and
death for thee, do thou taste Grace and Glory for him, page 76, 77

3. Doct. There is but a taste of God in this life page 77 to 100 1. The Quod
sit, that it is so, proved 1. By plain Scriptures, page 78 2. By undeniable
Arguments, scil. 1. The makings forth of God are not perfect in this
administration page 78, 79 2. We are not capable of much here, corruption
remains in the best, page 79, 80


2. The Cur sit, why'tis so? viz. 1. Why believers have a small taste of God
here, and it is not perfect Hell with them, four reasons of that, page 80 to
83 2. Why the Lord gives them but a taste, page 83 to 87 The Reasons four. page
83 to 87 1. To manifest his power and wisdom in our preservation. page 83, 84
2. To keep us humble. page 84 3. To wean us. page 84 to 86 4. To sweeten
Heavens joys to us. page 86.
3. The Quid inde, or inferences, page 87 to 100 1. It meets with those that
dream of perfection in this life. Five objections answered, page 87 to 91 2.
Let the world learn how to judge of Christians, not by what they are and
receive, but shall be and obtain, page 92, 93 3. Weak Christians should be
comforted that ever mourn under their imperfections. page 93
For 1. No perfection under the Sun, page 93 2. True grace little at first,
page 93, 94 3. As you do but taste the graces and ^^s^^ations of God here, lo
you do has taste of afflictions and death, the bitter fruits of sin, you do
but sip at the bitter cup. page 94, 95 4. All should be exhorted to two things.
1. To labor for more of Gods will, rest not in this, that you have grace in
truth; for though the best do but taste, yet some more and oftener then others.
There are degrees, page 95. to 99 2 To be even weary and sick of the world
that ye may have clearer visions and fuller enjoyment of God in the clouds,
page 99, 100

4 Doct. They only that taste can see how good the Lord is, page 100 to 118 1.
Arg. True knowledge is not bare speculation, it is heart-work as well as
brain-work, page 101, 102 2. God is at once the fountain of light and life, and
where there is life, there are all the spiritual senses. page 102, 103 3.
Illumination is a fruit of Christ's ascension and intercession. page 103, 104 4,
Christ as a Prophet teaches only his friends page 104 5. Such as have a
filial fear, are numbered among his Disciples. page 104, 105 6. The promise of
Knowledge is to such as obey God, and live up to received light. page 105 1
Use. This discovers the true Reason of that little insight into Spiritual
things in the midst of so much light that is in the world. page 105, 106 2 Use.
To mourn over those that have bright notions, and choice speculations in
Religion, and yet never tasted God; they see truths, but not with a believers
eyes, nor in his light page 106 to 108 3 Use, To search and enquire if our
visions of God are not delusions. page 108 1. Do you thirst after more and more
knowledge in the mysteries of Christ? page 108 2. Is thy knowledge
experimental? page 109, 110 3. Diffusive? page 110, 111 4. With full assurance?
page 112 5. Art thou humble and teachable? page 112, 113 6. Does thy knowledge
transform and heavenlize thee? page 114
4. Use. Labor for such discoveries of God as may have a witness within you:
a little sanctified knowledge will go far. page 114 to 116 5. Use. This will
follow, As without some tasting there is no clear vision, so without some
knowledge there is no right tasting. page 116. 117

5 Doct. The Lord is exceeding good unto all his people. page 118 to 149 This
proved, 1. from inspired quils page 118 2 Heathenish and Natural page 118, 119
The point opened and illustrated in two Enquiries. 1. Inquiry, what
goodness, and the goodness of God is? page 120 2. Inquiry, What are the
Epithites of divine goodness? page 1^0. to 136 1. He is a universal good to
all, the young Ravens, and old Devils, and all the Creation finds it. page
120. to 124 2. He is in Christ a special and peculiar good unto his Elect.
page 124. 125 3. God is an independent good, and no independent being but he.
page 125. to 129

He is most blessed and glorious in himself, and all the creatures cannot add
one spark to his felicity. Proved by three things. 1. God was thus good and
happy and all sufficient before all worlds. page 127 2. God is the Author of
all his creatures good. page 127 3. That good and perfection that is in the
creature, was first in God, and most perfectly good there. page 127. 128 4. God
is a most free good. page 129. 130 5. An absolute, suitable and perfect good is
he. 130. to 132 6. A most desirable and delectable good. page 132. to 134 7. A
lasting and everlasting good, and that two ways. 1. Essentially in himself.
page 134 2. Relatively to others, and that 1. Ex Part Ante, looking to their
Election. page 135 2. Ex Part Post, Eying their glorification, page 135 1.
Use. Matter of Lamentation over poor sinners. For 1. Some have lived without
tasting this goodness all their days, the time is yet to come that ever they
tasted this goodness and sweetness in any ordinance or outward enjoyments.
page 136 2. Others sin against this infinite goodness without reluctance. page
136
2. Let not any man say when he is tempted, he is tempted of God, he tempts no
man, but is goodness it self without mixture. page 137. to 140 3. Believe not
calumnies, for some heretics, as Sardian and Marcion have said, even of God,
that he is not good; Christ slandered. page 140. to 142 What is the meaning of
that Petition, Lead us not into tentation? page 139. God many times punishes
one sin with another. Five sins especially. page 139. 140
4. Admire the goodness of Gods nature. 142 to 143 5. Delight not to grieve,
fear to displease him. page 143. 144 6. Examine if the Lord be good to thee in
a peculiar manner; the Characters four. page 144 to 146 7. This should persuade
sinners that are ignorant of divine sweetness, to taste and try him. page 146
8. Let believers be thankful for all this goodness. page 146. 147 9. Imitate
God in goodness, be and do good page 147 10. Esteem nothing sweet or good
any farther then you can find or enjoy God in it. page 148 11. Keep in with
this good God, and be careful to abide in his goodness: Prize his presence,
adore his discoveries, implore his aid, and attend his calls. page 148. 149





The Table to the second Part you find after, Page 149.

Courteous Reader, The Author earnestly desires one favor at thy hands (before
thou read this Book) which is to correct with thy Pen the Printers mistakes
following.
PAge 31* in the Margent for (...) read (...). page 42. in Marg. for
Schueptius, r. Schuepfius. p. 51. in Marg. for Manzius, r. Mauzius. p. 58. in
Marg. for Aug. de Tem. p. 18. r. Aug. de Temp. 18. p. 60. in Marg. after
Business, only a comma; but after Pythagoras, a full stop. p. 69. line 29. for
thing, r. things. p. 70. l. 13. the directive w, which stands before
bitterness, place l. 15. before earthly p. 73. l. 7. after to damn, add me. p.
73. l. 11. for prooping, r. drooping. p. 78. in Marg. after life, only a
comma. p. 91. l. 9. blot out the comma. p. 117. in Marg. for Elu-Par, r. Eln
Par. p. 127. in Marg. for, idem in Mat. 19.17. r. P. Martyr in Mat. 19.17. p.
128. l. 12. for there, r. the^^. (...). 2^. for God, r. (...) p. 140 in Marg.
for 810, r. 800. p. 146. in Marg. (in most copies) for quevere, r. quae^^re. p.
147. in Marg. (in most copies) for gratiarum, r. gra^ia ^m: and for,
religrovis, r. religionis. p. 179. place the directive x, before Prophesies. p.
189. in Marg. for Hexam^n, r. Hexeme^. p. 191. in Marg. for vegetubit aeternum,
r. veget abit in aeternum; and for lues, r. luce. p. 198. for Jersome, r.
Jerome. p. 208. l. 24. for heart-siftings, r. heart-liftings. p. 211. in Marg.
(in most copies) for 1 Cor. 1.30. r. 2 Cor. 1.30. p. 212. in Marg. for Diodati,
r. Diodate. p. 213. l. 17. for often, r. of them. p. 214. in Marg. for
Sugenium, r. Eugenium. p. 220. l. 25. for 2 Cor. 4.21. r. 2 Cor. 5.21. p. 229.
in Marg. for 777. to 779, r. 777. to 791. p. 248. l. 23. for Joh. 12.13. r.
Joh. 12.32. p. 252. in Marg. for expectant, r. spectant, p. 259. in Marg. (in
many copies) for resigere, r. resistere. p. 262. l. 21. over against the
directive *, write in the Margent, 1648. July. p. 277 in Marg. for Julii, r.
Jul.

DIVINE RELISHES OF Matchless Goodness.
PSALM. 34.8. the former part. O taste and see that the Lord is good* Blessed is
the man that trusts in Him.


THIS Book of Psalms, 1. Of the book of Psalms.
which for the most part was penned by David, is called by some, The Anatomy of
the Soul: For herein we see all the postures and conditions of Gods servants
lively expressed in very excellent patterns. We find them sometimes mourning
for sin, and sin straights; otherwhiles rejoicing in deliverances, and boasting
in the smiles of Christ; now putting forth their longings after God, and
dependence on him: anon their joy in God, and care to please him: sometimes
earnest for themselves, by and by for the Church. This variety of Hymns stands
upon record, that in public and private Services, we might use them according
to several occasions, not only by reading and meditating on them, but also by
singing See Mr. Cotton on this subject. See 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Matthew. 26.30. Jam
5.13. Col. 3.16.
of them.

2. Of this Psalm the occasion of it.
The occasion of this Psalm you find in the Title prefixed (which is as truly
Scripture as the rest of the Psalm,) A Psalm of David when he changed his
behavior before Abimelech, who drove him away and he departed. 1 Samuel 21.12,
13.
David being in continual fear of his life, by reason of Saul's cruelty, flies
to Gath, a City of the Philistims: Doubtless there he hoped to have sojourned
unknown, and although he could not but apprehend much danger in flying thither,
by Arthur Iackson on the place.
reason of the many victories he had obtained over the Philistims, and for
killing Goliath (who was of Gath;) why yet such was Saul's wrath, and David's
fear, that he had more hope of safety there, then in the land of Israel. Well,
but David is fallen out of the pan into the fire; for no sooner is he got
thither, but the servants of King Abimelech Abimelech a common name to the
Philistian Kings, as Pharaoh to the Egyptian
(whose proper name was Achish) discover, apprehend, and carry him before the
King. And now David was put to his shifts, his plot was this, He changed his
behavior before them, and feigned himself mad, he scrabbles on the doors of
the gate, and lets his spittle drivell on his beard. See the desired effect,
Achish frowns upon his servants, saying, Lo, you see the man is mad, wherefore
then have you brought him to me? Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought
this fellow to play the mad man in my presence? So David departed thence, and
escaped to the Cave Adullam.

From all which you may note four things.

1. That Saints going on in Gods ways, See Heb. 11.36, 37.
may be brought into wonderful straights, and be put to very strange shifts.

This God suffers to try them,

Judge not such as are brought into straights, as though they were Luke 13.2.4.
greater sinners then others: you see it may be the portion of Gods own
children, keeping in his own ways.

Guess likewise what perplexities are treasured up for unsanctified wretches,
1 Pet. 4.13.
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

2. vid. Salt marsh of this subject
a lawful kind of policy which holy men may use without sin, for their own
safety and preservation. The Scripture abounds with examples, 1 Samuel 26.12.21.
Judge. 3.19. Josh. 8.4. cum mul^is aliis.

Reas. They are bid to be wise as Serpents, and they have need of policy, for
they live as sheep among wolves.

1.

2. 2. Cor. 4.2.


3. 2 Samuel 15.31 Isai. 54.17.
infatuates his enemies, that they let slip great advantages for the ruin of
his friends.

That so (when it is too late) his enemies may see their folly, Psalm. 124.1, 8.
a bird out of the snare, may see Gods wisdom, and acknowledge his goodness.

Let enemies be warned no longer to engage against the holy Ways and Ones of
God: Psalm. 2.10.
he can blind their eyes, and infatuate their counsels.

Let Believers be Phil. 4.6.
careful in nothing, g 2 Cor. 4.2.
is the Lords opportunity.

4. And lastly, David. From this deliverance arose the 34 Psalm.

God deserves and expects this from us,

Let us blush at our unthankfulness, will not give him Isaiah 2.48.
glory to another,

3. Of this verse and the coherence in the first place.
For the Text that I have culd out of this Psalm, we shall examine the
coherence, and then the words themselves.

1. The coherence, which stands thus, David blesses God for this deliverance,
and persuades others to taste him and trust in him.

I Verse 1.3.4, 6, 7, 1.
will bless the Lord at all times, and his praise shall continually be in my
mouth, etc. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. I
sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. This
poor mancried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed are all they
that trust in him.

The notes from the coherence are three.

1. The presence of Angels encamping round about Believers, taste and see how
good the Lord is. For,

1. It Is Angel (in the singular number) but he speaks of an Host, else how
could he encamp, 1 Kings 10.22 and 1 Chronicles. 11.4. and Psalm. 105 33, 40. Heb.
12.22.
and often in the Hebrew one is put for a multitude. You read of an innumerable
company of Angels. And when there is mention of particulars of Psalm. 68.17,
twenty thousand, and thousands of thousands. This glorious Host encamps round
about the people of God. And if 2 Reg. 19, 35
one Angel in a night made such havoc among their enemies, as to slay an
hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians. then why should we doubt but
huge Hosts of these are able to guard the Church and subdue their enemies;
especially considering that.

2. This is their office, as you see Heb. 1.14. and Psa. 91, 11. The Angeli in
hunc finem creati sunt ut serviant. Calv.
work of Angels is to attend and wait on the heirs of glory, and bear them up
in their hands, lest they dash their feet against a stone, viz. lest they come
to any evil.

Col. 16.2.10.
eye Jesus Christ who is their General, the Prince, the Lord of the Angels,
and taste his goodness in their attendance.

1. Then it meets with those heart-dejecting and soule-cumbring In metu
consilia prudentium and vulgi rumores juxta audiuntur. C. Tacit. hist. lib. 3.
c. 11. Res est imperiosa timor. Martial. lib. 2 Ep: 59
fears of Gods Saints, David Psalm 11.3.) How often have they given up all for
lost, and yet God has wrought deliverance? Surely such forget this truth. An
Host of Angels guards the Church, all our outward strength is nothing to this,
and yet how ready are we to nestle and repose there? And thus our faith ebbs
and flows with our outward accommodations.

My brethren, a Believer having this Guard of Angels about him, is more secure
then King Solomon in that posture, Cantie. 3.7, 8. Gant. 3: 7, 8.
For a stronger power might come and destroy such a Guard, or they might fall
out and destroy one another: Drouzinesse might over-take them as an armed man,
The vanity of outward strength.
and then their weapons might be turned against them. Or finally, they might
conspire to betray their secure Master. How ever, were they never so strong,
unanimous, vigilant, or faithful, they could not keep off hot thunderbolts
from heaven, or the arrows of pestilence that fly by night, nay, they could
not give a minutes sleep, nor ease an a king tooth, etc.

There is no Believer but has a stronger and better Guard then that every
night, seil. an invincible Guard of Angels with glittering Spears round about
him, such honor, such security have all the Saints.

Others run into the contrary extreme, Caranza most knavishly reads it, De us
qu^ anguios colunt, That meet in corners, well knowing how much the place makes
against their worshipping of Angles.
and think of them above that which is written. This is to entertain the man,
and slight the master, admire the Tool, and not the Workman. God does not love
these doings, he is very jealous, etc. Nay, the Angels are grieved. See Judge.
13.16. and Rev. 22.8.9. Col. 2.18. Yet thus do poor silly Papists, and all of
that Synagogue of Satan, that pseudo-Catholicke Church. Whereas we should see
and taste divine goodnesie in all, and admire God still, saying, if the
servants be so powerful and glorious, what then is the Master, Angeli sunt
ministri parati ad omnem voluntatem Dei, quemadmodum itaque stulte feceris si
ministros consulum and senatus imploraveris, and non consules ipsos and
senatum, cum potestas juvandi non sit in ministrorum, sed in magistratus manu;
ita and haec summa stultitia est, in necessitatibus invocare Angelos cum
invocandus sit Dominus ipse, apud quem est potestas juvandi and salvandi quae
non est penes Angelos. Musculus in Psalm. 34.7. page 308. Angelos non esse
colendos, demonstrat Augustine. de vera Religione, cap. 55.
he that made them, and keeps them, and sends them to us? How shall we conceive
of his greatness and goodness, before whom those creatures skreen their faces
from the dazzling and stunning brightness of his glory, at whose beck and
command they are continually? we may admire him, and love him in our hearts,
but we cannot comprehend him in the Epycicle of our minds. These are but
spangles, and twinkling stars in the Canopie of heaven, he is that Sun of
righteousness that at once illuminates and drowns them. They have all their
beauty and luster from him, and are lumps of darkness and deformity compared
to him.

Thirdly,

And first, Ut Angeli nostri sint Christi membra, nos esse oportet. Calv.
ways, and thy ways ( viz. in your callings general and particular) For GOD
has charged his Angels to keep you in your ways, but not in your wanderings,
Psalm. 91.11.

this, 1 Cor. 11.10. and 1 Cor. 4.9. 1 Timothy 5.21.
that Angels are always looking on you. Angels are present at Divine
exercises, and are ey-witnesses of our carriage there. O grieve not your guard
of Angels by irreverence.

viz. swiftly, without delay; wililngly, without grudging; faithfully, without
treachery; humbly, without pride; and constantly, without withdrawing: write
after so fair a Copy, echo to the music that is above, come as near them
as you can, and beg of God to help you, that you may do his will upon earth,
as it is done in heaven.

Quisquis hie premitur, and affligitur sive pravis animi affectibus, sive
corruptione and molestia respiciat ad istum statum Angelicum futuri saeculi
illoque se soletur. Muslus in Matthew. 22.30.
Luke 20.38.

Non dicit gustate and videte quoniam bonus Angelus, sed quoniam bonus Dominus.
Musculus in Psalm. 34.7. page 308.
This the coherence chiefly urges, and therefore consider the goodness of God
in reference to that in these three particulars.

1. God might have left you exposed to dangers, and turned you all going to
Hell with the fallen Angels. Truly my brethren, you are more engaged to God
then Angels, Heb. 2.16.
That God should leave some of them being fallen, and resolve never to pity
them, nor look after them more, and yet send his Son to redeem, his elect
Angels to guard you, causing his bowels to sound over you, and charging all his
servants to show love and respect to you, truly this may give you a taste of
free grace, and the goodness of God to you.

Ingens bonitas Dei and cura paterna erga Ecclesiam describitur, quod tales
nobis praesides adjungit. Hen. Mollerus praelect. in Psalm. 34.5. pa. 275.
Now that such creatures should be seen to encamp about sinful wretches, dust
and ashes, yea Worms and no Men, this is the goodness of God: that any
creatures should be serviceable to man that lost his Dominion over them by the
fall, that a Raven should minister unto the Prophet, this is more then we could
challenge. Again, that men like our selves should be ready to guard us, servants
in our families, Civil powers and Martial in kingdoms; here is the goodness
of God; but that all the Host of Heaven should be abased to so low a work, this
especially invites us to taste and see Divine goodness. Lord what is Man that
thou art thus mindful of him? Tigers and Devils might deservedly be our
companions, and lo Angels are sent to minister unto us: Angels encamp about us
who have often encamped against thee.

Optime ergo infirmitati nostrae consulit Deus cum tales dat nobis adjutores
qui Satanae nob^scum resista^t, su^mque operam moais omnibus impendant ad nos
tuendos, Calv. in Heb. 1.14. Dan. 8.16. and 9.21.23.
suitable relief to the Saints in tentations and inward assaults from Satan
and his evil Angels: they are not more ready to tempt and divert, then good
Angels to revive and counsel us. Indeed this is properly the work of the
Spirit to come with inward strengthenings; and yet good Angels may be his
instruments or agents. Oh admire the goodness of God in making such a suitable
provision for our security. And so much for that point.

Secondly, in that David is not content to taste Gods goodness himself,
unless he call upon others to join with him, Observe,

Such as by sweetest experience have once tasted Divine goodness themselves, O
taste and see with me, how good, etc. As if David should have said, I for my
part have seen and tasted much of God and his goodness; and which may seem
strange, never more then in my greatest straights: For the golden conduit pipes
of solemn Ordinances, and creature enjoyments, being cut off, I have been
driven to go to Gods fullness, and drink more immediately and plentifully at
the well head. I am loath to eat these heavenly viands, and soul. ravishing
morsels of contentment alone, Come hither all you that fear God, and love God,
Psalm. 66.16.
and I will tell you what God has d^ne for my soul. O come fellow-sinners,
taste and see with me how good the Lord is, how comfortable the embraces of
Christ are, and how sweet communion with heaven is, etc.

I shall now lay you down the grounds and arguments.

The first shall be drawn from Scripture-examples of Saints that have been
careful to do this.

1. Paul Acts 26.29.
wished heartily that both Agrippa,

He that had received the five Talents, Matthew. 25.16


It Is said, Malach. 3.16
They that feared the Lord spoke often to one another in Malachi.

So soon as Luke 5.29.
Matthew was converted,

Philip had no sooner tasted communion with Christ, Nathanael to invite him to
Christ, saying, O come and see. John 1.45.
Above all,

Samaria had no sooner tasted Christ's living waters, John 4.28.
but in post haste, leaving her water-pot, she runs into the City to call out
her friends and neighbors to see and taste how good the Messiah was.

David here in this Psalm, etc. and elsewhere, Psa. 51.12, 13.
where he vows, that if God will restore to him the joys of his salvation,
that then he will teach transgressors Gods ways, that sinners might be
converted unto him.

Now all these examples are written for our instruction, 2 Thessalonians. 3.9. 1 Chronicles.
11.1.
and we must imitate Saints in well-doing.

God has strictly commanded this: Luke 22.13. Ezekiel. 18.32. 1 Pet. 4.10.
then much more those that have obtained the Heavenly Riches of Gods grace, are
warned to do good therewith to others, and to be ready in point of
distribution and communication.

3. It Is Gods end in bestowing his graces and comforts on us, member made and
furnished with abilities: Injuriam facit acceptis Christi bonis qui illa
tenaciter sibi soli usurpat. Musculus in Johan: 1.16 2 Cor: 1.4.
Men do not light a Candle to thrust it under a Bushel, but to set it up in a
Candlestick, that it may give light to all, Matthew. 5.15. The manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, and God comforts us in all
our tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which be in trouble. Let
not God fail of his end. O deceive not his expectation.

4. Next, Acts 4:20.
Grace cannot long be concealed, they that have tasted divine sweetness,
cannot choose but speak of it to others, their hearts would burst if they should
be silent. Jerem. 20.^
Grace is like fire in the bones, they that have it cannot hide it, it is
compared to new wine, and it must have vent: the blind men that were cured,
were charged to be silent, but they could not hold their peace, etc.

5. The love which believers bear to Christ, 2 Cor. 5.11. See v. 14.
Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men (says Paul). The love of
Christ that constraines us, The soul never thinks it can do enough for
Christ, who formerly did so much against him, etc.

6. Love and pity to the precious souls of men puts them on it. Gal. 5.6.
first and chief work of Faith is love, and there is no love in him to his
neighbor that loves not his soul. Levit. 19.17. and 2 Thessalonians. 3: 15.
Having found grace and comfort our selves, let us pity others that are as yet
strangers to Christ, unacquainted with that divine sweetness that is in him,
and say to them, Why will ye dye? If there be any love to thy brothers soul,
any pity for his spiritual condition, allure him to taste the mercy and
goodness of God to all that come by Christ to him.

7. Themselves have not the less, Romans 1.11, 12. 2 Cor. 9.6.
to partake with them. I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some
spiritual gift, that I may be comforted with you, Nihil periculi est si
intelligamus Paulum vere sperasse a Romanorum fide suam quoque instaurandam.
So here. For

1. Christ Jesus is an inexhaustible fountain, there is an unfathomable Ocean
of sweetness in God, enough to satisfi^ thee and all comers. When all the Elect
which are a numberless number, Rev. 5.12.
shall have tasted divine sweetness here, and drunk their fill of those
Crystal Rivers in glory, 'twere blasphemy to think there should be the less
in God, still in Christ fullness dwells. The Sun has not the less for
filling all the lesser vessels of the Stars with light; So here, etc.

2. The best way to draw more abundantly out of this well, is to communicate to
others, the Though both arms grow, yet that which a man uses is the stronger
and bigger, so is it with our gifts and graces. Trap. on Mat. 25.16. page 567.
Scien^iarum ea vis est and natura, ut quo plus doceas eo ditior ac doctior
fias. Bodin.
more you improve and impart talents, the more talents shall be given you, but
to bury one in the earth, is the way to have that taken from you. Besides, as
when others feed with you, this does increase your appetice, and draw down that
which you would not have eaten alone, so at this heavenly banquet, the more the
merrier, nay the better cheer. Much is to be gotten by communion with Saints;
And a Saint cannot convince and reclaim another, but he betters himself, and
exercises his graces and gifts; and as a needle or a Weavers shuttle are the
better for using, so are our graces, etc.

8. True grace and envy cannot sleep in one bed, nor rest in one soul.
Moses; Numb. 11.29.
Would all the Lords people were Prophets; John; he must increase, John 3.30.
but I must decrease; See how well contented he was. One member does not envy
another for what it is, has, or wears, 1 Cor. 12.
We are all one body, another grace will not darken thine, but all together
make one constellation.

9 Believers cannot but delight to make joy in heaven, Si angeli sibi invicem
in coelo gratulantur dum vide^t restitui ingregem suum quod diffluxerat, nos
etiam ejusdem gaudij socios esse decet. Calv.
Angels, and all the glorified Saints, to break out into singing and rejoicing.
Why this is the work of Heaven, at the conviction and conversion of one sinner.
A coy sinner cannot stoop and sip of this nectar, but there is shouting in
heaven, and loud music amongst the Angels, as you see Luk 15.10. If at the
making of the world, as Job 38.7. then much more at the conversion of a sinner,
which is the greater wonder, and at the making of new heavens, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13.

Lastly, Nihil praestantius aut magis optabile quam animam eripere e morte
aeterna. Calvin in Jacob. 5.20.
nothing finds such acceptance and recompense with God as this. No usury so
gainful as the winning of souls. James 5.20. He that converts his brother,
has saved a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. God will
mention it to their praise and comfort another day: For if the works of mercy
toward the bodies of others, which are vessels of dung, and breathing lumps
of clay, shall yet be mentioned that day, as Mat. 25.35. then much more such as
aimed at the good of others souls, which are Jewels of such price, that one
soul is more worth then the world. Surely this will hide a multitude of other
failings, and this may bring many temporal comforts and blessings along with
it.

To wind up this bottom in a word, here is matter of reproof and duty.

1. Of reproof to two sorts of men;

All mind their Quaerere quae sua su^t est private am utilitatem and gloria^
quaerere, et negligere communem utilitatem et gloria^ Christi, seu evangelii.
Erasmus Sarcerius in Psalm. 1.21.
own things, few the things of Christ, and the souls of others. Every one
takes up that wicked speech of Cain, Am I my brothers keeper?

2. To such as allure men to sin, earthlinesse, and vanity. They say not with
David, taste, etc. but as children of the Devil they imitate their father, and
are tempters to evil, saying: O taste and see how sweet sin is, how good the
creature is. These are of the forlorn hope, that march undauntedly upon the
mouth of hell, these shall be damned with a witness. Here above others comes
in the ringleader in intemperance (every Town almost has a king of
drunkards.) These persuade and force men not only to taste but drink deep of
that cup of devils; these carry the sins of others to Gods tribunal. The
hottest seats in hell are kept for these. God has plagued our drunkenness
with immoderate rain, which has spoiled much corn, and is like to produce
scarcity. The Lord has turned our summer into winter; and whereas Christ said,
The harvest is great, and the laborers are few, we may say, the laborers are
many, the harvest is little. Famine is a most fearful judgment. Lam. 4.9, 10.
Ocyus torquet, lentius tabefacit, sensim occidit. Basil. Ser. 3. contra div.
avaros. Two sins chiefly produce this great rain and waters that have fallen. 1.
Our Star gazing and Prognostications which foretell these things. God suffers
it to come to pass as a judgment on the Land for suffering such things, and
to harden people in the belief of them, some believing the Almanacks, have
carried their corn wet into the barn, fearing more rain, and there it grows.
See Perkins touching yearly Prognostications, third Volum, page 653 to 667.

2. Our gluttony and swinish drunkenness, we have fought against God with his
blessings, and now he begins to disarm us. For this flood of drink within are
come floods of water without, this sweeping rain, as Solomon calls it, Pro.
28.3. Let Magistrates therefore scatter our innumerable Conventicles of
drunkards, let Ministers stand in the gap and say, Spare thy people, O Lord;
and let us all humble our selves under his mighty hand. We have deserved
showers of fire and brimstone from heaven.


God is now plaguing the land for these sins. Now they health it on their knees
(a sacrifice to the devil) and force others to drink, as those that thrust the
bottle to the nose, Habak. 2.15. But the time is at hand when they shall beg
upon their knees for one drop of water, when they shall be fed with fire and
brimstone for ever. The very heathen shall rise up in judgment against them,
see Ester 1.8.

the erroneous, revive the disconsolate, and admonish the fallen. To which is
required knowledge. Romans 15.14. a foundation of grace in your own hearts, that
you may speak experimentally, and inwardly to them. 2 Cor. 4.3. else you may
reclaim others, and be cast-aways your Monica gained her husband Patricia from
being an impure Manichee, not by force of argument, but purity and chastity of
life, says August.
selves. Finally, there is requisite fit and suitable addresses to strong and
weak Christians, to civil worldlings, and such as are openly profane, for one
key will not open every lock, the wards are not all alike, so here, etc. Well,
pluck up the loins of your mind, resolve to meet with difficulties and
discouragements, if you set upon this work; without prudence, resolution, and
patience, no good will be done. Though your endeavors prevail not on all,
they may on some (it is well if thou ^^nst melt but one, James 5.20.) though not
now, they may hereafter, it may be somewhat may stick by them, as long as they
have a day to live, and so though not presently, yet hereafter they may be the
better, and glorify God in the day of their visitation, as 1 Pet. 2.12. q. d.
It may be on their death beds; as Joseph's brethren remembered him in their
straights. In a word, though you prevail not at all, your reward is with God.
See Isa. 49.5. a place that has much revived me in the want of success. And
so much also of that point.



They that have tasted Gods goodness are truly blessed, and should at once
trust in God and fear him. But least my porch should be larger then my
building, I see I must be brief, and therefore

They that have once tasted the sweetness that is in God, are a happy people
and truly blessed. If man's summum bonum stands in communion with God, as
Scripture ( Psalm. 144.15.) and experience demonstrates, (for who ever found
contentment at home, knocking at other doors? Then this must needs be a truth,
They that have tasted God are blessed. And if so

Cor. 2.9.

Job 28.14. So here; A man can never gather figs of thistles; Seek not the
living among the dead.

They that have once tasted the goodness of God, should for ever trust in him
The Chaldee expounds it, in his word.
. God is unchangeable. He is ever the same God. Dispensations may vary, but God
is the same. They that know thy Name will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. The Lord
has heard me, and I will call upon him as long as I live, Psalm. 116.2. Boni
dum spirant spera^t imo cum expirant, so Joh. Though he kill me, I Will trust in
him.
But see a notable place, Romans 5.4. Tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, (scil. of Gods relieving us in trouble) and experience hope ( viz.
for the future, and in new straights) and hope makes not ashamed ( i.e. it
makes a man lift up his head among the waves)

If bare and naked promises are sufficient to stay and strengthen the soul in
trouble, Psalm. 119. so John 20.29. Then much more performances.

If our experiences help others, Isa. 51.9. Romans 15.4. then much more should
they quiet us, and cause us for ever to depend on God, and live on him.





To which is requisite Observation and Memory.

1. Observation of the ways and works and proceedings of God with the soul.
Psalm. 107.43. and Isa. 5.12.

2. Memory, the ^aying up of the known and observed works of God; forget not
his outgoings, and in-comings to thee. The Philosopher says, that experience
is Multiplex memoria.

Now remembrance includes 4 things.

1. A committing to memory those passages of providence, that have given us the
sweetest tastes of God and his love and goodness. 2. A retaining Omnium rerum
the saurus and custos est memoria. August.
or keeping them in memory, as in a storehouse, that they slip not from us. 3.
A recalling them to mind upon occasion offered, bringing out things new and
old. 4. A skillful applying them to our own uses and occasions in a suitable
manner.
How shall I do,

1. H^ghly prize and esteem the gracious dealings of God with thee. Psalm.
119.129. and 16. ver. Tull: de Senect.
One writing in defense of old age, says, Where is that old man, that forgets
where he lays his treasure? Where your treasure is, there will your hearts and
minds be also (says Christ.)

2. Use continual helps, such as these.

1. Write down your experiences in a book year by year, and peruse them
continually. When King Ahasuerus could not sleep, he commanded his Records and
Chronicles to be read, Est. 6. And when thy soul has no rest, peruse this
paper or little book of experiences.

2. Christian conference, Psalm. 105.1, 2. compare your experiences with others.

3. Holy meditation, which being fixed on God, will be sweet. See Psalm. 77.11,
12.

4. Prayer, that the Spirit may be your remembrancer, Joh. 14.26.

Well, by these means you may store up plenty of experiences, and by all It Is
an old Proverb, Sperare and expectare multos reddit stultos. But this is
certain, Nunquam confusi Deo confisi.
draw near to God, and grow more familiar with Christ, more bold and
confident, and fearelesse in future troubles.

3. Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with God, that he may be feared. And Hosea 3.5.
They shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. This is a
filial Aliud est timere quia peccaveris, aliud timere ne pecces. Philip. in
Job.
fear.

Sin not therefore because God is good,

But say of God,

O taste and see that the Lord is good.

Wherein you have two general parts, 4. Of the text it self.
an exhortation, and an encouragement.

1. 1. The division.
The exhortation in these words: O taste and see.

2. The encouragement in the words following: That the Lord is good.



1. The manner, with an interjection, expressing the passion of that mind that
utters it, Oh taste and see. Oh! It Is a little word, but full of affections. Oh!
Taste and see.

2. The matter, or the exhortation it self, Taste and see; where 1. You have
two distinct duties urged, viz. the exercise of two spiritual senses, viz. 1.
Tasting, Oh taste, get an holy relish of God and the Word. 2. Seeing -- and
see, endeavor to get a glimpse of God.
2. You have the golden link that fastens them together, taste and see. As a
man cannot see clearly till he tastes God, so he cannot taste God, till he see
something of him, Ignoti nulla cupido. And as tasting without seeing will be
blind devotion, so seeing without tasting will be naked speculation, Ergo,
Taste and see.


In the second, which is the encouragement, viz. 1. The proper fountain of
goodness, the Lord; The Lord is good. He says not that sin is good, or that
the creature is good, for there is but one good, and that is God. See Mat.
19.17. viz. none absolutely good but God. 2. A lively description of God, the
Lord is good. q. d. not only just, holy, powerful, and wise, etc. but he is
good, mercy is his darling attribute, and God glories most in it, as Exodus
34.6. Mercy triumphs over justice. If you would describe God to the life, say
he is good. 3. The application of all this to us, for you see this goodness
must be tasted; as meat in the platter will not nourish us unless we taste it,
so here God is full of goodness, but all this will be nothing to you, nay it
shall be something against you, unless you taste it, unless by faith you
apply it, and have interest in it.


Thus you have the division of the Text, 2. The observations.
now for the observations, those which I shall insist on are five.

1. Doct. All that exhort others, should endeavor to work much upon the
affections. 2. Doct. Sinners should taste of God, and venture to make trial of
him and his ways; Tasting implies trying. 3. Doct. There is but a taste of God
in this life. Tasting is but tasting, not full satisfaction. 4. Doct. They
only that taste can see how good the Lord is: Such only as taste communion
with God in his ways, and have experimental enjoyments of God, can rightly
see and discover his sweetness and goodness. 5. Doct. The Lord in Christ is
exceeding good unto all his Saints, yea he is not only good in the concrete,
but goodness it self in the abstract.
Of all these in order.

First, Oh taste and see. And again in the next verse, O fear the Lord you
his Saints; The very heart of David (you see) is ready to leap out of his
mouth. Oh taste and see.

Whence I observe, that all who exhort, etc. This interjection is frequently
used in sacred Scriptures, setting forth the passions and affections of the
soul, especially four, viz.

1. Joy. Deuteronomy. 33.29. 2. Griese. Jer. 44.4. Mat. 23.37. 3. Love. Psalm. 119.97.
4. Desire, vehement desire, and so it is used here, and elsewhere, Genesis 17.18.
and Deuteronomy. 5.29. and 2 Samuel 23.15. and Job 6.8. Strong desires and affections,
break out in passionate and melting expressions; For the tongue is the hearts
interpreter, and out of the abundance within the mouth speaks; but to come to
the point.
That such as undertake to exhort others, and win them, should principally
endeavor to work upon the affections.

Let us open the Quare and Quomodo, why they must endeavor so to do, and how
they may come to do it.

First, for the Quare, 1 Quare, why?
why this must be their great design?

The reasons are three.

First, us, etc. O what melting expressions are scattered there! Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, etc. Luk, 24.32. Did not our hearts burn whilst he opened the
Scripture to us? There be coals of fire in the Scripture to singe all your
affections, and make your hearts to turn and burn within you, and your fingers
to drop with myrrh. Is not my word like a fire, or hammer? Fire is the most
melting and stirring of all the elements, Heb. 4.12.
etc. See Jer. 5.14. Heb. 4.12.

Secondly, Corinth. 9.7. God loves a cheerful giver: he says, My son, give
me thy heart. Quod cor non faeit, non fit. So that if we do not stir up the
affections of others, the religion we beget in them, will be little better then
formality, Laodicea's sin, Rev. 3.15, 16. v.

Thirdly, They are dull of bearing, Heb. 5.11. There is a lumpish heaviness,
and a sottish stupidity, and a cursed carelessness that sits on the spirits of
unregenerate men, in reference to any thing that good is, with Gallio, They
care for none of these things Acts 18.17. It Is not a small matter will move and
stir men, and bring them to sit as on Nettles before us. We must make them care
for Quicquid facis cum hilaritate fac. August.
In the Greek it is (...), viz. slow paced.
these things, and scatter hell fire in their faces till they cry out, What
shall we do to be saved?

Secondly, for the Quomodo, 2. Quomodo? How?
how may we do it? I answer, Four things are required,

William Fenner in a treatise of the affections. Gal. 3.1. opened.
a man must set out heaven, as if the people did see it with their eyes, and
describe Hell as if they were walking a turn among the damned. And if this will
not work on men's affections, they are bewitch, as Gal. 3.1. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitch you, that you should not obey the truth, before
whose eyes Christ has been evidently set forth and crucified? q. d. Christ
crucified has been described and set out to the life in our Sermons (for that
generation saw not his crucifixion on the cross.) Now to this is requisite
much Quintilian would have his Orator well nigh omniscient; and surely Ministers
should be (...), which signifies being able as well as willing to teach.
knowledge; A man must be well furnished before he can persuade, exhort,
insinuate and wind into the hearts of people, Romans 15.14. To utter seasonable
and suitable things fitly, closely, and describe things to the life, requires
much knowledge.

Quintilian.) Acts 17.34. you see Paul did so move the peoples affections, that
they clave to him and believed. How came he to do this? See verse. 16. His
spirit was stirred in him, i. e. Paul was greatly affected himself, and so
came to affect others. One candle being lighted, 2 Cor. 2.4.
will light many. So 2 Cor. 2.4. I wrote unto you with many tears. Non tam
atramento qua^ lachrymis chartas illevit. Lorinus.
Pene quot syllabas, tot lachrymas (says one) he shed as many tears as he
wrote syllables; he could hardly write for tears. O that we who are Gods
Ministers, could be thus affected! The Lord lay it not to our charge that we
are not.

Gregory says of Athanasius, that his life was a continual Sermon, and wooing
men for Christ.
of life: Aristotle require this in an Orator, That he be a good man. We must
speak feelingly and experimentally, as 2 Cor. 4.13. We also believe, and
therefore speak. Paul exhorts Titus to show himself a pattern in all things,
viz. Such must lead convincing lives, this is more winning then words. See 1
Pet. 3.1. When Elies sons were wicked, it is said, the people abhorred the
offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17.



1. A due carriage of the voice, which (says Austin) sends an occult influence
into the affections of men, Phil. 3.18. Of whom I have told you before, and now
tell you weeping, they are enemies to the cross of Christ. The Apostle speaks
to them with a weeping voice. Let not this be the main thing you look for: It
is a brand on the Jews that they were affected with Ezekiel. 33.32.
Ezekiels pleasant voice, and little else. And even a rare and worthy Moses may
be defective herein. But the meanest voice has some hidden grace in it.

2. A decent Quintilian. Gerardus Johannes Vossius. Orator. Instit. lib. 6.
cap. 11. p. 511. Vide Ar. Montan. lib, 8. Antiq. Jud. ubi varias g^stuum
significatine^ e sacris sedulo colligit.
action, so not over-affected, will work upon the hearers. Ezekiel is bid to
stamp with the feet. And John Baptist was totus vox, all voice, Matthew. 3 3. The
voice of a crier in the wilderness. He was all voice, that is, says one, his
eyes spoke, and his hands spoke, and his body spoke. The Prophets stretched out
their arms to the people in fullness of affection. It is said Paul set his
eyes on Elimas that wicked Sorcerer, Acts 13.9. saying, O thou child of the
Devil, and enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord? His eyes spoke as well as his tongue; you see how a man
may work on the affections of others.

First then, Persuasioni humanae opponit ostensione^ spiritus quae vim qua^dam
supra modu^ efficace^ ad persuadendu^ animos habet. Meyer. in 1 Cor. 2.4.
to be zealous in dispensing the word; Our Sermons must not be only informing,
but inflaming Sermons. We must not rub itching ears, but shake drowzy hearts;
not preach to please them with novelties, or puzzle them with nicities, but
fire them with love to the truth, and care of sincere obedience. In a word, not
to set forth our selves, but Jesus Christ in his loveliness to poor sinners,
that they may be sick of love to him, and languish with desires after him. This
must be our design, our delight.

Secondly,

This is done six ways:



Matthew. 11.15 Christus electos Dei hortatur, quibus perforatae sunt aures, ut
attenti sint ad considerandum Dei arcana, ne obsurdescant cum incredulis.
Calvin.
attention, listening to the matter as well as sound of words, else you be no
more affected then the Whelps or Birds that hear a sound as well as you. David
says, I will listen what God will speak. Christ says, He that has ears to
hear, let him hear. q. d. Let him with intention and greediness of spirit
receive the Word. It Is said, Luke 2.20. The peoples eyes were fastened on
Christ when he taught them. A good help against distraction, and an argument of
their attention.

Thirdly, submission and stooping to God, That you may Jam. 1.21
receive with meekness the ingrafted word: Say with Paul, Lord, what will thou
have me to do?

1 Reg. 8.38.
and saw the passengers baulk you, and stop their noses, etc. How would you
then skream, and cry out with Paul, O Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? And so here when we pray you to
taste divine sweetness, conceive you were at a rich feast, to which men come
with edged appetites, and eat the fat, and drink the sweet, etc. This would
work much on the affections.

Psalm. 84.2. and 42.1.
breath after the enjoyments of Christ, fling up divine ejaculations: O that
this truth might transform me, and work with power! Now when all wish the same
thing, what can hinder the work? We say as in the Text, O taste and see, O be
persuaded to hear God, and delight in God! O that this day there might be joy
in heaven over the conversion of some soul! Well, a believer under the word
falls a wishing too, Psalm. 119.15. and 55.6.
O that my ways were directed according to thy Statutes! O that I had the
silver wings of a Dove to fly into the bosom of Christ! To conclude, God and
Christ fall a wishing over you too (in whose will and power it is to do you
good) Deuteronomy. 5.29.
O that there were such an heart in you, that you would fear me, and keep my
statutes! Luke 19.42.
Oh that thou had known in this thy day, etc. Now I say, when there is
wishing on all sides, what should hinder execution?

Deuteronomy. 14.8. Levit. 11.7.
Those beasts which chewed not the cud were unclean. So here. Psa. 62.11. God
has spoken once, twice have I heard this, That power belongs unto God. So
here, God speaks once to you in the Sermon, you must hear it twice in
repetition at home. Thus the noble Acts 17.11.
Bereans searched the Scriptures daily, whether the things they heard of Paul
and Silas, were so or no. And thus I have done with that point.

Sinners should be induced to taste God,

In the Doctrinall part we shall inquire

1. What this tasting Gods goodness is?

2. Whether unregenerate men may have this taste?

3. Why all must strive for experimental tastes of God?

First, what this tasting is? 1. Enquiry.
I answer, there is a corporal and a mystical taste.

1. There is a Corporal taste, 1 There is a corporal taste.
1 Samuel 14 43. It may be defined thus,

Aristotle.
Tasting is one of the most necessary exterior senses, distinguishing such
sensibiobjects as are tastable. So that to taste is to chew and consider what
it is we receive before we take it down for nourishment. The taste easily
distingu^shes between that which is bitter and sweet, stale or new. It quickly
gives sentence what is pleasant, and what is offensive. The curious palate
serves to relish or disrelish things. So 2 Samuel 19.35. to taste is to try and
discern. Now thus Gods goodness is not to be tasted; unless occasionally by
taking a rise from the creature to the Creator, and by eying his love in
outward mercies: And so even in bodily food, a Believer tastes how good the
Lord is; he sees God as a Father providing food convenient for him: and he
tastes Divine goodness in every morsel of bread he eats. Whether you eat or
drink (says the Apostle) or what ever you do, do Intellectus comparatur
gustui, quia intellectus noster judicat de re ut sensus saporibus. Erhard.
Schnepsius in Psalm. 34.6. page 204.
all to the glory of God. Mat. 6.31.32. 1 Cor. 10.31.
q. d. See and admire his goodness in these things, and be sure you be sober
and temperate in the use of them.

But this corporal taste is not meant here.

2. A spiritual taste.
2. There is a Mystical and Spiritual taste, which is to examine, try,
consider, and relish divine goodness, and partake of its sweetness and joy.

How we taste Gods goodness.
But how be we said spiritually to taste the goodness of GOD? I answer, Five
ways.

1. In Ordinances.
First, in Divine Ordinances, which God has appointed for this end, viz.

1. The Word.
1. The Word, by hearing or reading of it, a believer Heb. 6.4. Gustus verbi nos
suaviter delectat, Calv.
tastes God in the Word, and finds a world of sweetness there. See Psa.
119.103. How sweet are thy words to my taste, yea sweeter then honey to my
mouth? The Word is exceeding swest, and none but believers can taste it. For as
Ezekiel ate the Roll, Ezekiel. 3.3.
Ezekiel. 3. which was in his mouth as honey; so a believer does spiritually In
sacris Scripturis abu^dat and quod robustus comedat, and quod parvulus sugat.
Fulgentius Sermon. de Confess.
feed on the Word, and if the threatenings of the Word are sweet to them (for
that Roll was full of curses, Ezekiel. 3.10.) because they are assured they belong
not to them, and that God shall gain glory to his truth and justice by them, Oh
then how sweet are the promises, which are called the unsearchable riches of
Christ, and exceeding great and precious promises? 2 Pet. 1.4.
When all the world cannot cheer up a drooping heart, the thought of a promise
does the work: For the promise is full, free, and firm. Now if the promise is
so sweet, how sweet is the performance? How sweet is the enjoyment of Christ,
in whom all the promises are Cor. 1.20.
Yea and Amen?

2. Prayer.
2. Prayer. A Saint tastes God, and lives upon God in prayer; by this he draws
out of the well of salvation, which is deep, but very sweet. David says, he is
Prope est omnibus qui ubique adest, nec refugere eum possumus si offendimus,
nec fallere si delinquimus, nec amittere si colamus, Amb. in Psalm. 119. I^lum
maxim fovet qui appropinquat sibi. Idem.
nigh, but Paul, he is rich to all that call upon him. And Christ says, Your
heavenly Father will give good things to them that ask him, viz. by, and in
prayer, they shall taste of his goodness. For, making their requests known to
him, the very peace of God which passes understanding, shall keep their hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4. I here appeal unto believers. Have
not you known the time, that you have touched the hem of Christ's garment, and
tasted of the joys of heaven in prayer, and holy enlargednesse of heart, when
thou have wrestled with God? Have you not seen heaven cleft, and Christ sitting
at Gods right hand. There is no believer, but frequently tastes the goodness
of God in and by prayer: For God says not, Seek ye me in vain?

3 The Seals.
3. The Seals. viz. 1. In baptismo signu^ est aqua, res autem ablutio animae
per sanguinem and spiritum Christ's, and carnis mortificatio, Calv. in 1 Pet.
3.21.
That of Admission into the Church; there we taste Gods goodness in Baptismus
pactum seu foedus gratiae, quod init inter baptismum nobiscum Christus,
Bulling. in Act 2.38.
culling us out of the world, and planting us in the garden of his Church.
Thereby our sins are washed away, and we are baptized with the holy Ghost,
and with fire. 2. We taste divine goodness in ^he Sacrament of Confirmation,
the Lords Supper, we feed upon Christ in those Elements of Bread and Wine.
There Christ crucified is emblematically set forth, and sacramentally received,
and the heart raised (...) to taste the goodness of God, Mat. 26. Quid igitur?
P^nem vides praeterea nihil: sed audis tesseram esse corporis Christi, ne
dubita impleri a Domino quod verba sonant, corpus quod nequaquam cernis,
spirituale esse tibi alimentum. Calv. in Mat. 26.26.
This is my Body, and this is my Blood, q. d. These outward Signs and Seals
are most sure and certain pledges of my Body and Blood, which I do as truly
give to be spiritual food, as I give the Bread and Wine to be bodily food to
every believer, 1 Cor. 10.16. This was long since promised, Isai. 25.6. The
Lord will make a feast of fat things, of wine on the Lees well refined. So
Prove. 9.5. Here Christ, as the Master of the Feast bids us welcome, saying, Eat
O friends, yea drink abundantly my beloved. Here the the hungring and thirsting
Soul has refreshment and strength from heaven: here it is put in mind of
Christ, and all that he has done and endured for us: Here it has heavings and
violent liftings of heart toward God. And Christ says, Open your mouths
wide, and I will fill them with good things. Here the Soul has meetings with
God, and is convinced of his love, and the truth of his promises. For this is a
Seal of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. It confirms the covenant of
grace to us. You see how we taste the goodness of God in the Lords Supper.

4. Conference
4. In Society and Communion, and Christian conference with the Saints, and
speaking often to one another of the things of Heaven, Mal. 3.16. For thereby
we taste of others gifts, which are given them for others to profit withal,
and they will be ready to comfort us with the comforts wherewith they have been
comforted of God, as 2 Cor. 1.4. Indeed much of God may be seen and tasted in
communion with the Saints. It Is a piece of heaven upon earth; it is the joy of
Christians: All my delight (says David) is in them that excel in virtue.
Communion with the Saints is often made a step to fellowship with Christ, as 1
John 1.4. Haec itaque socletas, cujus meminit Johannes, est Ecclesia Christi,
quae in symbolo dicitur sanctorum communio, habet aute^ maxima bona
spiritualia. etc. Thomas Naogeorgus in 1 Johan. 1.4.
That ye may have communion with us, and that also our communion may be with
the father. Throw a dead Charcoale among the living, and it will soon sparkle
and kindle: Simile.
First indeed sparkle, viz. Thou will dislike their ways and principles; but
afterward kindle, and glow with love to God and his truth, when you have looked
better into them, and tasted Gods goodness among them.

5. Meditation.
5. In Gustare est cogitare. Erhard. Schueptius Comment in Psalm. 34.6.
Meditation. This is a Saints pastime, it recreates and perfumes the tired
spirits: it is a Ladder by which the Soul-clambers up to heaven: it is a duty is
ever at hand, Prove. 6.22. When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou
sleep it shall keep thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee.
When thou art alone, nay in the dark, when traveling, etc. On all occasions
you may let out your soul in meditation, when other duties cannot be performed:
Nay, when you sleep you may be meddling with this duty; For having communion
with God in the day, and closing thy eyes with some meditation, even thy
dreams may be of the love of God, and the glory of heaven, as the experiences
of the Saints can witness. Meditation it enter^ us into the first degrees of
those heavenly joys, and imparts to us some beginnings of the vision and
fruition of God: It enables us with Moses to discern, as we are able, some
glimpses of God, that our faces shine with purity and divine splendour. By this
we are ravished with Paul, and are caught up into paradise, and in the
twinkling of an eye are driven (as in a fiery Chariot) into heaven. By this
with holy Soli Stephano conspicua fuit Dei gloria, impiis enim qui eodem loco
stabanc hoc spectaculum latebat. unde sequitur non in coelis, sed potius in
Stephano editum fuisse miraculum. Calvin in Acts 7.56.
Stephen we see the heavens opened, and Jesus sitting at the right hand of God.
Indeed admirable are the effects of divine meditation. It confirms our
knowledge. Psalm. 119.99. It strengthens our memory, Ps. 63.6. It enflames our
love (as bellows the cynders) Psalm. 119.97. and Psalm. 39.3. It cherishes
affiance in God, as Psalm. 119.147, 148. It maintains a true and son-like fear
of God, Psalm. 4.4. It hushes and quiets the soul in afflictions, Psalm. 119.23.
1 Pet. 4.12. Think it not strange. q. d. It matters much what our thoughts and
meditations are in trouble. It promotes prayer, Psalm. 143.5, 6. Eccles. 5.2.
and praising God. This tunes the harp. Psalm. 63.5, 6. It weanes and sequesters
the heart from the world. It spiritualizes our discourse, Psalm. 77.12. Mat.
12.34. If there be fire on the hearth, some sparks will fly out at the
chimney. In a word, it casts a secret influence on the life, Josh. 1.8. Psalm.
1.3. and 119.15. Purge the fountain, and the streams will run pure.

The life is easily transformed, when the heart is new molded. What shall I
say? Cogitare est vivere. Tull. Acad. Quaest. lib. 1.
Meditation is the very life of our life, as a Heathen could say and see by the
light of nature. It is the food of our souls, the fuel of our zeal, the spur
of our devotion; The soul that can meditate on God, is never less Nunquam
minus solus, quam cum solus.
alone, then when alone; for his fellowship is then with the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ. It delights to walk in these groves, and fold the arms in
these shadie bowers of solitary but divine meditation, where it hears the
Nightingale of a good conscience warble melodiousl^, and. Psalm. 104.34.
My meditation of thee shall be sweet, says David, and in the multitude of my
thoughts, thy comforts delight my soul. q. d. I cast much of God in this
duty, and it feeds me with many sweet morsells of contentment. Psalm. 104.34.

But now do beleever^ taste the goodness of God in divine medication?

1. By meditating of all his glorious perfections, especially the boundless
dimensions of his sweetest attribute, which is his mercy. So Hic locus hortatur
omnes homines ut velint cogitare de bonitate Domini. Erhard. Schnepfius in
Psalm. 34.6. Page 204.
taste and see ( viz. consider a little with me, says David here) how good the
Lord is. q. d. By meditating dive into the Ocean of divine sweetness, and
contemplate of him that is beauty and goodness it self.

2. By meditating Nolite omnia beneficia Dei sine gustu deglutire, aut malign
perpetua oblivione sepelire, sicut faciunt impii. Sed adbibete palatum, videte
and judicate. Molerus in Psalm. 34.5. Page 275.
of the works of God, the creatures of God, and the doings of God. Consider
others deliverances, and your own. Surely David aims at this here, O taste and
see how good the Lord is. q. d. Oh consider all my deliverances, and especially
that from the hand of 1 Samuel 21.12, 13.
Achish (as in the title of the Psalm) and consider your deliverances and
mercies from day to day. Meditation like the Be hovers up and down, and will
taste of every flower in the garden, and admire God in all his creatures, and
in all his providence. I have been the longer on meditation, because David
ch^efly ^^me at this in the Text. Thus you see the first thing opened. We
taste God in his Ordinances, viz. the word, prayer, seases, conference and
meditation.

2. We taste God by faith.
Secondly, We taste God by faith, and particular applications of Christ unto
the soul. For where there is tasting, there must be touching and applying the
food Aristot.
In other senses, as seeing, hearing, there must be a medium between the object
and organ, not so in tasting. The thing tasted must be touched. T^s so here in
this spiritual taste, there must be an application of Christ, and union with
him by Qui fidit invocat, qui invocat exauditur and salvatur: Hinc ille gustus.
Musc. in Psalm. 34.
faith, and a grounded persuasion of his goodness to us, or we can never
taste him: To ponder Gods goodness in himself and to others is not all, but
to bring it home and weigh his goodness to me, as, 1 Timothy 1.15. and Gal. 2.20.
Oh it is this rasses so sweet a relish in the heart Hunc vero gustu^ in Christo
percipi significat Apostostolus ut certe nullam unqua^ extra Christum requiem
(and dulcedinem) inveniat. Calvinus in 1 Pet. 2.3.
For what would it profit thee that God is good to others, and not to thee,
marrow to others, and gall to thee, (surely this will but add to thy torment.)
Now faith applies that goodness and sweetness that is in God, to a man's own
soul in particular: And this lies plainly in the Text. O taste and see how
good the Lord is, blessed are they that trust in him. q. d. O be persuaded to
taste God, for they must needs be blessed, that believe in him. You see he
makes tasting and trusting (or believing) all one. Now though God have never so
much power and goodness in him, yet till the soul has interest in him, it
has no reason to trust in him, for God to such is a consuming fire. One that
never tasted God by faith may say he is a tower and a Savior, etc. Psalm. 144.2.
But only the believer can sing that song, My goodness, and my fortress, my
high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I trust.

Thirdly, 3. In partaking of divine influences. 2 Cor. 3.18.
We taste Gods goodness by partaking of divine influences, viz. the gifts and
graces of the Spirit: These are certain rays and sparkles of his goodness
shed in upon the heart, to make it resemble God in Goodness.

So then.

1. There Is a taste of Gods goodness, when we partake of the gifts of the
Spirit, as, Heb. 4.6. There it is called tasting of the heavenly powers; It Was a
fruit of Christ's ascension, to give gifts unto men Ephesians. 4.8.
.

2. And more especially, we taste Gods goodness, when we partake of divine
graces, which are the very stamp or image of the divine nature Notandu^ est
naturae nomen hic non substa^tiam, sed qualitatem designare. Martin. Luther in
2 Pet. 1.4.
. Cant. 2.3. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons. I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste. He brought me to his banqueting house, and his banner over
me was love See Ainsw. in locum.
. Now this fruit of Christ, which was so sweet to her taste, is nothing but the
graces of God, which are called the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Mat.
3.8.10. You see regeneration is tasting of God. It Is called (you know) partaking
of the divine nature, and being changed from glory to glory, etc.

4. We taste God in outward reformation.
4. We taste Gods goodness in outward behavior and reformation, when we make
trial of him and his ways, and turn our feet into his testimonies; When men
search and examine things well, and resolve to try if the ways of God deserve
to be evil spoken of. 1 John 4.1. Try the spirits, whether they be of God or
no: and so we say to sinners here, Requiritur ut gustemus, i. e. experimentum
capiamus de Deo quod bonus sit. Sicut enim nemo certo, quanta sit dulcedo
mellis cognovit, nisi qui gustat, ad cum modu^ divinae bonitatis cognitione^
non poterit habere, nisi qui expertus est. Musculus in Psalm. 34.8. P. 309.
Try the ways of God, whether they be sweet or no. Men are apt to speak evil
of things they know not. See John 4.10. So I say here. Oh if you did but know
what ravishing sweetness were in God and his ways, you would soon taste and
try them. Methinks what David said to God, that God says to sinners. Search me
and prove me, see if there be any way of wickedness in me. God says: Are not
my ways equal? Is not my yoke easy? Do but try and disprove me, and then
testify against me, all this to put us on the trial, to prevail with us, but
to taste and see how good he is. Job 34.3. The ear tries words, as the palate
tastes meats; Let us know among our selves what is true. So the soul by
tasting and trying is able to discern between things that differ.

5. In actual discoveries of sweetness in God.
5. We taste Gods goodness in experimental and actual discoveries of
sweetness and fulness in God, when we have tried and now find
soule-filling and satisfying delight and comfort in God; when the soul
rejoices with joy unspeakeable and glorious, when it has got earnests of the
Spirit, and evidences of glory Grace is a beginning of glory; it may be
compared to the golden chain in Homer, whose top was fastened to the chair of
Jupiter.
, when it sees God smiling on the soul, now indeed it has tasted how good the
Lord is; now it calls out for more of God, O stay me with flagons, and comfort
me with apples, for I am sick of love. Now it longs to have its full and will
of God, and to be even swallowed up of God, when he shall lead us into his
wine-cellar, and shall draw up his sparkles of glory into one confluence and
constellation round about him; and we shall be filled with all the fulness of
God.

Now when a sinner has got such discoveries of God, and appearances of Christ,
that it longs for these things, then indeed it has tasted with David, how good
the Lord is.

You see what this spiritual taste is.

Now secondly, we must inquire, 2d Inqu.
whether unregenerate men and mere hypocrites may be acquainted with these
tastes of Gods goodness, and yet still continue in the state of nature? Now to
this I answer.

1. Wicked men may seem to go very far in this work, Heb. 6.4. opened.
as Heb. 6.4, 5. It Is evident, this is spoken of unregenerate men. Because the
Author says, they may fall away, and never be renewed (which cannot be said of
them that have true grace, Romans 11.29.)

But there you see an unregenerate man may deceive himself, and others, and
go very far; for,

1. They may taste of the heavenly gift, viz. the common gifts and influences
of the Spirit Solos quidem electos Deus spiritu regenerationis dignatur, sed
hoc non obstat, quo minus reprobos etia^ gustu gratiae suae a spergat, irradiet
eorum mentes aliquibus lucis suae scintillis, afficiat eos bonitatis suae
sensu, verbumque suum utcunque eorum animis insculpat. Calvin. in Heb. 6.5.
as great knowledge, some kinds of 01 faith, hatred of some sin, and a
seeming zeal for God, as Judas (before his discovery) had.

2. They may taste of the good word of God by feeling some sudden flashes of
joy and delight under the Word, as Herod and Felix did.

3. They may even taste of the powers of the world to come, that is, be taken
up with the contemplation and admiration of the Saints blessedness in heaven.
Thus Balaam desired by all means, to die the death of the righteous, that his
last end might be like theirs. All this is held forth in that one place, Heb.
6. But if we range through the Bible, we shall find many other particulars
touching this thing, viz. how far a^ hypocrite may go in these tastes of Go^
and Religion.

I find eight Alexander Gross in his fiery pillar mentions 14 steps. cap. 5.
steps, more are named.

1. They may abound with knowledge in the mysteries of godliness, 2 Pet. 2.21
1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Luke 12.47. Mat. 4.6.

2. They may be moved and troubled a^ the denunciation of judgment, and si^^
quaking under the Word, Acts 24.25 id. 5.33. James 2.19.

3. They may be perplexed in mind about sin, and that both before committing
it, as in Mark. 6.26. and afterward, Mat. 27.3, 4. Genesis 4.13. Exodus 9.27.

4. They may pray themselves. 1 King 21.27.29. Isa. 1.15. Mat. 6.7. nay
earnestly desire others to pray for them, Act^ 8.24. So did Simon that was in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

5. They may make open profession of the strictest ways of godliness, Isa
38.2. Acts 13.50. and 26.5. Mat. 25.7.

6. They may joy, and take delight in the Word, Mar. 6.20. Mat. 13.10. Heb.
6.5. Luke 4.20.22. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. Isa. 58.2.

7. They may reform in many things so 2 Kings 10. Luke 18.11. Acts 6.20. and 2
Pet. 2.20, 21.

8. They may hold out with Christ in very great troubles, As Servetus Mauz^us,
Bishop Fisher, and Friar Forest did.
nay suffer even death in the cause of Christ, 1 Cor. 13.3. How many Jesuits
have worn the Tyburne-tippet (as Father Latimer phrases it) rather then
renounce the Popes supremacy.

You see hypocrites may ascend many rounds in Jacobs ladder, but the greater is
their fall into hell at last, for

2. Notwithstanding all this, Albertus Magnus was thirty years about, that by
reason of springs and devices within, could walk up and down, and speak
articulately, which still was void of life, so here, etc. Some springs within
resulting from self-love, some screws of ostentation may produce in the
hypocrite speech and motion in the ways of God, but being destitute of
spiritual life, he must needs be void of spiritual senses, and so he is a
stranger to the taste in the text.

But wherein lies the difference between the taste that may be in reprobates,

1. Wicked men may seem to taste, find a secret loathing and weariness
within, but now believers have real tastes of God, and that joy which they
express, is but the over-flowings of inward delight and comfort.

2. They may have some general tastings of the mysteries of Christ, but they
cannot taste or know those mysteries with sound application as theirs.

3. That taste in wicked men is but for a Est igitur aliqua etia^ in reprobis
cognitio, quae postea evancscit, vel quia minus altas radices, quam oportebat,
agit, vel quia suffocata degenerat. Calvin. in Heb. 6.5.
season, it cannot be lasting: They taste for a fit of a river running by them,
but not of a fountain before them.

4. Such may taste, but never digest, they are not the better, there is no
change within, but their souls are cages of unclean birds, but now believers
are transformed by these tastes of God. What shall I say?

A sincere heart out-strips an hypocrite in many things, for he hates sin
universally, Psalm. 119.104. He exercises holy duties in public and secret
constantly, Job 27.6, 8, 9, 10. Acts 14.16. He obeys the whole will of God
chearefully, Psalm. 40.8. and 119.128. 1 John 5.3. They endeavor the glory of
Christ above their own good, Romans 9.3. Luke 14.26. With David they desire to
win others, and they call upon them to taste God, 1 John 3.14. Luke 22.32. But
such are especially busy with their own hearts, continually bemoaning the
deceitfulness of them, and desiring sincerity with much earnestness, Psalm.
119.23, 24. You see a believers taste is much different from the taste that is
in hypocrites, who may have a name to live, and a name to taste, but are indeed
dead and senseless.

Lastly, 3d Inq.
let us inquire why sinners should labor for experimental tastes of God? I
answer:

1. Because God and his ways are undeservedly evil spoken of by Mammonists,
Grave dum tollis suave cutuleris. Greg. in Ezekiel. lib. 2. Hom. 7.
ways, to be ways of pleasantness, his burdens light, and like those
burdens of Cinnamon, that refresh those that carry them through the deep sands
of Arabia, and all his Quid enim levius eo onere, quod non solu^ non onerat,
sed portat omnem cui porta^du^ imponitur. Ber. epist. 72.
yokes to be easy, so that in the very keeping Gods ways is great reward,
Psalm. 19.11. Many bring an evil report on Canaan, but behold these fair
clusters; The graces of God are grapes gathered from that Vine above. O taste
and see how good the Lord is, and how good grace is.

2. We shall never know the true sweetness of God and his ways, taste and
see; till you taste, you can never clearly see how good the Lord is. And who
(my brethren) would be ignorant of the souls summum bonum, and range up and
down seeking contentment, when it is only to be found in a neglected Messiah?
Thy poor heart will not only be void of content, but ignorant of the proper
fountain, till thou have tasted God, and then thou will rate thy self, for
trying no sooner. This is certain; for

3. 2. Cor. 7.10. Trap in locum.
who never Concerning this tasting there is no repentance, unless that it was
nosooner, as 1 Cor. 15.8.
repented for so doing, should invite us to taste and try. True repentance is
never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. Job cursed the day of his birth, but no
man was ever heard to curse the day of his new birth, says one upon those
words. Hypocrites have played the Apostates, but they never tasted God. Theirs
was but cadaver fidei, or the picture of grace. See 1 John 2.19. They might be
wens or botches on the body, but they never were member^. No, never did any
repent of their tasting God, and venturing on Religion* though persecution has
immediately attended their profession. Men of our time, calling, rank, and
parts, have chearefully waded through all the difficultie^ following Religion
Nec ratione componimur, sed omnes consuetud ne ab ducimu^. Sen. Epist. 122.
There Is a multitude of examples round about you, tasting and rellishing divine
sweetness. The Wise men had but one star to guide them to Christ, but we
have all the assembly of Gods Saints, the company of renowned Diutius durant
exempla quam mores. Corn. Tacit. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 17.
Martyrs, many precious Christians, as so many millions of stars, to allure
and conduct and enlighten us to Christ; All which will certainly rise up in
judgment against us, if we follow them not. Mat. 12.41, 42. Besides, others
could never prize Christ, and rejoice in him thus, if there were not a glorious
fulness, and soul quieting sweetness in him; There Is that in Christ that
can satisfy every longing soul: Let this make us consider and inquire what
Christ is, and taste his goodness.

4. Either you must taste of Gods goodness, or fury; Ingens telum necessitas.
Livius.
. There is a cup in Gods right hand of that is ten thousand times sweeter then
Nectar. Of this he entreats you to taste, and many will not; But then there is
a cup of trembling in his left hand, into which the dregs of his fury are wrung
out, and of this cup they shall taste and drink deep to eternity. You must all
have to do with God one way or other, as children with a father, or as
traitors with a Judge. God can raise himself glory out of your ashes. If you
will forsake your own mercies, and shut the door against the offers of grace,
justice shall break in upon you as armed men, and deliver you to the
tormentors. Deuteronomy. 30.19.
Behold, I set life and death, hell and heaven, sweet and bitter, before you
this day, you must taste of one. Make therefore (with Mary) a wise and
judicious choice; Taste and see how good the Lord is, and then you shall never
taste and see how terrible he is, how just he is, how powerful he is for the
destruction of the creature, yet so that it may ever live to feel what
infinite power, justice, and wisdom can inflict upon it to all eternity.

Fifthly and lastly. Habemus vitae futurae pignus. Theophylact.
hereafter, for what is grace but glory begun, and what is glory but grace
finished? Now indeed you can get out a glimpse of God. There Is much coldness
and darkness in you, and you 1 Cor 13.12.
know and taste but in part. A thousand things step in to break off your
communion with God. But the day is at hand, even at the door, when thou shall
see God face to face, when you shall swim in those crystal rivers of pleasure
Neque enim erimus otiosi spectatores, sed participes gloriae. Bern. in Diverse.
1.
: in a word, when you shall have your fill and will of God. In the mean time,
this taste will at once prepare you for that fulness, and assure you of it,
and make you isntrumental for the lifting up Christ upon his throne, and
glorifying God in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, which must
needs be joy and delight to every gracious heart in this life. Phil. 2.15.


Let us come now to the improvement of this useful point in Application.

First,

Acts 18.17.
Gallio they care for none of these things, they savor not, they relish not
the things that are of God, etc.

The last, may some say, Peter, a child of light, an eminent Apostle, etc.

It Is most certain, Mat. 16.23. The Saints in some things are dark, and
sometimes they seem to be utterly void of any spiritual relish in the best
things, for a Christians palate may be down, he may have his seasons of
deadness, as the best gardens have their winters, and the Sun his eclypses.
And in this posture, all the precious ordinances are juicelesse to the soul:
It still goes to prayer, but not with wonted affections; to the word but no
relish; to the Table of the Lord; but now no tastings of the things signified:
And this is the greatest burden to a gracious heart in the whole world: it
mourns under deadness, and laments these indispositions, and is weary of this
temper Peccata non nocent si non placent. Aug. de Tem. p. 18.
.

Quest. But how may the souls palate be ra^^ed, and its relish restored?

Answ. Nemo intelligit quam bonus sit Deus, nisi qui variis tribulationibus est
exercitatus. Na^ dulcia non norit qui non gustavit amara Hen. Mollerus in Psalm.
34. pa. 275.
Bi^ter things are wont to do it. You must feed on Christ, the Paschall Lamb
with the bitter herbs of compunction, and Gospel-contrition. Make your moan to
God, grieve that you can grieve no more, complain to God of your dryness of
eyes, as Isaiah of his leanness; find out the Achan that stole this wedge of
gold, the Jonas that causes this tempest within thee. O mourn for that sin
especially that is the cause of Gods withdrawing. These bitter herbs may
recover thy spiritual relish.

But now if this meet with the best, that for a season are deprived of this
taste, how much more with Intellectualibus amme sensibus non pollent. Euthym.
them that never had it? The time is yet to come with many millions of souls
that ever they tasted the Lords goodness in any mercy, in any duty. I have
read of one that had no bodily Lazarus (vitrivorax vulgo dictus) nullo prorsus
gustu praeditus erat, nullam in c^endo voluptatem persentiebat, says Realdus
Columbus in his last book quoted by Nierembergius Iist. not. ib. 3. cap. 9.
taste at all. Nay, I knew one of a very strong and healthy constitution, that
had little or no taste. This is the condition of thousands in spiritual things.

Now if you put this question to me, why many cannot feel such sweetness in
holy duties as others do, why they pass from duty to duty, and taste nothing
of God in the Ordinance? I answer, that indeed it will not be amiss to
discover unto you the proper causes of this temper, and they are six.

Romans 10.14. Such as want the ordinances, will never taste the sweetness of
God: For faith comes by hearing. Strab. Geog.
Some live near the Arcttick pole, and six months together see not the light of
the Sun. These are to be pitied, but much more such Prove. 29.18.
as enjoy not the sunshine of the Gospel, and will never taste Christ.

Not but that strong believers (as David here) in the want of ordinances, enjoy
most of God, who is not tied unto means, and then they lie down and drink at
the fountain where the water is sweeter and plentifuller: but (mistake not) I
speak of unregenerate then who want the ordinary means of conversion, and
believers that neglect the ordinances. Now if in these cases there is want of
the ordinances, Heb. 10.25. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
no wonder if people taste not, as otherwise they might, the sweetness and
goodness of God.

Next, We must not make Gods service (...), a lazy business, This was a
precept of Pythagoras. Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustavit amara. Erubescat
humana pigritia, plus vult ille dare quam nos accipere. Aug. Ser. 29. de ver.
Dom. Labor omnia vincit.
negligence under the means. Many Christians are often restrained in the tastes
of the sweetness of Gods favor and presence, because they are not careful
enough to attend upon him in the use of ordinances: They bestow little pains,
few strugglings with their hearts; they hear, and pray, and read, etc. all in
a lazy and perfunctory manner. No wonder therefore some taste not such
ravishing sweetness as others, for they use not like pains and diligence to
search out the comfort of the Word. For as rich Minerals are not gotten on the
superficies of the earth, but men must sweat and dig deep into the bowels of
the earth to find them. And as the sweetness of a kirnell is not rasted till
the shell be cracked, nor the goodness of marrow known till the bone be broken;
even so it is here. The sweetness of God, and the rich comforts of the word,
are not tasted nor felt by them that look but slightly and superficially into
them, but are at no pains to suck the breasts of Consolation, which are the
promises, and labor would overcome allthings.

palats, and no wonder Angelical viands are not pleasant to them. To a sick
man that which is sweet seems sour and ungracious; so it is here: For besides
that some have the taste of pleasures and profits, and the lusts of the world
in their Currus bovem trabit siratio pareat affectui. Lucian. mortuorum
Dialogo. tom. 1. p. 257.
hearts, when they come to duty, where they should relish divine sweetness; to
whom Christ says, they shall not, because they cannot and will not taste of
his Supper in Luke 14.24. and Matthew. 13.22. Others dream of a seeming
sweetness in forms and pictures and postures, and superstitious worship,
which the Prophet calls Feeding upon ashes; and now these are snatched from
them, their religion (which consisted in such things) is also gone. So that now
they are as people that have lost their Judge. 18.24. So here.
God, they can relish nothing else, nor discover any sweetness in pure
ordinances. Isai. 65.11. you read of these, They prepare a Table for the Troop,
and they furnish the drink offering unto that number. q. d. There are Relics
of idolatry, and superstitious doings, and will worship among them. Now see the
thirteenth verse, Therefore thus says the Lord) my servants shall eat, but you
shall be hungry; they shall drink, but you shall be thirsty; they shall
rejoice, but you shall be ashamed. q. d. They shall have communion with me, and
taste of my goodness, whilst you are strangers altogether unacquainted with me.
Others are so taken up with Ascanius his Parrot could say all the C^eed: and
another Parr^t being seized on by a Kite, could repeat that piece of his
L^tany, Sanite Thoma ^ra pro nobis. How many nominall Christians do thus stick
in forms, and play the Parrots with God? These will never taste divine
sweetness in any duty.
forms of godliness that they taste little of God in any duty, they play the
Parrots with God; what is this but mocking of him, and cheating a man's own
soul? No greater strangers to God then formalists, more hope of profane ones
then such, says Christ, Matthew. 21.31. Thus you see the palats of men may be
vitiated and distempered, and prepossest with other things, so as they cannot
taste the goodness of God in a promise, which is compared to wine on the lees
well refined. Now as a man that has eaten lushious food, cannot taste nor
relish the best wine, so it is here, etc.

Vide Joseph Bentham of society with the Saints.
are engaged and entangled in wicked company, in holiness contemning and
Christ-disrelishing society, which is a snare and muzzle unto them, that they
cannot taste the goodness of God. Prove. 9.5, 6. There you will see there be some
that taste not of Wisdoms banquet, because they leave not the way of the
foolish. Bad company will make thee bad, and then declare thee so. For
qualiscunque quis suerit, cum tali se conjung^t. Amb. ad virg. devotam. It Is
not good to be at the Devils mess, though ones spoon be never so long.
All sense in spirituals is curbed, if not extinguished by carnal and cooling
company, who (as you shall see anon) have learned of Satan to oppose beginnings
of goodness. See Ephesians. 5.11. intimating you cannot have fellowship with
unfruitful workers of darkness, but twenty to one you will have fellowship in
their works also; For can a man touch pitch and not be defiled? The
experiences of many Saints can witness, that carnal company is cooling and
ensnaring.

Next, some are delivered up to a spirit of slumber. Romans 11.8. Like those
Asses in Hetruria, that feeding upon Henbane would lie for dead. Nay,
unregenerate men are not only fast asleep, but Ephesians. 5.14.
dead in trespasses and sins, and what taste has one that is asleep, or dead?

Vocat gustum doni coelestis, qua supra naturam and mundum, Chr. Hosman in Heb.
6.4.
Psalm. 36.8. They shall be satisfied with the fatness of thy House. They and
none but they who are Gods children: to others God is a sealed Book, or
enclosed well. Divine goodness is Childrens bread, and Dogs shall not eat of
it.

Blunts voyage to the Levant.
delight and satisfaction in earthly comforts. The Turks c music is any
sound, so some patch up a delight out of every vanity. This is certain, except
you relish Christ and his love in the creature, you will Joh. 6.6.
find no more taste then in the white of an egg. Nescis quale tegat splendida
vita malum. Reynolds vanity and vexation of the Creature.
They that have skim'd off the very cream of the creature, as Solomon did, have
been like those that have gone to a Lottery with a head full of hopes, but
returned with a heart full of blankes. And therefore as Samuel said to Saul, Why
should a Kings heart be set upon Asses? So say I, Why should a Christians heart
be set upon trifles, winged vanities? They are Physicians of no value;
miserable comforters are they all, when thou come into distress; and yet
how many seek for contentment in these perishing things, nay often think they
find it, like Isai. 29.8.
them in the Prophet that dreamt they ate, but all this while they are
deceived, embracing with Ixion, a cloud in stead of Juno. These taste how good
the creature is, not the Creator. Others likewise come under this reproof. viz.

2 Samuel 2.2.26. Prove. 9.4.
Know thou not, O man, that sin will be bitterness in the end? People
will be nibbling at Satan's baits, though with the mementany pleasure they
swallow the hook of Gods eternal vengeance.

Vide Aug. Ser. 231. de te^p. Basil hom. in Ebr, and Ludovici Cresollii
Mystagogum. lib 4. ca. 29. sect. 5 page 2005. 2006.
Let our good fellows that are ever tasting of the Cup, remember Dan. 5.2.5.
whilst Belshazzar tasted the wine, fingers were seen writing on the wall, Mean,
Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin, i.e. Thou art weighed as in a balance, and thy kingdom
is taken from thee. And that very night was the sot slain. God scores up every
superfluous glass that goes down thy throat, and the same night thou may be
sent to hell to beg for one drop to cool the tip of thy tongue.

Some will say, they drink but a little,

But to sit and sip, Vide Harris. in Isai. 5.11. Prima cratera ad sitim
pertinet, 2a ad hilaritatem, 3a ad voluptate^, and 4a ad insaniam.
For loving to eat and drink between meals at unseasonable times, is made a
sin of those Princes, Ecclesiastes 10.17. Drinking is made one of the lusts
of the Gentiles, as well as drunkenness, and he is accursed that eats and
drinks with the drunken in Matthew. 24.49, viz. Such as sit by them, and sip
with them, and but kiss the cup; For this consents unto their sin, and
countenances their villainies, when you should reprove them, and complain of
them. See 2 Par. 20.37.

Ioh: Downam treats of it, and Preston on Col. 3.5.
uncleanness is called) remember Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.
Heb. 13.4. Nay, he plagues them here spiritually, Prove. 2.19. and outwardly,
Prove. 6.16.33. And their bones shall be filled with the sins of their youth.
Some cry, Cause si non cast, but God that is their Judge, sees them.

See the Casuists of Restitution.
You that by oppression taste of unrighteous gain, remember God will plead the
cause of the poor, whose faces you grind, and that your moneys so gotten,
shall perish with you, Prove. 14.31.

See Lombard, lib. 3. Jo. Downam, and Walter Powel against Swearing.
swearing and cursing, know the Lord will not hold you guiltless that dare
take his Name in vain. Surely your tongues are set on fire of Hell. This of
all other sins the most unprofitable, all Religions condemn it, and therefore
such shall be damned with a witness, and then they will have their fill of
cursing and blaspheming to eternity.

See William Fenner of this sin.
know it is ill playing with edged tools: the Devil rides astride the bit of
bread down your throats, and you eat and drink your damnation, not tasting nor
discerning the Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11.27.29.

And so of all other sins, you cannot taste the sin and escape the smart.

Touch not, taste not, handle not, Col. 2.21. Have not thou to do with precise
ones and ways, let Ministers lungs sail in exhortation, and their eyes in
expectation, but taste not, if you love your peace, purse, or pleasure.

Thus as Herod endeavored to kill the Babe Christ; so these Lulla, an Hag that
used to hurt little children, which made the nurses cry, Lulla abbi, now by
contraction Lulla by.
Lulla's watch to smother grace in the cradle; they seek by all means to
cool, ensnare, divert, and discourage such as begin to hanker after God, and
cast a favorable eye on Religion, saying, Touch not, taste not, handle not
such precise and factious doings: But the hottest place in hell is kept for
such seducing discouragers. See what Christ says, Matthew. 23.13. Woe unto you
that shut up the Kingdom of heaven: for ye neither go in your selves, nor
suffer others that are entering, to go in. These are compared in a Latin Canis
in praesept.
Proverb, to a Dog in the Manger, that will not himself taste the hay, or
provender, nor suffer the Cattle to come near it, that have a mind to it, but
lies snarling at them.

This is the lively picture of Seducers, and Discouragers; they will not taste
the goodness of God themselves, nor yet permit others to do it. These are the
Devils Factors, and he will pay them their wages.

Paul describing the Revelations of Christ to his soul, says, and immediately
I conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16. that is, with carnal reason
(say some) which is an evil counselor for the soul, Romans 8.7. But I rather
think, that by flesh and blood is meant evil men, as diverse Martin Luber and
Perkins on the place.
Expofitors conclude. So then in that nick of time, when he began to taste God
in converting love, he would not consult with such at Damascus as might rather
hinder then forward him in the work: For this do all wicked men lest the
goodness of others should discover or molest their wickenesse.

2. Use. To inform us in the true reason of all that rage and fury, They
Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.
speak evil of things they know not, nor ever tasted, Jude 10. This made them
crucify Christ, Acts 3.17. They are sortishly ignorant of that real worth and
sweetness that is in God and Religion, and hence comes all their rage and
foame against such things. If men that are now as furious as Lions and Tigers,
did but make trial of holiness, and understand things aright, they would be as
tame as lambs, as Isai. 11.6. When Christ offers to wash men from their sins,
they cry out with Peter, Thou shall never wash my feet: but when they begin to
see his love, and taste his goodness, then, Lord, not my feet only, but my
hands and my head, Joh. 13.9. In a word, men are not so averse before tasting,
as they are greedy afterward.

3. Use. Somewhat by way of trial and examination,

the savor of life unto life, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. A man cannot taste God and
remain in a dead condition. Some boast of Revelations, but have they a
principle of life? are they purged from their filth? do they walk close with
God?

Phil. 3.8. or as some render it, dogs meat to Christ, viz. course and
contemptible food after such junkets. The soul will esteem Christ, as the
people did David more worth then 2 Samuel 18.3.
ten thousand, or as Ruth 4.15.
Naomi did Ruth, better then seven sons. Acts and Monuments.
None but Christ, none but Christ, said Lambert lifting up such hands as he had
and his fingers ends flaming; A good heart prizes God in Christ above all the
world. For as the shining of the Sun drownes the Stars, so the unconceivable
sweetness of Christ, turns other sweets (which the soul admired before) into
As the Priests of Mercury eating their figgs and honey cried out, Sweet is
truth^; so here, etc.
bitterness; And if the soul meet with any sweetness, any content in earthly
things, it still admires God, and cannot but infer, If the creature be so
sweet, how sweet is the Creator? If the viaticum be so pleasant in my journey,
how glorious will the feast be at home? Have you such thoughts of Christ? You
indeed have tasted the goodness of God.

3. Ab illis qui gustaru^t, mira cum dulcedme percipitur vita nova. Mar.
Luther. in 1 Pet. 2.3.
Exultation and delight, springing from the love of complacency (as the schools
call it) when the soul is lost in a desired labyrinth of spiritual
enjoyments, and the longings of the soul are shuffled with the breathings of
the Spirit; When the soul does acquiesce, repose, feast and solace it self in
the sweet fruition of Christ, in whom fulness dwells, and all that the sinner
desires now is, that he may be able to Beatitudo hominis est gustus bonitatis
Dei. Scultetus. Id. Typ. Psalm. 3 Page 272.
manage his joys, and that his heart may not be too little for his comfort,
and so break with the longing it has after God, but that it may be content to
live a while in banishment, and wait with patience till the marriage day in
heaven. Oh here is a soul that is crowded with glorious thoughts of Christ, and
many times knows not whether it be in the body, or out of the body. Psalm. 36.8.
They shall be satisfied with the fatness of his house, and in thy light shall
they see light. This tasting is an earnest of heaven, and the first fruits of
Bona conscientia maximu^ semper praestat solatium; Euthym. It Is a continual
feast.
glory, and therefore well may such sing and leap for joy, and then say,
Return to your rest, for the Lord bath dealt bountifully with you, Psalm.
116.7. scil. They joyfully take their Gustus doni coelestis totum hominem
refocillat. Christo. Hosman in Heb. 6.4.
recumbency in the bosom of Christ. Were you ever acquainted with these joys
(for no Christian has them continually) and has the God of hope filled you
with joy and peace in believing, thou have tasted how good, how sweet the Lord
is. Hear what Acts and Monu. fol. 1361.
Lawrence Saunders the Martyr said unto his wife before his death. Dear wife,
riches I have none to leave behind wherewith to endow you after the worldly
manner, but that treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is to hungry consciences,
(whereof I thank my Christ, I do feel part, and would feel more) lo that I
bequeath unto you, and to the rest of my beloved in Christ, to retain the same
in sense of heart always: Pray, pray. I am merry, and I trust I shall be,
maugre the teeth of all the devils in hell, and so I resign me to my Christ,
in whom I know I shall be strong as he sees needful.

A diversion to mourners, close-mourners for the withdrawings of Christ.
Droop not disconsolate souls, you that with Mary seek Christ sorrowing, you will
find him in the Temple; Attend the means, live upon a promise, call to mind
your former experiences. And Mulier foetu^ conceptum non semper molita^ tem
sent^t, u^i tamen s^mei and iterum se^sit praegnantem s^ ^ss^ non ambigi^.
Spin. de Instit. Christi.
as women reckon from the first stirring of some weeks they feel not motion; so
do you; did you ever feel any spiritual motions within, any holy desires and
pantings after God, any joy and delight in him, doubt not but Christ is formed
in you the hope of glory. Christ sometimes in the soul, as the soul in the
body of him that is asleep, which lies as a senseless and helpless lump, yet
still the soul is there. Diu desiderata du^^^us obtinentur, ci^^ data
vil^s^umt. Aug. de verb. Dom. 5.
Christ withdraws his presence, that thou m^ist prize it, and the longer he
stays, the ^weeter will his discovery and return be at ^ast. Be not therefore
like the Panther, that lets ^oe that which he gets not at three jumpings, but
rather like the Rot^ ab und^ ^^j^cta (...) ^^^^em revovi^^r. Sal.
wheel in a. Water mill, the more violently it is driven ^^ay, the more swiftly
it turns upon the streams. Give God no rest, till thou have ^est in him; and
then it is sufficient answer that thou have a heart to continue praying. See
what may be the cause of this distemper, and endeavor to lament and remove
that, and again I say chew the cud of your former experiences, and with David
remember the days of old, Ps. 143.5. Ejaculatio.
Thou have formerly tasted communion with God, say, Lord if thou meanest to
damn, wherefore did thou show me such things? I am not able Lord to trace
thy footsteps, or understand thy ways. O shine upon my prooping graces that
are ready to die. Return, O Lord, how long? O put me into a condition of
glorifying thee, and confirming others, it is thou must speak peace, friends,
Ministers, promises cannot do it without thee. If thou art silent, who can
comfort me, and if thou smilest what can disturb me? Oh therefore pass before
me in thy glory, and suffer me once more to taste thy loving kindness, so
shall my heart dance for joy, and heaven shall ring of praises.

And having thus done, wait, wait I say on the Lord, admire the least dawnings
of refreshing, and behold he that shall come, will come and not tarry one
moment longer then to fit thee for his presence.

Well now suffer the word of Exhortation which I put to all of you, in the
bowels of Christ Jesus, to consider things well, and make trial of God and
his ways. O taste divine goodness. You Will never repent of it, but wish you had
tasted sooner. The greater thy sins are, the more need to taste of mercy.
Take some motives to the work.

1. If you taste other things bodily, Vide Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. and cap.
1. Aselli marini cor in ventre, so a gluttons heart, nay his God. Phil. 3.19.
is in his belly. Eusebius. Nierembergius Hist. not. lib. 1. and cap. 19.
gluttons: And therefore that great Epicure Philoxenus wished at a feast, that
he had a neck as long as a Crane, that so his meat might be longer in tasting
and going down. Nay, as the pleasure is short, so saciety breeds loath
somnesse, and the most pleasant things become most Prometheus told Mercury that
Sales in covivio ad vitanda^ temule^tiam and edacitate^ were commendable.
Lucian in Promet. Tom. 1. p. 166. When men are persuaded to intemperance, to
feed and drink without fear, it is inimica amicitia. August. ser. 231. de Temp.
Epulis nostris intersit Christus.
unpleasant. But now if once you taste divine goodness, it shall be a lasting
pleasure, and thou shall have the relish in thy soul as long as thou live,
to stay and comfort thee in desertions; And the Be d^^^k with love, Cant. 5.1.
and the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18.
more you feed upon Christ, the more appetite and desire will thou have after
him. The soul can never loath this Manna, nor nauseate divine Magnum enim
d^s^rim^^ inter delicias corporis and cordis. Greg. in Evang. Domin. 2. (...).
sweetness.

2. God invites and allures you to taste him, Isa. 55.1, 2. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come buy and eat wine and milk, and let your soul delight in
fatness. And Rev. 22.17. Let whosoever will come and take of the waters of
life freely. Christ would willingly have sinners taste of his love, and smell
to every flower in his bosom; he stretches out his arms all the day long, and
would sain gather you into his embrace^.

3. Kings have their tasters, Potione^ prius bibit Medicus, ne bibere timeret
aegrotus. August. in Psalm. 98.
Physicians taste the cordialls, so we desire to be examples, and go before
you in holiness, to demonstrate there is no danger, nor ill taste in the ways
of God. We believe and therefore we speak; and as St Paul says, we should be
able to comfort others with the same comforts, wherewith we are comforted of
God, 2 Cor. 1.14. We should be loath to enjoyne you any thing but what we
endeavor to practice our selves, Plus Plato ex moribus quam ex verbis Socrates
traxit. So Seneca. Epist. 60.
and indeed there is no such way to prevail with others to taste divine
goodness, as by falling to our selves.

4. Consider what the damned would give that they might be capable of tasting
divine goodness; Judas had a thousand worlds, and they would be taken, he
would part with them all for one hour of the day of grace, to get a taste of
mercy; Dives (in the Parable) begs but in vain Illic impii miseriae suae sensu
dire torquentur solatium aliquod cupiunt non habent Calvin. in Luc. 16.23.
for a drop or two of water to cool his mouth. He desires not to taste the
water of life, but a drop of common water that runs down in torrents among us.
But God will not let the damned taste so much of his goodness as that comes
to, who yet in this life are woed to taste of the richest nectar, and they will
not. Now therefore turn not from his sacred breathings, but know the things
belong to your peace, and seek the Lord whilst he may be found, before the day
of grace be finished, for then though all the glorious Saints and Angels of
heaven should down upon their knees and beg for one smile upon you, for one
drop of mercy, God would turn away from them, and swear you should never
enter into his Luke 13.24.
rest, never be offered to taste his goodness any more; Then may you have
wishings and wouldings to return, but all your faint purposes Hos. 6.4.
shall vanish as the early dew before the Sun. God will harden their hearts as
he did the heart of Pharaoh, that they shall not let their fins go. Now
therefore lay hold on the golden seasons and opportunities of grace.

5. And lastly, Of the passion, Vide Lombard. lib. 3. Joanne^ Docaeum, Bishop
Bilson, Henry Jacob, and Mr Herle.
Christ tasted gall for thee, Mat. 27.34. that thou may taste Ambrosia for
him. He tasted death for thee, Heb. 2.9. that thou might taste life for him,
and drink of those heavenly Nepenthes, that Ocean of pleasure, Psalm. 16. He
sweat and fainted in his agonies, that he might stay the with flagons, and
comfort thee with apples. He fasted forty days, that thou might be feasted
to eternity. He wore a crown of thorns, that thou may wear a crown of
glory. He suffered among base evil doers, that thou may be blessed among
those sweet companions in heaven: In a word, he endured the sorest pains, that
thou may enjoy the greatest pleasures. O therefore deceive not his
expectation, but let him see the travel of his soul, and be satisfied, Isa.
57.11. It Is sad when Christ shall complain, as Isa. 49.4, 5, 6 verses. 1 Cor.
1.17.
O make not his death to be of none effect to you, forbear to fetch any more
sighs from that heart that is so full of love to you, and now at length be
persuaded to give up your selves to Christ, to taste and see how good the Lord
is.

The next point is, that

There is but a taste of God here Tasting is no more then tasting a little of a
thing, (...). 3.8. p. 28.
1 Samuel 14.29. not full satisfaction. But now to lav you down the Quod sit, and
Cur sit, and Quid inde. That it is so, why it is so, and what will follow by
way of improvement.

1. For the Quod sit, That this is so, 1. Quod sit.
I shall prove it by Scripture and Arguments drawn out of the Word.

1. By plain Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. As newborn babes desire the sincere
milk of the Word that ye may grow thereby, if so be you have Monemur verbo
gustandi nos in hac vita illam bonitate^ Dei experiri tantu^ ex part, gustus
quidem nobis praebetur non plena fruitio. Hen. Mollerus in Psalm. 34.6. Page 275.
tasted that the Lord is gracious, q. d. If you have tasted a little of God,
desire to suck more sweetness from the promises, and labor to grow in grace,
so that here we live in a tasting, desiring, and growing condition.

2. By arguments drawn out of the Word, which are two especially.

1. Arg. The makings forth of God are not perfect in this Administration. Exodus
13.21.
As a 14 Saints blackest night here has a pillar of fire, so his brightest day
has a pillar of cloud. The Lord gives out but a little of himself now, in
comparison of what he means to do hereafter. These are part of his ways
(says Job) but how little a portion is heard of him? Job 26. ult. All that we
have and do from him is imperfect. So 1 Cor. 13.12. We Chytraeus said, my
greatest knowledge is to know that. I know nothing, and even in the Scriptures,
said Austin, which are my chief study and trade of life. Multa plura nescio
quam scio. August. Epist. 119. cap. 21.
know but in part, and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part shall he done away (at the 9 and 10. verses.)
Then at the 12. verse. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face. Now I know in part, but then I shall know him even as also I am known.
Here we do but get a taste of divine sweetness, we cannot reach unto the
thousandth part of the joys of Gods presence and favor; nay, we come so far
short of them, that we cannot conceive them, 1 Cor. 2.9. Exodus 33.23. i. e.
Aliquam gloriae m^ae imperfectam imaginem. Junius in locum.
God shows us but his back parts, he keeps the best wine till last, as Christ
did at the wedding. The best of Christ is behind, as the sweetest honey lies in
the bottom. God works not as natural Agents, that cannot suspend their
power, but work to the utmost, as fire in burning, etc. but he lets out
himself by degrees, and he works as pleases him.

We Of this subject vide J. Gerhard. locorum theolog. tom. 4. de bonis
operibus, sect. 3. and page 59.
are not capable of much here, guttatim, drop by drop. He that thinks he has
no sin, deceives himself, and makes God a liar. There Is many relics of
corruption in the best heart, which hinder the workings of grace. Ad divinae
legis obedient^am fert spiritus, caro in contrariam partem retrahit ut homo
guodammodo duplex est. Calv.
There Is a perpetual combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, so as one
weakens and hinders the other. See Romans 7.23. and Gal. 5.17. The workings of
our fleshly principle hinders us from or in weldoing, that either we shall
neglect it quite, or perform it amiss. Besides this, there are innumerable
withdrawing insinuations from the Tempter, and encumbrances from the world,
and the cares and business of this life; all which do hinder the reception of
much grace, and will see we shall but taste God in this life.

2. Cur sit? 1. Why a taste?
Thus far of the Quod sit. Now secondly, which Janus-like has two faces: For
we must show you, why the Lord gives us a taste, and then, why but a taste of
his goodness in this life.

First, let us examine the Reasons why the Lord will give his people a taste of
his goodness. Why, seeing every one has his hell, the godly here, and the
damned to eternity; yet it is not perfect hell with believers here, as it is
with reprobates in hell fire.

The Reasons are four.

Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius. Plaut.
conscience, the terror^ of the law as so many flashes of hell fire, astonish
them, and they are often laid upon the Rack of an accusing clamorous
conscience, which is a taste of infernal torments; and therefore it is but
equal the Saints now in their hell, should have some tastes of God, and the
powers of the world to come.

Joseph had much ado to keep a grave countenance, and conceal himself from
his brethren, Genes. 42.7.24. and 45. 1. v. to 15. v. His love at the length
brake out into tears and kisses. So it is here; God knows not how to conceal
his love from the elect, but it must break forth in this life. He is the God of
peace, and delights to speak peace to believers. Dr. Homes on Isai. 55.9. page
12.
His thoughts of grace and favour^, spring merely from the sweet and un^^^^able
excellency of his nature, which m^^^ (...) ^ver hammering and contrivi^^ (...)
^or his people, as you see Jerem. 29^^^. I^ God takes a great deal of pleasure
in thinking, then much more in acting for us. See Deuter. 30.9. Mich. 7.18.

Psa. 103.14.
He remembers that we are but dust, he Rev. 2.2.19.
knows our frame, our labor, our patience, our tentations, and he would not
have us pine and sink, and give up heaven for lost, and therefore he gives us
tastes of his goodness to Psa^. 125.3.5
encourage us, and keep us from sin; and the taste we have here of God, will
do it: For it is the earnest of the Spirit, and our sealing up unto the day of
redemption; and Faith is the evidence of things not seen; and the least
glimpse of Christ, and Heaven, will do much, Heb. 11.26.

4. And lastly, Hoc non aliter intelligendum qua^ quod fides Apostolorum
Israelitis sit ademptura omnem excusationem. Alioqui Christus solus in judicio
sedebit jud^x. Musculus in Mat. 19.28.
condemn them for not tasting, when pleading impossibility, God will show them
men and women of their time, estates, parts and callings, that were religious,
and shined forth in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. See Matthew.
12.41.42. We read that the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. and Matthew.
19.28. This I conceive will be done two ways.

1. By their consent unto and applause of Christ's judgment, saying,
Hallelujah, Honor and power be to the Lord, for true and righteous are his
judgments. Rev. 19.1, 2.

2. By their Erunt tanqua^ assessores, and judicabunt mundum pietate, fi^^, and
integritate, Calv. in 1 Cor. 6.2.
holy lives and good examples, as Ambrose speaks; Their zeal shall judge the
worlds coldness, their piety the worlds profaneness, their prizing and
embracing Christ, the worlds rejection and shameful neglect of Christ. In a
word, their tasting Divine sweetness, the worlds disrelishing the ways of
holiness^.

2ly, Why but a taste?
Thus you see why the Saints have here a taste of Gods goodness: Next we must
show you why they have no more then a taste here? Seeing we might think sure it
would be better for us, and God would have more glory, if we were wholly purged
from sin, and grace were perfected in us in this world, etc.

The Reasons why God, notwithstanding, gives us but a taste of himself, and
his grace and goodness, are four.

1. To manifest his power and wisdom in our preservation and perseverance in
the strength of that tasting:

Vide Lockyer his useful instructions on Col. 1.11.
Hereby the mighty power of God is displayed: You are strengthened with all
might (says the Apostle) according to his glorious power. It Is glorious power
indeed, that can keep grace alive in such naughty hearts as we bear about us.

Moreover, the Wisdom of God is seen, by turning poison into food: For their
very falls and failings Romans 8.28.
better them, and all things work for their good. And hereby the Devil is the
more confounded, when he sees, that for a taste of Gods goodness, we disrelish
glutting our selves with his follies, and the pleasures of sin. A Father
says well, The tears of true penitents do more scortch the Devils, then all
the flames of hell: For hereby all their hopes are blasted, and the great
underminer countermined and blown up.

2. That we might not be puffed up, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10 Romans 11.20.
lacking in our Faith and other Graces, may be filled up. Be not high minded,
but fear. God resists the proud, but gives more grace to the humble. The
survey of our imperfections should make us humble, as the Peacock looking on
his black feet, lets fall his plumes: and then humility gets larger and further
tastes of God, as the silver deawes flow from the mountains to the lowest
valleys: The Deus non infundit oleum misericordiae, n^si in vas contritum. Bern.
high and lofty one will dwell in a broken heart.

3. To we^ne us from the world, Bonum est esse hic, It Mat. 17.14.
is good for us to be here. Come, let us build Tabernacles, etc. Now therefore
God would give us but a bait, but a taste here in our pilgrimage, that our
hearts may not be glewed to the world, and take up our rest here, but that we
may long for clearer Ibi non gustabu^t qua^ suavis est Dominus, sed implebuntur
and satiabuntur dulcedine mirifica, Cyprian. Sermon de Christi ascens.
visions, and fuller enjoyments of God, when we shall be filled with all the
fullness of God. scil. with Christ's diffusive fullness, and the influences of
his grace, and the rays of his glory. Oh this makes a Saint say with David, My
soul breaks for the longing it has after thee; with the Spouse, Make haste
my beloved, Cant. 8.14.
as the swift Roe on the mountains of Spices; with Paul, I desire to be
Heathens that knew not Christ, have had strong grounds of comfort against the
fear of death. Tull. in Tusc. and Seneca passim in Epistolis. Couradus
Vorstius. Com. in Phil. 1.23. Vide introductionem Lypsii in Stoicam
Philos^p^iam.
dissolved, and be with Christ; and with John, O come Lord Jesu, come quickly.
When the child has tasted of the breast, it thirsts with most greediness to
be filled; and when the soul has got a taste, a glympse of God, it longs to
be satisfied, to smell to every flower in Christ's bosom, to view God face to
face, when sorrow shall take wings and fly away, when corruption and
temptation shall be no more, but Grace shall be swallowed up of Glory, and you
shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament.

Truly, my brethren, the manner of Gods dispensation here, which you see is but
in tastes of his goodness, must needs raise up in believers, continual
breathings, and thirstings, and inflamed desires, after God.

Alexander the Great sailing in a boisterous Sea, discovered before the rest of
his companions, the happy land of Arabia, by the smell of those sweet odors
which the wind conveyed to him; whereupon himself and his fellow soldiers
took encouragement, and knew they had not far to go. What is grace but a
smell of heaven beforehand, to encourage poor sinners sailing in this Aegean
Sea to glory? how should this make us long to land there, and kiss the ground
of our native Country, which is heaven?

And then,

4. And lastly, Afflictiones sunt tanquam grata condimenta quibus desideria
nostra incenduntur, and promissiones divinae redduntur dulci^ ^s. Basil.
our combat here, will exceedingly sweeten and as foyles set of our rest, our
joy, our crown there. Who (think you) will most admire heaven, the Angels that
have been there from the beginning, or forlorn captives and poor pilgrims,
that come in a manner out of hell into heaven? Christ and heaven shall be
admired in all them that 2 Thessalonians 1.10.
believe, etc.

For these Reasons we may guess (positively we know not) why God will give us
but a taste of his goodness here: Romans 11.33.
Indeed his ways are past finding out; these are but conjectures. Well, the
Reasons of these things shall be fully cleared up to you in the clouds, when
all the workings of God which you see now peece-meale, shall be laid in a
frame together, and you shall all be forced to fall down and cry, Rev. 4.8.11.
Holy, Holy, Holy: Thou art just and righteous in all thy dealings with the
children of men. Great is thy wisdom, and thou do what thou please, and
when.

I come now to the improvement of the point. 3ly Qui^


And first, this meets with the wild fancies of some that dream of a fullness
and perfection here, and stick not to call themselves Perfectionists, whereas
you see we do but taste God here, and to be kindly sensible of our
imperfections, is the highest pitch of perfection attainable in this life, as
Hierome Haec hominibus sola perfectio si imperfectos se esse noverint. Hieron.
lib. ^. adversus Pelag.
speaks.

But let us hear their Arguments.

First, how often say they, is it said, believers are filled in this life? Open
your mouths wide (says God) and I will fill them with good things. See Luke
1.53 Romans 15.13. Ephefians 5.18. Now is tasting a little of God, and being
fille with his goodness, all one? I answer.

First, the Saints are said to be filled in this life, we are straightened in our
bowels, 2 Cor. 6.12. and are of slender and shallow capacities in the things of
heaven, and so a small drop of grace fills us, and yet it is but a taste, for
our hearts are widened and enlarged to take in much more above.

These. 5.23.

Ecclesiast. 1.2. But the least taste of GOD fills and refreshes, and delights
the Soul. Psalm 116.7.

2. Ob. You read often of the Saints perfection here, Genes. 17.1. Walk before
me and be perfect. So Matthew. 5.48. Philip. 3.15.

There is a perfection in substance, or parts, have respect unto all Gods
commands, as David and Paul (see Luke 1.6.) Ex quo factum est, virtutem quae
nunc est in homine justo, perfectam hactenus nominari, ut ad ejus perfectionem
pertineat, etiam ipsius imperfectionis and in veritate cognitio, and in
humilitate confessio. Aug. lib. 3. contra duas Epistolas Pelag. cap. 7.
they are deeply sensible of their imperfections, and mourn for their failings,
they have the foundation and seeds of perfection, but for perfection in measure
or degrees, that is in heaven.

3. Ob. But he that is born of God sins not. John 3.9. therefore what should
hinder perfection of grace within? True,

Such an one sins not willingly, customarily, impenitently: Sin is a
burden to him, and he makes not a trade of sin. But if men will say they
have no sin, conscience will accuse them, and experience will judge them for
making God a liar, who says, In many things we sin all. William Pemble of
Justification, sect. 3. cap. 1. page 181.
Where is that man, or how is he named, that can say he finds no rebellion nor
distemper in his affections, nor disorder in any motion of the soul, all
within is sweetly tuned to obedience, without jarre or discord from corruption?
etc. Certainly Paul's confession will make such ashamed, Romans 7.21. and 24.
when I would dee well, evil is present with me. O who shall deliver me from
this body of death!

4. Ob. All the works of God are perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. But grace is the work of
God, Phil. 2.13. Ergo grace is perfect.

Works that are merely works of God which he works by himself,

Now that believers are Nolite cogitare invitum trahi, trahitur animus and
amore. August. tract. 26. in Johan.
coworkers with God after the first act of conversion (wherein I confess they
are merely passive) to me is evident from that place, Cant. 1.4. Draw me and we
will run after thee. It Is not draw me and we will be Inclina^do voluntatem, non
intrudendo potestatem.
dragged after thee, but we will run after thee. So Acts 26.19. Paul says when
the Lord had once touched his heart, he was not disobedient to the heavenly
vision: So that Acti agimus, Though his effectual working is irresistible, yet
it is done leni spiritu non dura m^nu, rather by sweet influence then extreme
violence.
God melts our wills and makes us active in the working out of our own
salvation with fear and trembling. Libertines teach otherwise, viz. that the
holy Ghost dwells in the Saints in proper person, and there does formally
believe, pray, love, repent, we being always mere patients in mind, will,
affections and memory, etc. But we say he dwells in us by spiritual gifts and
graces, created in us to act with the vital influence of our understanding,
will, and affections, for we are not mere blocks after conversion, but are
Ephesians. 2.1.
alive unto God in Christ. We are not the mere shops of the Spirit in which
he works, for this would make our failings the Spirits, 'twould nourish all
laziness, and security in us; and, in a word, include this blasphemy that we
are Christed and Godded with Christ; But on the other side Gods working in,
with, and by us, lays the true ground and guilt of all our graces,
imperfections and defilements, at our own doors.

Lastly, They object yet farther and say, will may be done on earth as in
heaven, and he did not teach us to pray for impossibilities Ergo.

I answer, Sufficit hoc voto testari nobis odio ac tristitiae esse quicquid Dei
voluntati adversum cernimus, extinctumque cupere, etc. Calv. in Mat. 6.10.
pray not that we may be equal to the Saints and Angels above, but that we
may write after so fair a copy, imitate them more and more, still striving to
be and do like them, though the most we can reach unto is to make some broken
and imperfect eccho's to those Hallelujahs.

So then when we pray we may do Gods will on earth as it is in heaven, the
meaning is that we may strive to do their work in their manner, and that we
may come as near them as we can In arduis voluisse sat est.
; It argues not equality or perfection of grace here.

2. Is it so that believers can get but a taste of God and his goodness here,
and that the full meals be above, then let us learn Col. 3.3, 4. Tantu^ abest
ut nunc appareat carnis oculis, ut contra nihil sit Christian viventibus
calamitosius. Beza.
how to judge of Christians, not by what they are and receive, but shortly
shall be and have. Indeed at present they are in a low condition, loaded with
many burdens, slighted and despised in the world, so that if believers had
their portion here, they would seem to be of all men most miserable Apoc. 3.17.
2 Timothy 3.12. Psalm. 44.23. Romans 8.36.
, 1 Cor. 15.19. But remember worldlings our life is hid with Christ in God As
the pearl is hid till the shell is broken.
, and it does not yet appear what we shall be Ac si diceret quamvis mundus
noncognoscat vos, tamen in hac carne in hoc mortali cor pore filii Dei sumus
per fide^, nec moramur mundi judicia, nec propterea promissio Dei and fides
evertu^tur. Non fallimus etiam si simus expositi omnibus fere mundi and Satanae
jaculis; long certiora sunt quae Deus promittit qua^ ca quae nostra ratione
aut se^su metiri vel comprehendere possumus. Tho. Naogeorgus in 1 Johan. 3.2.
, 1 John 3.2. We have somewhat in possession, but more in reversion. We are yet
in our minority, in our pilgrimage, in our traveling cloths (as it were) but
the whole world shall stand amazed at the light of a glorified Saint, shining
with divine luster, and enriched with a royal diadem, 2 These. 1.10. Then
Christ shall be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe.
scil. When the world shall see believers that here are despised and accounted
the off-scourings of all things, then shining forth as stars, Dan. 12.3. nay,
as the Sun, Mat. 13.43. nay, as Christ himself, their bodies being new molded
and fashioned like unto his glorious body: Then shall all the wicked of the
world see their folly and madness in despising such, and gnaw their tongues
for anguish, envy, and vexation of heart. Hearken profane ones, twill be your
wisdom to admire them now, and so look into their ways, and be like unto
them, for all your wondering and admiration then shall do you no good, as is
evident from Mat. 25.8, 9, 11, 12. For you shall be hurried from the Lord, and
the glory of his power, and never see God nor Saint more; consider this you
that forget God, and slight the godly, least, etc.

Next, Vide Doctor Sibbs broken reed and smoking flax; and that excellent piece
of Jos. Symonds, The case and cure of deserted souls.
ever mourning and complaining, and so exceedingly discouraged and
dis-heartened at the sight of their many faylings and infirmities, and ready to
sit down in despair and give up all for lost. Hearken dejected souls, open
your sluices, and let in refreshing streams of consolation.

Psalm. 27.14.
wait, wait I say on the Lord, live more upon Christ and less upon your own
actings and incomes, which are not only small, but uncertain in this life,
ebbing and flowing with the Sea; But Christ has a Colos. 1.19.
dwelling fulness in him, and his fulness is yours.

Again, very little at first, like a small Regnum Dei grano si^ap^s confor^ur,
and Dommus cons^l o regnu^ suum a tenuibus and contemptis principris
auspicatur, ut insp^ratiprogressus ejus potenti^m melius illustrent. Martions
Bucerus in Mat. 13.31.
mustard seed. Look on your selves as elected to be blameless and without
spot; Who is be that despises the day of small things? Zech. 4.10. Christ
would not have us despise little things: A bonfire was but a spark at first,
the huge oak an akorn; the glorious Angels disdain not attendance on little
ones, little in their own eyes, and little in the eyes of the world: It Is
Christ that raises the worth of little and mean places and persons; Bethleem
the least, and yet not the least, the least in it self, but not the least in
respect Christ was borne there; Jesus Christ is formed in thy heart. The second
Temple came short of the outward magnificence of the former, yet it is said to
be more glorious then the first, because Christ came into it 2 Cor. 6.16.
, and thou also art the Temple of the holy Ghost. The pupil of the eye is very
little, yet sees a great part of the heaven at once, though faith be no bigger
then a mustard seed, yet it is all eye to behold Christ. Fides licet exigua et
infi^ma accipit tamen quae largitur Deus haud secus ac puerulus parvula, vel
scabiosa mendecus manus, ille panem, hic stipe porrectam accipit perinde c^si
major aut sanior esset. Spin. de justitia Christi. 3.7.
Pearls and Diamonds, though little, are of much esteem, but nothing under
heaven is of that worth and use as a little grace; Oh therefore let not your
spirits droop in despondency, though as yet you have got but a small taste of
God. Once more,

As you do but taste the graces and consolations of God here, so nor
afflictions and the bitter fruits of sin. It Is said of believers, that Isa.
54.8.
God in a little wrath hides his face from them for a moment, God is not
always chiding, your good hours are many to your bad; you do but taste of
afflictions and A maritudine^ radicis dulcedo pomi co^pensat. Ita. etc.
desertions, nay believers do but taste of death it self, Mat. 16.28. which
is never spoken of the wicked, but only the elect. They do but taste death,
but sip at this bitter cup: Passing the first death is but a taste of death,
nay it is a silver bridge to glory, and says Cyprian, Cyprian.
the midwife of immortality Mors aeterna vera mors est, hanc non videbunt.
Martin. Bucerus. in Johan. 8.51.
. But they drink deep of that dismal cup, that carouse in it to eternity by
partaking of the second death.

Lay these things together, you can but taste God here, the least taste is not
to be despised, and you shall but taste of the bitter fruits of sin. O
therefore complain not; mourn not as men and women without hope, Rejoice in the
Lord, and again I say rejoice.

Suffer then the word of Exhortation,

Qui melior esse non cupit, nec est bonus, ubi incipis nolle fieri melior ibi
desinis esse bonus. Bernard. in Epist. 91. Ideo deteriores sumus quia meliores
esse debemus. Salvian. de Provid. lib. 4.
others, so this is a sure sign thou have no grace, that think thou have
enough, and if thou cease to be better thou begin'st to decline; for it is the
nature of true grace, like a spark to aspire toward its proper element, a
Saint never leaves climing till he get above the clouds. See Phil. 3.12, 13
Ingredi sine macula dicitur non qui jam perfectus est sed qui ad ipsam
perfectione^ irreprchensibiliter currit: Ingr^ssu quippe hoc iter nostrum quo
tendimus ad perfectione^. Aug. lib. de perfec. justitiae.
Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect (now mark
what he infers) but I follow after if I may apprehend that for which also I
am apprehended of Christ Jesus: Brethren, I count not my self to have
apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press
forward to the mark. See the Apostle says not, let us be careless and lazy,
for we get but a small taste of God, we cannot be perfect Saints, let us not
therefore be righteous overmuch, and so more precise then wise, but eat,
drink, and be merry, etc. He does not argue thus; But the Saints have here but
a little grace, therefore let us be vigilant, let us up and be doing, and get
as much as we Finis appetitio non habet limits definitos. Arist. Pol. 1.6.
can, for surely some have less then others, more may be had, and the most we
can get will be but enough, strive therefore to excel in grace, to get farther
tafts of God, that so you may be exemplary and sit high in glory. Growth
honors God much, Joh. 15.8. It makes us stand fast in trialls, and endure the
shock of a tentation, 2 Pet. 1.5.10. Mat. 14.31. It gives us the comfort of our
graces in life and death, 2 Timothy 4.7. and fits us for greater measures of
glory. There are degrees, Non modo inter coelestia and terrestria discrimen
est, sed ne coelestibus quide^ omnibus aequalis est gloria. Calvin.
, 1 Cor. 15.41. and Mat. 10.41, 42. And surely the more grace here, the more
glory there, the better man has undoubtedly the bigger mansion. And we may
safely eye this in duty, Heb. 11.26. Many Christians have been eminent in
grace, we are encompassed with a cloud of witnesses, let us be followers of them
who through faith and patience inherited the promises. Either quit the name of
Christians, or quit your selves like Christians; the body must grow up to
Christ in all things, that we may be conformable to our head, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
Luke. 2.52. Our head has received all fulness to this end, Ephesians. 1. ult, Joh.
10.10. Nay our growth makes up his fulness, even the fulness of Christ
mystical, though Christ personal be full without us, Ephesians. 4.13. Vid. Mr Tho.
Goodwin of growth. Nonnulli hoc ad quantitatem and aetatem corporum
resurgentium in novissimo die retulerint, at apertis verbis loquitur Apostolus
de doctrina qua crescimus ad perfectionem cognitionis Christi, sive qua
crescimus plene in Christum, ut agnoscamus solum Christum nostram esse salutem.
Philip. Melancthon. in Ephesians. 4.13.
The pitch of every Christians growth is called the stature of the fulness of
Christ.

There is Plenitudo Partium and Graduum.

1. A fulness of parts, when no member is lacking, Joh. 6.39.

2. Of degrees, when no measure of growth is wanting in every part; Every
member must grow according to its fit proportion. O therefore be not contented
with a small taste of God, when larger tastes and portions of grace are to be
had here, especially in these times of larger Gospel discoveries, and all
plenty of means, Luke 12.48. Finally, consider how you are affected in
inferior things, how men resolve to be rich, and so fall into many snares, and
tentations. Will a competency, a taste of outward things content you, that yet
perish in the using? We never think our grounds, orchards, and gardens
fruitful enough: When we come to a feast, we think it not enough that we
taste of any dainties, unless we are satisfied; it should be thus in
spiritualls; Wicked men never think they have enough of sin: It Is their
character to grow 2 Timothy 3.13.
worse and worse, they drink deep of the cup of pleasure, they heap sin upon
sin, till their iniquities reach up to heaven; They draw the threads so big, so
long, till they make cords of vanity, and then wreath and twist those cords,
till they become Isa. 5.18.
cartropes of iniquity; why so believers likewise must aim at a perfection, and
go on from 2 Cor. 3.18.
virtue to virtue, from glory to glory; As the light that increases to the
perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

Mesech. Our souls break with longing after God. O you children of promise,
and heirs of heaven, why desire some of you to Quid est diu vivere nisi diu
tor queri. Aug. de temp. 113.
live so long upon Et mundus carcer est, et cor pus carcer est. Aug. in Psalm.
141. Mors est quae efficit ut nasci non sit supplicium. Seneca ad Marc. cap.
20. Prunum honu^ non nasci secu^du^ citius mori. It a Silenus apud Lact.
Lactant. in Instit. li. 3. c. 18.
earth, where you must drink down continually the bitter potions of care and
sorrow, and can get but now and then a taste of divine sweetness and joy? Why
love ye not the appearance of Christ? Why long you not to enjoy and swim in
those rivers of pleasure, where you may have your fill and will of God? You may
guess at the joys of heaven by those tastes of God and ravishings of spirit
you have sometimes on earth; Speak you joyntheires with Christ, have you not
sometimes in prayer and meditation, when your hearts are enlarged and your
souls upon the wing, holy ecstasies and transportations of spirit, in so much
that whether you are in the body or out of the body you cannot well tell? Call
in your sweet experiences and see if they will not witness to this truth, and
have you not esteemed such a moment above all the world, what would you give to
have more of them, and to have them more lasting? Why now, my Brethren, if
there be such unspeakable joy at tasting the sweetness of God for a little
moment, how unconceivable will that happiness be when you shall be filled with
those joys for evermore? If our viaticum be so good, how great is that 2 Cor.
4.17. The same word in the Hebrew signifies glory and weight. Glory such a
weight that if we were not upheld by the power of God, we could never bear it.
Joy so big, that it cannot enter into us, 1 Cor. 2.9. but we must enter into
it. Matthew. 25.21. John Trapp. Com.
weight of glory which God has prepared for them that fear him? The Lord give
you heaved hearts and winged affections in the consideration of these things.
Amen.

4. Doct. They only that taste can see how good the Lord is. They only that
taste communion with God, and have enjoyments of God in a holy life, are able
rightly to see and discover and know his goodness. A good understanding have
all they that do his commandments, says David, Psalm. 111.10. When God turns
men Acts 26.18.
from darkness to light, he turns them likewise from the power of Satan unto
God.

A man may seem to know much, and yet know nothing a right, no not the least or
easiest principle of Religion, till this be done. 1 Corinthians. 12.3. No man can
see nor say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

They know nothing yet as they ought to know, and Ephesians. 4.21.
as the truth is in Jesus, till they have the Spirit, and by him have tasted
how good the Lord is, till they have warm affections in heavenly things, and
the bent and purpose of their hearts is to please God, and work by rule.

Let me lay down the grounds or arguments which will open and illustrate the
truth.

1. True knowledge is not bare speculation, Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to Duplicem
illuminationeus ponit, unam Evangelii, alteram arcanam quae fit in cordibus.
Calv.
give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. Where you see,

1. That Jehovah is a very glorious Being, he is clothed with light as with a
garment.

2. We are not able with Non nisi in Christi facie cognoscitur Deus qui viva
est at que (...) pressa ej^s mago. Col. 1.15. Idem.
comfort to behold this glory, but in the smiling face of Christ: God out of
Christ a consuming fire.

3. Till God shine, we are not able to see him in Christ: the Gospel is a
sealed book till he unclasp it by his Spirit.

4. Illumination of a dark soul is as great a wonder as the creation and
illumination of the world. But then

5. And lastly, that which I quote the Text for, is this, That when God shines
in upon men, he does not only shine into their heads to illuminate them, but
into their hearts to affect and transform, and new Renovamur in imaginem Dei
per cognitionem. Col. 3.10. Idem.
mould them. It Is said, John 17.3. This is life eternal to know Thee and
Christ whom Thou have sent. Gospel knowledge therefore is more then a
Metaphysicall speculation and sticking in the notion; for thousands with such
kind of knowledge perish: saving knowledge is a very glorious and
comprehensive grace.

Again, Semper in Sole sita est Rhodos, qui and calorem and colorem nobis
impertit. Aeneas Sylv. y Talpis auscultationis gloria damnatur oculis. And
usually, say the the Naturalists they that are excellent in one sense, are,
def^cient in another. But in spirituals, he that has life, has all the senses
in vigor.
Sun (to which he is compared, Mal. 4.2.) that does not only enlighten but
enliven and quicken us, Psalm. 36.8.9. They shall be satisfied with the fatness
of thy House -- With thee is the Fountain of life, in thy light shall we see
light. You see light and life come together. Now where there is life, there are
all the spiritual senses, and the sweetness, that is the sense of Gods
goodness will delight them all.

1. There Is smelling of his rich perfumes, as Psa. 45.8. All thy garments smell
of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia.

2. Touching the hem of Christ's garment by faith, and kissing the sweet lips of
Christ, Cant. 1.2.

3. Hearing the pleasant voice of Christ, with which the soul is so taken,
that for joy it can speak but broken words, Cant. 2.8. -- The voice of my
beloved!

4. Tasting the Graces and Comforts of Christ, Cant. 2.3. He is as the Apple
tree among the trees of the wood, I sat under his shadow with great delight,
and his fruit was sweet to my taste.

5. There Is seeing Christ; Cant. 5.10. and 16.
His countenance is comely, says the Spouse, He is the fairest of ten
thousand, his cheeks as beds of spices, and his lips like Lillies. See Ephesians.
1.18.

To behold God in Christ, is a delightful thing, a transforming sight, 2 Corinthians. 3.18.

Thus you see that God at the same time is a Fountain of Light and Life, and
that where there is spiritual life, there are all the spiritual senses in the
greatest vigor; therefore they only that can taste, can see and discover how
good the Lord is.

Next, sanctify us through his truth, Joh. 17.17. Vide Aug. Marlorat. in locum.
Therefore till we are sanctified by holy truths, and cast into their moulds,
till we have tastes of Gods goodness, we shall not see divine truths by the
light of the Spirit, and by virtue of Christ's intercession: for you see the
truths which are of Christ's purchasing of his Father, to be unvailed unto us,
they are renewing, inflaming, and sanctifying truths.

Again Christ (as a Prophet) teaches only his friends, Christus ex inimicis
fecit amicos quibus omnia patris mysteria areanaque aperit atque exponit, ut
nihil ignorent earum rerum quas filios nosse oportet. Bullingerus in Joh. 15.15.
John 15.15. I have called you friends, says Christ, for all that I have heard
of the Father, I have made known unto you, Christ does freely unbosome
himself to his friends, but he spoke in parables to his Disciples, lest others
should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, and should be enamoured
with those mysteries, and Christ should heal them. A sad place, Mark 4, 11.12.
No man can see and know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him, but the Son reveals him to none but his friends; every one
is not let in to see this sight, but the door is shut against them. Now who are
the friends of Christ, but such as feast with him, Cant. 5.1. such as have
bosom communion with Christ, and sweet embraces from him? They that having
tasted Divine sweetness strike an eternal league with God? Now such only
shall be taught of Heaven?

And so those that have a filial fear of God, Psalm. 25.12. What man is he
that fears the Lord? Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. And
at the 14. verse, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. He
unlockes his Cabinet to such, and to these he shows his rich jewels of truth.
Justice may have the knee of fear, but only mercy her heart.
Now the original of filial fear is the taste of his goodness and sense of
his love, when the soul being tempted to grieve him, says, He is so great I
dare not displease him, and so good I fear to forfeit him, how can I do this
wickedness, and sin against my God, a God in covenant with me? Get you hence,
What have I to do any more with Idols? A man fears not to hazard the loss of
that in which he never tasted any sweetness or goodness.

Once more,

The promise of knowledge is made to such as obey God, John 7.17. Et nos
componamus ad obsequendum Deo; Id ubi factum fuerit, facile quid verum quid
falsum judicabimus. Brentius in Joh. 7.17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know his doctrine. Now they only do
the will of God that have tasted his goodness. Others may obey the laws of
men, or a clamorous conscience, not Gods will because it is his will, etc.

By all which you see, that they only that taste, can see God and his
goodness. Now to the improvement of this point.

1. This discovers the true reason of that smalnesse of knowledge, and that
little insight into spiritual things, that is in the world, nay in so glorious
a light as we have. Would you know why many souls are so dark? why men and
women are ever 2 Timothy 3.7.
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth? why they grope
at noon day, and are to seek in the knowledge of the truth? Non crimen Phoebus,
noctua crimen habet.
The fault is not in the word, but in themselves. The true reason is this, They
endeavor not to get tastes of God, they work not by Rule, they walk not
according to the light they have received, they are vain, loose, and earthly in
their lives: This is the Reason why men hear Sermon after Sermon, and still
are ignorant, Heb. 5.12.
why those that for the time ought to be teachers, want instructing in the very
first principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of
milk, and not of strong meat. They walk not as the Starlight of Nature, and
the Moonlight of Reason does direct them, nor as the Sunlight of Scripture and
example does require them: they never had any taste of God, any holy desires
and endeavors to please God.

To mourn over those that are filled with choice speculations, Non in verbis
sed in factis res nostrae religionis consistunt. Just. Martyr.
refuse to taste and try him and his ways: They see truths, but not with a
believers eyes, nor in his light. A painter admiring a Landscape very plain, yet
of rare workmanship, and hearing a silly fellow Quanto plus and melius scis,
tanto gravius inde judicaberis, nisi sanctius vixeris. Chrysostom.
ask what worth he saw in that poor piece, answered, Could thou see with my
eyes, thou would wish thy self all eye, and be ravished with it. And so,
could carnally minded men but see truths with a believers eyes, and in Gods
light, Oh how would they love Jesus Christ, and prize holiness? Well, these
with all their knowledge are as tinkling Cymbals in the ears of God; which
make sorry music without any distinction of notes.

They say we see, and therefore their sin remains: but John says, they are
downright liars, 1 John 2.4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. He that says, I One day
God will require of men, non quid legerint, sed quid egerint, nec quid
dixerint, sed quomodo vixerint.
know God, and yet takes no delight nor joy in God, is the loudest liar under
heaven; for he knows not God at all as he ought to know him, and as the truth
is in Jesus. And surely the lowest and hottest place in hell is kept for these,
they shall be beaten with many stripes, and lasht with whips of Scorpions,
that knew their masters will and did it not. Sapientes sapienter descendunt in
infernum, says Bernard, Bernard. Romans 1.21.24.
they shall be damned with a witness, and curse the time that ever they heard
of Christ, or knew his will, for this will add unto their plagues.

3.

First, Such as had lived long without making progress in knowledge, were
called by Philo very properly, Longaevi pueri, B. Cowper on Psa. 119.9.
more knowledge, and lie panting for clearer visions of God? This you could not
do, but that you have tasted Gods goodness, and so long to see and know, and
enjoy more of it, Psalm. 119.97. Oh how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all
the day. And at the 99. v. I have more understanding then my Teachers. How came
David to be continually meditating of the Word, and getting more and more
knowledge of God? Why he loved the Lord so as could not be expressed. Oh how I
love him! He had tasted divine goodness, and so came to see so much of God.
But see 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word,
that you may grow thereby, if so be you have tasted that the Lord is gracious.
q.d. Else I shall in vain press you to labor for more knowledge: for wicked
ones Job. 21.14.
desire not the knowledge of God, or his ways, They love Darkness rather then
Light, says Christ.

Secondly, is thy knowledge experimental? Quam multi sun^ qui sermon valent
and loquuntur, non tamen sale coelesti conditi su^t, rece^sentque multa de
mensa regia quorum nulium adepti sunt gustum. Macar. ho. 16.
So it is with a formal Professor, he gathers all his knowledge out of books,
discourses and Sermons, nothing by experience: Whereas a true believer, as he
can discourse of the joys of heaven, so he clearly sees them (with Stephen)
by the eye of Faith, and sensibly feeds on them by the power of hope; he
stands not on the shore, observing the tempestuous seas and temptations in
which others toil, but himself is miserably tossed too and fro, and turmoyled
in the tempest, and by the grace of God he gets through all, and is more then
conqueror. He does not only read of Crystal fountains, spicy Islands, and
rocks of Diamonds but he himself is enriched and invested with them, and his
soul is filled with spiritual sweetness. Is thy knowledge thus
experimental, as Jobs was, Titelman restrains it to a bodily sight of God
appearing then in a visible shape, but others say it describes celestial
visions and appearances of Christ to the soul.
Job 42.5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
sees thee. i. e. Most of thee, Job had knowledge before; but now in his trials
and afflictions he was taken off from the world, and tasted communion with God
more then ever, and now he sees God by a clearer light. Ah now mine eyes see
thee. q. d. My soul was in a mist till now, but now I have clearer visions of
thy glory and splendour.

Thirdly, Vide Thom. Cartwright, and Dr Jermin on Pro. 10.21.
Prove. 10.21. The lips of the Righteous will feed many. Others monopolize
knowledge to themselves, lest others should outstrip and darken them; but
(mark) the lips of the righteous will feed many.

It Is a table furnished, not with earthly, but heavenly dainties, and it is a
free table, such as come, are welcome. David (says Gregory) prays for a Door,
not a Bar, (Keep, O Lord, the Door of my lips) Now a door Ostium non
obstaculu^, quia ostium and clauditur and aperitur, Greg.
(says the Father) is both shut and opened, and therefore though the lips of
the righteous be shut, that no hurtful thing come forth, yet they will open
also in a free hospitality, whereby to feed many. Philip having tasted
communion with Christ, was not contented to see Christ himself, unless he call
Nathanael, saying, John 1.45.
Come and see; and the 4.28.
woman of Samaria calls her kindred to see the worlds Savior. This is the
nature of spiritual knowledge, that is accompanied with tastes of Gods
goodness, Latum discrimen inter corporalia and spiritualia bona, nam si quis
reperiret in agro aliquo thesaurum, co solus uti vellet, nec cuipiam
patefaceret. Musculus in John 4.28. At verae Christi cognitionis natura est, ut
qui eam nactus fuerit nihil habeat prius qu am plurimis eam communicare. Martin
Bucerus. Neque enim sepulta and otiosa jacere potest in fidelium cordibus Dei
cognit io quin se apud homines proferat. Calvinus.
They cannot but speak the things that they have heard and seen. They believe
and therefore speak. Socrates (an Heathen) knowing there was but one God, said
in his Apology for his life, that if they would give him his life on condition
to keep that truth to himself, and not to teach it to others, he was resolved
rather to dye, for he would not promise that ( viz. silence) which he knew
himself unable to perform; for he could not bury such a truth by sealing up
his lips; much less can they that see truth by a clearer light, keep it to
themselves, like new wine it must have a vent.

Fourthly, Romans 14.5.
is thy knowledge backed with full assurance and strong confidence (I say not in
all things at all times.) This seeing has tasting joined with it. 1 John 2.3.
Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. q. d. If we
taste communion and take delight in him and his ways, then our knowledge will
be backed with full assurance. Though an Paulus meras flammas loquicur tamque
vehemeater ardet ut incipiat etiam quasi angelu maled^ere. P. Martyr. in Gal.
1.8.
Angel from heaven preach any other doctrine, let him be accursed, said zealous
Paul, that knew whom and what he had believed, and resolved not to be cheated
of truth: But now an hypocrite may know and take up many things on trust, and
at last begin to believe them; but yet notwithstanding they are clear and
steadfast, and fully resolved in nothing, but Deus enim verbum suumdedit in quo
actis radicibus maneamus immoti; homines autem huc and illuc suis figmentis nos
abducunt. Calvinus in Ephesians. 4.14. Circumferri ergo omni vento doctrinae est ad
quamvis doctrinam oblatam de sincera ac vera doctrina, addubitare, est seduci
nunc his nunc aliis doctrinis. Erasmus Sarcerius.
are driven about with every wind of doctrine; and dance after any pipe that
plays, (says holy P. Bayn on Ephesians. 4.14.
Bayn.) See Prove. 14.15. Heb. 13.9. We may justly fear these never received
truths in the love of them, they never tasted Gods goodness.

Fifthly, Altissima flumina minimo sono labuntur. Q. Curtius. l. 7.
humble in the midst of light and gifts? Does thy knowledge beat down pride and
conceitedness and frowardness, and make thee patient, humble, and teacheable
in heavenly things; These are celestial visions, James 3.17. The wisdom that
is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy, etc. q. d. There is a wisdom or vision that is not from above,
and that is earthly, sensual and devilish, full of envy, strife and
unquietness; Pride is a veil before their eyes, that they cannot see God: But
the wisdom that comes from above, a spark falling from the father of lights,
that is accompanied with meekness and Vide Titelmannum in locum.
humility. See Job 42.6. Now mine eyes see thee, therefore I abhor my self
in dust and ashes, q. d. Lord now I begin as through a crevice to discover thy
purity and beauty, I cannot but abhor my self for all the unsutablenesse,
and defirement that cleaves to me, when I see how unlike I am unto thee! etc.

But now if men vapor and count themselves above ordinances, and begin to
despise prophesying, these never tasted, neither do they rightly see God, or
any thing of God. 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man think he knows any thing (alas! poor
heart I pity him) for he knows nothing as he ought to know, but if any man love
God, the same is known of him Epicurus said that he was the first man that
ever discovered truth, who yet in many things was blinder then a beetle; But
Socrates cried this one thing I know that I know nothing. Trap. on 1 Cor. 8.2.
Intimating that such as boast of their knowledge, know nothing aright, and
never loved God nor tasted his goodness.

Sixthly and lastly, Nam evangelii doctrina vivum est speculum in quo Christi
effigiem contemplantes in eam transfigurantur, and ubi non adest pura
conscientia non nisi inane scie^tiae spectrum esse potest. Calvin. in 1 John
2.3.
See 2 Cor. 3.18. But we with open face beholding in a glass the glory of the
Lord Jesus, are changed into the same image from glory to glory. When the soul
begins to spy Christ, and views his beauty in the clear crystal glass of the
Word, by a strange metamorphosis, it is suddenly turned into the same image,
whilst certain sparkles of his glory are shed in upon the heart.

You see the right visions of God are transforming, bettering, beautifying
visions, as the pearie by the often beating of the Sunbeames upon it becomes
radiant; An orient splendour shiues on that soul that has seen Christ.

4. Can they only clearly see that have tasted God and his goodness? Non
omnes qui divina eloquia legu^t, quae in ill is admira^da sunt considerant,
nisi qui coelesti sple^dore and gratia potiuntur. Basil.
The Sun is not seen but by his own beams: Say with David; In thy light we
shall see light. What said: Father? Methinks I see great Doctors and profound
Rabbis, with all their speculations crowding into hell to be beaten with many
stripes, whilst silly old women with a little sanctified knowledge of God in
Christ drop in at heavens gate, and are crowned with Diadems! Oh that all of
you could say to me as the Woman of Samaria her friends whom she called out to
Christ, said to her, Isla non ideo dicu^tur, ut ministeriu^ mulieris hujus quo
been suera^t usi, contemptum fuisse intelligamus; absit; sed ut extolla^tur ea
quae ex ipso Christo audierant, supra testimoniu^ mulier is; Ita Musculus in
Joh. 4.42. q.d Parcius tu quidem praedicasti de Jesu, quam ipsa habet res.
Bullingerus in Loc.
Joh. 4.42. Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard and
seen him our selves, and know that this indeed is the Christ, the Savior of
the world. Mark, when they had once tasted communion with the Messiah, they
clearly saw and knew him, no longer now by hearesay, but sweet experience. We
may rise up early, and go to bed late, to unfold divine mysteries for you, and
we may open the glorious things of eternity to you, but till you will take up
your Bibles, and look more narrowly into these things, and like noble Bereans,
search the Scriptures, whether that which we deliver be so or no Austian begged
of God that if it were his pleasure Moses might come unto him to tell him the
meaning of some Texts in Genesis. Do thou call out for his Spirit, he can best
teach thee. When John wept much, Christ opened the book sealed with seven
seals. Rev. 5.4, 5.
till you will down upon your knees and seek God in secret for light, and
endeavor to live up to received light; surely all our pains is but ploughing
of a rock, or a watering a dry and rootlesse stake in the hedge, which will
never be fruitful; some chaos of confused notions may swim in your heads, and
you may think you know enough, but as sure as the Lord is in heaven, and you
will nere come there, if you pass away in this golden dream, you will never have
full, distinct, and clear knowledge of God, and the mysteries of salvation;
for till you taste you can never see how good the Lord is.

Lastly, Eadem ratio contrariorum.
; As you cannot see unless you taste, so likewise you cannot taste unless
also you see somewhat of God; without some tasting there is no clear vision,
and without some knowledge there is no right tasting. The will and affections
boil up as the understanding is enlightened and principled, Ignoti nulla cupido.
for Ignoti nulla cupido, a man cannot let out his desires after unknown
things. Sound knowledge bree is holy affections, and enkindles heavenly desires
after God. We must first discover some want of Christ, and worth in Christ, ere
our hearts can bray and pant after him. Simul admonet Christus quam efficax sit
bono^u^ suorum cognitio, utpote ad ea expetenda nos stimulat, animosque nostros
accendit: Si sci^es, inquit, peter^s. Calvinus in Joh. 4.10.
See John 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, says Christ to tha^ woman,
and who it is that says, give me to drink, thou would have longed to be
tasting of his living waters that now speaks to thee. So that no seeing or
knowing, no tasting; they are loving twinns that are never asunder; the soul
must have a glimpse of God, or it can never taste his goodness. One that is
blind may yet feed heartily, but not so here, for our Elu-Parr on Romans 10.2.
Page 122.
zeal must be according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. else we shall be like a small
ship without ballast, or fraught, but with mighty sayler, which is sooner
either toppled over, or dashed against a rock; 1. A zeal according to
knowledge. Exodus 32.27. 1 Reg. 18.40. 2. Not so, in Philip. 3.6. 1 Timothy 1.13.
Acts 13. So Latimer says before his co^version he was a most fiery and
obstinate Papist.
zeal without knowledge is like a string in an Instrument over-strained beyond
the proportion of sound wherein is harmony, which makes a squeaking and
unpleasant noise; and it is usually compared to fire, not on the hearth, but in
the middle of the room, which instead of roasting the meat may burn the
house; or to mettle in a blind horse, which makes him rush against the wall
and hurt his rider.

Blind devotion (in Papists and others) God abhorres, therefore we must see
and know God in some measure, or we can never taste him and savor spiritual
things aright: But when the day star begins to arise in our minds, this
glimmering light breeds in us an unspeakable refreshing and Giudere nisi
sapiente^ ne^a^t ^toici. Aug. de Civ. Dei. Lib. 14. Cap. 8.
gladness of heart in Gods presence, and it sets a man's soul upon a constant
wondering at the glory of the things revealed: The man sees in a mirror, he
sees and admires, he sees and rejoices, nothing more transports and ravish^s
the heart, then visions of God smiling in the face of Christ.

Thus you have heard that as a man cannot see unless he taste, unless he see
God, both must go together, and therefore content not your selves with one,
unless you have the other, what God has joined together, let no man separate.
Taste and see how good the Lord is. Tasting without seeing will be blind
devotion, seeing without tasting will be naked speculation, tasting and seeing
together will be sincere conversion.

The Lord is exceeding good unto all his people, Suavitas and Bonitas Dei, quam
in Christo sentimus allicere nos debet. Calvin. in 1 Pet. 2.3.
and perfection, and sweetness it self.

David's argument to prevail with you to taste and see God, is drawn (you see)
from the goodness and sweetness of God; so then this is our last point which
is few words, but full of matter, God is good.

See it proved from inspired and heathenish quills.

1. The Scripture in every leaf confirms it, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and
^^est good. Thou art good in thy self, nay goodness it self, and an
overflowing fountain, as thou art, so thou do good. The Lord best knows his
own excellencies. See Exodus 34.6. God proclaimed himself, to be merciful and
gracious, abundant in goodness and truth, etc.

2. Deus opt max. and ^uide^ ante Opt. qua^ max. qu^a me^ius est prodesse
omnibus quam opes magnas habere. Tull. de Natura Deorum. Lib. 2. Deus nullo
uspiam modo injustus sed plane justissimus, nec ei quisqua^ simili^r inveniri
potest, qua^ qui inter nos justissimus fuerit. Plato in Theaeteto and in
Timaeo. Deus omnium optimus and saelicissimus, ad hujus similitudinem quo
quisque propius accedit hoc and melior and beatior dixit Socrates. Rot. lib. 3.
Apoph. Seneca passim in Epistolis, and in libro de Beat. Vita ca. 20. and in
lib. 4. de Benef. cap. 28. Bonum est a quo omnia pendent, quodque omnia
appetunt, accipientia ab ipso principium, ejusque penitus indiga, ipsum vero
nullius egenum, ipsum sibi sufficiens, nihil penitus appetens, mensura om^ium
atque terminus. Plotin. lib. 8. Ennead. 1. c. 2. Deus bonus, imo ipsum bonum
est, nec aliud quicquam praeter bonum. Trism. ser. 2. Pimandri.
The very Heathens maintain this point, in calling God Optimum, Maximum, that
is, the best and greatest; so Tully most frequently: Plato called him the horn
of plenty, and the Ocean of beauty, without the least spot of injustice.
Socrates says, God is the best and happiest good, and the nearer we come to
his likeness, the better and happier are we. Seneca up and down his Epistles
goes very far in this point, so that he is called by some Divine Seneca; A
man may prove it philosophically that God is good. 1. God is the chief being,
and therefore the chief good, because Entity (or being) and goodness are
terms convertible. 2. Among the creatures there are found many things good,
therefore much more is their Creator good. Quicquid enim in effectu est, id
longe^ praestantius in causa invenitur. 3. A thing is said to be good in that
it is perfect, but God is essentially and absolutely perfect, Ergo. 4. The
better a thing is, the more communicative 'twill be, for Bonum est sui
communicativum, but God is ever making forth his goodness to the creature in
creation and preservation. Ergo. 5. That is good which is the center of all
desires, so is God. Deum omnia appetunt entia, non primo, sed quia esse
appetunt, says Scaliger.

But now to pitch on some particulars. We will enquire. 1. What this goodness
of God is? 2. How it may be illustrated and set forth.

To the first I answer, 1 Enqu. What the goodness of God is.
Goodness is the perfection of things for which they are desirable. Perfectum
id est cui nihil deest, That is perfect which wants nothing, God is thus good.

His goodness may be thus described.

It is a communicable attribute, whereby the divine essence is in, and of it
self, merciful, good, liberal, and bountiful, communicating good to the
creature In Deo nihil est quod non est ipse Deus. Zanch.
; yea to speak properly, God is goodness it self, for there is no accident
in God, whatsoever is in God is God; for God is such as that whatsoever is in
him is essential, so that goodness is God, and God is goodness. Psalm. 144.2.
My goodness, so he calls the Lord.

To the second Enquiry I answer, 2d Enqu.
the goodness of God may be illustrated and set forth by seven Epithites.

1. It Is so communicative, 1 Epithet. Universal good. Psalm. 145.9. ^uk. 6.35.
that he is a general and universal good. Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to
all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. He is kind to the
unthankful, and unto the evil, Luke 6.35. Good to his enemies, yea to all his
creatures, good to man and beast. Psalm. 73. The whole earth is full of his
goodness; In their creation he made all things perfectly good in themselves,
and relatively good for some use to others; In their Vide Marlorat. in Mat.
5.45.
sustentation he continually preserves and governs them; all their life and
motion comes from him; The young ravens taste of his bounty, he opens his
hand and all the creatures are satisfied, he causes the Sun to shine and rain
to fall on just and unjust. Thus you see he scatters common beams of his
goodness over the whole creation, etc.

Nay to show that God is indeed an universal good, Genebrard. in Psalm. 145.9.
let me tell you the very devils and damned in hell do partake of his
goodness. For if God be infinite,

1. In wisdom, to devise still greater and crueller Torments, if he please.

2. In power, by strong hand to put them, when he will, with ease, into
execution.

3. In justice, eternally and infinitely to punish sin committed against it,
there being sufficient foundation of guilt in the creature to clear and
justify God in his proceedings. Then it is evident he could inflict sorer
punishments on the damned, then he now does; for then a thing is infinite when
it has no end, but has still a farther step to go. Ergo. etc.

Obj. I but it is said, they shall have judgment without mercy,

Sol. It Is called judgment without mercy,

1. U^i mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defectus sine defectu, quia and mors
semper vivit, and sinis semper incipit, and d^fectus deficere nescit. Greg.
mor. l. 9. c. 47. Vide I. Yates model of Divinity, p. 58. and Aug. de Civ.
Dei, l. 21. c. 3.
In Duration: For they shall never to eternity be eased of the least jot of
that punishment once inflicted on them.

2. In Apprehension, because the greatness of their insufferable torments,
does swallow up all sense of mercy, and make them think the Lord could not
inflict sorer punishments upon them.

Quest. But wherein can the Devils partake of this goodness?

Ans. Why in three things, Being, Mitigation, and Employment.

1. In their very Being, not only in respect of their first estate, Coloss.
1.16. In the beginning of time not the beginning of eternity. Amb. Hex. l. 1.
c. 4. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 11. c. 32.
when in the beginning of the world, they were made glorious creatures,
spiritual, immortal, intellectual, free, holy, wise, powerful, and the
inhabitants of Paradise, capable of seeing God clearly: But also in their
present condition, they are his Creatures; for he made them Angels, though not
He, but sin made them Devils, and their Being is continued from God, and some
Dr. Twisse lately Prol, to the Assembly of Divines; now in glory.
godly learned have maintained Condemnation to be a less evil then
Annihilation.

2. In mitigation of their deserved punishment: For certain it is, they are not
punished according to the height of that measure of punishment which their
sins have merited, and Gods wisdom, justice, and power could inflict upon
them. For their heinous offense Albin. quaest. in Genes.
deserved not one Hell only, but a thousand hells, because in so high a State,
without any temptation. David Dixon in exposition on Mat. 8.29.
Matthew. 8.29. And the evil Spirits cried out, Art thou come to torment us
before the time? Whence we may conclude, there is a time coming when the
Devils shall be more tormented then they are as yet.

3. In Employment, and in respect of their ministry, Daemones sunt spiritus
nocendi cupidissimi, a justitia penitus alieni, superbia tumidi, invide^tia
lividi, sallacia cal^^d^. Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 12.
because the chief mirth of Devils is to do mischief, and they are most
pleased when God does use them to try the good, or fry the wicked; or if his
mercy do not extend to them in this employment, yet it is undoubtedly showed
in them, by bringing light out of darkness, in using such impious and bad
Agents for effecting of his good ends. And thus the Lord suffered Satan to
perplex Job for his Lombard Sent. l. 2. did. 44.
good, though there might be in the Devil a will to destroy: But all power is
of God, Romans 13.1.

Thus you see the very damned and Devils partake of Gods goodness, and that
there is no place that can be imagined, wherein there is not some impression
of Divine goodness: And therefore well might David say, The Lord is good to
all, and his tender mercies are over all his God was but 6 days in making the
world, 7 in destroying one City Jericho. Chrysostom.
works. When he plagues us, it is less then our iniquities deserve: for God
pitieth his own works even then when he punishes ours. i.e. our sins. Tho.
Goodwin. Aggr. of finning against knowledge and mercy. p 97.
If Paul being but one poor vessel, was so richly laden with Divine goodness
and patience (as 1 Timothy 1.16.) how is this great Bark of the world then fraught?

2. As Divine goodness is universal to all, 2. Epithet.
so it is a special and peculiar goodness to the elect, 1 Timothy 4.10. He is
the Savior of all ( viz. in a common way of providence he does good unto all:)
but he is Quibus non tantum dat corporalia bona, sed etiam spiritualia, fidem,
spem, patientiam and co^stanti^m; testatur s^nctos ver^ off^^curae Deo, non
^^gl^gi cor^^m^^o, Luke 12.6. Aug. M^lorat in 1 Timothy 4.10
especially good to believers. His peculiar goodness to them appears in his
electing love, and choosing them from eternity out of the mass of corruption,
to be chosen vessels of his mercy, and all ages must wonder at his ^indnesse to
them in Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.7. These he inwardly and effectually calls to
himself, and having purged and sanctified them, he adornes them with all the
Jewels of grace, and makes them a p^culiar people, zealous of good works; he
forgives all their unkindnesses, and who cun tell how often he offends? He
sweetens and sanctifies all their str^^hts, and gives them communion with
himself in all conditions; and finally, receives them up into the clouds, to
be in his bosom for ever. Incomprehensible is his sweetness and indulgence to
his own people, he is exceeding courteous and affable to them; he rays forh
the discoveries of peculiar love on them, which maker more happy then when
corn, wine, and oil increases, and hereby they lead heaven on earth. Luce
solis, vital^ spiritu, teriaeque alime^tis om^es communiter fruuntur, sed
benedictio qu^ in Christo speranda est panis filiorum. Calv. in Mat. 15.26
Now this is childrens bread, and Dogs may not eat of it; he gives outward
blessings to the worst, not in love, but as one flings a bone to a dog. When
Xenophon.
Cyrus gave Artabazus a cup of gold, and Chrysanthas a kiss (in token of
special favor) Artabazus complained that the cup he gave him, was not so good
gold as the kiss he gave Chrysanthas. Coelu^ and terram bonitate implevit, sed
panis dicitur quicquid ad filiorum adoptionem spectat. Calv. ut supra.
Why so a Christian rejoices more in the sweet kisses of Christ's lips, for so
are the pledges of divine love termed, Cant. 1.2. I mean with true spiritual
blessings, then if he should give him all the treasures of the world: Dr
Stoughton in his choice Sermons.
To be able to say, God is mine, is better then a thousand mines of gold, Psalm.
144.15.

3. God is an Independent good. 3d Epithet. Independent good.
Indeed there is no other Independent Being, though this name be given to some:
God only is independent, and has all in himself and from himself, without
reference to others, or being beholding to any for what he is or has, Psalm.
16.2. H. Ainsworth in Psalm. 16.2.
O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, My goodness extends not unto thee.
The Chaldee reads it, My good is not given but of thee. But the Seventy thus,
Of my goods thou have no need; Nihil jubet quod sibi prodest. Augustine.
with which your translation suits, that says, My goodness extends not to
thee. Can a man be profitable to God (says Eliphaz) Job. 22.2. Non accedet Deo
quicquam utilitatis si in innocentia vitam egeris, sicut e contrario nihil
damni vel incommodi ex hominum impietate ille accipit. Fran. Titelman in Job.
22.2. Bonorum enim nostrorum ipse non indiget; non accipit de domo nostra
vitulos neque de gregibus nostris hircos: omnia ab ipso habemus, ut nostris
donis vel bonis non possit in aliquo dittor evadere aut beatior, quiex sua
natura fibi est sufficient issimus, nullius rei indigens vel indigere potens.
Idem in Job 35.7.
And if thou be righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he at thy
hand, says Elibu? Job 35.7. He is Elshaddai, a God of all sufficiency in
himself. If I were hungry, sure I would not tell thee, says God, for the world
is mine, and all the fullness thereof, Psalm. 50.12.

Vide Doctor Preston his new Covenant on Genesis 17.1. page 27. and 158
Thus you see God is an Independent good, he has a bottomless fountain of
goodness within him, so that he needs not our praises, or services, he is most
perfectly blessed, and happy, and glorious in himself, and all the creatures
cannot add so much to his goodness, or felicity, as a drop does to the Ocean,
or a spark unto a Bonfire.

Shall I need to illustrate and confirm this truth unto you? It may easily be
done: Consider three things.

First, God was thus good and happy, and all-sufficient, before the world was,
or creature was; therefore on whom should he depend? Psalm. 90. Before the
mountains were made, or the hills were laid, from everlasting thou art God. He
made the world, not that he had need of it, or any thing in it, but to
communicate his goodness, and to make known his praise. From eternity God was
taken up with the surveyes of his own beauties and perfections.

Secondly, that Nemo hominum quicquam excellentiae a seipso habet. Calvinus in
1 Cor. 4.7. Nam nihil est aut donorum aut charismatum quod spiritui sancto non
debet acceptum referri, and quicquid in nobis est aut facultatis aut energiae,
id totum Dei depositum, animis nostris commodatum, P. Martyr in loc.
good which the creature has, God must needs be the author of it all: For,
what have we which we have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. It Is the Spiders Motto,
Nemini debeo; for she climbs up by a thread of her own weaving, and the matter
of it is spun out of her own bowels. But even this creature, and all others,
have their esse and been esse, being and well-being from God. Wealth, beauty,
and honor, etc. all from him; so that there is no room for boasting, we may
not sacrifice to our own net. Now he must needs be sufficient of himself, that
is sufficient for all other things. No^ potest su^mus reru^ conditor in se non
habere quae rebus a se conditis dedit quemadmodum sol astris. Hugo de anima.
lib. 4. cap. 15.
Nay,

Thirdly, that good and Quicquid bonitatis in creatura reperitur id oportet
esse ex Deo tanqua^ font omnis boni. Idem in Matthew. 19.17. Creata omnia
perfectius sunt in Deo quum in seipso. Dionys. de Divin. cap. 7.
perfection that is in the creature, was first in God, and most perfect and
good there. All was after the divine Image, Genesis 1.27. they depend upon God as
the effigies in a Look^^^ glass on the face, which likewise was t^^ perfect in
the face before it appeare^ (...) the glass. See Jam. 1.17. Every good (...)
perfect gift comes down from above, and descenu^ from the Father of lights.
Mark the similitude: As beams flow from the Sun, and are of the like nature,
but were more perfect in the Sun ere they flowed there: so all the good which
is in the creature, did not only proceed from God as the Author and Creator,
but was first in God; certain The Platoniques who yet were heathe^s, held that
whatsoever good is in the creature, it is but splendour quidam summi illius
boni. A sparkle or beam of that infinite goodness that is in God. And they
said, that then only was the good which is in the creature rightly used, when by
it men learned to go up and return to the Creator. Bp. Cowper on Psalm. 119.57.
rays shooting from that Sun of Righteousness, as Christ is called, Mal.
4.^. Man's goodness is but the beam, the image which is not so perfect as the
Sun, or face; man may be good in the concrete, but the Lord is good in the
abstract.

By these three things you see God is no borrowed, but a most independent good
in himself, and that all the creatures neither do, nor can add to it. The
bounty of Kings is but as that of the clouds, which though they shower down
plentifully, yet they first received all from the earth below them. Now GOD
has all in himself, without any dependence on others, Pulchrum coelunt,
pu^chra terra (and sic pulchra a^ima) sed pulchrior qui fecit illa. Aug.
but all things as they had their excellency from him, so they depend upon him
for continuation.

4. God is a Free Good; 4. Epithet.
the goodness (...) God is free, and therefore it is frequent^ ^^lled The
grace of God. Free grace and ^^^dnesse in God are all one. See 1 Pet. 2. (...)
If ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. ^^vers think Peter has reference
to my Text, and so make goodness and graciousnesse in God all one. Grace is
nothing but the free favor and goodness of God to his people. Nullo enim
nostro merito, sed sua ipsius gratia, and suapte voluntate spontaneaque
beneficentia impulsus and commotus fecit haec nobis Deus, Gasp. Megan. 2 Timothy
1, 9.
Romans 3.24. You are justified freely by his grace. Now this excludes not only
Gods eying, but our having any foundation of desert in us, 2 Timothy 1.9. We are
called not according to works, but his own ^urpose and grace. And therefore
Isai. 55.1. (...) Quam sitis inopes and exhausti scio nec posse vos pretio
tanti boni participes fieri exploratum habeo. Non igitur merita virtutum a
vobis, ut ad me adeatis exigo, cum sitis contaminati flagitiis and criminibus
summis obnoxii, non munera pietatis atque sanctitatis efflagito, cum sceleribus
innumerabilibus alligati sitis non denique par and aequale tantis bonis pretium
posco, cum fieri non possit, fide^ tantum incensam and incitatam reij^^, ut eam
non secundum debitum, sed secundum amplitudinem gratiae meae remunerem,
Hieronymus Osorius in Paraph. in Isai. 55 1. page 200. Dei gratia vocatur, quia
gratis datur. Aug. in Joan, Quomodo est gratia si ex debito reddita? Idem de
Great. Chris. cap. 23. Nisi gratuita non est gratia. Idem cap. 31. Isai.
65.1.23. Hos. 14.4.
you will see God has no impulsive mo^ing cause in him to do us good, but only
his good will and pleasure: for there he freely invi^es us to partake of his
goodness and sweetness made out in Christ: Ho! come, come, thirsty sinners,
buy wine and milk without money, and without price, hearken unto me, and eat
that which is good, and let your soul delight in fatness. q. d. Taste me
freely, for I am good: Come monylesse, penylesse, meritlesse souls, and
worthless, graceless sinners, here is mercy in a Saviors bosom for you. You
see all the good things of God are freely tendered to all sinners without
respect to any merit or desert in men, which would eclipse free grace, if not
extinguish it. No, eternal life is the gift of God, not wages, but gift; not
due, but free. It Is called a penny for the labourer, (...) crown for the
conqueror; not that we, but Christ has earned it with good store of sweat
and blood, and we by holy live testify the truth of our faith, which applies
Christ; and God has freely, yet firmly promised it, and so has made himself
a debtor (says Austin) so that still God is a most free good.

5. 5 Epithet. Absolute and perfect.
God is an absolute, suitable, and perfect good unto the soul; Communion with
God, and participation of divine goodness and sweetness is a Christians
Summum Bonum, his chief good Sir Robert Barkley his Summum bonum.
. Varro collected out of the Philosophers books 288 things, in which according
to their several conceptions, they would place our summum bonum, man's chief
good; And thus forsaking, or rather not spying the fountain they digd unto
themselves broken eistems, they shot wide and missed the mark, at which David
aimed Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case ( viz incircled
with all temporal blessings) yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord.
So your Bibles read it, but the Hen. Ainsworth on Psa. 144.15. P. 185.
Greek Septuagint translates it thus: They count that people blessed that have
these things, but I pronounce them happy, who have God for their Lord. Indeed
to speak the truth, God in Christ is not only the chief, but only good of
the soul; as Mat. 19.17. Mutabiles sumus a bono in malum, and nostra bonitas
ad divinam collata, malitiaest. Theophylact in Mat. 19.17. In vetustis
e^emplaribus legitur, (...), etc. Quid me interrogas de Bono? unus est Bonus.
Beza in locu^.
There is none good but one that is God: Christ as man pute by this Title;
There is no absolute complete good but God; There is nothing the soul wants,
but it is in God (there is a streaming fountain of light and life in him) and
there is nothing can fill and content the soul but God; give the child
rattles and cymballs, yet nothing will still him but the breast; give the soul
all the gewgaws and vanities of the world, and the riches of both the Indies,
yet nothing will quiet the soul but God. The heart (says Hugo) is little, yet
it desires great things, it cannot satisfy a bird of prey for its dinner, and
yet the whole world cannot satisfy it; And how is it possible the world, which
is globular, should fill the Triangle of man's heart? Some nooks and corners
will be empty, it will still range after further satisfaction, but God can make
us lie down contented, and see heaven opened before us. In all other things
there is some disproportion, imperfection, or emptiness, but in God fulness
dwells, and there is no deficiency in him, Habenti Deum nihil potest deesse.
Cyprian
naked Christ can make Job on the dunghill happy; The Perdiderat omnia illa
quae dederat Deus sed habebat ipsum qui omnia ^ederat, Deum.
soul that has God says it has enough, nay wishes she may be able to manage
her joys, and that the heart may not be too little for the comforts, and so
break as old bottles filled with new wine, which was David's fear, Psalm.
119.20. For,

6. 6 Epithet. Delectable good.
God is a most desirable and delectable good; for the object of the will is
good, nothing can be good but it is desired, and nothing is desired but it is
really or seemingly good Beatitudo hominis est gustus homitatis Dei. Scultetus
in Psalm. 34.6. page 272.
; Now if goodness be that which all desire, and if all desires be bent upon
goodness, then it must needs follow that all undeceived Christians (who
formerly mistook their good) must needs desire God the author of all good,
Christ is the desire and delight of Nations. As John leaned in Christ's bosom,
so do all believers, and they solace themselves in his embraces: Fecistinos
domine propt^r te and semper inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te,
etc. August. confess. lib. 1. ca^ 3
Austin spoke sweetly, Thou O Lord, have made us for thee (thou art the
loadstone of our hearts, and the center of our joys) our poor hearts are
never at quiet till they rest in thee, our souls hanker after thee, when shall
we fully enjoy thee? As the Needle in a Dial still trembles till it settle in
the North point, so with Noabs Of the sending forth of this Dove, and of her
returning unto Noah (whom Heathens name De^calion) there is express mention in
Plutarch. Dialog. de Indust. Animal. This was a lively emblem of the souls
resting in Christ, who was typified by the Ark. Ainsworth.
dove, the soul hovers up and down till it rest upon the Ark Jesus Christ;
saying with David, Return to thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee: now loose thy self in a labyrinth of spiritual
enjoyments. You see God is the most sweet good, pleasing and filling the soul
with rich delight, and therefore here we are bid to taste how good. i. e. how
sweet and delectable the Lord is; It Is usually set out by Psalm. 63.5. Marrow
and fatness. Both words in the original^ ^^^^fie fatne^^^ and he^^^^ (...)
meant satiety of divine pleasures, as Psalm. 36.9. Idem. Ornabi^ (...) opipare
convivium conquisitissimi^ epulis and vino purissimo atque (...) catissimo
diligenter extructum and omnes nationes invitabit qu^ (...) cum incensa side
convenerint, participes suae clementiae, atque benignitatis efficiet. H.
Osorius in Paraph. in Isaiam 26.6. v. Page 80. Vid. Psalm. 65.11. Isa. 55.2. Me
audite and eritis repent bonorum divinorum ubertate completi, animique vestri
prae rerum coelestium saturitate and copia, erunt ingenti gaudio cumulati.
Idem. Page 201. Ignatius the Martyr cried, Ignis, erux, bestiae, tota in me
tormenta diaboli veniant tantum ut Christo fruar. Drex. 12. Sig. Praed. Page
135.
marrow and fatness, to set forth his unconceivable sweetness. Oh there is
amazing and ravishing sweetness in the sense of divine goodness, that will
drown all worldly sweetness (as the Sun the Stars) and serve to uphold and
revive the soul in the greatest trials; This made the Martyrs to deny
themselves in all that is dear to flesh and blood, and embrace Christ and the
stake together, for they were satisfied with divine goodness, Jer. 31.14.

7. Epithet. Eternal good.
7. and lastly, God is an eternal good, a lasting and an everlasting good. How
often is this comfortable word repeated in the book of Psalms; The Lord is
good and his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 100.5. and 106.1. Now God is an
eternal good essentially and relatively, as the Schools distinguish.

1. Essentially he is a Facile aeternitas Dei evincitur. Nam 1. Deus est suum
esse uniforme, ergo etiam est, sua aeternitas. Tho. Aquin. p. 1. q. 10. ar.
2.2. Sive motus ab aeterno ponatur, quod dicit Philosophus, sive in tempore
caepisse esseratur, quod dicit veritas, perinde est ad aeternitatem Dei
commonstrandam. Gerhardi Loc. Theolog. Tom. 1. page 120.
and o, without beginning or end, like a circle; Now God is goodness who is
thus eternal, and goodness is the divine essence, therefore it must needs be
as eternal as God. Some things have a beginning but no ending, as Angels and
men's souls. Some things have no beginning and yet have an end, as the decrees
in their final accomplishment; some things both beginning and ending, as all
sublunary things, but God and his goodness have neither beginning nor ending.

2. God is an eternal good relatively in respect of others to whom this
goodness does peculiarly belong, and that two ways.

1. Ex Part Ante, looking to their election. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us
before the foundation of the world. No new thought can happen to the mind of
God, for then he should be subject to change, and therefore all his thoughts of
love and goodness must needs be as eternal as himself; And as this is a
wonderful prop to believers in their greatest trials; so the decrees of God
are miserably abused by some, as two Martyrs Acts and Mon sol. 1663.
Bradford and Idem fol. 1505.
Philpot with grief observed.

2. Ex Part Post, Eying their Glorification, for as his purposes of doing good
were without beginning, so his executions in bestowing good are without end.
Psalm. 117.2. His merciful kindness is great, and his truth endures for ever;
and, we shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. Eternity is the heaven
of heaven The Saints happiness in heaven, nulla rerum vic ssitudine tolletur
vel minuetur. Adam. Sasbout Hom. 2 in Genesis 3.19. Gaudium in fine, sed gaudium
sine fine. Bernard. de Diverse. 19. Amiantus is a stone that can never be
defiled. Isidor. Etym. lib. 16. cap. 4. And Amarantus a most curious flower,
that being gathered continues a long time fresh and green. Ctemens Paedagog.
in lib. 1. cap. 8. Well, the Saints one day shall wear such a crown as shall
be studded with the stone Amiantus, and garnished with the flower Amarantus.
For Peter says, it is undefiled and that fades not away. 1 Pet. 1.4. Trap.
. When a thousand millions of years are run out, heaven shall be the same, and
the glorified Saints the same; Whom he loves once he loves unto the end: Thou
shall see an end of all perfections under the Sun, but of Gods goodness to
believers there shall be no end.

Here is matter of reproof, An quia Deus bonus est id^a tu malus? Ambros.
Pravi cordis est ^dro malum esse quia Deus bonus est. Bernard in Cant.
-- Whoh! God is good, and Christ has dyed, and at what time soever, etc. Thus
the greatest motive to obedience is made an encouragement to profaneness, but
this will prove a sad aggravation of all thy unkindnesse, and abused patience
will turn into fury. Exodus 34 6, 7. He is abundant in goodness, and will by
no means clear the guilty. i.e. Obstinate, impenitent wretches, that despise
his goodness Ergo ubi non regnat Dei timor, securitas in rebus prosperis est
contemptus ac ludibrium immensae ejus bonitatis. Unde sequitur graviores poenas
jure daturos quibus in hac vita Deus frustra pepercerit. Calvin in Romans 2.4.
Cavendum ergo ne illicito bonorum abusu infaelicem hunc thesaurum nobis
reponamus. Idem in Romans 2.5.
. Romans 2.4. And so treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Ah
foolish and perverse sinners, do you thus requite the Lord for all his
goodness, and wish no better to your own souls? The Lord give you hearts to
consider where you are, what you are doing, and whither you are going; As yet
you behold the white flagge of mercy, but God will shortly hang out his black
flagge of defiance, and then laugh you to scorn, etc.

2 Use. Is the Lord so exceeding good, Deus, inquit, natura bonus est, nullis
malis sollicitari potest, ideoque neminem sol^icitat ad mala. Bulling. in
Jacob. 1.13. Deus malum non appetit ergo neque ma^e agendi nobis author est.
Calvinus. Deo reprobante non irrogatur aliquid quo homo fit deterior, sed
tantum non erogatur quo fiat melior. Augustine.
let not any man say when he is tempted, he is tempted of God, James 1.13. God
tempts no man. Why? He is goodness it self; That which is good of it self
has no evil mixed with it; Honey has no sour in it, the Sun has no
darkness, and God is nothing but goodness, and therefore cannot tempt men to
sin. Yea but some will say, he decreed my sin, for nothing comes to pass
without his will, and the second causes move not unless they be moved by the
first. I answer; The first cause is not the cause of the error that is in the
motion of the second, though it be the cause of the motion. As in the wheels
of a Clock, the principal wheel with his motion turns about the lesser, yet
if there be any error in the motion of a lesser wheel for want of a tooth, or
the like, it is no cause at all thereof. Now sin is not properly a motion, but
an error in the motion of thy heart. Gods will being the first cause produces
the motions of the heart, for in him we live, move, and have our being, but if
there be any sin, any error in the motion of thy heart, thine own will is the
cause thereof, God only withdraws his grace from thee, and leaves thee to thy
self, as not being bound unto thee: He does not urge thee nor press thee unto
sin, he does not infuse or instill into thy mind any wicked motions (as does
Satan) he only leaves thee to thy lusts. Bish. Davenant in his Animadversions
on a Treatise called Gods love to mankind. page 49.69.113.137.144.162. and 164.
Bishop Davenant says well, Preterition or Reprobation is not a decree
necessitating men to sin, but a decree permitting men not elect out of the
freedom of their own wills to neglect and abuse such means as God has
appointed for salvation. Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Fulgentius, Prosper. ad object. Vinc. resp. 3.
Prosper, Zanch. de Natura Dei lib. 5. page 7 12.
Zanchy, Suarez in ^pusc. lib. 2. page 175.
Suarez, and Calv n on 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Calvin, all say the same thing. Divines holding reprobation say no more then
this, that God has a hand in the production of sinful Actions, but not as
they have formalem rationem peccati, he is not the cause of the Obliquity or
sinfulness of the Action, but leaves us to our perverse wills, and In 1.
Aquin. qu. 19. p. 436. and Valentianus in opusc. lib. 2. cap. 1. page 126.
Aquinas himself confesses this, although I confess a learned Divine has
gone too far of late. But has not Christ taught us to pray the Father, he
would not lead us into Tentation? I answer, the meaning is this, We pray that
God would neither suffer us to be led by others, nor lead us himself
judicially into tentation.

1. That he would not suffer others and deliver us up to the world, Satan, or
our own lusts, to be tempted and conquered by them; For none can tempt us
without leave from God, as in the case of Ahab and Job. Now we pray not that
God would never let us once be tempted, but that he would uphold us, give us
strength to withstand, 1 Cor. 10.13. Or policy to escape it, and that he would
make us watchful, patient, and victorious, that it may turn for our good.

2. We pray that he would not lead us Sir Richard Baker on the Lords Prayer.
page 186.
with the left hand of justice into Tentation in a judicial manner, Chemnit.
in^ harmon. C. 51. page 621.
punishing one sin with another, as 2 Samuel 24.1. Psalm. 81.3. Romans 1.28. Ephesians.
4.18. Act. 5.3. 2 Timothy 2.15. which he does for these sins Ward on Mat. 6.13.
page 316.
especially.

1. Ignorance, Romans 2.21. 2 Cor. 4.4.

2. Inconstancy and wavering in Religion. Ephesians. 4.14. Romans 1.25.

3. Security and slighting of Gods calls, Prove. 1.24. etc. 29, 30. 1 King. 22.8.

4. Cleaving to some bosom sin, Romans 1.26.29. 2 Pet. 2.12, 13. especially if
through backsliding and Apostafie, 2. Pet. 20, 21, 22.

5. Calumniating and scandalizing of God and Religion, Romans 1.21. Thus you see,
that although we are taught to pray God not to lead us into tentation Hac
loquendi forma utitur, ne nos inducas in Tentatione^, non quod Deus quenquam
tentat, sed quia Deus non modo Satanae libidini nos per mittit; ut ignem
concupiscentiae accendat, sed eo utitur irae suae ministro quoties vult homines
in exitium praecipites agere, ipse quoque suo modo in Tentationem inducit.
Calvinus in Matthew. 6.13. Imbecilles sumus homines, ideo non debemus nosmetipsos
in Tentationes injicere, sed si inciderimus orandum ne absorbeamur a
tentatione; Absorptus enim and victus ille in profundum Tentationis inductus
est, at non item qui incidit and vincit. Theophylact. Enar. in Mat. 6.13. In
8to. Page 16.
yet he cannot be said to allure or tempt any man to sin, his goodness is such.

3. Next is the Lord so exceeding good, then believe not calumnies, Sardian
began it, and Marcion after him (says Tertullian,) Marcion being
excommunicated for uncleanness, in envy taught that blasphemy He urged Amos
3.6. But malum Poenae and Bonum justitiae are all one, and it is in order to
his own glory. Tertull. contra Marcion. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Chrysostom says, he had conference with a Marcionite, and the blasphemer
reasoned thus; God is not good because he takes account of sin, etc. To whom
the Father answered, God is therefore good, for if men now exceed Lions and
Bears and Tygres, what then would they do if God should take no account of
sin; And Etiam in severitate est bonitas Dei, ut recurrat unusquisque
castigatus, and pedem referat a peccatis and ad tramite^, bonamque
conversatione^ revertatur. Ambros.
Ambrose sai^, the goodness of God is seen in his harshnesse and severity
against sin, which does not only dishonor God, but debase us. So that you
see God is good although he takes an account of sin, let heretics and
blasphemers think and say what they will. Well, Brethren, the servant is not
better then his Master, remember God and Christ and the Saints have been
slandered and falsely accused before you, and therefore think it no new thing,
if you meet with like usage. Was not Quum dira in eum congererent convitia
Judaei and horum primores Pharisaei and Scribae, quumque non deessent
gravissima scelera quae Dominus ipse Christus in adversarios potuisset
ejaculari, obticuit tamen, imo pro hostibus suis Patrem obsecravit caecitatis
eorum misertus. Bullinger. in 1 Pet. 2.23.
Christ that went up and down doing good, and was goodness it self, was not
he termed a wine-bibber, a blasphemer, a Devil? Yet being reviled, he reviled
not again, says Peter; All the Saints before you have tasted of the same cup.
Amos was accused by Amaziah, as one that preached against the King: and Ezra 4.
the King is told, that if the Jews rebuild the wall, they will pay no Toll nor
Tribute: Paul was called a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition: Calvin,
Beza, and Bucer accused as layers of sedition, of rebellion. Was not Luther
called the very Trumpet of rebellion, and Eliah the troubler of Ishael? The
Arrians charged Athanasius with adultery, murder, and witchraft; so true was
that prophecy of Christ, Men shall hate you, and speak all manner of evil
falsely for my names sake. As it is a great sin to invent, coin, and Prove.
22.1. Ephesians. 4.31. Exodus 23.1. Prove. 3.29. Exodus 22.28.
raise slanders to bespatter innocence, which is very rife in our days, even
among Professors of different judgments, 1 Timothy 5.19. Levit. 19.16. 1 Cor.
13.5. 1 Samuel 24.9. Prove. 17.4. Psalm. 15.3. Mat. 1815. Prove. 10.18. 1 Thessalonians.
4.11. Genes. 18.21.
so it is no less a sin to hear, believe, and blaze slanders; 2 Kings
19.14.18. Psalm. 31.18.20. 1 Pet. 2.12. and 1 Pet. 3.16. and see the 9 verse.
Eccles. 7.21. Psalm. 38.12, 13. Else Prove 15.1.15. Prove. 26.4. Job 27.5. Psalm.
37.6. Isai. 61.7. 1 Pet. 4.14. and Matthew. 5.12.
and believers ought to make good use of slanders, and not return railing for
railing.

4. Admire the goodness of Gods Nature, Psalm. 31.19. and 21.33.
desires after him: He is provoked every day, and yet he spares us, and he
would fain overcome our evil with his good. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O
earth, let Angels and Men stand gazing and wondering at the matchless goodness
of God. Oh how should this singe our affections, and make us all in love, yea
all love to Christ. Ama unum illud bonum in quo omne bonum est and sufficit,
Ansel. in Prosol. cap. 25.
O Love the Lord all ye Saints, here is a Lodestone to draw your hearts, the
goodness of God to believers: we live upon his goodness every ^oment, no
subsisting without it. Oh the unsearchable riches of Free Grace! Ama quod
amando carere nequeas. Guigo Med. cap. 17.
You may love and prize other things, and yet not enjoy them; whosoever loves
God is one with him, which was a sweet meditation of Guigo.

5. Is the Lord so exceeding good? Bernard says, for a man to do good for
good is natural, to do evil for evil is sinful, but for a man to do evil
for good, is Diabolical. There is mercy There is an active filial, as well as
a passive slavish fear: where justice breeds but stubbornness, mercy breeds
reverence. Res est solliciti^plena timoris amor. Sir Richard Baker on Psalm.
130.4. p. 189. Justice perhaps may have the knee of fear, yet none but Mercy
has her heart. Id. ibid.
with God that he may be feared, Psalm 130. 4. The Deus Opt. Max. (...) i. e.
Longanimitate probat genus humanum, Procopius in Reg. lib. 3. c. 19.
long-suffering and goodness of God should lead us to repentanee, Romans 2.4.
Davidem Regem suum, i. e. Christum ejus filium. Nomen Patris pro Filio
frequentissimum est in Scripturis, David pro Christo. Hier. Zanchius in Hos.
3.5. (and bonitatem ejus) Indicat ergo Deum non appariturum formidabilem neque
terribilem, sed clementem and bonum, ideoque illos suaviter ad se attracturum
sua bonitate (...) ei sponte and hilariter inserviant; Nec apparet ita bonus
and clemens nisi in Christo, quia per Christum solum Dei bonitas nobis,
gustanda proponitur and communicatur Id. ibid. page 58. and 64.
And it is said of Believers, They shall fear the Lord and his goodness in
the latter days, Hos. 3.5.

6. See and examine if the Lord be good to you in this peculiar manner, David,
My f 0200 0524 V 3 goodness, Nostra plus aliis placent, P. Sir.
my fortress, my deliverer, Psa. 144.2.

1. Art thou purged from thy defilements, and art thou pure in heart? Then God
is peculiarly good to thee, Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel, even such
as are of a clean heart. Except thou art clean, he cannot with honor love
thee, and did not he love thee first, thou could not be made clean.

2. Do thou continually fear him, and walk as under his piercing eye? 'Twas
a true saying of Bernard, Soli silii irae iram non sentiunt. Bern. in Ep. 256.
Only the sons of wrath fear not wrath. Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? God is to be feared
( Timendus ne timeatur, Greg in Evang. 26.
says Gregory) that he may not be feared; and they that fear God (says
Origin) fear nothing else Timor timore ut clavus clavo pellitur, says one,
Quit timet Deum, timet nihil praeter eum Origin in Levit. 16.


3. Are all the stakes of thy trust and confidence pitched in God? Do thou run
to him in distress, and pour out thy complaints in his bosom? See Psalm.
31.19. How great is thy goodness which thou have wrought for them that trust
in thee? The just shall live by faith, their continual dependence is on God.
Nay,

4. Do thou but long and thirst after him, and vehemently wish thou had
interest in him and all his goodness, certainly God is thine. Psalm. 107.9. He
satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness. When a
woman longs for dainties she hears of, it is a sign (says one) she is breeding;
and if qualms of sickness come on her, it argues she is with child: and so if
thou long'st after Christ, and grace, and comfort, and if thou art sick of
love, be assured that Christ is formed in you. Traps Expos. of Mat. 5.6.
True desires are the breathings of a broken heart, which God will not despise.
There may be saint wishings and wouldings in the worst, thus Balaam desired to
dye the death of the righteous, but cared not to live their life; and Pilate
desired to know what was truth, but staid not to hear it Carnales no^ curant
quevere quae tamen desidera^t invenire, cupientes consequi sed non and sequi.
Bernard.
. But our desires, as they must be ardent and violent, so also impatient and
laborious, seconded with endeavors after the thing desired. Now if you find in
your selves these four things, Purity, Fear, Trust and Desire, conclude with
David, God is your goodness.

7. This should persuade sinners that are ignorant of divine sweetness, Taste
and see how good the Lord is; that is, take delight in his Word, venture upon
him, yield up your selves to his service, and turn your feet into his
Testimonies: Ab illis qui gustarunt mira cum dulcedine percipitur nova vita.
Vobis itaque optimi fratres, novum hoc videri non debet siquidem gustastis quam
benignus sit. Deus. Masculus
you will soon get bidden Manna, and have morsels to eat the world knows not
of, you will quickly relish Divine sweetness, and blame your selves you tasted
it no sooner. As Annot. on the Bible printed 1645. and Sa Moore in his
Christians heart drawn out to Christ page 17.
Paul looked upon himself as one born out of due time, because he was converted
no sooner, 1 Cor. 15 8. Thou will smite on the thigh and say, Ah wretch that I
am, what have I done, and where have I been all this while? Why have I been
such a stranger to God hitherto? O that I could hear you thus chiding and
rating your selves in this respect!

8. Let believers be thankful for all this goodness; O give unto the Lord the
honor due unto his Name, and worship him withholy worship. You can sing those
new Songs, which none can learn but the redeemed from the earth. Every one
cannot finger David's Harp, the upright in heart shall glory; the nightingale is
welcome* into your gardens, but not the Skreech owl. It Is Angels work, and
should be our delight. Ascensus gratiarnm est, descensus gratiae. Bernard.
Surely you will lose nothing by lifting up God in your praises, and praise is
comely for the upright, it is all the rent you pay to God for his goodness.
Amnem sequatur qui viam vult ad mare. Plau^us. Origo fontium omnium mare,
bonorum omnium Deus. Bern. in Cant
have you not cause of thankfulness? What greater felicity then to be the
object of Divine love? God has given you Christ, and with him all things. Oh
therefore know well your happiness, that so your sleep may be pleasant to you,
your hearts may be filled with joy, and your mouths with praises.

9. Imitate God in goodness, be ye followers of God as dear children, strive
to be holy as he is holy, perfect as he is perfect, merciful as he is
merciful, good as he is good. Be good and do good, as to all men, so
especially to the household of says: Summa religiouis est imitari quem colis.
August.
strive to imitate so sacred a nature, and though you must needs come infinitely
short, yet delight to write after so fair a Copy. James bids us be easily
entreated, full of mercy and good works; and Paul says, Be kind one to
another, courteous, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you, Misericordiam qui non praestat alteri, tollia sihi.
Chrysologus in Sermon. 43.
lest God repent of all his goodness to you.

10. Esteem nothing sweet or good any further then you can find or enjoy God
in it; Austin loved to read Tully before his conversion, but not so much
afterward, quia nomen Jesu non crat ibi, he could not find Christ named there,
Tully was unacquainted with God. Dr Stoughton in his love sick Spouse, p. 133.
The Jews, say the Rabbis, throw the Book of Ester to the ground ere they
read it, because the name of God is not once there. The thing I aim at is this,
Look how much of God you can find in any creature, in any mercy, in any duty,
and so much of real comfort you may expect in them; for God is good, and
nothing is good without him.

Lastly, ibide in his goodness, Romans 11.22. that is, having tasted divine
sweetness, drive a constant trade with God, keep daily correspondence with
Christ, that so you may be preserved in communion with heaven. Deus prius quam
deseratur neminem deserit. Augustine.
God forsakes none, but they first forsake him. True, once gracious and ever
gracious; but know, men may dream they have grace, and yet be deceived, and
such as have grace may want comfort, and but just scramble to heaven. Be not
like a waning, but like a new Moon, that is, increasing. Many begin gloriously,
but end shamefully, our end must be best. El. Par. on Romans p. 192 Illi
permanent in Dei bonitate qui retinent fidem and bonam conscientiam. Nic.
Hemingius in Romans 11.22. Frustra velociter currit, qui priusquam ad metas
venerit, deficit. Greg. Mor. lib. 2. cap. 40.
To conclude, keep close unto your God, prize his presence, adore his
discoveries, admire his bounty, implore his aid, and attend his calls, so shall
God take delight in you, and you in Him. Amen.

MESSIAH'S SPLENDOUR; OR THE GLIMPSED GLORY OF A BEAUTEOUS CHRIST.

By ROBERT DINGLEY, Minister of the Gospel.

And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun rises.

2 Samuel 23.4. I Jesus am the bright Morning-Starre.

Rev. 22.16. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy people
Israel.

Luke 2.32. Lumen est umbra Dei; and Deus est lumen luminis.

Plato. Pol. 6. LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, at the gilded Lion in
Aldersgate-streete. 1649.

TO THE HONORED and religious Lady, Mris Elizabeth St John's, wife to the truly
Honorable Patriot, Oliver Saint-Johns, Lord chief Justice of the common Pleas.
As also To her worthy and virtuous sister Mris Mary Langhorn, wife to Mr
William Langhorn, Esquire, R.D. dedicates his Book, and wishes an abundance of
Grace here, and eternal enjoyments of God in Glory.
THe light of the Gospel is as the Sun which shines more and more unto the
perfect day. Eo hominem virtute praestante^ sub vehit ut non ante ascendendi
fine^ faciat, quam ad summum illud praestantissimumque lumen pervenit. Dr
Jermin out of Nazianzen.
Knowlegde shall cover the earth, as waters the Hab. 2.14.
Sea. The light of the Isa. 30.26.
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light
of seven days. Now, if ever, are these Scriptures fullfilling, a great light
appears, and in the midst of this light you are not in darkness, but 2 Pet.
1.19.
the day star is risen in your bearts: Oh shut not your eyes against any
truth of God, rest not in the things you have received, but 2 Pet. 3.18
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ. 1 Timothy 1.19.
Many there are who of faith make shipwreck. Try 1 These. 5.21.
all things, but hold fast that which is good: You have formerly honored me
with your attention when I was present among you At Barnes in Surrey.
, And you were members of my Congregation.
you were indeed the fairest flowers in my garden, and much encouragement I
received from you in my Ministry, for which I bless God, and you, and for all
the favors you have showed me: Be pleased now to peruse these notes, which I
acknowledge unworthy your piercing and judicious eyes: The subject of these
Sermons is Christ in his beauty, Effluens plenus manet. Theophylact.
shedding his rays of glory on all that stand round about him; This should be
1 Cor. 2.2.
the subject of all our Sermons, who are the Messiahs Paranymphs 2 Cor. 5.20.
, under-suitors for Christ: It Is a mercy to enjoy the light of the Sun Of old
it grew into a Proverb, Satius esse sole^ non lucere, quam Chrysostomum non
docere.
much more the bright beams of Gospel-Discoveries. Let us walk in this light,
and live up to it, let us prize it, and rejoice in it: Now the good Lord bring
your hearts more and more in love with Christ, and help you so to live in him,
and to him now, that shortly you may enjoy Gaudium in fine, sed sine fine.
Bern. de diverse. 19.
endless felicity in his bosom; This shall be his prayer for you that is.

November. 4. 1648. Your servant in Christ. ROBERT DINGLEY.

To the Wel-disposed READER.
THere are two desirable Suns: Per metaphoram, filius Dei vocatur (...). Sol
justu^ae. Mal. 4.2. Vide Matthew. 17.2.
and what so much as these are the desire of Nations? Now who that is wise
covets not discoveries of the chief of them? This judicious Authors rendition
of the Righteous Suns worth, has warmed my heart, God grant it cooles not
thine by accident.

Christ as a Sun is a public good; Matthew 20.23.
He Is a servant to Saints, He came not to be ministered unto, but to minister:
He Is a great one, yet Sunlike serves he his inferiors. Stand and wonder at
this. The Sun's that vast vessel into which the light natural was gathered at
first, which till then was scattered in the Heavens entire Body. (...) Sol qui
significat servum, a (...) Chaldaeis ministrare. Dan. 7.10. Quod verbum in
Chaldaica paraphrasi Genesis 40. v. 4. usurpatur. and sic dictus, quoa in
adminiscrando tum^ne totius ^^un^^ mini^^er si^: He took upon ^im the form of a
servant, Phil. 2.7. Non solum servi ut subesset, sed quosi mali servi ut vap^^
laret. Bern. ter. quart. Heb. Cant 1.13. Exodus 16.21.
But behold! this feeling Author shows thee an higher Sun, filled with all
light spiritual, light mavelous: Christistians, where is your admiration and
adoration of this glorious Sun? Behold, you that love to see him, he is a bundle
of Myrrh to you; let him lie all night between your breasts: in your nights of
sorrows and sharpest sufferings, improve him heartily, and use him kindly. For
did not he open his Arms, Heart and Bowels in the night of his heaviness, to
embrace, heal and save you?

Would thou be thawed, melted, and well molded into an heavenly Frame? In
this elaborate Treatise thou have a glimpse of the means. Love thou to be
scorched kindly, and not consumed? Let this Sun look upon thee. What but this
brings forth thy fruit, Cant. 1.6.
ripens that which has root, and withers that which has none? Desire thou
to be warmed, heated, inlivened, and clothed? Christ's presence as an huge Sun
effects all this, Deuteronomy. 33.14. Job 8.16. Mark 4.6. Rev. 21.32.
and makes thy soul (his heavenly plant) to thrive. The woman, the Church
which John saw in his Visions, was clothed with the Sun, i.e. Jesus Christ,
and uxor fulget radiis mariti; even the Spouse shines out in the beams of her
Husbands beauty. Matthew. 13.43.
They shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. A Christian is
never so araied as then.

Gracious child! what wantst that thy Father has not laid up for thee in this
righteous Sun? Psalm. 136.8. Psalm. 19.5. The Sun in 24 hours turns round the
celestial globe: so God and Christ come riding on the clouds, the swistest
movers in nature. Christ can encompasse all Saints in the world ^stu oculi, in a
moment. Jer. 31.35.
He can and will adorn the with immense glory, rule thee and speed thee in
every performance.

He will attract thee to himself, exhale, draw, and dry up all thy empty
vapors, and sinful bloody issues, make thy dark air light, and fill thy
obscure intellectuals with an huge mass of visions. Eclipse not then this Sun.
What! shall fleshly delights and carnal pleasures intervene, interpose, and
chop in 'twixt sweet Christ and thine own soul? Will not this veil his beauty
from thee? Luna ingerens inter solemn and obtuitu^ nostru^ ohumbrat sole^. This
moon of earth, and earthly trash should be under foot Rev. 12.1. Chrysostom. hom.
ad Pap. Antioch.
and cause that thou thy self shall lie down in sorrow? It Is a wonder to the
wise, that since all fire ascends, the version of the Sunbeams should be
toward the earth, and that the light thereof should stream downward: But
behold a greater, viz. Jesus Christ laying out himself on sinners to make them
Saints, the Maker clothing himself with the person made.

After Paul came from Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.4. Nee Christus nee coelum pacitur
hyperbolen A man cannot hyperbolize in speaking of Christ and Heaven. Trap. in
loc. Oecolampadius on his deathbed spoke thus, Hic sat ^^is, Here (...) hin me
is divine light in p^enty.
where CHRIST dwells, he affirmed that he saw such things there, (...), which
is not possible for a man to utter: for words are to weak to express its
worth, are (...), word less words.

And if such be the glory of his mansions, what is he? and what mortal can
behold his face and live? Excellens sensibile destruit sensum the object is to
strong for the seeing faculty; James 1.7. (...), a man without Jesus Christ, is
but (...) vu^gus fictilis. He is but an Earthen pot, Isa. 64.8.
the eye is little whilst here, and therefore takes not in much of such light:
light and brightness makes one stone excel another, and stars themselves to
ourshine each other; but this Sun excels them all, having no parallax, no
variableness, he is always one and the same to his: be not thou then wholly
void of (...), a tacit consent and seed-plot of grace for Christ, Vae mundo al
scandalis, vae, vae, vae, ab exemplis bonis. Bernard.
and walk not unworthy of him.

Finally, this pious Author has painfully anatomized Christ unto thee, as a
glorious Sun, a Righteous, Rising, and Healing Sun: Do thou bless God for
such an instrument of Sions good, Gratiae cessat decursus, ubi non est
gratiarum recursus.
who has spoken these things from his own heart, to correct and comfort the
hearts of others, lest the same Sun harden thy heart, which is wont to soften
others. Thus speaks he, who prays that the followers of the Lamb may be many,
and subscribes himself a lover of the meanest of the Members of Christ,

From my Study in Brides Churchyard* November. 5. 1648. SAMUEL MOORE.

A Table of the Principal Heads contained in this Discourse, viz. this 2d Part.
OF the Book of Malachy. Page 151 Of this 4th Chapter and its parts. Page 152.
to 155 The Text divided and Points raised. Page 155, 156 Two Points raised from
the Coherence. 1. Christ is at once a scorching Oven to sinners, and a
refreshing Sun to Saints. Page 156 Three Grounds. Page 157 1 Use. Let not
dogs catch childrens bread. Page 157. to 160 2 Use. Let not children fear
the dogs whip. Page 160
2. Christ a reviving Sun to such as fear the Lord. Page 161, 162, etc.
What this fear of God is, and why Christ will shine on such? Page 161, 162
Three Uses of the Point, ubi motives and helps to fear God evangelically. Page
162. to 165 1 Doct. from the Text in general is this; There were many clear
predictions of the coming of Christ in the old Testament. Page 165. to 180 1
Reason to prepare the people for the coming of Christ, and quiet them in the
expectation of a Messiah. Page 168, 169 2. Reason, to manifest the truth,
wisdom, and power of God, in their punctual fullfilling in all the
circumstances. Page 169 170 3 Reason. To silence and convince the Jews. Page
170
1 Use. Against those that think hardly of those under the old Testament, a^
though they were not redeemed by Christ. Page 171, 172 2 Use. See our
happiness and duty that see most of those prophesies fulfilled. 1. Our
happiness in five respects. Page 172. to 176 2. Our duty in five things. Page
176. to 180
2. Doct. Jesus Christ is that glorious Sun that shines upon the Church. Page
180. to 223 The shell cracked, and the kernel commended in 21. particulars. 1.
The Sun is of a communicative nature. Page 180. 181 2. The manner of the
communication observable. Page 181. to 185 3. There is but one Sun, although
the Stars are innumerable. Page 185. to 187 4. The Sun is at the Lords
commandment. Page 187, 188 5. It Is a body of an unconceivable magnitude. Page
189, 190 6. I^ has a dazeling splendour. Page 190. to 194 7. The Sun is the
beauty and ornament of the world, and discovers the worlds beauty. Page 194 So
Christ is the beauty, 1. Of souls. Page 194 2. Of Nations. Page 195, 196 3. Of
Heaven. Page 196, 197

8. The Sun by situation is in the midst of the Planets. Page 196, 197 9. The
Sun is very admirable and wonderful in its motion. Page 197. to 200 10. The
Sun by his light is expergefactive, or awakening, so Christ. Page 200, 201
11. The Sun pierces and penetrates into the bowels of the earth. Page 201, 202
12. It easily expells the thickest darkness. Page 202, 203 13. The Sun is
seen by its own light. Page 203 14. It exhales the thick and muddy vapors.
Page 203 15. The Sun abides pure in his beams when the air is corrupted.
Page 203, 204 16. The Suns heat is felt when his face is maskt with clouds.
Page 204, 205 17. The Sun is useful to generation and production of fruits.
Page 205, 206 18. It works diversely on different objects, as butter, clay, Page
206 19. The Sun comforts, and cheares up the creatures. Page 206 207 20.
Neither Moonlight, Starre-light, nor Torch-light, can make day, if the Sun be
wanting. Page 207, 208 21. We are not greatly troubled when the Sun sets or
is eclipst. Page 208, 209
Wherein Christ and the Sun differ. 1. The Sun is but a creature. Page 209
2. It can discover things obvious, but not give sight to the blind. Page 209,
210 3. Countries in the torrid Zone have too much of the Sun. Page 210 4. The
Sun is good by aspect, but evil by conjunction. Page 210, 211 5. The Sun
must one day be blown out, viz. at the end of world. Page 211. to 213
Where it is showed in what sense Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to his
Father. Page 212 1 Use. See the audacious impudence of the Pope, that styles
himself the Sun of the Church, and the Sun among the Stars. Page 213. to
216 2 Use. To confute an old heresy, new dressed, that Christ dwells in the orb
and circle of the Sun. Page 216 to 218 3 Use. See the happiness of our
condition that enjoy this Sun in the Gospel. Page 218 4 Use. It opens their
misery that have no interest in Christ, they are as People near the Artick
Pole without the Sun. Page 219 5 Use. To check those that seek to cloud and
eclipse our Sun, but in vain. Page 219 6. Exhortation to many duties, viz.
1. To admire the beauty and amazing splendour of Christ. Page 220 2. Open your
hearts to receive this light, down with the shutts of wilful ignorance, and
this Sun shines in thee. Page 220 3. Be clothed with this Sun, and have the
Moon under your feet. Page 220 4. Set the Watches of your lives not by the
clock of example, but the Sun-Diall of the Word. Page 221 5. Delight in Christ's
day, commonly called Sunday, or a day dedicated to this Sun. Page 221, 222 6.
Labor to be and do like Christ. Page 222 7. Let Pilgrims be comforted. Page
222, 223

3. Doct. A Sun of righteousness. Page 223, etc. The Point opened at large. He
is a Sun of righteousness. 1. Inherent. 2. Imparted. 3. Imputed. 4.
Remunerative. 1. He is a Sun of righteousness inherent in himself, he is
holy and pure, as the Sun without spot: Four Questions answered. Page 224.
to 226 1 Inference. Then a vast difference between the first and second Adam.
Page 226, 227 2 Inference. Erberies doctrine dangerous. Page 227. to 230 3
Inference. See the desperate madness of this world to condemn such a one as a
malefactor. Page 230, 231 4 Inference. Adore the matchless love of Christ, in
that having no sin he took ours. Page 231 5 Inference. Hence it is manifest,
impenitent sinners shall not be spared of God. Page 231, 232 6. Lay Christ as a
pattern before you. Page 232
2. Christ the Sun or fountain of imparted or infused righteousness, even
all those rays of beauty and holiness shed on believers. Page 232, 233, etc.
Three Questions answered. Page 233. to 236 1 Inference. See the dangerous
condition of profane Gospellers and subtle Libertines. Page 236 2 Inference.
Labor to find and feel this work in you, ubi motives to get it done. Page
236, 237 3 Inference. See whence all your infused righteousness must come, not
from Ordinances, Angels or God himself out of Christ. Page 237. to 239

3. Christ is the Sun and fountain of imputed righteousness. Page 239. to
240, etc. The Point opened, and three Questions answered. Page 240 to 243 1
Inference. See the folly and madness of Justitiaries. Page 242 2 Inf. Here Is
comfort for believers. Page 243

4. Christ is the Sun of righteousness remunerative; and that 1. in
remembering and rewarding his followers. Page 244 And 2. in administering Justice
with an equal and impartial hand. Page 245 1 Inf. Let not believers mourn
under the non-accomplishment of promises. Page 246 2 Inf. Nor sinners presume,
because God is slow to wrath and patient. Page 246

4. Doct. There is a time of Christ's arising and discovering himself and
beauty to the world, and to the soul. Page 247 to 265 1. Enq. When Christ may
be said to arise in the world? 1. Properly and literally, 1. in his
incarnation, 2. Crucifixion. 3. Resurrection and Ascension into heaven. Page
247 to 250 2. Spiritually, or mystically. 1. when the Gospel is preached. 2.
when his Church is defended. 3. when he comes in glory at the last day. Page
251, 252
2. Enqu. When in a soul? When he comes, 1. to enlighten. 2. Renew. 3. to
quicken the soul. Page 252. to 254
3. Enqu. Wherein Christ's revealing and discovering himself is like the Suns
rising. 1-'It Is by degrees. 2. it scatters mists and dewes, 3. It Is the rising
of millions. 4. not always visible. 5. Its visible rising attended with the
singing of birds, and welcome to all but whoremongers and robbers. 6. in the
East. 7. All the world cannot hinder it. Page 254. to 258 4. Enqu. Touching the
disparity in four things. Page 259, 260 1. Use. Rejoice in Christ's
appearances. Page 260 2. Use. Worship this rising Sun. Page 260, 261 3. Use.
Reckon on the rising of others with but against Christ. Page 261, 262 4. Use.
Prepare for Christ's settings, first on the land, 1. in temporals, 2. in
spirituals. Secondly on your souls: three staying thoughts then to quiet the
heart Page 262 to 265

5. Doct. When Christ thus arises, then he comes with healing in his wings.
Page 265. ad finem 1. The expression opened at large. Page 265. to 272 2. The
point proved by two Arguments. 1. Arg. Christ a most skillful, careful, and
faithful Physician. Page 272, 273 2. Arg. He heales corporally, spiritually,
and politically, Page 273. to 278

Quest. What are the grounds and reasons why Christ heales our souls? Ans. 1.
It Is his goodness so to do. 2. His office. 3. Believers are one with him. 4.
No other eyes can pity them. 5. Christ would marry and receive them into his
bosom. Page 278. to 280 Caution. We are not perfectly healed here, but still
lie under the Physicians hands. Page 280 1 Use. Hence see your natural
condition, sick and full of botches and sores. Page 280, 281 2 Use. Terror to
all that will not be healed by Christ. Page 282, 283 3 Use. Marveilous comfort
for all believers, let them rejoice in Christ. Page 283
Seven great objections answered. Page 283. to 288 1. Object. My sins are
great, and my spiritual diseases grievous. Page 283, 284 2. Object. Green
wounds may be cured, but mine are old festred sores. 285 3. Object. My
diseases are relapses. 285, 286 4. Object. If Christ were but sensible of my
pain, he would cure me. 286. 5. Object. Or if he were at hand be might do
somewhat, but he is in heaven. 287 6. Object. Others neglect me, why should
Christ regard such a worm^s I am? 287, 288 7. Object. When he does come and
cure me, he will expect large fees, and I have nothing to return him. 288
4. Creep under the healing power of Christ's wings. Some motives. 288, 289 The
means, to f^^quent the Ordinances especially. 1. The Word. 2. Prayer. 289, 290
Do thus, and in patience possess your souls, wait, wait, I say on the Lord,
his time the best. 291.
THE GLIMPSED GLORY OF A BEAUTEOUS CHRIST.
MALA. 4.2. Part of it. The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in
his wings.


MALACHY John Diodate in Argument on Mal.
signifies an Angel or Messenger, and because there is no mention elsewhere of
this Prophet, some think it no proper name, but a name of office, and that
thereby may be meant Ezra, or rather Haggai (who is so termed Hag. 1.13.) But
howsoever, it is likely he was the last of the ancient Prophets; and certain it
is that this Malachy wrote to the several Tribes, which were returned from
Babylon, after the re-edifying of the Temple, confirming the doctrine of the
foregoing Prophets, and carrying on the Reformation of what was yet corrupt,
either in Gods service, or the peoples lives.

Of the Chapter.
This Chapter is near of kin to the Gospel, not only in place but nature, for
it is purely Evangelicall, sounding with silver Trumpetts the Messiahs
approaching; Wherein is contained both matter of prediction and injunction.

1. There is matter of prediction touching three particulars, Judgment, Mercy,
and John the Baptist.

1. Of judgment and furry to all impenitent and obstinate sinners, verse. 1. So
Hierome and the ancient Expositors.
By it opposing their former blasphemy, Mal. 3.15.) such as will not receive
Christ as his coming, the day is coming (the grand Assizes that will make a
gaole-delivery) when all stout-hearted sinners shall as so much stubble be cast
into the hot Oven, of Gods wrath, says Remigius, which is Hell, says Lyra.

2. Of mercy and goodness to the Godly, verse. 2. and 3. Where three things are
promised, Christ, Growth, and Victory.

1. There is a Promise of the Messiah, verse. 2. The Sun of righteousness shall
arise with healing in his wings. i. e. Christ shall come according to all your
expectations, to refresh your drooping souls.

2. There is a Promise of Growth in grace, verse. 2. And ye shall go forth and
grow up as the calves of the stall. I know Hierom. Re^^g V^tab. and. so
Tertull. lib. de Resur. c. 31.
some understand this of Christ's second coming, and the resurrection, when
believers shall go out of the Prison of this life or the grave into heaven;
But I rather think it signifies the increase of grace in this life. You shall
grow -- The 70 has it, skip or frisk; The Chalde, You shall thrive or grow fat
and plump. As the calves of the stall. The 70 has it, Like calves at liberty;
but Marbeck signifies Saginarium, a stable or stall where calves are fatted.
The drift is this, All Corpus nostrum continue aut crescere co^stat aut
decrescere, sic etiam necesse est and spiritum aut proficere s^mper aut
deficere. Genesis 18.12. Vidit Jacob in scalam Angelos ascendentes and
descendentes stantem vel residentem neminem. Bern. Epist. 91. and 254.
Gods elect shall grow and thrive in grace. Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5. John 15.2.
Philip. 1.6. James 2.5. Grace is of a growing nature, and the wicked grow every
day worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. Phil. 3.13, 14.

3. There is a Promise of Victory over enemies of the Church, verse. 3. And ye
shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your
feet in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord of Hosts. You shall
tread them down. The Chaldee reads it, You shall thresh them; the meaning is,
you shall be over them, and subdue them, and trample them as dirt under your
feet. Now hence you may observe. 1. God many times letts his people see their
desire on his and the Churches enemies. 2. God many times destroys the wicked
enemies of his people, by the hands of the Church, and by their means. Ye
shall tread, Luther called his groans his gunns, but believers may have other
weapons too. Psalm. 58.10. Heb. 12.4. Rev. 17.14, 15.
etc. 3. We must wait with patience for these things -- In the day that I
shall do this says the Lord. 4. When Gods people engage against their
enemies, God himself will be their General -- The Lord of Hosts: We have had
much experience of these things in our days.

3. As there is a Prediction of judgment and mercy in these three things, so
of Gods sending John Baptist to fore-run the Messiah, verse. 5. and 6. Behold I
will send you Elijah the Prophet, etc. The Papists understand it of the true
Elijah, and Ribera is fierce for it, the reason of their contention is to prove
the Pope is not Antichrist, for (says Sanders) Elijah for certain must resist
him, but Elijah is not yet come to do it, Ergo -- John called Elias no^
propter identitatem personae, sed spiritus et virtuti^. Jun. Parall. lib. 1.
Par. 31. Pet. Martyr. Loc. clas. 3. cap. 16. sect. 21, 22. Lucas Osiander
thinks that by Elias here is meant Martin Luther.
We say that by Elijah here is meant John Baptist, Luke 1.17. Mat. 17.10, 11,
12, 13. and Mat. 11.13, 14. All the Prophets prophesied till John, and this is
Elias which was for to come. Saint Mark makes the last words of Malachy to be
the first words of his Gospel: Now the work of John was by preaching of
repentance, and thundering out the Law to prepare and make way for Christ, for
Mercy would be welcome to sin-discerners.

2. As you have a Prediction touching these things, so you have an Injunction,
verse. 4. Remember the Law of Moses, etc. Lex enim manifestando Dei justitiam
homines propriae injustuiae coarguebat, Nam in praeceptis Dei tanquam in
speculo intueri poterant quam procul abessent a vera justitia, it a
admonebantur quaere^dam esse alibi justitiam. Call. in Gal. 3.24. The Text.
The Law was a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, therefore he bids them read
and mind that: Again, whilst he is speaking of Christ the Savior, he would
not have them grow wanton or secure, for the Law must continue a rule of
obedience to the worlds end; finally, because from hence they were to have no
more Prophets till Christ's coming, when John should be his forerunner, he would
have them give the more diligence in reading and exercising themselves in the
Law. And thus we have taken a view of the whole Chapter; Now to the Text.

The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings.

If we look on these words with reference to the matter foregoing; Two points
may be observed.

1. That Christ who is a scorching Oven to proud sinners, is a refreshing Sun
to drooping Saints. 2. That Christ is a reviving Sun of righteousness only to
such as fear God and tremble at his glory.
If you look on the words as they are in themselves, you have in them a
prediction and a description of Christ.

1. A Prediction; The division of the Text.
The Sun of righteousness shall arise; viz. the Savior shall come.

There were many clear predictions in the old Testament of the coming of
Christ.

2. A description of him in the Beauty of his person and manner of operation.

1. His person is described. 1. in that he is exceeding glorious as the Sun,
and 2. in that he is very pure, a Sun of righteousness.

2. The manner of his operation is described likewise; for 1. It is by arising
and discovering himself and beauty to the soul. 2. It is with healing in his
wings.

So that the main Points are four.

1. Jesus Christ is that glorious Sun that with resplendent luster shines out
upon the Church. 2. Christ is a Sun of righteousness. 3. There is a time of
his arising and discovering himself to the world, to the soul. 4. When Christ
who is the Sun of righteousness does arise on believers, he brings healing
under his wings, he does much for us is point of grace and comfort. First of
the coherence.

Of all which in order; lend me your helping hand by prayer.

I begin with the coherence of the Text, 1. Note from the coherence.
as it has reference to the foregoing words where the first note is this, that
Exodus 34.6, 7. and Romans 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
Christ is at once a scorching Oven to pro^^ sinners, and a refreshing Sun to
droopi^^ Saints.

The Point may easily be proved from the Titles, Wisdom, and Justice of Christ.

1. From his Titles; He is called a Savior, in reference to believers, and a
brother, a friend, a husband; but in reference to the wicked, a Judge, a
creditor, an enemy; A Lamb to his friends when on the Throne, A Lion to his
enemies, etc.

2. From his Wisdom; only children and fools smile or frown alike upon all,
friends and enemies; others know when to look pleasingly, and when gravely;
much more He can make forth himself in several postures, suitable to several
relations.
Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

3. From his justice, which calls upon him to give every one according to his
works: As for believers, though they can merit nothing at Gods hands, yet
Christ has purchased heaven for them, and God has promised rewards unto them,
and therefore God is faithful and just to forgive, reward and save them. And
as for Reprobates, they do even dare God, and dishonor him much, by breaking
his Laws, and slighting his Commands. And besides, God has severely threatened
them in the Word, and therefore he is not just, unless they suffer.

By way of Inference,

Let not Dogs catch the childrens bread,

First, is Christ at once an Oven and a Sun? Then let not Dogs catch the
childrens bread, nor wicked wretches meddle with Saints comforts: What have you
to do to take my promise into your mouths that are resolved to go on in a
course of sin? Many dainties are preparing for the Saints, but you shall not
taste of the Supper. How ill will a Jewel become a Swines snout? Surely Gospel
comforts are precious Jewels, and wicked ones (says Peter) are filthy Swine,.
Think not because he is good to others, he must needs be so to you, for at the
same time he is a Sun and an Oven. Read the first verse, and you will see four
things speaking terror to impenitent sinners, notwithstanding all the choice
comforts appertaining to believers.

1. Four things in the Context thunder terror.
Forbearance is no Quittance, a Reprieve no pardon, a Truce no Peace. The day
comes that shall burn as an Oven. Though it is not yet come, it is coming;
Eccles. 8.11. and Psa. 50.21, 22.

2. De excelso gravior est casus major de alto ruina. Be n. ad soror. cap. 39.
God will chiefly set himself against proud and stout sinners, such as flourish
in wickednesses as a green Bay tree; such as the world takes notice of for
jolly and happy fellows, Psalm. 37.35, 36. Job 24.23, 24. Prove. 33.35. Rev.
6.15, 16. Jam. 5.1. And therefore envy them not, but rather pity them, for
their fall is the Et gravius sun^n^ culmine nuss^^ ^uunt. M^^n. in. E^^^. 1.
greater.

3. Sinners though never so great, rich, or honorable, yet they shall have no
power to resist Christ, or to help themselves. The proud shall be as stubble.
Though in this life they be Iron and Brass, proud and stout against God, yet
they shall be as stubble, weak and unable to make resistance, as little
strawes, or small sticks, poor stubble that cannot fortify themselves
against the flame, Jer. 13.24. Isa. 47.14, Idem 27.4. Psalm. 37.20. Isa. 1.31.
Nab. 1.10. Dan. 4.30, 32. Isa. 40.22. Dan. 4, 35. They are as stubble and
grasshoppers to him, and his arm is clothed with power.

4. Reprobates shall be fully and utterly destroyed, God will leave them
neither root nor branch; their ruin is irrepairable; not that sinners
hereafter shall be annihilated, or have leave to dye: no, they must live to
feel what infinite power can inflict upon them. Quia omnis peccator, peccat
suo aeterno.
But the meaning is, they shall be utterly wasted of all joy, and comfort, and
hope.

O consider this you stiff necked sinners, look up and behold, every cloud is
lined with thunder, and the brow of GOD is pleated with wrinkles of
displeasure: Notandu^ est pios in manus duntaxat hominum incidere, impios vero
(quod long terribilissimu^ est) in manus Dei viventis. B^^linger in Heb. 10.31.
O it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, those hands
that span the heavens, and shake the pillars and foundations of the earth,
those hands that have been stretched out all the day long to embrace you, but
you would not.

Is Christ a Sun as well as an oven? your Fathers good will to give you a
Kingdom: Lo, his bosom is opened to you, you are his Jewels, and the Signet
on his right hand. It Is true, the Oven is heated and prepared, but will he
throw the apple of his eye in? will Christ cut off his members, and fling them
in? Whilst the Oven is heating for reprobates, is not heaven fitting, and
furnishing, and perfuming for you? Lift up your drooping heads, for your
redemption draws nigh. Necesse enim fuit communi mundi tristitiae and
anxietati, piorum gaudium opponi quasi e regione, and n^tari inter ipsos and
reprobos discrimen, ne Christi adventum exhorrescerent; Scimus Scriptura^ non
de ultimo tantum judicio, sed de omnibus quae quotidie Deus exercet, vary
loqui prout vel ad fideles vel ad incredulos dirigit sermonem. Sic Calv. in
Luc. 21.28.
Mark the Text.

BUT unto you, etc. The adversative form shows the opposition of these to
them that were mentioned before, and the manifest difference of Gods dealing:
They shall be cast into the oven, but unto you the Sun of righteousness shall
arise with healing in his wings. A blessed BUT to us, a BUT full of Nectar,
level all your golden Arrows of thankfulness at this BUT. The Sun is hot
as well as a flaming Oven, but not so hot, Christ is a suitable good unto all
his people, fitted to their wants and capacities. And so much of that point.

2d Note from from the coherence.
Christ is a reviving Sun of Righteousness to such as fear God. This is so
linkt with my Text, that somewhat must be spoken. We Will enquire

1. What the fear of God is.

2. Why Christ will shine upon such.

First, what the fear of God is.

Aliud est timere quia peccaveris, aliud timere ne pecces. Philip in Job.
There is a slavish and sinful fear, which only fears Gods anger, and
scares us away from him, 1 John 4.18. Genesis 3.8. Rev. 6.16. Jam. 2.19. Romans 8.15.

2. There is a Filial and Reverentiall fear, compounded of Admiration and
love: Its object is Excellency, and its ground apprehension of disproportion
Heb. 12.28. Eccles. 5.2. and 9.4. Prove. 13.13. Hos. 3.5. Isa. 25.3, 4. Jer.
5.24. and 33.9.

Now precedence is given here, and elsewhere in the Scripture to this grace,
for many reasons John Brian in a Sermon on 1 Samuel 12.16.17, 18 page 13, 15.
.

1. The fear of Gods Name is the fountain, root, or foundation of Religion.
Psalm. 111.10. 2. It gives beauty and amability to all other Graces and Duties,
Psalm 2.11. and 5.7. 3. It Is frequently put for the whole worship of God, Acts
9.31. Pro. 31.30.
Nemo melius diligit, quam qui maxim veretur offendere. Salvian Epist. 4.


Secondly, why the Sun of righteousness will shine out upon such as fear
hi^ name? I answer, Such are humbled, and emptied, and see their need of mercy,
and such will not abuse his love, and the Lord has promised his favor to
such, not only in the Text, but Matthew. 5. Beati qui lugent, nam hoc modo
formantur ad percipien^^n aeter^^^ ^audium, and q^^s^st^^^u lis e^^tantur, ne
alibi quam in Deo solidam consolationem quaerant. Calvin. in Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall he comforted. And Isai. 50.10.
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that walks in darkness and has no
light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself on his God
Manencibus igitur in tenebris filiis diffidentiae evadit in novam hanc lucem,
lucis filius, de potestate tenebrarum, si tamen jam fidenter Deo dicere potest,
particeps ego sum omnium timentium te. So Bernard speaking occasionally of my
T^xt. Bernard. Epist. 107.
.

Gemendus est qui non gemit. Greg.
Then let us bewail the want of this grace among us, Pueri lucernam non
timent, larvam timent. Ita, etc
, though they fear things they need not. Psalm. 36.1-5. Romans 3.10. to 29. Genesis
20.11. Why is the face of Christ the Sun of Righteousness hid from many? It
is to be feared they have gone to the utmost bounds of their liberty, if not
beyond it.

2. See if you be in that small but blessed number of them that fear the name
of God.

1. Is it your constant care to avoid those things that are displeasing to God,
Marks of the fear of God.
Pro. 3.7. even every known sin, though never so secret? Levit. 19.14. Genes.
42.18. Nehem. 5.15.

2. Do you study to do that which is acceptable to God, aiming at Perfection?
See Eccles. 12.13. Deuteronomy. 5.20. Psalm 112.1. 2 Cor. 7.1.

3. Do you slight the displeasure and power of men in comparison of Gods, 1
Pet 3.14, 15. Mat. 10.28. Isa. 8.12, 13.

4. Do you employ and demean your selves in holy things with reverence, using
the very Name and Attributes of God in your ordinary discourse with trembling?
Daniel 6. 1 Corinthians. 7.25. Luke 12.45. Isai. 8.12, 13.

3. Be persuaded to get and cherish in your hearts a filial fear of God,

1. Take some motives.

1. The fearful condition of such as are secure, and without any fear of God,
1. Motives to fear God.
Psalm. 90.11. Eccles. 8.13. Jer. 2.19.

2. The blessed estate of such as live in the fear of God, they are favorites
of Heaven, and the blessings of this life and the next belong to such, Psalm.
147.11. Prove. 22.4. Psa. 85.9. and 103.17.

2. Use these helps.

2. Helps to the fear of God.
1. Be much in reading and hearing the Word, Deuteronomy. 13.11. Psalm. 19.9. Deuteronomy.
17.19.

2. Be frequent in Prayer, Jer. 32.40. Psalm. 86.11.

3. Acqu^int your selves with godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11.

4. Act Faith on the promises, Hebr. 11.7.

5. Give scope unto your hearts in meditation, 1. Touching Divine Omnipresence,
Prove. 15.3. 2. His Omnipotency, Luke 12.5. 3. His justice in punishing sin,
1. Pet. 1.17. 4. His truth in fulfilling his threatenings, Heb. 3.16. 5. His
particular judgments against sin, Romans 11.20. 6. The uncertainty of life,
Hierome thought he always heard this sound in his e^^^s, Surgite Mortui, etc.
and the last trumpets blast, 2 Cor. 5.10 Psalm. 147.11. Cum dixisset timentes
adjecit sperantes. August. Vis a Deo fugere? ad ipsum fuge; vis fugere ab
irato, fuge ad placatum. Idem in Psa. 30
7. His infinite mercy, and all his benefits, Psalm 130.4. Jer. 5.24* Psalm.
72.5.

Consider the motives, and follow the rules, and doubt not but the fear of God
shall possess you, and the Sun of righteousness revive you. Amen.

And thus much of the coherence, come we now to the words themselves.

The Sun, etc.

And first, Of the Text it self.
let us speak somewhat of the words, as a prediction of the Messi^h: For
Malachi fore-tels that Christ the Sun of righteousness should arise with
healing in his wings. Observe thence,

There were clear predictions of the coming of Christ under the old Testament.
The Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Christ often appeared in
the visible shape of an Angel, to inure the people and prepare them for the
incarnation, See Doctor Tailor of the types and shadows of Christ.
all the ceremonies under the Law pointed out Christ, and all the Prophets
foretold of the Messiah: Daniel and Haggai spoke so clearly of the time of
Christ's coming, which was to be while the second Temple stood, that the
Jewish Doctors and Rabbis knew not what to say to excuse their unbelief, but
Rabbi Sam in aureo tractatu de miserrimo statu Judaeorum.
confessed indeed, that his coming was to be about that time, and that the
sins of the people caused him either not to come at the promised time; or if he
did come, yet hitherto to hide himself in the Seas, or inaccessible Rocks,
and not to manifest himself unto his people Ish Copher, that is, a Reconciler,
or a Peacemaker between God and Man. Greg. Will. page 948. Isai. 7.14. Micah
5.2. Hos. 11.1. Mal. 4.5. Psalm. 41.9.
. The Prophets did not only speak of the time, but also punctually foretold
almost every thing that should happen throughout the life of the Messiah, and
touching his death and resurrection. Isaiah said, a Virgin shall conceive him;
Micah, that he should be born in Bethlem-Judah; Hosea foretold of his flight
into Egypt; Malachi, that John should fore-run him, Quicquid est veteris Testa
menti Christu^ sonat.
David, that his own Disciple should betray him. In a word, how falsely he
should be accused, how basely he should be handled, what kind of death he
should dye, betwixt the wicked, how his garments should be taken from him, how
he should have gall and vinegar to drink, how his bones after death should not
be broken, nor his flesh lie so long a^ to see corruption. etc. The Sybils
spoke much of Christ by way of prediction (as Varro, Baronius and Aug. de Civ.
Dei, lib. 18. cap. 23. with the notes of Ludovicus Vives, and Bp. Montague.
Acts and Monuments of the Church before Christ. lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 157.
Austin tell us) they long before Christ (being heathens inspired by God) said,
that a famous one should be born of the virgin Mary, daughter to Anna, and
wife to Joseph at Bethlem, that he should be baptized in Jordan, and the holy
Ghost should come down upon him as a Dove. The most famous of the Sybils for
this, was Erythraea, that made a Poem, whose initiall letters put together make
these words,

Jesus of Christ Son of God, Savior.

The sum of this Acrostichis, and other Prophesies of Christ by Sybilla, is
thus abridged by Austin out of Lactantius. He shall afterward fall into the
hands of misbelievers, they shall give him, being God, blows upon his cheeks,
and bid him guess who struck him: with impure mouths shall they spit poison
at him, he shall bow his back to the whip, and being smitten, hold his peace;
no man shall understand what the Word is, he shall be crowned with thorns, and
shall speak to them in Hell, they shall give him gall to eat, and vinegar to
drink, such entertainment shall they provide for him. O foolish nation, they
have not known their God representing himself to humane knowledge. the veil
of the Temple shall rent in twain, and for three hours it shall be dark night
at high noon, he shall be put to death, and sleep three days, and then
returning back from Hell, shall appear alive in the day time, and shall
manifest the beginning of Resurrection to such as are raised up. Cicero speaks
much of this, and wonders what those initiall letters (mentioned) would have.

This Erythrea lived about the time of Codrus before the siege of Troy: she
lived about 2700 years ago.

Thus God gave some light to the Gentiles, by some of their own prophesies,
which they would read and heed, and their Emperors kept and perused in all
their straights. Virgil lived 20 or 30. years before Christ, his fourth Eglog
is much concerning Christ, and learned of the Sybile. 'Twas much admired of the
Ancients, Hierom thinks he had faith, one Marcellinus they say, was converted
to Christianity by that only. The Sybils prophesies were so fulfilled in
Christ, and quoted by the ancient Fathers of the Church, that the Pagans
commonly styled Christians Sybillianists, says Origin. All this and much more
was foretold of Christ. But why were there such clear prophesies of Christ in
the old Testament? I answer, for three reasons especially.

1. To prepare the people for the coming of Christ, Gal. 4.2. and 3.24.
God respected them as children, and erected for them in Jewry a little free
School, set up in a corner of the world, he appointed the Law and Prophets as
their Primmer or A. B. C. out of which they might easily spell a Messiah and so
they did. For about the time of Christ's coming, the people of God had raised
expectations and longing desires after him. We read of Simeon, that he waited
for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. And in the same chapter it is said,
that Hannah spoke of Christ to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem,
verse 38. Yea we read, that not only the Jews, but Samaritans expected his
coming, Nam and ipsi Samaritani Christum expectabant hactenus cum Judaeis
sentientes, tametsi in cultu extra Christum admodum inter se essent diversi.
Musculus in locum Ergo cum Messiam dicit venturum de tempore propinquo videtur
loqui, and certe multis argumentis satis constat passim tunc erectos fuisse
omnium animos Messiae expectatione, qui rebus misere collapsis imo perditis,
succurreret. Calvinus in Johan. 4.25.
John 4.25. The woman (of Samaria) said, I know that Messiah comes, which is
called Christ, when he is come he will tell us all things. So that by these
prophesies of Christ, all the Regions round about were white unto the harvest,
v. 35.

2. To manifest the Truth, Wisdom, Vide Bp. Hall in his passion Sermon on John
19.30. at the beginning, p. 412.
* Matthew has noted 32. several prophesies concerning Christ fulfilled in his
Birth, Life and Death: to all which John has added many more, and still the
burden or undersong of every event is this, Vt impleretur -- That it might be
fulfilled which was written by the Prophets, saying, etc. which insinuates the
sweet harmony between the Prophets and Apostles Theodoret de curat Graec.
affect, lib. 2.
. So that as Numenius said, Plato was nothing else but Moses translated out of
Hebrew into Greek: and Ascham, that Virgil is nothing else but Homer turned out
of Greek into Latin: so the New Testament is nothing else as it were, but
(...) ^ehearsal and exposition of the Old, which wonderfully commends unto us
the truth of God in performing, his wisdom in contriving, and his power in
effecting all that was foretold, so that not a tittle was unaccomplished, etc.
By Lawr. Clarksons Pilgrimage of Saints, p. 4.
. This ought to confirm us in the Divinity of the Scriptures, which now among
other fundamental truths is called in question.

3. To silence and convince the Jews, Impletae erant omnes prophetiae, sut
latum erat Israeli regnum and sacerdotium devenerat in potestate^ and
gubernationem Gentilium, juxta vetere^ Israelis prophetiam. Genesis 49.
Bullingerus in Joan. 4.25.
It Is said in Genesis 49.10. That the Scepter should not depart from Judah till
Shilo came. They all see and confess the Scepter is removed and quite gone
from them, and yet they will not believe that Christ i^ come, but they look
for another. Well, the clear prophesies will be sufficient to damn
unbeleeving Jews, and make them speechless at the great day.

Is it so, of Christ of old, and many believed in the Messiah? then here is
somewhat against such as think hardly of them under the old Testament, as
though they were not redeemed and saved by Christ, whereas Paul tells us
plainly, They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink: For they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3 And Christ was a Lamb slain Semel actu
semper fructu
from the beginning of the world. Reputatu^ est illi ad justitia^ quia rationem
non quaesivit. Ambros.
And Heb. 11. you see they were not strangers to faith in Christ. Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, he saw it, and was glad, says Christ, and his faith
was imputed to him for righteousness, Genesis 15.16. because he shut his ears
against carnal reasonings, and resolved to believe, says Ambrose. And he
embraced God in Christ as his Father, says Calvin. Their Sacraments signified
the sams things as ours, and their Paschall Lamb did lively resemble Christ,
Christ a Lamb, denominatione, qualificatione and adumbratione.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. Finally, the
thing promised and attained by believers under the old Testament, was not
terrene felicity, or an earthly Canaan only, as some imagine, but eternal
enjoyments of God in the Heavens, and this may easily be proved; Quia vetus
Testamentum perinde ac no^u^ non ad carnalem seu terrenam foelicitatem,
praesentisque vitae bona, sed multo magis ad beatae immortalitatis spem electos
excitabat. B^^^^. lo^. com. page 210.
For the covenant God made with them and us, is one and the same, Genesis 17.17.
Levit. 26.12. Exodus 3.6. They had the same Spirit of Faith as we have, 2 Cor.
4.13. Heb. 11.1. They reckoned on the same happiness with us, Heb.
11.9.10.13.26. Nay, Balaam himself said, he hoped to dye the death of the
righteous, Numb. 23.10. Which David afterward explains, Psalm. 116.15. vide
Psalm. 39.6, 7, 8.13. But remarkable is that of Job, Chap. 19. ver. 25, 26. I
know that my Redeemer lives, and though worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God.

To conclude, our Savior promising eternal happiness to believers, says,
they shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 8.11. Mat. 8.11. Unde cert o colligimus candem quae nobis exhibita est in
Christ's, olim Patribus quoque promissam suisse salut em, n^q^^ enim commun^^
foret haereditas nisi una essct fides, quae est ejus obtin^dae ratio. Calvinus
in locum.
Thi^ shall suffice to silence such as think hardly of them under the old
Testament.

Next let us see the happiness and duty of such as live under the Gospel,

Let us see our happiness.
1. The happiness of Christians, for though all that I have said in the first
Inference be true, yet our happiness is greater under the Gospel, then was
theirs under the Law, in many respects. God by those low administrations, in
his wisdom provided for the further advancement of Christ, and the Gospel,
which compared with the Law must be manifested in greater brightness and
glory. Christ the Son must come in more splendour then Moses the servant
Intelligitur de jis qui in novo Testamento ministri facti sunt Christi, ut
evangelij majestas supra lege^ and illud medium praeconium emineat. Calv. in
Mat. 11.11. Dr. Tailor in Types. John 1.17. opened.
Mat. 11.11. From the days of John the Baptist until now the Kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it away by force, and he that is
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, ( soil. under the Gospel) is greater then
John; And we are Ministers not of the letter only, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.6. But most clear is that Job. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ; The Gospel is called Grace, not because under
the Law the same Grace was not preached; but comparatively, that was scarce
Grace to this; There was Grace, but here is more Grace; Let us open it in five
particulars.

Velatus in veteri, revelatus in novo Testamento.
1. More grace in regard of manifestation, they had the dawning of the morning,
but we the light at noonday; Nay, the light of the Sun is sevenfold, and
like the light of seven days, as was prophesied, Isa. 30 36. All things
concerning our salvation are more clearly discovered Col. 1.26. The Apostle
terms the Gospel a mystery, which had been hidden since the world began, and
from all ages, but now is made manifest to the Saints. q. d. God has now
opened his whole heart to his Saints; He whispered things darkly to them, but
now speake^ them loudly and clearly to us N^m illae Revela^^^nes Propheticae
erant instar Lucernae splendontis in obscuro loco, sed praedicationes
evangelicae sunt instar solis medio die radiantis. Joan Davenant Episc. Sarish.
expos. in Coll. 1.26. Scriptura Sol animae, nullis celatum est evangelium, lux
est communis omnibus, nullus est in verbo Cimmerius. Clemens Alexandrinus in
Protrept. In jis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt inveniuntur illa omnia
quae continent fidem, moresque vivendi. Augustinus de Doct. Christ. lib. 2.
cap. 9.


2. In Impletion and accomplishment; That which before was held forth in a
Promise and Prophecy, as matter of expectation and desire, to us is become a
Performance, and fullfilling, and so a ground of acquiescence and rejoicing.
Hope d^ferr^d makes the heart sick, and is as smoke to the eyes, or vinegar
to the teeth, but their expectations are our exultations. Acts 13.33. And we
declare unto you glad tidings, how that the Promise that was made unto the
Fathers, God has fullfilled the same unto us their children Christus qui vitae
aeternae, and hono^u^ om^ium su^slantia est, illas tantum promissus crat, and
eum tanquam procul absentem expetchant, nobis datus ^st and Praesentem
obtinemus. Calvin.
.

3. By Indulgence; for the Jews had a burdensome and chargeable service in
the Ceremonial Law, but that now is abolisht by Christ. Act. 15.10. A yoke
which neither we nor our Fathers were able to be^re; But now we are invited
to come and take of Christ a yoke that is easy, and a burden that is light,
Erat quidem dura and laboriosa veteris paedagogiae servitus, sed de solis
ceremoniis cum non loqui facile colligitur. idem. Portare legem est legi morali
satisfacere ad justitiam. Erasmus Sarcerius in Acts 15.10.
Mat. 11.28.

4. In Extention and Apprehension by believers in all Countries; Before 'twas
confined to the Jews, and in Jewry only was God known Hoc novu^ and speciale
habuit Christi adventus, quod diruta maceria Deus promiscue totu^ mundum
amplexus est. Calvin. in Acts 10.35.
but now the Partition wall is broken down, and the Gospel is commanded to be
preached, unto every creature, Gentiles as well as Jews. Romans 1.16. and 3.29.
And the Grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto all men, Tit.
2.11. And now in every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness,
is accepted with him, Act. 10.39. Good news for us Gentiles, The Wilderness
is become as a watered garden.

5. In Perfection and wonderful growth of Faith and Grace in the hearts of
ordinary believers above them, by reason of the Erat and in Prophetis spiritus
sanctus etsi donum hoc contractu^ erat, et in Apostolis ante cruce^, sed non
sic ut post assumptionem, largus scilicet ac copiosus, it a ut fluminibus
comparari debuerit. Theophylact. in Joan. 7.39.
Plentiful effusions of the Spirit since Christ's ascension. Joh. 7.39. The
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified, i. e. Not so
much given. It Is true, some particular Saint, as Abraham might have a greater
measure of the Spirit then ordinary believers have under the Gospel. But now
the bulk of Believers have the Spirit of glory resting on them, and shining in
them. Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. Believers then for
the generality of them had but little of the Spirit; hence it is said Heb. 10.1.
; The Law was but a shadow of good things to come, not the Image and Truth it
self, viz. It had a rude and dark delineation of good things to come, as a
draug^ made by a Painter with a cole, but the Gospel exhibits the picture it
self in the flourish and Beauty, says Tailor Dr. Tailor in his Types.
that is, the Truth, and Being, the Glory, and Perfection thereof; Let Us see
our happiness in these five respects.

2. Let us know our Duty.
2. Let Us not only see our happiness, but consider our duty; Let me name five
particulars.

Ptolome was astonished at the 72 Interpreters, because being placed in sundry
Rooms, and never conferring not seeing one another, they did notwithstanding
write the same, not only for sense of matter, but sound of words upon the
self same Text, as Justin Martyr in Admonitorio.
Justin Martyr, and Augustine. de Civit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 42. Galatin. de
Arcanis. lib. 1. cap. 2.
others report, then how should we admire God in that divine concordance,
between the Prophets, and Apostles, who writing the word of God in diverse
places at diverse times and upon diverse occasions, do notwithstanding so
harmoniously agree, that they seem not, says Bellarmin de verbo Dei. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
Bellarmin, diverse Penmen, but only diverse pens of one and the same Writer.

Indeed the Apostles and Disciples, saw and heard those things that many
Prophets and righteous men desired to see and hear, but could not, Mat. 13.17.
But for us that live sixteen hundred years since the accomplishment; we have
as much need of Faith to believe these things are done, as they before Christ
had to believe they should be done; and yet to believe the History only is
nothing, (the very Devils do that) unless we can say with 1 Timothy 1.15.
Galat. 2.20.
Paul, He dyed for us, and gave himself for us, and that be came into the
world to save sinners, whereof we are the chief, etc.

Jews, that say the Prophecies are not fullfilled, but still expect the
Messiah. They pitied us Gentiles when they said, we have a little Sister has
no breasts, let us mourn for the Jews and say, We have an elder Sister has
no eyes. God has promised to restore them. Zach. 12.10. Jer. 20.21. Mat.
23.39. 1 Cor. 3.16. Romans 11.24. to 27. Note.
And God has miraculously preserved them for that end; For whereas sundry very
ancient People, and famous, as Persians, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Trojanes,
Vandales, Lombards, Goths, Saxons, Picts, etc. are either quite distinct or
destroyed, or else being severed and scattered, have not so held their own, as
to keep still their own Ordinances, and preserve themselves for their civil
life and Religion unmixt with other people whither they came; yet behold a
strange thing, and remarkable, says Beza, the Jews only notwithstanding their
great, and long dispertions, and calamities, do yet not only remain in
innumerable multitudes, but keep their Tribes distinct, and unconfounded, and
enjoy all their Ordinances, except sacrificing of Beasts, and will show you
their pedigree, and descent from Abraham; and doubtless says Calvin, they are
thus miraculously preserved against the time of their conversion, which now
will be visible to all. Aquinas, Pareus, and Pet. Martyr.
Others of the learned concur with Calvin herein. O therefore let us with
Beza be importunate with God to hasten their conversion, etc.

Psalms, Daniel, and the Revelation, which is not yet fulfilled, as Mat.
24.14. 2 These. 2.8. Romans 11.25. 1 Timothy 4.1. Acts 3.19. Isa. 65.17.
The Preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, the coming down of Antichrist, the
coming in of Jews and Gentiles (in the fulness) under the Standard of
Christ. His giving a time of refreshing to the Church, toward the end of all
things, when there shall be new Heavens and new Earth, in which shall dwell
righteousness, (spiritual, halcyon, glorious times indeed) and finally, his
second coming to judgment, when the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
rise, and all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. All this must come
to pass, and all this may be comprised in our comprehensive prophecy in the
Text, The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings See a
Tract of Mr. Geerings called A discovery of the vanity or iniquity of Judicial
Astrology, Published 1646.
.

5. And lastly, reject other Prophecies, and Predictions, which ensnare many
souls in our days; Leovitius in admonit. de usu Astrologiae.
Erasmus and Aulus Gellius. lib. 14. cap. 1. in sine.
Phavorinus disputing against Astrologians, conclude all Prognostications and
Predictions unprofitable, saying, if they foretell joyful news, they decrease
our future pleasures, if evil tidings they increase our present pain, the
fear of danger being often worse then the danger it self; besides this, all
Predictions of this kind, are vain, uncertain, and ambiguous, and miss
oftener then hit; but above all, they are sinful, and unlawful, either in the
maker, or receiver, and God will set his face against such, Lev. 20.6.2 Par.
10.13.2 Reg. 1.16. Peep not therefore into the Arc of Gods secrets, be willing
to go Gods pace, do not outrun Providence, but wait, wait I say, on the Lord;
and so much of that point: And thus having handled the Prediction of Christ, I
now come to the Description of him, The Sun, etc. The second Doctrine is this,
that

Jesus Christ is that glorious Sun, that with so much resplendent luster shines
out upon the Church. For,

Psalm. 84.11. The Apud Deum quide^ est sons vitiae, justitae, virtutis,
sapientiae, at sons nobis occultus and inaccessas, sed horum omniu^ copta nobis
in Christo exposita fuit, ut inde petere lic^at, ultro. enim ad nos fluere
paratus est si modo transitu^ illi fide demus. Call.
Lord is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace, and no good thing will
he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Mark, he no sooner calls God, in
Christ a Sun, but he talks of giving, and withholding nothing. And indeed he
makes all the Creatures participant of his goodness, he gives forth his light
unto the Saints, who are called Stars, Dan. 12.13. The lesser vesseils are
filled by him, and of his fulness we all receive Grace for Grace; Christ
has a sea of Grace, and glory, able to fill all our channells, like the
ointment (says Martin Hoc adu^bratum est per Aaronem qui d^^ in Sacerdo^e^
consecraretur, perfusus est oleo super caput, quod praenimia abu^dantia in
barbam and oram vestimenti ejus defluxit sic, etc. Mart. Bucer Joan. 1.16.
Bucer) which being poured out on Aarons head, trickled down to his Beard, and
the very hemme of his garment: So that divine, and rich anointing of the
Spirit, which was in such abundance poured out upon our head Christ, flows
down to all his members: God in Christ is a general, a communicative good, the
word here used is Schemesch, the Minister of God, viz. the Sun which imparts
and ministers light and heat: for the word ( Sam. Torsh. in Mal. 4.2.
says Torshel) is of Schamasch, to serve or minister to God or men, according
as the Syriack version of the new Testament uses this word Matthew. 20.28. The
Son of Man came not that he might be ministered unto, but ( Deneschtammesch
(...).
) that he might minister. Christ does benignly impart grace and glory, a
Fountain he is, and that opened, Zach. 13.1.

2. The manner is observable, Sol non expectat preces, sed statim refulget, and
omnibus videntibus lucem vitvmque affert, ita Christus prior dilexit nos, and
cum inimici essemus praevenit sponteque sua maximis beneficiis ditavit and
ditat. Corn. a Lapide in Mal. 4.2.
they are not brought by violence or attractives, or any art or diligence of
man, but come of their own free motion; and surely all that Christ does, is
freely, without money, or without price, he justifies without the concurrence
or help of our merits, he is not moved by any thing in us, but his own good
will and pleasure, Beneplaciti nomen omnia merita diserte excludit. Calv.
Ephesians. 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 11.6.

Object. I but the violent take heaven by force.

Sol. It Is certain: but this force is not offered on God, but themselves and
the world, Violentes rapere regnum coelorum, est regni Christi cupiditate adeo
flagrare, ut vitam and omnia quis contemnat modo particiceps sit Evangelii, and
regni coelorum civis. Mart. Bucer. in Matthew. 11.12.
whereby they master all impediments and difficulties that else would hinder
them from heaven, and this not in their own strength, but Christ's.

Next, the Sun communicates his beams suddenly many times in an instant. Have
you not seen the Sun mufled with clouds, suddenly show himself, and in the
twinkling of an eye, disperse his beams? Christ also can suddenly give out
comfort to the soul, not Luke 17.24.
only his second coming in glory, but his coming in grace may be compared
to lightning, which flashes suddenly. Nihil fulgore celerius. Erasmus in Matthew.
24.27.
So Erasmus and Calvin expound Matthew. 24.27. The Gospel was suddenly scattered
over the world, grace and joy is oftentimes suddenly infused into the heart.
It Is said, Psalm 85.8.
God will speak peace unto his people. q. d. Look how easily and quickly you
can speak a word, and with like facility and celerity can Christ give his
grace, and let out the discoveries of himself to us. Thou that have long
waited for comfort, remember this, Christ can, and may suddenly show himself
unto you, when you are ripe for comfort, and his set time is come to do it, he
will not be long about it, comfort may come next moment: We are but Praecones,
Criers, Publishers of the Gospels glad tidings, but your inward peace and rest
must drop from the clouds. It Is a new creation, and if God say of a dark soul,
Let there be light, there shall be light, and that suddenly; nay, Christ can
cure Nations in an instant, Jer. 18.7.
Jer. 18.7. It Is but giving the wheel a turn, and the Potter can new make us:
for we are as clay in his hands, and though never so out of shape, he can soon
mend us, Isai. 64.8.

Again, the Sun communicates his beams impartially, and universally: For the
Sun shines on the just and unjust, Matthew. 5.45
Matthew. 5.45. The Lord Jesus is impartial, he is no respecter of persons, But
in every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted; he
shines more or less on all Saints: Nay, he enlightens every man that comes
into the world, John 1.19. that is, So Musculus and Calvin on John 1.9.
every man that comes into the old World with reason and understanding; and
every one that is new born, and comes into the new world, with grace and
comfort, sooner or later: Nay, he offers himself unto every sinner, and
reprobates keep the shuts of ignorance fast pined, lest the light should come
in, because their deeds are evil. In a word, God by his omnipresence and
providence (says Ambrose) shines (like the Sun) every where, and in all places
of the world De sole non dubitas quod ubique resplendeat, de Deo dubitas quod
non ubique fulgeat? Ambrose
. And then

Lastly, the Sun sheds his beams not sparingly, but abundantly; the Sun when
he shines can as easily fill a vast Palace, as a small closet with light, and
so Christ deals liberally, and upbraids not; he gives wisdom and much wisdom,
light and much light, James 1.5.
Iam. 1.5. Of his fullness we receive grace for grace, as it is in John 1.16.
viz. Grace in abundance. The metaphor (says Hunnius) is taken from the
overflowing Fountain, that poures out water in abundance, and yet remains
full: the same says Metaphora desi^mpta est ab exuberante aliquo sonte, de quo
licet subinde haurias, nunquam tame^ exhaurias, Aegidius Hunnius in Joh. 1.16
page 70.
Thesphylact. Brethren, Christ can as eafily fill the most widened, enlarged,
capacious heart with E^^luens plenus manet, Theophy^act* in locum.
grace, and joy, as the slender narrow mouthed, straightened soul. Thou have
got but a little grace, or but a little comfort, what is the reason? and where
lies the fault? Is the Spirit of God straightened? Surely no, Mich. 2.7. Does
the Fountain in God fail? Is his hand shortened, or his heart niggardly? No,
no, the fault is in thy lelf, thy Arms are pinioned, thy mouth sewed up by sin
and Satan, or else you strive to drink in the cracked dish of your own merits or
inventions, so that Christ may say as Paul, 2 Cor. 6.12. Ye are not straightened
in me, but in your own bowels 2 Cor. 6.12. Ye do not comply, ye do not
reciprocate. Trap.
Open your mouths wide (says God) let me alone to stop them with good things.
For though your hunger and thirst after righteousness be increased, and your
hearts and desires enlarged, though you pull down your old barnes, your old
thoughts and aims, and build bigger, yet I will replenish them and satisfy
them: For ye shall be filled with all the fullness of God. Will that content
you? Ephesians. 3.19.

Quicquid lucidum est in coelo and in terra aliunde mutuatur splendorem suum,
at Christus lux est ex seipso and per se refulgens deinde irradians totum orbem
suo fulgore, ut non alia sit usquam origo vel causa splendoris Calvinus in
Joh^n in 1.9.
Thus you see now Christ communicates himself: all things receive of Christ,
but Christ has a fullness in himself, M^one and Stars borrow light of the
Sun, the Sun has fullness of light in himself, so has Christ. And yet
the Sun is always communicating out of that sulnesse, so is Christ, and the
manner is remarkable, freely, suddenly, generally, and abundantly. That is the
second thing.

Sol, quia solus. There are many Stars, but there is only one Sun: there
is but one Sun of righteousness, but one Savior, Vnicus vitae author est,
quod Papistae fatentur sed dum tot adminicula confingunt, vix centessima^
salutis parte^ illi faciunt residuam. Idem in Acts 4.12.
Acts 4.12. Christ is become the head of the corner, neither is there salvation
in any other, for there is none other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved. But one high Priest, but one master of Requests in
heaven, neither good works, nor yet Angels or Saints are Co-saviors with
Christ, they are not joined in commission either in point of satisfaction, or
intercession. Suetonius says, Suetonius.
that when Augustus Caesar either out of humility or policy, desired the
Senate would adjoyne two Consuls with him, Sol quia solus Cicero de not, Deorum
lib, 2.
for the better government of the State. The Senate answered, That they held it
as a diminution of his dignity, and a disparagement of their own judgment, to
join any with so incomparable a man as Augustus. And surely friends, it would
much derogate from the worth of Christ, and lay folly to our charge, if we
should join ought with Christ, either in redemption or invocation: He alone
trod the Wine press of his Fathers wrath, he only is able to intercede
between a guilty sinner, and an angry Judge: He is fitted and accomplished in
all respects, so that having him, we need no other, and all believers may say,
To whom shall we turn, or whither shall we go, but unto thee, thou have the
words of eternal life. Saints cannot hear us, Angels cannot help us, good
works will not avail us, it is Christ only that can save us: let filly
Papists say what they will, at last they must confess this. Bellarmine having
long argued for justification by works, concludes it is safest to rest on Christ
only; and Acts and Monuments, fol. 953.
William Tracy Esquire, in Hen. 8. time, made it in his Will, that no Masses
should be said at his Funeral, for he trusted in Christ only, and hoped by him
to be saved, and not by any Saint, etc. Hereupon his body was taken up and
burnt as an Heretic, Anno Domini 1532. You see Christ admits no rivals, or
Divide si potes Arriane solemn, and tum demum divide Trinitatem. Aug. Sermon. 1.
de verb. Apost.
sharers; as there is but one Sun, so there is but one Savior; there are many
stars, many adopted Son^, but not a begotten son besides him, John 1.18. 1
John. 4.9.
He is the only begotten Son of God, and so the only Sun of the Church,
we acknowledge no other: One is our Master (and so one is our Savior) even
Christ, Matthew. 23.8. Math. 23.8.
and but one God.

Job 9.7. both for its rising and standing still, going back or going down; the
Titelman in Job. 9.7.
Sun does all by order and appointment from God, and so did Christ, he spoke
not by himself, or of himself, but all he did by virtue of his Fathers
Commission, and he came about his Fathers business, John 5.30.36. And we read
when he prayed the Father, that the Cup might pass from him, still he put in
this, Not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26.39. And so in all things he
was guided by his Fathers will, and came into the world to Haec vox est seipsum
dede^tis atque offerentis in plenum obsequium Deo. Pelicanu.
do it, Heb. 10.7. Lo, I come to do thy will, O God.

Object. Socinians urge it as an argument against his Deity and coequality with
the Father. They discourse thus, He that does nothing of himself, but is
altogether at the will and appointment of another, is inferior to him whose
will he obeyes. But -- John 5.19.30. Ergo.

Sol. John 5.22. it is said, The Father judges no man. i. e. not alone, but by
the Son: the Son does all things, the Fathers will going before, not in time
and nature, but order of persons, and this society and order of divine
operations, does not abolish but establish the equality of persons. Quatenus
est filius hominis omnia a patre accepit, quatenus vero est Dei filius omnia a
se ipso habet. Muscuius in Johan. 5.26.
So that although the Son be guided by the Fathers will, and in point of
subsistence depends on the Father, as the rivolet on the Fountain, yet this is
no disparagement to Christ, and still he counts it no robbery to be equal with
the Father; Consult John 5.26.

a great light, Genes. 1.16. And it is questionless the greatest of all the
celestial bodies. Anaxagoras held the Sun much greater the^^ Peloponesus,
country in Greciae Plut l. ^. de placitis Philosoph. cap. 21.
Anaxim inder to be as ^igge as the earth: but since Mathematicians have found
that it exceeds the earth in bigness 166 times See how Ambrose demo^^trat^^
the Sumres magnitude, lib. 4. Hexamen. c. 6.
, and none of the other stars of the first magnitude (whereof there are 15.)
to exceed the earth above 18. times; and yet this vaste Body shows but little
to the eye, because a man's sense cannot comprehend the dimensions by reason of
its huge distance from us, which Eratosthenes affirms to be an hundred
thousand thousand, and five hundred thousand miles from the earth. But not to
stand on curiosities, you see the Sun is of a wonderful magnitude. Let me
allude to this, Jesus Christ is very GREAT in his power and goodness, Titus
2.13. See that Socinus confounding Text, Christ is there called the Great God,
Christ is thus great without quantity, his magnitude is unmeasurable, and there
are no bounds or limits to his greatness, David says, His Greatness is
unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. For he fills heaven and earth, Christum ideo ma^num
no^^i^ (...) ejus magnitudo (quam nunc inani mundi ful^^e exe^^^ (...) nes
extenuant ac interdum quoque quantum in se e^^ ex^n^^^ (...) se proferet; mundi
enim species dum magna oculis nostr^^ (...) oculos perstringit ut Dei gloria
quasi in ten^b^s la^^t (...) adventu suo fumos mundi omnes dis^utiet, ut nibil
amplius o^^ (...) riae suae splendorem, nihil amplitudinem diminuat. (...)
Jer. 23.24. And ve^ how little is Christ in the worlds eye? Surely they which
dote upon the glory of the world, and make Sense the Judge, will have low
thoughts of Christ: Christ is at a distance, he stands a far off from the
proud, but he is nigh unto such as are of a broken heart, Psalm 38.18. For they
are made nigh by his blood, and the more they believe, the nearer they approach
to him, Romans 13.11. and so the more they discover and admire his greatness
with the Psalmist, The greatness of God is his Majesty or power, Deuteronomy. 3.24.
and 9.26. and 32.3. Exodus 15.16. 1 Par. 17.19 Luke 1.49. Psalm. 97.11. and
145.3, 6. Ainsworth on Psalm 150.2.
Thou art great, O Lord God, and there is none like unto thee.

6. The Sun has a d^zeling brightness and splendour, so that no creature can
behold it for a long time, with a st dfast and undazeled eye but the Eagle; no
man can behold it with a fixed eye, unless he look downward, and see it in
the w^^e, thick and gross medium, so that what is said of the Spouse, is much
truer of Christ, Cant. 6.10. He looks forth a^ the morning, he is fair as the
Moon, clear as the Sun, etc. he is of such amazing brightness, and
resplendent luster, and astonishing beauty, that were we to view him in his
glorious Being, our eyes would dazzle and wink at it. Tantus enim e facie Domi^^
fulgor emicabat ut ne mentes quidem ipsae purissimae, at que beatissimae, illam
intueri possent, nisi quemadmodum nos, cum volumus intueri solemn oculis manum
opponimus, ita and illae oculos suos binis alis utrinque sublatis, hoc est pio
me^u and verecundia immensae majestatis adumbrarent. Osor. in Isal. 6.2. fol.
22.
For the Angels are glad to skreen their faces with their wings, and cry, Holy,
holy, holy, the world is full of thy glory. As the picture of the Sun upon a
Table, comes short of the Sun in its orb, so the Son it self 01 comes
infinitely shorter of Christ. Nay, let us imagine says Sam Rutherford in his
survey of Christ's loveliness p. 292.
one, that millions of Suns were all massed and framed into one Sun, and the
sense of seeing, and faculty of understanding that are in all mankind were
contracted into one man, and that the Lord should set Christ by that Sun in his
glory and splendour, Acts 26.13. Rev. 1.16.
why truly that Sun comparatively would be a Globe of darkness, and that eye
could not view Christ's Glory, nor that understanding comprehend it. But though
carnal men cannot see Christ and live, see Christ and rejoice, Sicut Sol
Aquilarum oculos vegetat nostros sauciat (ait Augustine de moribus Manich lib.
2. cap. 8.) Ita Christus justorum mentes acuet and vegetabit aeternum; impiorum
vero animos oculosque sualues excaecavit. Cor. a Lapide in Mat. 4. p. 355.
yet Eagle-eyed souls (such are believers, Matthew. 24.28.) they shall through
Christ, look upon God in the clouds, and behold him face to face, and the
object shall be suitable and delightful; nay, in this life we may look
downward and see this Sun in the paile of water, Christ in our flesh, Christ in
the Word and Ordinances, Christ in the image of his children, and so he is
visible; and yet therein most lovely: For he is the express image of the
Father, and the brightness of his glory. Heb. 1.3

And thus the light of the knowledge of the Dum igitur audimus filium esse
splendorem gloriae pa paternae, sic apud nos cogitemus-gloriam patris esse
nobis invisibilem donec in Christo refulgeat. Calv. in Heb. 1.3.
glory of God, is given us in the face of Christ, that face that is white, and
ruddie, in whose cheeks are beds of spices, his eyes like Doves eyes, his looks
bushy, and his lips like Lillies, fairer then the sons or daughters of men,
the chiefest of ten thousand; O his countenance is as Lebanon, he is altogether
lovely, Heaven's in his smiles, This is our beloved, and this is our friend, O
daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 5.

When Christ gives the soul a glimpse of himself, it cannot but say that the
beauty of Creatures is ugliness, and deformity to Christ, and the best and
highest comparisons and expressions are created shadows, which come infinitely
short of Christ; If I had the tongue of men and Angels to describe him, it
would be as deep silence to Christ's showing of himself to you; And when you
have viewed and gazed upon Christ with all greediness to eternity, believe
this; There will remain unseene treasures of loveliness and glory in Christ
In his transfiguration very glorious. Matthew. 17.2. much more in Heaven.
Plato speaking of God could say; He was the horn of plenty, and the Ocean of
Beauty; He is like the lovely Rose of Sharon. O it is a ravishing sight to see
this King in his Beauty Isa. 33.17.
Isa. 33.17. It Is a changing, transforming sight, is casts down certain rays,
and sparkles of glory, on them that view it 2 Cor. 3.18. Rev. 4.6.
2 Cor. 3.18. Angels have eyes within and without, Rev. 4.6. But here is fuel
enough to feed them all, and they cannot get their eyes pulled off from Christ;
Sinners no sooner see him, but they are sick of love, and ready to fall into a
swound, cry, Stay us with Flaggons, and comfort us with Apples! Cant. 2.5.
Tully tells us of Zeuxis, that being to draw the Picture of Helena (I think for
the Temple of the Crotonians) he caused diverse comely Virgins to stand before
him, that as a Garland out of several flowers, from all their features, and
complexions, he might draw one perfect Beauty; and thus the industrious Chymick
extracts a little Gold, out of much course mettle; should I imitate that
Painter, or this Chymick, set all the delights and glories of the world before
me, and put them all together, or extract somewhat amiable and excellent, out
of all the dross and dung here below, as Paul calls it; all would not be able
to coin in your hearts, an Idea of Christ, you would still rest unsatisfied, and
walk in darkness, unless the Spirit would reveal Christ unto you, as he did
unto Paul, Gal. 1.16.

To conclude this, Genesis 39.6.
Joseph was herein a Type of Christ, it is said he was a goodly Person, and
w^^^ favored, Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.
and though bodily beauty is a gift of God, yet says Austin, he was fairer
within, then without; Well, herein he was a type of Christ as well as in the
other things; For Joseph was set Gloria Christi ineffabilis, et exact in bujus
vitae infirmit ate sciri nequit, sed quando videbimus Christum a sacie ad
Faciem. Gerhard. Tom. 9. De vita aeterna.
Pulchrior in luce cordis, qua^ facie corporis. Aug.
over the whole Land in general, the Kings house in special; so Christ is
Lord over the whole world, but chiefly of his Church, which is called Gods
Family Ephesians. 3.15. Galat. 16.10.
Joseph had the custody of the Kings Garner, and therewith fed all Egypt, and
other Nations, and Christ has all the fulness of God, wherewith he
spiritually feeds Jews and Gentiles, Believers of all Nations, that come with
empty sacks, and hearts to him.

viz. It discovers the worlds beauty, it is that makes all things appear so
lovely, and amiable; the fairest, and most lovely objects, is Pictures, etc. if
set in the dark, afford no pleasure, no delight, nor contentment. Christus
omnia n^va luce rova vita, no^apu Ch^^^udiue exornat. Cornelius A Lapide in
Mat. 4.2. Page 355.
Christ also is the Beauty and Ornament, both of souls, Nations, I and Heaven
it self.

1. Of souls, Christ is the beauty of your souls, and mine; Jeremy's dungeon,
dark, and miery, and so are your souls ignorant, and deformed, till Christ
shines in upon you; All outward comforts, or natural parts, or secular
learning, or Scripture-knowledge, cannot make a soul appear beautiful to
God, or good men, till Christ shines; unless the Apostles had been illuminated
by this Sun within, they had been darkness it self, says Nisi Apostoli p^r
hane lucem illuminatisu^ssent, prorsus Ten^brae essent. Muse in Joh. 1.9.
Musculus.

2. As Christ is the beauty and ornament of souls; so of Nations: Where pure
Ordinances are administered, there is the beauty of Holiness; and on all such
Glory, Lament. 4.1.
God will be a Defense: When Christ sits upon his Throne, then is a Nation
happy; Though a Land should abound with mines of gold, mountains of Pearl, and
Rivers of Nectar, and were another Paradise, yet if Christ, and Gospel, and
Ordinances were not there, the Inhabitants might cry Ichabod, for the glory is
departed; But then if Christ is there, what can be wanting? Haggai prophesied
that the second Temple should be far more glorious then the first, not that it
should be so adorned as the former, but that Christ was to be and preach there;
God has given Christ, and the Word to us, he has given to other Nations other
blessings; To the Muscovites hides, and precious skins; to the Moors of
Barbary Sugar, and sweet spices; to the Spaniards Wine, and fruits; to the
Indians gold, and silver; to them of Cathai, Pearls and precious Stones; to
the Persians silk, and Margarites; to them of Finland, Greenland, fish and
fowls; but to us he has given Christ, and his Gospel, and all other things
needful for us; Oh blessed be the day, and happy be the hour, wherein they
came to us; Let that day be as the day wherein Israel came out of Egypt; if
we had more tongues then Argus had eyes, if every hair of our heads, says
Sam. Otes on Jude.
one, were a life, and every life longer then Methuselah's, all were too little
to praise God for this mercy.

3. Ibi verus Sol justitiae mira suae pulchritudinis visione omnes reficiet, it
a universos coelestis patriae cives illuminat ultra omne^ solis nostri
splendorem. August. in Manuali. cap. 7. Visio Christi est tota vita aeterna, si
mali Dei faciem viderent poenis carerent. Idem lib. de Spiritu, and Anima, in
cap. 55.
As Christ is the beauty and ornament of souls, and Nations, so of Heaven it
self; As you see Rev. 21.23. The glory of the Lord does lighten it, and the
Lamb is the Sun there: Now when Christ shines out in his full splendour, and
has a constellation of lesser Suns round about him: This makes those streets
paved with Diamonds, to sparkle gloriously by reflection; Indeed the
brightness of this place is unconceivable, says Chrysostom, we that sleep
in dark holes cannot apprehend it; But all this amazing light and glory flows
from the face of Christ, the Sun of righteousness. Brethren, Heaven it self,
would be an obscure place, if God and Christ were not there; He is the Crown
of Crowns, the Glory of Glories, and the Heaven of Heaven. Luther in Genes.
Luther said, he had rather be in Hell with Christ, then in Heaven without him;
and Paul desired to be dissolved, and be with Christ; He well knew to be with
Christ was Heaven.

8. Sol cor coeli dicitur quia in medio. In medio ponitur ul vim sua^
undequaque diffundat, sic Alstedius.
The Sun by situation is in the midst of the Planets, three above him, and
three below him; Nature and the God of Nature has placed him in the middle
(for which many reasons are given) why so Christ was and is still in the midst;
When his parents sought him, they found him in the Temple, In medio Doctorum,
in the midst of the Doctors, disputing with them, Luke 2.46. When he was
crucified, they hung him between two thieves, and he was in the midst, Joh.
19.18. After his resurrection when the Disciples were assembled, Jesus came,
and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you, Joh. 20.19. Virtus in
medio consistit, and Christus in medio stat.
And still he is In medio Candelabrorum, In the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks, viz. The Assembly of Saints, Rev. 1.13. Now who this is that
walks there, and how described, you read afterward, His countenance shines as
the Sun, and it is the Son of Man, verse. 13. and 16. And now in glory he fits
upon a Throne of Gold, Angels and Saints innumerable are round about him,
Revel. 5.11. So that still Christ is in medio, in the midst; The center of all
our desires, and joys.

Suitable to the 12. signs of the Zodiac are the ^2 Articles of the Creed,
through which he passe^h: There was somewhat in Christ, and his motions to
answer all the signs. Pro Ariete est illa Mansueta Ovis quae ad Occistonem
ducitur; Pro Tauro continuus labor, and defatigatio: Pro Geminis duae Naturae
admir^biliter conjunctae; ubi Leo etiam e Triba judah, Cas^ imonia Virgmis,
Libra Justitiae, etc. Cresollius in Mystagogo. lib. 3. page 481.
, which is Strong, Swift, Constant, and Distinguishing.

Strong, for it is a Giant-like motion Psalm. 19.5. He rejoices as a strong man
to run his race; and he goes forth in his might, says Deborah, Judge. 2.21.
The motions of Christ are strong, and powerful, especially when he comes to
convert souls, to help his people, and avenge himself on his enemies. Isa.
63.1. He travails in the greatness of his strength, and is mighty to save:
This is plainly spoken of Christ, and his motions toward his church, he
travails in his strength, and who shall let, or hinder him? Now Sampson was
herein a Type of Christ, and that both in his Name, and Arm. 1. In his Name
(Sampson) whether with Jersome And so it is interpreted in that old Rithme;
Sampson dictus Sol little, Christus lux est electorum, Quos illustrat gratia.
you interpret it, Their Sun, or with Mercerius, A little Sun: Sampson
cheared the hearts of men, in those dark, and sad times of Idolatry, and
oppression, yet he was but a little Sun in respect of Christ, whom he did
typifie, The Sun of righteousness, who is so exceeding great, and glorious,
that God thought fit to inure the peoples eyes by looking first on a lesser
light, John the Baptist (who is presently foretold after my Text, and was
before Christ arose, a burning and shining light) 2. As Samps^^ was a type of
Christ in his Name, so in hi^ Arm, in his Strength, for Samson grew, and the
Spirit waxed strong in him, so as he became a Savior of incomparable strength
Thus Jesus Christ grew, in stature, and in favor, with God, and man, and the
Spirit was so strong in him, (because unmeasured) that he became a Savior too
strong for Infernal Powers, he slew that roaring Lion the Devil Et
Christianorum processit examen instar apum. August. de Temp. Sermon. 107.
, and subdues our lusts, he laid heaps upon heaps, and destroyed more enemies
by his death, then life Vide Dr. Tailors Types. Pa. 55. to 59.
. In these and many other things was Sampson a type of Christ. Again,

As the Suns motion is strong, so it is Sol tam velox est ut 24 horis
conficiat milionem milliarium and insuper 140 milliacorunde^. Musculus.
swift, he makes have, says Solomon, Eccles. 1.5. As one that runs a race
for a wager, Psalm. 19.5. And indeed we may well wonder, that so vast a Globe
of fire, should be hurried round the heavens in a day, and not set the whole
world afire with the swiftness of its motion; and yet if you behold it, it
seems to stand still, etc. The motions of Christ the Sun of righteousness,
are swift, and speedy, he flies with healing in his wings; The word says
elsewhere, that he flies on the wings of the wind, and skips like a young Roe:
But Christ never makes more have then when he comes to the relief of his
people; Though it may be led by sense, we think he stands still, and has
forgotten to be gracious.

Next, The Suns motion is Solemn hunc intueamur and videamus number quid defor
mitatis (aut debilitatis) ex toto seculorum senio contraxerit. Idem in Psalm.
93. Page 706.
constant and unwearied, Psalm. 89.36. His seed shall endure for ever, and his
Throne as the Sun before me: The Sun is ever in motion, once he stood still,
not to ease himself, but for his Creators pleasure; The Sun does not tire nor
spend himself by his motions; It Is so here, Christ's motions are continual, he
is ever in motion for his peoples good, by Providence, and Grace; He is
indefatigable, and unwearied in doing of us good, for all his layings out do
not spend him, he is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever; Once more,

The Suns motion is distinguishing, Differencing times and seasons, day and
night, winter and summer, spring and autumn, are according to the access and
recesse of the Sun: So Christ's motions make great difference of times with
persons, It Is summer, or winter, joy and sorrow, according to Christ's coming,
and going. Consult, Psalm. 104.28, 29, 30. You see the wonderful motion of the
Sun, which is strong, swift, constant, and distinguishing.

Peccatores dormientibus similes. 1 These. 5.6. Anastas.
sleep, So Christ, and his discoveries rouse us out of security, and the
pleasant dreemes of sin; As the Converts, Acts 2. that cried, What shall we
do? Paul was asleep till this light shone round about him, then he cried, Lord
what will thou have me to do? Darkness is a great provocation to sleep, and
therefore we shut up windows, draw and pin our Curtains for that end; So here,
the unconverted Gentiles that sleep in sin, are said to sit in darkness,
and the shadow of Death; But now when the Sun of righteousness shines in, this
awakens, and raises us, crying, Noctem vocat ^gnorationem Dei, qua quicunque
detinentur veluti in nocte dormiunt; Lut^m vero sive Diem nominat Divinae
veritatis revelationem, per quam Sol Justitiae Christus nobis exoritur. Calvin.
in Romans 13.12. Romans 6.21. Shame is the companion of sin, and blushing is malae
causae bonum signum: Nemo debet dormire, solemn cernens. Chrysostom. Play not
the Porcupines, that sleep out the day. Eusco. Nieremb. Not. Hist. lib. 7.
cap. 51. page 123.
Now it is high time to awake out of sleep; The night is far spent, the day
is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light, Romans 13.12. And so,

As the Sun makes Candles, or Fires, as it were ashamed to burn, so Christ,
and his love, shames us out of sin, and puts out the fire of lust, and makes
the dim Candles of carnal reasons to go out Cor. 1.19, 20.
.

Psalm. 19.6. Apostolus dictione usu's est ex quadam excoriatae Ovis Metaphora;
Nam ut illu cu^ demitur tergus, vel jugulo culter infigitur, and enectae demum
a collo pellis devellitur, interiora cuncta nudantur, and patent, haud secus
and Deo universa quae in terris geruntur, vel animo concipiuntur, vel mente, ut
aperta, and enudat a mox innotescunt. Theophylact. in Heb. 4.13.
All things are naked to Christ, and his eye is every where, he Mat. 6.4.
sees thee in thy closet, as well as open field, he is present by his workings,
in every corner of the Earth, yea of Heil Psalm. 139.8.
, and he searches the heart, and reins Jer. 17.10.
.

Sol and calorem, et colorem nobis impertit. Aen. Sylv.
darkness, which is full of error, terror, etc. Though like that darkness in
Egypt which might be selt Exodus 10.21.
. The darkness was exceeding great, not moved at Junius.
Artificial lights, and the air was thickened Perer.
with gross mysts, and vapors, that it might be felt: This Origin mystically,
but fitly applies to those thick mysts and fogges of ignorance, in which
unregenerate ones are inveloped till Christ shines; It sets forth, says Ferus,
the spiritual darkness of their souls: Brethren, Christlesse souls are very
dark, yet no heart so sottishly ignorant, but Christ can inlighten it, and
instruct Olim non modo Tetrici and Fuliginosi sceleribusque commaculati, sed
ipsae Tenebrae eratis. Bullinger. in locum. ubi non lucet Dei claritas, ni^il
est praeter horrendam caecitatem. Calv. Quod de Tropo tenebrae diximus, etia^
de lucis vocabulo intellige^ du^ est, nimirum, quod sa^cti lux, id est lucidi
facti, du^ per Christi spiritum edocti sint. Gasper. Megander. In locum.
it; Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are light. Mark all in the
Abstract, not dark, but darkness, not enlightened, but light; here is a change
indeed: So in that 1 Pet. 2.9. Who has called you out of darkness into his
marpellous light. in your unregeneracy, you sat fettered with Egyptian
darkness, but now Christ shines, You are called on a sudden into a mavelous
light; Many say they are not book-learned, but the truth is, they are not holy;
I knew one that lived in desperate ignorance 40 years, yet afterward when the
Sun of righteousness shined in upon her, she soon learned to read, searched
the Scriptures day and night, and quickly attained a vast proportion of
knowledge; No soul too dark and ignorant for Christ to enlighten.

Duplicem illuminationem ponit, unam evangelij, alteram arcanam quae fit in
cordibus. Calv. in 2 Cor. 4.6.
light is not seen, but by it self, and its own rays; darkness cannot
discover it. Job. 1.5. And the light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. Only Christ can discover himself to the soul; if we
mean to see him, we must plough with his heifer, and then in his light, we
may see light, Psalm. 36.9. For he gives us the light of the knowledge of the
Glory of God in the face of Christ, as it is 2 Cor. 4.6.

healing in the Text; So Christ exhales, and dries up, the stinking sinkes of
sin, and mud of corruption, that else would poison and ruin his people, he
arises with healing in his wings.

filthiness; Christ is pure, he is a Sun of righteousness, though the
Creatures he has to do with are infected. Sin cannot infect Christ, though he
know it, see it, order it, yet he is not defiled by it. Christ can handle
Pitch, and escape pollution.

Non deserit, ettamsi deserere videatur. August.
Saints may have Grace when they want comfort from Christ: Hear the Cant. 3.2.
Spouse, I will seek him, whom my soul loves, when she lost, she still loved
him, and resolved to seek him. Hear Job 13.15.
Job, Though be slay me, yet will I trust in him, Psalm. 23.4. opened.
David likewise harpes upon the same string; Though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod
and thy staff they comfort me. Qui operatur ut accedamus, operatur ne
discedamus. August. de bon. persev. cap. 7.
Here are three things.

1. David a child of God reckons on such a time, when by dismal desertions,
he should take a Turn in the dark and damp valleys of the shadow of death.
i.e. be encompassed with dreadful terrors, and sor^ trials.

2. He resolves that in such a case he will fear no evil. q. d. I will not be
dismayed, and utterly confounded, and finke into the gulf of despair.

3. He gives the reason, and shows the hand that holds him, Thy rod and staff
comfort me (with such, Shephears used to guide and rule their flocks. Consult.
Levit. 27.32. Ezekiel 20.37. Mich. 7.14. Zach. 11.7, 8.
) Thou will teach, stay, comfort and uphold me in such a condition. The Saints
are bid to rest on God then, as you see Esaias 50.10. we may feel his Arm
sustaining of us, when we cannot see his face shining on us; we may have
assurance of adherence when we want assurance of evidence.

17. The Sun is useful to generation and production of fruits, Sol dicitur
esse anima mun di.
Sol and homo generant hominem; and the fruits of the earth are all fetched out
by the Sun, Deuteronomy. 33.14. It makes the plants which lay hid in their graves, to
peep out, and bear fruit: Non nulli dum coelum and mun dum animal putarunt,
cerebrum dixere lunam, cor solemn: certe ^acturi anima^l monstrum fecerunt.
Eusebius. Nierembergius Hist. Not. lib. 1. cap. 8. page 5.
Why thus we are regenerated and born anew by the Spirit of Christ: All the
precious fruits of the Spirit, as holiness, faith, love, joy, patience, etc.
they are all drawn forth by Christ; he is very profitable to every soul where
he is, he comes richly laden with blessings, and makes our spices to flow out,
Cant. 4.16. Good things in us lie dead and bound up, unless the Spirit let
them out, he cherishes the graces that are ready to dye: Cum nullum agens
secundum agat nisi in virtute primi. sitque earo spiritui perpetuo rebellis,
non potest homo licet jam gratiam conse quutus, per seipsum operari bonum,
absque novo auxilio Dei ipsum moventis, dirigentis and protegentis, quamvis
alia habitualis gratia, ad hoc ei necessaria non est. Aquinas. Doctor Sibs on
Cant. 4.16.
we need not only grace to put life into us at first; but likewise the fresh
in-comes of the Spirit to quicken and draw forth that grace we have.

Indurandi verbum non solum permissio onem, sed di vinae quoque irae actionem
significa Call. in Romans 9.18.
Thus Christ the sun of righteousness, softens some, and judicially hardens
others according to his pleasure, Romans 9.18. From good hearts that are like
beds of Spices, he exhales by shining on them, the sweet savor of
thankfulness; but the more Christ shines in a way of mercy to the wicked, the
more like Reynolds van. and vex. of Cap. 77.
dunghils they evaporate the filthy streams of ingratitude, sinning freely
because grace abounds. Thus Christ is set for the rising and falling of many.

Diogenes priz^d the Sunshine above any thing Alexander could give him, light
is sweet and pleasant, but darkness is uncomfortable and dismaying, and it
damps the spirits of men; but when the Sun shines, all the creatures seem to
smile together: when Christ the Sun Qui hac lae ^itia non effe ^untur supra
caelos, ut solo ^^^sto conten (...) ^mundum de ^^^ciant frustra (...) ^^^nt s^
habe^^ (...) ^^amabi^^^ Christi (...).
of righteousness breaks out of the cloud, Oh how sweet is his voice, and his
countenance is lovely! the sight of it is better then wine, or life it self i.
David says, Life up the light of thy countenance. And, Thou that sit
between the Cheruhims, shine forth. Psalm. 80.1. The soul that sees Christ
shining, and God smiling, has joy unspeakable and full of glory.

A saving of Heraclitus.
and they are all drowned and cannot appear when the Sun is up with his greater
glory. Brethren, it is not the Moonlight of Reason, the Starlight of
Ordinances, nor the dim Candlelight of Creature comforts, that can make day in
the soul if Christ be wanting. And as all the creatures are sensible of the
Suns absence, the Marigolds droop, and wrap up themselves, as unwilling to be
viewed by any eye but his; and the birds refuse to sing their pleasant notes:
So it is with the soul, no comfort in Christ's withdrawing, the Spouse is even
sick and dying, when Christ does not beam forth his love-rayes upon her. I am
bowed down and go mourning all the day long, says David, Psalm 38.6. But
hear Job, I went mourning without the Sun, (this may be meant of the Sun of
Gods favor) my Harp also is turned to lamentation, Job 30 28.31. The soul in
such a case hangs up the Harp on the willow-tree, she refuses to be comforted
by other Iovers; Deus ergo sol quo solo fruens, beat us fit cultor ejus, and
quo solo non sruens, omnis men's misera est, quaelibet realia perfruatur, Aug.
lib. 2. contra Faust. 5.
bring music, and friends, and contentments, etc. all is but the white of an
egg Quosdam deserit, quosdam deserere videtur, Amb. in Psalm. 118.
, if Christ the yelk (which is the Suns picture) be wanting: no true relish
or sweetness in any thing without Christ. But then when a soul is in a
storm, when environed with afflictions and temptations, then to miss Christ
is double misery. Paul describing his dangerous voyage to Rome; aggravates the
tempest thus; Then neither Sun nor Stars appeared many days, Acts 27. When
there are storms within, and tempests without, then to have no sight of
Christ, is irksome, to have no comfort without, nor within neither, this is N.
Lockyer in his useful instructions for these evil times. Sermon. 11. page 135.
sad.

But on the other side, when Christ the Sun of righteousness shines with full
face, with perpendicular rays, this drowns the lesser glory of Moon and
Stars, this darkens your outward comforts, which indeed are not worthy a
glance of your eye in respect of Christ: the soul that sees him, is in a
continual rapture, and with heart-siftings and leapings, sings, There is no
beloved like this beloved, he is the fairest of ten thousand: And then looking
upon other things, it counts all dross and dung for Christ (...), quasi (...),
quod prolicitur canibus Beza.
. (Not to dwell here.)

Sun cannot be totally Sol nunquam totus obscuratur, quod luna minor sit.
Arist
eclipsed, as the Moon may; because the Moon which interposes, is far less
then the Sun. It Is so here, let us not be overmuch dismayed when this Sun of
righteousness sets, Psalm. 30.5.
For though sorrow endure for a night, yet joy may return the next morning.
Jesus Christ may be eclipsed, but never totally (as the worlds comforts may;)
for though his face be hidden in great part, yet some crevice of light remains
to cheer and sustain the soul, Si impius es cogita Publicanum, si immundus
attend meretricem, si homicida prospice latronem, si iniquus cogita
blasphemu^, Peccasti? poenitere: millies peccasti? millies poenitere. Chrysostom.
Hom. 2. in Psalm. 50. Wherein Christ and the Sun differ.
because sin which interposes between Christ and us, is far less then
Christ; if sin abound, his grace will much more abound, for his mercy is
broader then our sin or misery.

Thus you have seen at large the resemblance opened between Christ and the
Sun, yet know that in some things they are unlike, especally five.

by Christ God made the Sun and world, and all things in it: Christ is from
everlasting, Prove. 8.25. Job. 17.5.

Rev. 3.8. Psalm. 36.9.
whereas Christ inlightens the hidden man of the heart, and gives Deus qui lux
est interioris hominis, plus illi praestat quam Sol oculo, nam Sol oculum ad se
conversum illuminat, aversum a se, and clausum deserit: Deus vero non solum
mentem ad se conversum illuminat, sed etiam mentem ad se convertit, quod lux
oculo non praestat. Augustine. contra Pelag. lib. 2. and cap. 5.
eyes as well as light: this Sun has healing under his wings, and among
other things he cures our blindness, Psalm. 146.8. The Lord opens the eyes
of the blind.

torrid Zone, and the Moore looks black with it: But no soul nor people can
have too much of Christ, nor can be tan'd and sunne-burnt here, but the more we
behold Christ, the fairer and clearer we shall be; So 2 Cor. 3.8. Indeed the
Spouse says, I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me. Cant. 1.6.
But She there speaks of the scortching Sun of affliction, not the
refreshing Sun of righteousness.

Agglutina^^r Domino, (...). 6.1^. ut ^^^^^et arctio^^^ esse coniun^^^onem
Christi ^^biscum quam viri cum uxore Call. Non tamen eo proficit haec conjunctio
ut illi efficiamur aequales. P. Mart.
Aspect, but evil by conjunction: Christ is good by aspect, but then the
sweetness and perfection of our amity, consists in conjunction, Heb. 2.11. Joh
15.5. Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32. Romans 12.5.
union and communion: we are made one with 1 Samuel 18.1. John. 4.16. Joh. 17.23.
Christ* by love Joh. 6.56. Ephesians. 3.17. Romans 11.20. Gal. 2.20.
faith, and the Romans 8.11. Gal. 4.6.1 Joh. 3.24. and 4.13.
Spirit, being joined to him, we are one with John 14.20.
the Father, Phil. 3.9. 1 Cor. 1.30. John 7.22.24
all that Christ is, has, is ours, and all our sins and miseries are his by
1 Cor. 5.21.
imputation and Heb. 4.15. Isai. 63.9.
sympathy. And being once joined to him, we can never be Romans 8.1.35.
separated from him. This is a glorious union and love-knot indeed, neither men
nor Devils can unty or dissolve it.

Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the world and all in it shall be burnt
up with fire Vbi lumen immensum, lumen incorporeum, lumen incorruptibile, lumen
incomprehensibile, lumen indeficiens, lumen inextinguibile, quod es tu Domine
Deus meus. Augustine in Soliloq. cap. 36.
. But Christ shall endure for ever. Both mentioned Rev. 22.5 And there shall be
no night there, and they need no candle, neither any light of the Sun, for the
Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever. Christ the
Mediator shall be King, and shine among the Saints to all eternity.

Object. But is it not said, at the end of the world, Christ shall deliver the
Kingdom up to the Father, 1 Corinthians. 15.24.28. Nonnulli offenduntur, cum
Christum audiunt Regnum traditurum Deo Patri-fingunt enim propter haec illum
esse long minorem. number existimant ita filium traditurum esse regnum ut illud
fibi non retineat: si hoc velint, cogentur eadem ratione statuere Patrem se
abdicasse universa potestate quando tradidit regnum filio, Mat. 11.27. P.
Martyr in 1 Cor. 15.24.
how then shall he continue to shine in his wonted splendour for ever?

Sol. Distinguish between the substance of Christ's Kingdom, and the form or
manner of administration: in the former respect it is absolutely eternal,
Christ shall be a Head, and a Husband, and a Rewarder of his members for ever,
and an Everlasting Father, for so Christ is called, Isa. 9.6. In the latter way
the Lord Christ shall keep his Kingdom as Mediator, till the last soul
belonging to the Election come into Heaven, and the doors are shut, and then
having no farther work to do, as Mediator, he shall surrender up the kingdom
to his Father I. Diodati, in his P^ous Annotations on the Bible opening that
place.
, and then the Father, Son, and Spirit, in unity of Essence, shall begin
immediately to reign over his Church, and fill all his, with Light, Love,
Life, and Glory; But think not, says Peter Martyr, 'twill disanull Christ's
greatness, to give up the Kingdom to the Father, for the Fathers Greatness
was not eclipst, when he first gave the Kingdom to Christ, Mat. 11.27. But
only the office of Mediatorship will now be shut up, and God will change the
meaner form of Christ's Kingdom, into more perfection, and beauty, which
Christ longed for, Job. 17.5. Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
Glory which I bad with thee before the world was! So that you see Christ has a
double Kingdom, Oeconomicall, and Essential, the former as Mediator, which he
resigns at the worlds end, the latter as God, which he possesses with the
Father, and the Spirit for ever; For of his Kingdom as God there shall be no
end, Luke 1.33. Heb. 1.8. When the extinguisher is clapped upon the Sun, Christ
shall continue to give light unto the Church, and that for ever; For the Lamb
is the Sun there, Christus erit Sol tu^s, ita ut lumen a Sole mutuari necesse
non sit, ne ergo mutationem ullam aut vicissitudinem rerum pertimescas, lucem
enim perpetuam, ac immutabilem habebis. Pignetus in Apoc. 21.23.
Rev. 21.23.

Let us come to the Inferences of this point.

First, Sol qui^ solus.
peculiar title, and character of Christ, then admire the impudence of
Antichrist, that man of sin, that can hear his flatterers, call him the Sun of
the world; Nay the Pope pronounces himself to be greater then the Emperor,
by so much as the Sun is greater then the Moon: Proud things have been done by
Popes, and said often: Sir R. Bark. his Sum. Bon. Page 110. 186. 199.
Pope Gregory the seventh, made the Emperor Henry the 4th stand three days,
and three nights, at his gates barefoote, in frost, and snow, to entreat for
Absolution; and Pope Alexander the third, made Frederick the Emperor at Venice
fall down, and ask him forgiveness, whilst he trod on his neck, applying that
Scripture to himself, Psalm. 91.13.
Super aspidem, and Basiliscum ambulabis. Never such fearful Tenets, as now,
concerning the Pope; That God ratifies what ever he does; that if the Pope does
at any time change his mind, it is presumed God does also change his; That
it is not lawful to appeal from the Pope to Christ; That the Pope may decree
against the Epistles of Paul, because greater then Paul; Nay it was disputed in
their Schools, whether he be a pure man, or as it were a God, and whether he
does not participate both Natures, Divine, and Humane, as Christ does. What
shall I say; All the Titles of Christ have been given to Pope^, as B^. Mourton
in his Book called, The Grand Imposture, Pa. 246, 247. 251, 252.
Bishop Morton shows; as, 1. The Bridegroom of the Church; This title was put
into the Miter 1300. An. This title peculiar to Christ, Joh. 3.29. Nemo
co^mitcit spons^m suom vicaris. Bern. Epist. 237. ad Sugenium Papam.
Bernard was much offended at the Popes presumption in this, Ministers are but
Paranymphs, or undersuitors for Christ, and the friends of the Bridegroom. 2.
Pope Innocentius the eight, was said to be in Royalty, and Unction above his
fellows; An attribute proper unto Christ, Heb. 1.9.3. Pope Paulus the second, a
Celestial Majesty. 4. Pope Pius the fourth, The voice, and Oracle of Truth;
proper to Christ, Job. 14.6.5. Pope Innocent the eight, (mentioned but now) One
above all Principalities, and Powers, and whatsoever is named in this, or the
other world, see Ephesians. 1.21. 2 These. 2.4.6. Pope Sixtus Quintus, called the
Corner stone in Sion, proved, pretlous, and chief foundation; proper to
Christ. Isa. 28.14. 1 Pet. 2.6.7. Pope Gregory the 13th, called Power, Might,
or Majesty of God on Earth: and again, Dominus noster Deus Popa.
Our Lord God the Pope. Lastly, for this Metaphor in the Text, as Athanasius
was anciently called the light of the Church, Basilius magnus (a Greg.
Nazianzeno) Orbis Lumen Sol inter sydera, Nazianzen in Orat. de Basil. Test
Baron. An. 371. number. 93.
and Basil, the great light of the world, and Sun among the Stars; So generally
the Title of Sun has been given to many Popes, by their cogging Parasites,
and blasphemous Flatterers.

Object. Some may say,

Sol. Herod at the day of Judgment, that the people cried out, Acts 12.22.
The voice of God and not man! He required it not; But ought to have sharply
reproved them, and did not: Simon Magus is not read to have required that
estimation, as to be called; The mighty Power of God, Acts 8.10. Besides it
cannot be denied, but that these Titles were used of Authors, in their
Dedicatory Epistles, and Personal Orations unto Popes, and were never reproved
for it; Nay whereas Pope Gregory 13th, as you heard, was called, Power, Might,
or Majesty of God on Earth, and our Lord God the Pope, himself authorized it
in the Papal Gloss.

And now having said somewhat of Popes blasphemous Titles, 'twere easy to say
as much of their wicked lives, which show them to be Devils Incarnate See M.
Cyprian Valera translated out of Spanish by John Golburn, Anno 1600. Treating
of the lives of the Popes.
: Innocentius the eighth, had 16 Bastards. John the 13th defloured Virgins, and
drank healths to the Devil. Gregory the ninth, a notorious liar. John the
eighth, a whore. Sylvester the second, for the Popedom gave body and soul to
the Devil. In a word, all of them from Boniface the third, An. Dom. 605. have
been blasphemers, murderers, and heretics, acting the part of the Antichrist;
That sits in the Temple, and has borns like the Lamb (which cannot be said of
the Turk) and he has exalted himself above all that is called God; Above
Kings, and Emperors, and Christ himsel^e Significat tamen Paulus, Christum
suis radiis, quos ante adventum suum emittet, tenebras in quibus regnabit
Antichristus, prosligaturum, quemadmodum Sol priusquam appareat nobis
irradiatione sua fugat noctis Te^cbras. Calvin. in 2 These. 2.8.
: But shortly it shall appear Antichrist is no Sun, but a blazing Meteor,
which shall fall as lightning from heaven, or rathe^ a Globe of darkness, and
ignorance, whom Christ the Sun of Righteousness shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming. AMEN.

Christ dwells in the Orb, and circle of the Sun, and is ascended no higher;
this was the opinion of the Manichaei solemn adorabant ut Deum imo censebant
ipsu^ and esse Christum, and ibi habitare filis virtutem. Aug. contr. Faustum.
li. 2. c. 6. Plinius (ex Homero) Soli dat clogia nimis augusta, and divina,
Plin. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Manichees, Hermians, and Passionists, as both Nazianzen and Austin affirm:
And this heresy, among others, is revived, and new dressed in these licentious,
and wanton times. The Scriptures they wrest and abuse to maintain this strange
opinion, are all those Allegorical Texts, that liken Christ to the Sun, such
as my Text, and likewise that place, Psalm. 19.4. which they read thus; He has
set his Tabernacle in the Sun; whence they infer, Christ dwells bodily in the
circle of the Sun, and there sits as in a fiery chariot.

The naming of this heresy is sufficient confutation, and yet because there
are who talk of such a thing, I shall speak four things to this point, to
show how ridiculous and absurd this opinion is.

1. If the body of Christ be still a true body, as they grant, then if it be in
the circle of the Sun, he has a solitary, hot, and uneasy habitation, so far
above the sublunary world, and below the seat of God, and blessed souls; Hot,
for the Sun is the fountain of heat, and warmes the whole universe; uneasy,
and restless, for the Sun is driven round the heavens in a day; But how a
glorified Christ can be in such an habitation, with such inconveniences, I see
not.

2. If this were so, and believed, 'twere the way to make us all Persians,
'twould soon create reverence toward such a glorious Creature, having such a
Guest; But God who gave his people such a charge, to beware of worshipping the
Sun, Deuteronomy. 4.19. And was so offended when 25. of them did it, Ezekiel. 8.16. He
would never put such a jewel there, as might draw the hearn and eyes of the
people to admire it above measure.

3. They wilfully mistake the Psalmist, for it is not, He has set his
Tabernacle in the Sun, but in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, as
your Translation and Ex quo soli disposuit tentorium in eis; scil. quarto
Creationis die. Genesis 1.16. Jun. and Trem. in Psalm. 19.4.
Junius renders it, viz. In the fourth day of the Creation.

4. It Is expressly said, Christ is ascended for above all Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10.
Therefore above the Orb of the Sun; which has many Orbs, and Heavens above
that; And Christ told the penitent Theife, that, that day he should be with him
in P^radise, and be sits down at ^he right hand of the Father, etc. Therefore
Christ, is not, cannot be in the Orb, and circle of the Sun, any otherwise
then he is every where, namely, by his Divinity.

you, pull down the shutts of wilful ignorance, and 'twill shine in you.

Those that live near the Articke Pole.
six months without the Sun, thousans are without Christ; many are exceeding
dark, and cold, as if they had never heard of Christ; Plus ethnicis prosecit
vitiorum ignoratio, quam in nobis cognitio v^rtutis. Just.
the twy-light of Nature has prevailed more with some Heathens, then the
Noontide of the Gospel, with many nominall Christians; But if the light of
Nature be enough to damn Heathens, and Typical light enough to damn Jews,
then you will be damned with a witness, that trade in sin, and ignorance Non
crimen Phoebus, noctua crimen habet.
in these days of dismantled light, and under this glorious Sun of
righteousness, you will be worse tormented then filthy Sodomites, and fearfully
beaten with many stripes.

Est and taliu^ poena Christus; lux enim est, and quid talibus tam invisum.
Bernard. de confid. lib. 5.
Egypt. Light is troublesome to such, but stand for the Gospel, and
Ordinances, and they will stand for you: Christ is refreshed, as a Giant to run
his race, it is not all the barking of dogs can hinder it, all the smoke that
comes out of the bottomless pit, shall not darken him long.

Next, viz.

1. Admire the beauty and splendour of this Sun; if the Persians were driven
to worship the Sun, how much more should we adore Christ, when all the
Angels of Heaven admire him, and worship him.

2. Open your hearts to receive his light, and glory in it; the birds chirp,
and all the Creatures, men, and beasts, seem to smile together when the Sun
shines Oecolampadius when he lay a dying, laid his hand on his heart, saying,
Hic sat lucis, here is light enough.
. Oh lets rejoice in the light of Christ's countenance kiss and embrace Christ,
and leap for joy when Christ shines.

3. Get your selves clothed with Christ righteousness, covered with his
rober, for then you will be Certe ecciesia quae Christum and ejus justitiam
induit, multo clarius illustratur quam aer a sole. Marlorat.
clothed with the Sun, and have the Moon under your feet, Rev. 12.1. Where
you have a lofty Poetical Description of Christ's imputed righteousness
imagine a garment were cut out of the Su^^ and put upon you, how glorious would
you be? Well, the righteousness of Christ is yours, and much more glorious.
See G^^ 3.27. 2 Cor. 4.21. Haec vera est servaru^ Christi^ota, si unius Christi
gloriae intenti coel ci^ despicient, and tanquam su^ p^^ bus habea^t. 1 Cor.
7.21.
And being thus araye^ behold the Moon is under your feet. i. e. y^^ trample
on all sublunary things, you p^^ ^^rthly things in their right place, not a^^
Crown on your heads, but as dirt unde^^ ^our feet, because uncertain, and
(...) char^cable as the Moon, and all their light an^ comfort is borrowed from
Christ.

4. Set the Watches of your lives by this Sun, not by the world, and ill
examples, but the light and life of Christ. It Is folly it self, to set the
Watches of your lives by the filly clocks of other men's Inventions, opinions,
and practices, and not by the unerring Sun-diall of the Word; To the Law, to
the Testimony, Search the Scriptures.

5. Delight in Christ's Day, it is commonly called Dies sols, Christ's Day.
Dies Solis, Sun-day, or a day dedicated to the Sun of righteousness;
otherwise in the Institution, for all the seven days were dedicated to the
heathenish Gods. Dies Solis, Sun-day, to the Sun in the Heavens: Dies Lunae,
Moonday, to the Moon: Dies Martis, Tuesday, to Mars: Dies Mercurij, Wednesday,
to Mercury: Dies Jovis, Thursday, to Jupiter: Dies Veneris, Friday, to Venus:
and Dies Saturni, Saturday, to Saturn: Thus all the days are dedicated to
several Gods among the Pagans, and though I will not conclude it flatly
unlawful to use these names, because it is the practice of Christian Churches;
and the Apostle stuck not to call a Ship, The names of other Gods not to be
mentioned in common talk. Exodus 23.13. Josh. 23.7. Psalm. 16.4. Zach. 13.2.
Hos. 2.17.
Castor and Pollux, Acts 28.11. Which the Painims feigned to be Gods of the
Sea, yet many could wish such names were abolisht among the Christians, because
God says, Thou shall make no mention of the names of other there Gods, Exodus
23.13. And the Israelites changed the Names of Idolatrous places, Numb. 32.38.
However, call not the Sabbath Day, Sunday, unless in reference to Christ the
Sun of righteousness, whose day it is, and therefore called the Lords day,
Rev. 1.10. viz. A day set apart, for, if not by the Lord Christ, to commemorate
his Resurrection; The rising of this Sun of righteousness in the Text, Oh
therefore lift up Christ's glory in his own day; speak good of his Name, it is
not more for Christ's honor, then your good; For without the conscionable and
spiritual observation of the Lords day, Religion lies a bleeding.

6. Learn of Christ, the Sun of righteousness, labor to be, and do like
him. The Sun keeps his Orb, E sede itio facile fi^, seditio.
do you keep your stations, be you likewise of a Injurtam facit acceptis
Christi bonis, qui illa tenacuer sibi soli usurpat. Musculus in Johan. 1.16.
do you keep your stations, be you likewise of a f public communicative
nature, keep still in motion, and therein be swift, and constant.

7. and lastly, Let Pilgrims take comfort, your journey is long, and ways
deep, but the Sun is before you, Musculus in Johan. 1.16.
Christ shines upon you, here is some comfort, you shall see your way; Is this
all? No; This Sun is in love with thee, and courts thee in thy way, it looks
upon thee clothed with its own beauty. Cant. 6.10. Who is she that looks
forth, as the morning, fair, as the Moon, and clear as the Sun! See how
Christ admires his own Graces in thee? By nature thou art blacker then Hell,
but he counts thee clear as the Sun: Glorious Titles are given to Believers,
which belong to Christ Psalm. 105.15. Romans 8.33. Genesis 23.6. Romans 8.17. Rev.
5.10. Phil. 2.15.
They are said to be anointed and chosen; to be Princes, Heirs, Kings, and
lights in this world; And there you see he compares his Church to the Sun,
who yet is full of spots, unless in reference to his own righteousness on her
Ezekiel. 16.14.
, and so she is perfect; She is fair, as the Moon, clear as the Sun. Well,
go on to admire, and follow this Sun of righteousness, and then see for your
comfort. Mat. 13.43. When this life is ended, you shall shine forth as Suns in
the Kingdom of your Father; Who has ears to hear, let him hear.

Jesus Christ is the Sun of righteousness,

1. The Sun of Righteousness Inherent, he is in himself a holy, pure, and
righteous Sun, without spot, without sin.

2. The Sun or Fountain of righteousness imparted. scil. All spiritual
Graces, are rays, shed from this pure Sun into the Heart.

3. The Sun, and Fountain of Righteoutnesse imputed. scil. That perfect
righteousness of God wherewith a Believer is clothed.

4. The Sun of righteousness, remunerative, in scattering rewards and
punishments, Non quia solis ctiam splendorem non superabunt, sed. quod nunc
nihil fulgentius sole videmus. Chry. Hom. 12. in Matthew.
with a just, equal, and impartial hand. All these may very well be included
in the Text, and therefore we shall speak of them severally by Gods assistance.

First, 1. Christ the Sun of righteousness inherent. 1 Pet. 2.22.
Christ is the Sun of righteousness inherent in himself, which is nothing else
but the full and perfect conformity of ^strists humane Nature, Will and Ways,
at all times, and in every thing, to the Will and Law of God, according to the
exactest rigor of the same; Dicitur ergo Christus per Antonomasiam Sol
justitiae, id est, justus verusque sol, bonus, benignus, liberalis, bona sua
omnibus impertiens. Musculus in Mal. 4. p. 357.
He did no sin, but was a Lamb without blemish, a Sun without spot. If Christ
had not been innocent himself, his sufferings had not been available for us:
John says, The Word dwelt among us, full of Grace and Truth, John 1.14. where
Truth comprehends all the virtues of the mind, and Grace all the beauties and
perfections of the will. Never man spoke nor lived like him. Enoch is commended
for Piety, Abraham for Truth, Job for Patience, Isaac for Meditation, Joseph
for Chastity, Moses for Meekness, Phineas for Zeal, Samuel for Uprightness,
Daniel for Devotion, and Solomon for Wisdom: Omnia in eo adeo erant divina
quadam elegant ia suspicienda ut nihil possit fingi eo gratosius, omnia quoque
ejus absolutam adeo and inimitabilem virtutem prae se ferebant, ut nemo posset
illum homine esse majorem dubitare. Mart. Bucerus in Joh. 1.
But all in Christ eminently when he was upon earth: He went up and down doing
good, and judged it became him to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. This
could not be otherwise, for in him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

1. Quest. Was he not like us in all things? sin only excepted.

2. Quest. Did he not spring from a sinful woman?

Ans. True, yet he was not conceived in sin; Qumvis ex Abrahae semine genitus
sit Christus, nihil tamen contagii ex vitiosa natura contraxit, quoniam ab psa
origin purum servavit Dei spiritus, nec tantum ut in se privatim sanctitate
pol leat, sed magis ut suos sanctificet. Calv^n Luc. 1.35. See this point ^f
the Incarnation excellently treated of by James Usher, Archbishop of Armah, in
a little Tract called Immanuel bound with his Body of Divinity. page 3, 4, 5,
etc.
for he was not begotten after the ordinary course by man, but formed of the
only substance of a pure virgin, and that in the conception overshadowed and
sanctified by the holy Ghost, and so that holy thing Jesus came without sin
from ^infull flesh.

3. Quest. How could justice afflict him in that measure that was innocent?

Ans. Non tantum pro nobis mortuus est Christus, sed tanqua^ a Deo maledictus
and peccator omnium scelestissimus, imputatione, mortuus est: sie enim mori
multo magis est quam meri, Gal. 2.13. S^rcerius in 2 Cor. 5.21.
Christ Jesus had then all the sins of the Elect upon him, and so was the
greatest sinner in the world, not by pollution, but imputation, 2 Corinthians.
5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. See Isai. 53.45.

Quest. 4. But was he not termed a Blasphemer, Caesar, a Devil?

Ans. God had one Son without sin, no Son without slanders and persecutions.
And usually the worlds poisoned arrows are shot at a white mark, they are
levelled at the godly; to hide or lessen the real wickedness of themselves
and fellow-sinners, they blaze and aggravate the pretended infirmities of such
as walk by Rule. No soul so spotless and innocent which has not met with
some See of slanders before, p. 140, 141, 142.
slanders, and godly Ministers especially are besmeared herewith, to blast the
fruits of their Ministry: a main engine of Satan's. But I remember a saying of
Austin, He that willingly takes from my good name, unwillingly adds to my
reward, Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae nolens addit mercedi meae. August.
Matthew. 5.11, 12. And thus we have a little opened this truth, That Christ is a
Sun of Righteousness inherent in himself, he was Righteousness and Holiness
it self. Let me infer six things from hence.

First, Adam and Christus sunt tanquam duo principia, vel duae radices generis
humani, and hoc vult Paulus conditione^ quam per Christu^ consequimur, long
potiorem esse quam fuerit sors primi hominis. Calv. in 1 Cor. 15.45.
Adams; The first Adam, who was the head of Mankind, was made a living Soul;
the last Adam, who was the head of all the Elect, was made a quickening Spirit;
The first man is of the earth, earthly, the second man is the Lord from heaven.
So Paul, 1 Cor. 15. The first Adam had a posse non peccare, and posse non mori:
the second Adam had a non posse peccare, and a non posse mori: The first Adam,
and all his children that lay then in his loins, had before the fall, a
possibility of standing; the second Adam, and all his seed, according to the
Spirit, had an impossibility of falling: our condition in the first Adam, was
very glorious, innocent, and free from all sin, had he stood: our condition
in the second Adam, is very sure and certain, though pestered with some
corruption. In a word, the first Adam by his folly, infected all the world with
sin; the second Adam by his power redeemed the world from If the Reader would
see this point described to the life, see a Book called Sparkles of Glory, writ
by John Saltmarsh, which Book, though dangerously erroneous in many things, yet
handles the point of the two Adams very clearly, only derogating a little from
the first Adam in innocence. Page 1, 2, 3, etc. to the 15. Try all things, etc.
sin

Secondly, what shall we think of Erberies doctrine, Vide the account given to
the Parliament by the Ministers sent to Oxford, p. 30.38.41.
saying, Why did Christ take some Disciples to pray with him? Because he was
afraid to pray alone. Why did he pray the same words over and over? Because he
could not go forward, but had the spirit of bondage as I have had. I dare not
say any more, for the time is not yet come to speak the truth, etc. Erberies
relation, p. 8. ad finem.
And he laid down this Thesis at a conference in Oxford, that the Saints have
the same fullness of the Godhead as Christ has, dwelling in them in the same
measure, though not in the same manifestation. This likewise he endeavored to
prove at a public meeting. But his Disciple Robert Robert Wastfield ^n his
bla^phemons book called Christ coming in the clouds. page 17.18.
Wastfield says plainly,

God, Christ, and the Saints shall be all one, the fullness of the Godhead
shall dwell in us bodily; and God shall be as fully and as really manifest in
the flesh of the Saints here in this life, as ever he was in the flesh of our
elder brother which was crucified at Jerusalem, etc.

Paul Best likewise says, Paul Best in his wicked book called, Mysteries
discovered, page 4.6.11.14.
It Is high blasphemy to equalize Christ with God. w

O sweet Jesus, art thou thus requited for all thy love? Thy patience is
infinite, for all judgment is committed unto thee; thou could grapple with
such blasphemers, as once with Julian, and dash them in pieces as potters
vessels, and destroy them with hot thunderbolts from heaven. But forbearance is
no quittance, nor yet any Argument why such should be tolerated.

Well, the Sun of Righteousness shall break through all these clouds, and
shine gloriously.

I will lay down two positions, then which nothing is clearer in the Word.

1. Believers in this life do find and feel many Relics of corruption, and
that Saint that has received most grace, comes short of perfection, This point
proved before page 77. all objections answered.
1 Cor, 13.12. Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17. 1 Cor. 15.19. 1 John 3.2. Phil. 3.12, 13.

2. Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, The Deity of Christ proved.
for time coeternall, for nature coessentiall, for dignity coequall with the
Father and Spirit. Doctor Gr. Williams his third Golden Candlestick. part 1.
cap. 3.4, etc. page 777. to 779.
.

1. Coeternall, Isai. 9.6. Titus 2.13. 1 John 5.20. See also Prove. 8.25. Job
38.4. Rev. 1.8. 2. Coessentiall, John 10.30. 1 John 5.7. 3. Coequall. For 1.
All the Divine properties are ascribed to Christ, Matthew. 28.20. Phil. 3.21.
Matthew. 9.4. Heb. 13.8. and so of the rest. 2. The peculiar operations of the
Deity are ascribed to Christ, John 13.18. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.3. John 1.9. and
16.7. and 14.13. Matthew. 9.6. 1 Cor. 11.13. Rev. 1.18. John 5.24. 3. Divine
honor and worship is due unto him, and exhibited of all the Saints, Phil.
2.10. John 17.5. and Rev. 5.13.

And indeed Reason tells us, that Christ the Mediator must be perfect God;
Lombard. li. 3 did. 5. Bellarm. lib. 1. cap. 4. de Christo, page 62. ad 77.
Athanasius in lib. de exposition. Fidei. Fulgentius in resp. ad object.
A^r^^norum. Dionysius de divin. nom.
For none can satisfy for sins, nor be a Psalm. 49.7.
Savior of souls, but God only. No Heb. 2.14.
finite creature was able to vanquish all our enemies, Sin, Satan, Death, etc.
much less abide and overcome the infinite wrath of God, and the sufferings due
unto us for our sins. Finally, his Divinity made his sufferings of an
infinite value; and as Mediator he was to undertake for our good behavior for
the future, and send his Spirit to apply the benefits of his death, etc. All
this shows he must be God. And thus you see the dangerous madness of those
that make him a mere man, Acts 20.28. Heb. 9.14.
or not perfect God, that is, the Sun of righteousness, and of unspotted
purity and glory.

Next, Christus sic fuit contemptus and abjectus, ut esset omnium mortalium
despicatissimus, tantis vulneribus concisus, tantisque dedecoris, and
ignominiae maculis affectus ut oculos ab eo averteremus, ne tantam indignitatem
contemptissimi hominis usurparent, Osor. paraph. in Isa. 53.3. p. 195.
yet men despised him, and Psalm. 18.4.
the nations abborred him, says Isaiah, and they counted him as one without
form or comeliness: Nay, they studied ways to grieve and misuse him, they
spat on him, and buffeted him, and preferred Barabbas before him, etc. The
reasons, John 15.18.20. Acts 2.23.

Fourthly, wonder and adore the matchless love of Christ to us, 1 Pet. 1.19.
spot, put on the skin of a L^opard, and so by imputation was laden with
sins. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Paul says, He was made sin for us, that knew no sin. Not made sinful,
Peccat iniquus and punitur justus.
but Sin, even all sin, a lump of sins by imputation. Oh what heart can
sufficiently admire his love.

Fifthly, hence it is manifest, God bruised him, and ^^t him to grief, says
Isai. 53.10.
Isaiah; and the Lord afflicted him in the day of his fierce wrath, says Lam.
1.12.
Jeremy: His own Father that so entirely loved him, yet finding others sins
upon him, was presently a devouring fire, and an overflowing torrent of wrath
upon him: Oh therefore how shall thou escape that never had his love, nor
never leavest thy sinning? Consider this you that forget God.

Sixthly and lastly, Praecedit Christus, sequamur nos.
and purify our selves as he is pure. The Moon is fair, but she has her
Vide Thom. Aquin. de coelo and mundo, lib. 2. lec. 12. page 91.
spots; the Stars glistering, but they have their erratick motions: Behold
the Sun, it has neither spot in its face, nor error in its course: the best
of Saints have their Deuteronomy. 32.5.
spots, their Prove. 24.16.
failings, 1 Cor. 11.1.
follow them no further then they follow Christ: But Christ is a Sun without
spot: a Sun of Righteousness, enriched with all grace and glory; O therefore
eye him, Frustra ille sortitur Christiani nomen, qui Christum minime imitatur:
Quid tibi prodest vocari quod non es? Aug.
and learn of him, Let the same mind be in you as was in Christ, walk in love,
justice, meekness, and heavenly-mindednesse, as he walked; though you come
short of the Copy, yet write after it.

2. Christ the Sun of righteousness imparted.
2. As Christ is the Sun of inherent Righteousness in himself Sol and sidera
non sibi, sed nobis lucent.
, so also he is the Fountain of imparted or infused Righteousness too, and in
believers all their goodness and holiness proceeds from him, and all their
spiritual graces are certain rays shed from that glorious and pure Sun into
the heart.

Now this imparted righteousness is nothing else but the conformity of our
minds, wills and affections, of our thoughts, words and deeds to Gods holy Word
and Will, accord^^g to the measure of grace received from Christ, Romans 6.18.
Being free from sin, we become the servants of righteousness.

Thus you see there is a righteousness of imparted holiness in the Saints,
although stained with many imperfections.

Quest. 1. But how come Believers by it?

Answ. It Is created, Creatio fit ex nihilo.
Ephesians. 4.24. The new man is created in righteousness and true holiness, so
that grace is another creation. The same power that made the world, goes to the
new making of a heart, 2 Cor. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.18, 19.

Quest. 2. Created?

Answ. Surely, by Jesus Christ, the Sun of righteousness (in the Text.) For
Christ is the Fountain of their infused holiness, as the Sun is the fountain
of light, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ Jesus of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. And John 1.16. Christus
bonorum omnium affluentiam in se continet, ita ut no^aliu^de ulla pars salutis,
nec gutta una gratiae petenda sit, Calv, in John 1.16.
Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace. So that all our water of joy
is drawn out of this Well of salvation, as Christ is called, Isai. 12.3.

Christ as Mediator was not only to pacify God, but (as I said) to engage and
undertake for a change in us, and that we should be pliable and obedient,
submitting to the new Covenant; Christ therefore by his Spirit must purge his
Church, and principle his Elect, that they may be presented spotless to the
Father. Agian,

All grace is conveyed unto us through this Conduit-pipe, a Mediator; because
herein God is well pleased with us, and so in him will give grace and glory,
and withhold no manner of good thing from us.

Lastly, the gifts and graces of the Spirit are the fruits of Christ's
Ascension, Ergo Christus nostrae utilitatis gratia, ad patrem ascen dit, nam in
coelum ipsum ingressus est, ut appareat nunc in conspectu Dei pro nobis. Musc.
in Joh. 16.7.
as Elias when he was translated, let fall his garment, so Christ at his
Ascension powered down his Spirit, and let fall some golden rays of his glory,
John 16.7. I might add to this, that Christ by his intercession prevails so^
grace for us, Luke 22.32. In al^ these respects Christ may be said here, to be
the Sun or Fountain of our imparted righteousness, though the Spirit properly
work it.

Quest. 3. How is Christ the Sun and F^untain of the Saints Righteousness
imparted?

I answer, by Conformity, Resignation, and Infusion.

1. By conformity with Christ in his Life, Death, and Resurrection; by faith we
draw virtue from these to tranforme, mortify, and quicken us, Romans 6.11. In
that Christ lives he lives unto God, reckon ye also your selves to be dead
indeed unto sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Tho. Wilson
expos. on Romans 6.11. page 186. Dialogue 5.
You see Christ did not these things for himself, we as his members have
fellowship with him in all, our old man was crucified with him, and we are
risen with Christ. Coloss. 3.1. that is, by virtue of his resurrection.

2. By Resignation, and giving up our selves to Christ in all his offices, that
we may be guided, acted, and ordered by Christ in all things. See Romans 6.13.
but c^iefly See Eln. Par. on Romans 12.1, page 220.
Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, that you
present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service. When a sinner lies down at Christ's feet, and says,
Christus non indiget nostro obsequio, sed nos ^llius do minio. Hieron.
Here am I, do with me as seems good in thy sight, I am not mine own, thou
have bought me with a price, etc. He that stands ready pressed for God, is not
far from righteousness.

3. By communication and infusion of the Spirit of Christ to new-mould our
hearts, to purge us, and wash us, and sanctify us, Romans 8.10, 11. If Christ be
in you, the body is dead, because of sin, but the Spiis life, because of
righteousness: for the Spirit of Christ dwells in you, and quickens you, etc.

The inferences from this point are three.

First, Heb. 12.14.) but also of subtle Libertines, that under the glorious
pretense of exalting free grace, secretly undermine holiness and
sanctification, From such turn away, you have not so learned Christ.

Secondly, that you may know him, Ephesians. 4.24.
and the power of his resurrection, and that for these considerations.

1. Imparted Righteousness is the Image of God, and that Amability of inward
splendour in which we were created at the beginning, it makes us exceeding
beautiful and lovely in the sight of GOD, Angels, and Men; Grace makes us like
the Kings Daughter, All glorious within. Nigra est exterius Christi sponsa, sed
formosa interius.
Hear Christ, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot upon
thee. Grace is the most becoming thing in the world.

2. It Is the end of our Ephesians. 1.4.
Election, Titus 2.14.
Redemption, and 1 Cor. 1.2.
Vocation. This is Gods great design to make a holy and righteous people, that
we may honor him and the Gospel. Nay,

3. It Is not the least part of glory, and bliss eternal, Ephesians. 5.27.
Righteousness is Heaven begun, and H^aven is Grace finished. Not only Turks,
Note.
but many Christians make false draughts of heaven, conceiving it barely a
place of content and happiness; but if you pencill Heaven out aright, Psalm.
17.1. Phil. 1.23.
and give it the true complexion, you will find it the greatest Hell to carnal
ones, because a place of such holiness, there we shall have fullness and
perfection of grace, beatificall visions, and enjoymens of God; and serve God
with Halelujahs and Adorations, Ier. Burronghs now in glory.
and that without intermission, or weariednesse. Now if this be Heaven, then
Grace and Righteousness here is not the least part of that blessedness.

3. and lastly, bodily exercise profits little, and it is not of him that wills
or runs, but God that shows Mercy. Not from blessed Saints, or b Angels,
Summa est stultitia invocare Angelos, cum invoca^dus sit Deus apud quem est
potestas juvandi. Musc. in Psalm. 34.7. page ^8.
they cannot hear you, nor help you, To which of them will you turn? They
live on Free Grace themselves; Not from God, out of Christ; shall stubble
petition the fire not to devour it? Will a man expect Grace, and favor from
his enemy, that whets his sword, and bends his bow for destruction? But then,
be sure you go, nay run to God in Christ, who is the Sun, and proper, full,
free Fountain of righteousness infused. And then to encourage you, consider
four things full of comfort.

1. He can easily do it, Plane nihil Deo d fficile, cui volu^sse s^cisse e^^.
Ambros.
with a words speaking, for all power is in his hands, no soul so unrighteous,
or filthy, but Christ can wash it.

2. He loves to do it, it is his office and delight to do it, he was anointed
for this end, and mercy is pleasing unto him.

3. He has done it for thousands, as vile, and grace-lesse as thy self, he
does it daily, and hourly for others, doubt not, but he will do it for thee
also.

4. He has engaged himself by Promise, to do it for all that are Juvat, qui
jubet.
elected; Is not this the Tenor of the new Covenant? I will give you a new
heart, Da Domine qu^d jub^s, and j^b^ quod vis. Aug. confess. lib. 10. cap. 31.
and I will cause you to know, fear, and love me, etc. What says Christ to h
s a^xious Spouse? I Will make thee bo^^e s of gold, with studds of silver; And in
Ezekiel; I^e m ke thee lovely, by the comelin^sse I Will put upon thee; So then he
has promis't, to work all our works, in us, and for us.

To conclude this, run, fly to Christ, as the Doves unto their windows, crowd
about him; give him no rest, say, Lord, whither should we go, but unto thee;
for thou art the Sun of righteousness, in thee is our light, and life!

Do thus, and stand in Gods way, lie at the poole, frequent the Ordinances,
and know, if thou can but desire Grace, thou have it already.

3. Christ the Sun of righteousness imputed.
3. As Christ is the Sun of infused, so of imputed righteousness; Now the
imputed righteousness of Christ is nothing else, but that rich, long, and
spotless Robe of Divine righteousness, wherewith every Believer stands
gloriously clothed, in the sight, and account of God, and this by Imputation.
Romans 4.6. God imputes Righteousness without works. And 5.19. By the obedience
of one shall many be made righteous Per vitrum vir^de omnia viridia videntur;
ita, etc.
. As red things put into a green glass, will appear green, so sinners put
into Christ are accounted righteous Qui e go in nobis pecc^^ores sumus, in
Christ* and per Ch^^stum justi sumus. P^meran^s in 1 Corinthians. 1.30.
; whereupon follows that gracious action of God, which is justi f^eation,
which comp^izeth not only Col. 1 21, 22. 1 Per. 2.24.
remission, whereby we are freed from the guilt, and punishment of sin, but
Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.21.
acceptance, whereby we are accounted just in the sight of God.

And the former of these is grounded on his Heb. 9.22. Isa. 53.5.
passive, the latter on his active obedience, and his original Righteousness;
so that now we have fully satisfied divine justice, and are most absolutely
perfect, and more righteous then Adam in Innocence, but all this not in our own
persons, but in, and by, another, even Christ; All that he is, has done, and
endured, being freely imputed unto us, as if we had been, done, and suffered
it.

This is our Imputed righteousness, and though it have many names in
Scripture, yet it flows only from Christ, the Sun, and Fountain of this
Righteousness.

I find that this is called the Righteousness of God, of Faith, of Saints,
and of Christ.

1. This Imputed Righteousness, is often called the Righteousness of God,
even the Divine Essence, and in particular, the Father. Romans 3.21. and 10.3. 2
Cor. 5.21. Because God has appointed to justify man this way, and no other,
and he as Judge is the justifier; for the party offended must forgive, Non ait
ut digni fit is, sed ut d^gni habe^mini. So Cajetan in 2 These. 1.5.
Romans 3.26.

2. It Is called the Righteousness of Faith, Rom 4.13. and 10.6. and 9.30.
Because Faith only is the hand that apprehends, and Instrument, that applies
it, Romans 3.28. Faith singles out Christ, as the only sufficient Romans 3.22.
Isa. 9.6. 1 Cor. 1.30.
means of life, and cleaves eternally to him for salvation.

3. It Is called the Righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19.8. Because they only are
the subject of it, and Christ never gives Imputed, without infused
Righteousness.

4. It Is called the Righteousness of Christus ut solus justus est, ita suam
justitiam in nos transferendo, justos nos reddit. Bullingerus.
Christ, Jer. 23.6. And in the Text he is called the Sun of Righteousness,
because he lived and dyed for us, and thus as Mediator efficiently justifies;
And so the Lord sees no Iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel, Numb.
23.25.

1. Quest. Are we not righteous in Gods sight,

I answer, No, the Text is express, Romans 3.28. We conclude, a man is
justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law. Linsey-woolsey-Garments were
of old forbidden, and so ploughing with the Ox, and Ass, we must not mingle,
nor couple Christ's Righteousness, and ours in Justification.

2 Quest. How? Alterius Doctrina doctus, Learned by another learning, etc.

I answer, Dispar exemplorum ratio, there is not the same Reason; For one man
is not united unto another, as the Faithful are to Christ, We are members of
his Body, and are acted by one, and the same Spirit.

3 Quest. Does not S. James say, We are justified by works, and not by faith
only?

Surely yes? But he speaks not says Vide Bullingerum, et Calvinum in Jacob.
2.24.
Calvin, of the Imputation, but demonstration of righteousness; we are
righteous by works, Non causative, sed declarative, Before others, and in our
own consciences; But the word is full, Romans 8.33. By the deeds of the Law,
shall no flesh be justified in his sight.

The Inferences will be two.

First, Periculosa habitatio ^oru^ qu^ habitant in M^^itis. Bernard.
endanger their own precious souls, but throw much dirt in the face of Christ,
for going about to establish their own righteousness, they have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God The Papists jeeringly call it putative
righteousness.
, as Romans 10.3. These dote on their own rags, and reject his Robes; They feed
on husks, and refuse viands; Narcissus like, they are enamored with their own
shadows; They stand a tip-toe, and scornfully overlook Christ; But when it is
too late, then such will see the vanity of their own righteousness Opera ante
fidem inania, ut cursus celerrimus praeter vi^m. Augustine. Enarrat. in Psalm. 31.
; when Death, and Devils look them in the face, then they will know what it is
to slight Christ; The Lord rouse such, and show them their hopes are Cobwebs,
their foundations sandy, and their end destruction, except they get into
Christ! B^llarm^n has his Tut^ssimum est, etc.


Secondly, How much comfort, Romans 8. What shall I say? You have recovered more
by Christ, then you lost by Adam. For,

1. Adams righteousness was uncertain, and ^uch as it was possible for him to
loose, 'twas in his own keeping, and therefore he lost it so soon; But the
righteousness we have by Christ, is made surer to us; were it in our own
custody, we might be tempted to sell it, as Esau his birthright for a mess
of pottage; But blessed be God, it is in Christ's hands, and so it cannot be
taken from us: Our life is Ponitur in tuto quia reponitur in Christo. Col. 3.3
and 1 Pet. 1.5.
hid with Christ in God, and, we are kept by the Power of God to salvation.

2. Admit Adams righteousness had been unchangeable, yet had it been but the
righteousness of man; O but this is the righteousness of God, and as the
second Adam was a far more excellent person then the first, so is his
righteousness more absolute, more glorious.

To conclude; Thou that have the least faith, thou that art the poorest and
weakest believer, know thou art bottomed on this rock, clothed in this purple,
the very perfect righteousness of God is thine by imputation, O that thou
had eyes to see thy happiness, and an heart to be affected with it, that so
thou may rejoice in it, and be thankful for it.

4. Christ the Sun of righteousness remunerative.
4. And lastly, Christ is the Sun of righteousness remunerative; he is a Sun
of righteousness, or righteous dealing in impartial distributions of rewards
and punishments.

Righteousness remunerative, in remembering, defending, and rewarding his
followers, and that because he has promised it, and they depend on him for it,

1. Promittendo se fecit debitorem. Aug.
Because he has promised it, and now must be as Servus sum expecto alime^tum,
miles sum exigo ab Imperatore stipendium, vocatus sum postulo ab invitante
promissum. Ambr.
good as his word. I could easily instance in Temporals, Spirituals, and
Eternals. I refer you to the Margent. Psalm. 36.6, 7. 2 Pet. 1.1. and Psalm.
24.5.
Heaven is called a Prize for the Runner, a Penny for the Digger; No^ in merit
is nostris, sed in misericordia Dei salus humana consisti^. Orig. in Romans lib.
9. cap. 11.
not that man, but Christ has earned it, and God has promised it.

2. The Saints depend on him for it, scil. for protection and salvation, and so
in righteousness he will not deceive their expectations, Psalm. 31.1. Isai.
45.19. They rest upon him, and he will not fail them.

Thus you see Christ is righteous in defending and rewarding his subjects,
especially in that he does it impartially, without respect of persons: In every
Nation he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted by him, Acts
10.35.

he will by no means clear the guilty, and, he will judge righteous
judgment. Men's Laws are like Cobwebs, which catch little flies, and the
buzzing great ones escape, and break thorough; but great, and small, shall be
judged by God Gods Law, it is like Vulcans iron net that took the Gods, it
apprehends and condemns all alike.
; if he find sin in his own children, he will smite them; but none of his
enemies shall escape at the Great Day: Now Wilson in Dict.
Wilson takes this punishing of Reprobates to be a maine thing intended in
these words, and to confirm this exposition, he compares the Text with the
first verse; The day comes that shall burn like an Oven, and all the proud,
and such as do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day that comes shall burn
them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them, neither root nor
branch, but to you that fear my Name, the Sun of righteousness, viz. that
does all these righteous things, shall arise with healing in his wings; If you
would know how it stands with his righteousness and justice, to punish the
fathers sin upon the children. See Greg. Williams second Golden Candlestick.
Page 753.
see Psalm. 94.1. O God, to whom vengeance belongs, O God, to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self? It Is in the Hebrew, shine forth; He desires the Sun of
righteousness to show himself in subduing his enemies, and rendering a reward
to the proud.

The Inferences will be two.

1. Let not the Godly mourn under the non-accomplishment of Promises, no
shadow of change with him; his time is best; Thou have but a little power over
thy lusts, thou fear relapsing, etc. All this while forget not God is
faithful, that has promised; and the patient expectation of the poor shall
not perish for ever; Think not the Lord is slack, as some men count slacknesse,
but wait, wait, I say on the Lord.

2. Let not the wicked presume, Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore Pecudes macello destinatae liberi i am
salta^t per pascua, alius in opere suda^tibus, etc. Drexelius de
Praedestinatione. Pa. 42.
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. Impunity
causes impudency; But quod defertur, non aufertur, Si nunc omne peccatum
manifesta plectaretur poena, nihil ultimo judicio reservari putaretur, etc.
Augustine. De Civ. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Forbearance is no Acquittance; As lead which of all mettalls is the coldest,
being set on the fire, and melted, becomes the hottest, so abused patience,
turns into fury, Diu quidem fert mortalium pecca^a, ubi vero patientiae ejus
intuitu augeri malitiam videt, tum poenas sumit. Basil.
and the longer the hand is lifting up, the heavier will be the blow at last,
ponder this all you that forget God, and your latter end Patientia Dei ad
poenitentiam invitat malos, sicut flagelium Dei ad patientiam er^dit bonos.
Augustine.
.

Thus you see in how many respects Christ is a Sun, and such a Sun, a Sun of
Righteousness.

There is a time of Christ's arising,

In handling this point, we will show you four things.

1. When Christ may be said to arise in the world? 2. When also in a soul? 3.
Wherein Christ arising, and discovering himself may be compared unto the
rising of the Sun. 4. Wherein they differ; And then we shall apply all.
1. When Christ is said to arise in the world.
First, When Christ may be said to arise in the world?

I answer; Christ this Sun of Righteousness, may be said to arise in the
world, either properly, and literally, or spiritually, and mystically.

1. Properly, or literally.
First Christ may be said to arise in the world properly, or literally, and that
in his Incarnation, Crucifixion, Resurrection, and Ascension; All these ways
Christ did properly arise in the world, and all may be foretold by Malaeby when
he said, Christ was to arise with healing in his wings.

1. Christ may be said very properly to arise in the world, at his Incarnation,
and Nativity. Arias, Clarius, Theodoret, and Montanus.
Diverse are of this judgment, that the Prophet aimed at this chiefly. See Heb.
7.15. and 9.26.
Heb. 7.15. It Is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, and that after the
similitude of Melchisedeck, there arises another Prophet Nonnulli haec
accipiun^ de primo Christi ortu et adven^u in mundumquem ipse quasi Sol oriens
illuminavit calesecit, omnique gratia, and virtute faecundavit. Corn. a Lapide
in Mal, 4.2. Page 355.
; When the Day Star appears, the Sun is at hand, so before Christ's Nativity
a star appeared, whence the Wise men concluded the Sun of righteousness was
rising, Mat. 2.2. We have seen his star in the East, and are come to
worship him. How did the Patriarcks and Prophets desire to see that Day? But
saw it not. As all the Birds chirp, and sing to welcome the rising Sun; so the
Shepherds went glorifying and praising God, nay a huge Host of Angels sang
Carolls over Christ at his Nativity, Luke 2. The Burden this; Glory to God in
the highest, on Earth, Peace, good will toward Men.

2. Christ did literally arise in his Crucifixion, when he was lifted up on the
Cross, and by his sufferings made atonement for the sins of the Elect, Joh.
12.132.

Object. Then if ever did this glorious Sun seem to set in obscurity, God had
for saken him.

Sol. Here consider two things.

1. That from his Vide Dr Tailor of Christ's Temptations, from Mat. 4.11. Pa^.
363.
greatest abasements, many sparkles of his Divinity flew out; for in the midst
of his Passion, the Temple was rent, the Graves opened, the Heavens darkened,
the thief converted, and many of the people convinced, who smote on their
breasts, saying, This was a righteous Person, etc.

2. That in his Death, he trod on Deaths neck, and destroyed him that had the
power of Death, the Devil See Mr. Sands in Trav.
. This spoiled their Oracle, and made that lamentable Funeral, and inutterable
howling of innumerable Spirits on the Seashore, when the Mariner advised by a
voice, pronounced these words, Great PAN is dead; The truth of which was
avouched by Thamus, Ephesians. 4.8.
and others that heard it before Tiberias Caesar, as Plutarch says. Quid est
captivavit captivitatem? vicit mortem. Mortem procuravit Diabolus et ipse
Diabolus de morte Christi est captivatus. Augustinus.
Christ's death gave that blow to the head of the old Serpent, which renders him
a conquered enemy. In this skirmish he smote all our enemies on the cheek bone,
bringing them to perpetual shame, and spoiling Principalities and Powers, so
that this was a joyful rising to the world.

3. Christ the Sun of righteousness may be literally said to rise to the
world, at his Glorious Resurrection from the dead. It Is said, Mark. 16.2. that
the Mary's came to the Sepulcher at the rising of the Sun: Indeed, two glorious
Suns were risen that day; for an Angel said unto them, come see the place where
the Lord lay, Christ is not here, but is risen. This was much for Christ's
glory, for hereby he declared himself to be the Son of God; He seemed to be
under a cloud in his Passion, says one Sam. Torshell on the Text. page 82.
, but brake forth in his Resurrection, and that by his Nonpotestate precaria,
sed virtute propria, ut victor prodiit de Sepultur a. Bern. de Resurrect.
Christ. Qui Agnus extuerat in passione factus est Leo, in Resurrectione, Idem.
Vide Ambrose in Joh. lib. 24. cap. 26.
own power, he suffered as a Lamb, but rose as a Lion, says Bernard: And the^
his Resurrection was for our good, that we might be assured of Remission, and
Christus solus resurrexit, sed non totus. Bernard.
rise up with him to newnes of life, Rom, 25. He rose again for our
justification, not that any part of the Price of our Redemption was unpayed at
his Passion, but that our deliverance was not manifested till then; God would
never have let him out of the prison of the Grave, but that all the debt was
paid; And if Christ were not risen, then is your faith vain, and you are of
all men most miserable, says Paul.

4. Christ may be said literally to rise at his blessed Ascension. Luke 24.51.
Whilst he lift up his hands, and blessed them, he was parted from them, and
carried up into Heaven. Having finished his Fathers work, he is exalted in our
Dum naturam humanam syderibus Christus importavit, cr^dentibus cielum patere
posse monstravit. Aug. in Act.
Nature, to consecrate a way, and prepare a plane for us, Bish. usher in his
Body of Divinity.
he has taken with him the paw^e of our flesh, and left with us the earnest of
his Spirit; Our Head is ascended, and all we his members shall follow; which
is an unspeakable comfort to Believers.

Secondly, 2. Mystically, or spiritually.
as Christ the Sun of righteousness, may be said properly and literally to
rise to the world these four ways; so he may be said to arise mystically and
spiritually to the world, and that three ways; When the Gospel is preached,
Church defended, and the world judged.

1. When the Gospel is preached, and Christ comes in the purity and power of
hi^ Ordinances. 1 John 2.8. The darkness is past, and the true light now
shines. viz. The Gospel. But see Luke 1.78. Zachary in his Song prophesied of
Christ, That he should give knowledge of salvation to his people, through the
tender mercy of our God, whereby the Dayspring from on high, has visited us,
to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and
guide their feet into the way of peace. This place, Jun. Paral. lib. 1. par.
50.
Junius, and Dan. Heinsius exercit. ad Luc. 1.78. lib. 3. and cap. 1.
Heinsius, parallells with the Text, Paul expresses it plainly 2 Cor. 4.4. The
Devil blinds the eyes of them that believe not, least the light of the
Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine upon them. See
Psalm. 102.16.

2. When his Church is defended, and his people prosper in the world, when
believers shall inherit the Earth, and Civil Powers come into godly hands;
Then does Christ arise on a Nation, then is the Sun seen in the Mount, Isa.
66.5. They that hated you shall be cast out, and the Lord shall appear to your
joy, and they shall be ashamed: The Sun will arise over the Hills, Christ will
appear to your joy, etc.

Verum hic agi de secundo Christi adve^tu patet ex praetedentibus, and
sequentibus, quae omnia expecta^t ad die^ judicii: Nam sicut Sol obscura
illuminat, and videnda, et confpicua oculis ommum exhibct, sic Chrisius pioru^
virtut^m, and justitiam, quae in hac vita, ab imptis obscurabatur, in die
judicii, illustrao^t, and clarificabit, and toti orbi conspicuam, and gloriosam
exhibebit. Corn. a Lapide in Malac. 4.2. Page 355.
3. When the world is judged, and Christ comes in all his Glory at the last day;
This Jerome and a Lapide think, to be the meaning of the Text; for as the
rising of the Sun discovers the things that lay hid, so Christ at the day of
Judgment, will open the secrets of all hearts, he will come in flaming fire,
and so astonish, and dazzle the eyes of his enemies. 2 Samuel 12 12. So here; you
see how Christ does arise unto the world literally, and mystically; I see not
but Malachy might respect all this, and prophecy of Christ's whose
administration, from his Nativity, till his rendering up of the Kingdom to his
Father.

When Christ rises in a soul.
Secondly, When Christ the Sun of righteousness may be said to arise in a soul.

I answer; When he comes, in an inlightning, renewing, and quickening manner to
the soul.

1. Christ may be said to arise upon a soul, Pet. 1.19. We do well in taking
heed to the Word, till the Day Star (that is, Christ, Rev. 22.16.) arise in
our hearts: Till then though Non omnes qu^^ (...). scriptu^^^, admirand^ ^nt
^^usi^^ rant, nisi qui coelesti splendore, and gratia ^otiuntur. Basil.
incircled with Gospel discoveries, our Romans 1.21.
foolish hearts will be darkened, but when Christ, whom the Prophet calls the
Sun, and Peter, the Star that ushers in the Sun, when he, I say, shall
arise with in us, in our hearts, to give us sanctified, and experimental
insight, into the things of Heaven, then indeed we shall be taught to purpose,
and know 1 Pet. 2.9.
all things.

2. Christ arises in a soul, when he comes to renew, and transform it, when
he suddenly works a change within, and all things become new, new Principles,
new Projects, new resolutions: How came Saul to fall a Jew, and rise a
Christian? See Acts 26.16. Christ appeared to him, for that purpose; See what
came on it, See Perkins 2. Volumne on Gal. 1.16. Page 180. opening that place.
Gal. 1.16. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, immediately I
conferred not with flesh and blood. q. d. I was alter ego, a changed man, no
longer a persecuting Saul, but a praying Paul, and I went not to consult with
flesh and blood, that is, neither with carnal company, nor old Principles; No,
I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision; Nay, I was resolved to obey it,
and stop my ears to all discouragements, etc.

All this when the Sun of righteousness arose in me, when Christ appea^^^ and
revealed himself to me.

3. Christ the Sun of righteousness arises in a soul when he comes to
quicken and revive it, when the soul has spiritual enjoyments of God, and
spiritual actings to God (which is the very life of poor Christians) when
there is grounded assurance of his love, and all joy and peace in believing,
when the soul is willing to be ordered by Christ, and bound up in the will of
God, and can tell how to live upon God; now indeed Christ is risen with healing
under his wings to such a sinner: why else does David say touching Gods favor,
O lift up the light of thy countenance, and return O Lord, and cause thy face
to shine upon me, etc.

3. Wherein Christ's revealing himself like the rising of the Su^^e.
3. Thirdly, Let us now see wherein Christ's revealing and discovering himself,
and his beauty, may be fitly compared to the rising of the Sun?

I answer,

The similitude holds in 7 things chiefly,

1. The rising of the Sun is not all in an instant, he rises by degrees; and
such also is the rising of Christ the Sun of righteousness in a soul: you read
of the dawning of the day of grace there, 2 Pet. 1.19. when there is the
twilight of grace, some glimmerings of light in the mind, and the soul sees
things imperfectly, as the blind man whom Christ ^nred, first saw men as trees,
afte^w^rds more distinctly: At first the s^u^e sees darkly and obscurely,
afterward Nunc quum lux nobis veritatis insulget, cum sese regni coelestis su
avitas me^tibus ap^rit ^am quide^ dies est, sed perfe^tus erit ^ies quando ^am
quicquam d^nocte peccati in me^te nostra ^n n^rit. C^e^. R^gis^ ep^^^^* 7. Ind.
1^. ep. 126 Vide idem in Exek. Homil. 5. l. 1.
more clearly; 7. Ind. 11. ep. 126.
for every believer increases in knowledge and grace, and goes forward to
perfection, Vide idem in Ezekiel. Hom^^. 5. l. 1.
as Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the Sun that shines more and more
unto the perfect day. It Is the same in the world, this Sun rises by degrees,
and the Gospel has small beginnings in many places, Dan. 2.34. That little
stone shall break in pieces the greatest Monarchies of the earth, and grow up
into a huge Mountain, that shall fill the world; for all the kingdoms of the
earth shall become the kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ. Rome was not
built in a day, neither will it be pulled down in a day.
And then shall that Promise be fulfilled, Isa. 30.26. The light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of
seven days.

2. The rising of the Sun dispels all Judge. 5.31.
Fogges, Mist^, and Dewes, Hos. 6.4. So it is with Christ, the rising of this
Sun scattered Jewish ceremonies, which were but as dark Types, and shadows of
things to come Figurae suerunt quae portenderent ea quae post essent vere
exhibenda a Christo. Bullinger in locum.
, Col. 2.17. These all flew away at the rising of this Sun; and still his and
the Gospels rising scatter the thick mists of superstition and ignorance, in
which kingdoms are inveloped. So Rev. 2.16. especially 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. He shall
destroy Antichrist with the brightness of his coming; which is not spoken
(says Doctor Sclater) of his last corporal coming, but of the Dr. William
Sclater in expos. on the Epistles to the These. page 143. and 144.
spiritual manifestations of his presence in the Church, at the appearance
whereof the very throne of Antichrist shall totter, and Popery vanish, as the
dew before the rising Sun: Christ does the like in souls; for when he
arises, and shoots his bright beams into our hearts, all the damp fogg^ of
unbelief are chased and dispelled, and he gives us the clear 2 Cor. 4.6.
light of the knowledge of the glory of GOD in the face of Christ.

3. The rising of the Sun is the rising of many millions besides the Sun,
whom it awakens, and raises, and sends out to work, Psalm. 104.22.23. The Sun
arises, and the Lions go into their Dens; but man rises and goes forth to
his work and to his labor unto the evening. It Is so when Christ arises and
manifests himself, sinners will then arise from the Down bed of Security, and
work out their own salvation whilst the day lasts. See Isai. 40.1. Arise and
shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Non
significat Paulus tune demu^ affulgere nobis Christi lume^ ubisurrexerimus ex
morte, sed demonstrat nos resurgere a morte quum nos Christus illuminat, Calv.
in Ephesians. 5.^4.
So Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, for Christ
shall give thee light. q. d. The Sun of righteousness is risen, therefore do
you also arise. The light and love of Christ, Oh how it shames men out of sin
and security!

4. The rising of the Sun is not always visible; Christ may be risen in
point of grace, and thou know it not, nor see him in point of comfort.

5. The visible rising of the Sun is attended with the Omnes pene aves mane
ca^tillant, cantuque suo solemn orie^tem salutant. Mu^cul.
chirping and singing of birds, yea it is welcome to Oriens sol est instar
sponsi de Thalamo suo prodeuntis. Corn. a Lapide in Mal.
all but Thieves and Whoremongers, who (says Solomon) delight in the duskish
twilight. The rising of the Sun of righteousness is welcome to the Saints,
they sing and leap for joy, 2 Samuel 23.4. He ( viz. Christ) shall be as the
light of the morning when the Sun arises, (an old prophecy of Christ) q.d. Oh
he shall be very welcome and refreshing to us, but wicked men love darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil.

6. The Sun arises in the Number. 34.15
East, and Templu^ versus orientem non ut solemn orientem adorarent, sed solis
dominum. Procopius in libros Regum. lib. 3. c. 6.
many conclude Christ will appear there when he comes to judgment, from Matthew.
24.27.

7. And lastly, as all the united power and policy of the world cannot hinder
the rising of the Sun the next day; so though Men and Devils make one Conclave,
and lay their heads together, they cannot hinder the rising of Christ, this
Sun of righteousness in a soul in the world

1. In the soul of an elect child of God, when God has a purpose to do a
soul good, who can let him? what can hinder him? Phil. 4.22. Paul mentions a
Church in Neros house; whence Doctor Doct. Hen. Airay in Lect. on Phil. 4.23.
page 948.
Airay observes, that Gods mercy is such that he will, and his power such that
he can beget children in the faith, in the worst places and companies where the
truth is most opposed, to show that nothing can hinder him, and to magnify
Free grace the more.

2. Nothing can hinder the rising of Christ in the world, the Gospel must
flourish maugre all opposition, If Luthers dim candle, could not be blown out,
much less the Sun of the Gospel. See Richard Web on Psalm. 2. p. 20.
Psalm. 2.1, 2. When people and great ones rage and storm against Christ, they
imagine a vain thing (as if one should think to stop with his hand the current
of the Sea, or devise Engines or Bulwarks to keep the Sun from rising, a vain,
a mad thing) no though such combine against Christ, though all the nations Rev.
12.8. Mat. 16.18. Isai. 8.10. Psalm. 121.4.
of the world should join heads and purses to destroy the Gospel, 'twere a vain
imagination; he that sits in heaven would laugh them to scorn, and wise
discree^ persons fearing the Lord, may wonder a^ them. Why do the Heathen
rage? etc. No weapons formed against Christ, shall prosper. Portae urbiu^
munitissimae sunt fere and propugnacula habent firmissima, per inferos autem
omnem vim contrariam, and Satanicam, omnem hostis impetum intellige. Magnae
sunt and firmissimae* ^romissiones quae fidelium conscientias tranquillant and
consolantur quum cogitant se ita stabilitos, ac fundatos ut certo sciant se
resistere posse omni potestati Satanicae. Zuinglius in Matthew. 16.18.
And the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church. Christ is
stronger, and wiser, and diligenter then all his enemies, he must reign.

4. The disparity between Christ's and the Suns rising.
Fourthly, somewhat of the disparity wherein Christ and the Suns arising
differ.

1. The Sun rises every day, and never misseth; so does not Christ: David
waited above a year for his rising, How long (says he will thou hide thy face
from me? Believers may be long in desertion^.

2. The Sun rises but for a day, and no longer, Eccles. 1.5. The Sun rises
and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the place where he arose. Christ has
his settings, but not his daily settings; though a Christians comfort be short
lived, yet it may live longer then the Ephemeron eodem die quo oritur moritur,
Arist. Hist. Anim. lib. 4. cap. 33.
Ephemeron, which rises and dies in a day, Isai. 54.8. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee for a moment, but (now) with everlasting kindness will I
have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

3. When the Sun arises to us, he sets to the Austin and Lactantius denied
that there were Antipodes, which Hackwel may well wonder at.
Antipodes, those of the other Hemispheare, but it is not ever so here, Christ
can and will arise to the whole world at one time. Rev. 11.15.

4. The time of the Suns rising may be known to a minute, though it may vary
continually, but no man knows when Christ will manifest himself to a soul, or
to kingdoms in darkness. Times and seasons are in the Fathers hands, and
secret things belong unto God.

To shut up this point, be directed and exhorted to four duties.

1. Rejoice in the appearances of Christ, Mary did thus, Luke 2.31, 32. and
Luke 1.46.
Luke 1. My Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. And so did Simeon, Let thy
servant depart, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared
before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentile^, and the glory
of thy people Israel. Oh let us be glad and rejoice, for the Rev. 19.7.
marriage of this Lamb is come, the Bridegroom shows himself, and the Bride
has made her self ready, Amen, Halelujah.

2. Worship and adore at the rising of this Sun, Persians every morning
worshipped the rising Sun, whilst their In the Comment on Lactantius.
neighbors in opposition cursed it, and flung stones at it: All which could not
hinder his progress; So here.

Let believers lie prostrate before Christ, for all the Angels of Heaven
worship him, whilst some oppose Christ and goodness, in opposition to some
good men whom they judge their enemies, and so to vex others they will damn
themselves; but do you worship the rising Sun, with the Matthew. 1.11.
wise men that fell down and offered gold, frank-incense, and myrrh. But,

Mistake not, I do not mean that you should Pompeius dixit, plures esse qui
solemn orie^tem quam occidentem adorent.
change and turn with the times, and ever admire the side which is uppermost,
you must not thus worship the rising Sun.

3. Reckon on the rising of others with, persecution will arise for the Gospels
sake, Matthew. 13.21. False Prophets will arise to darken Christ, Mat. 24.24. And
that in claborate Epistle before a book of Will. Fenner, called Self-murder.
all Ages though God has found out some to countermine them; See Tho. Hills
behold, I have told you before, that you may not wonder when it comes to
pass, See how the Heathens disputed against the Christians with fire and
sword. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 10.
the world will rage against you, Cain will be killing Abel to the end of all
things, and men shall speak all manner of evil against you, drunkards shall
spawle their slanders upon you, false brethren, that will not endure sound
doctrine, shall hate you; so that between profane Many a man may say with
Hypermnestra, Est mihi supplicii causa fuisse pium. Ovid. Epist.
ones and heretics, Non tam vos quam Christum in vobis persequuntur. Salv. de
Prove. lib. 8.
you will have little rest when Christ is risen, either in you, or the Land. But
Patientiae in prosper is nullus usus est. Greg. Moral. lib. 11. cap. 19.
in patience possess your souls. Mariners say no storm like a long calm.
Aristotle's she goats were stung with nettles ere they would give milk. Some say
the Palmtree, the more weight is cast on it (like the Camomill for treading)
the higher it rises. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 16. cap. 42. Pierius observes out
of Basil, That a Christian (like a Salamander) thrives best in the flame. Joan.
Pierius in Hieroglyph. lib. 16. page 196. God afflicts us non studio nocendi,
sed desiderio sanandi. Aug. epist. 48. Nec vincitur fides, sed probatur. Idem
de Civ. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 29, 30. and lib. 4. cap. 3.
These are Gods Scullions, to clear up his vessels of honor. Spice is the
sweeter for pounding, and ground is at once defaced and enriched by dung. The
Saints are better by persecution; the higher the waters arose, the nearer the
Ark was to Heaven, scourging keeps the Top going, and God would have his
corrections to better us; It is writ on the Armoury door at Venice, Foelix est
qui pacis tempore de bello cogitat. viz. Not to make it, but provide for it.
Get into Christ and you are safe.
prepare for a storm.

4. Prepare for Christ's settings:

1. On the Land, Christ may soon set on the land in things Temporal and
Spiritual.

1. In things temporal, how soon may the Sun of righteousness set on us, and
still be righteous? Nulla lux plane affulgeat aut spes adipiscendae laetitiae.
Jun. and Trem. in Loc. Fol. 226.
Amos 8.9.10. I will cause the Sun to go down at noon, and I will turn your
Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into lamentation. * Truly, I fear
there is a tempest at hand, the Sun seems to be clouded already. Well, into
your chambers, and shut the doors about you, get into the clefts of the Rock,
and hide your selves for a moment, till the indignation of the Lord be
everpast, ^sa 26.20.

2. In spiritual things the Sun may soon set: Some believe the Witnesses are
not slain, and that Popery shall overrun us for a season, and all that are
faithful shall be scattered. This is possible, I am sure we have deserved it.
Mic. 3.6. The Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark
over them. Nay the ca^dlestick shall be removed* Rev. 2 5. Genus est hominu^
ingratitudine fieri, ut verbi Dei beneficio, quod spreveru^t tandem
destituantur Marl.
We may fear lest our slighting the Word and Ministers, and unsuitable
walking, should produce as sad an effect as that, and then we may hang our
Harps on the Willow trees, and say, The glory is departed from us.

2. On our Souls Christ may set there also, Psalm. 27.9. Hide not thy face from
me. Cant. 5.6. My beloved had with drawn himself. Christ may hide his face and
withdraw from the best soul, to make her prize his presence, and disrelish
sin more then ever: Set things in order, provide a great deal of grace
against such a time, that then you may quit your selves like men, and not put
out your hands to evil. In particular, live in charity, let not the Sun, nor
this Sun, Non debuit occidere sol super iracundiam vestram, sed multi soles
occiderunt; transcat aliquando iracundia ve stra, dies magni solis celebramus,
de quo Man. 4.2. Ne occidat sol iste in cord tuo super iracundiam tuam ne in
tenebris remane as. Aug. Hom. 43.
says Austin, go down upon thy wrath, love thy neighbor as thy self, Christ
better.

Three staying considerations in Christ's settings.
Take three staying considerations in Crists setting.

1. When he with-drawes from us, he manifests himself to others of our
bre^hren, and fellow members; when the Sun sets with us, he rises in the other
Hemispheare. Moses and Paul non tantum populi salutem, sed ante omnia gloriam
Dei spectabant. Consult. Andr. Willet on Exo. 32 p. 631.
Moses wished his name blotted out, and Paul himself accursed for the peoples
sake, and for others good. Envy not others enjoyments, but be glad when you
see, or hear of them, as being your selves of the same body with them.

2. When the Sun is set, there may be Sydera nocte micant. Ovid. Meramor. li.
7.
Moon and Starre-light, and these though they will not make day (as we said)
are some comfort to Travelers. In Christ's with-drawings you have faith (the
evidence of things not seen) and all the promises as stars round about her, a
glorious spangled Canopy over you Ita vera virtus non apparet in prosperis
eminet in adversis, Bernard in Cant. 27.
, so that you shall live by faith, and Psalm. 23.4. Job. 13.15. Cant. 3.2.
adhere to Christ in such a condition, the seed of grace shall remain in you,
and you shall continue to love Christ.

3. And lastly, possess your vessels with patience, Christ will rise again,
Though sadness come at night, joy may return the next morning, Psalm. 30.5. The
Hebrew has it thus, Singing will come in the morning. The Chaldee thus, In the
morning he raises us up with a Song. There is a sweet place like this, Isai.
17.14. which Ainsworth reads thus, At even tide lo there is trouble, Ainsworth
on Psalm. 30.5. page 48.
but before the morning it is gone. ( Junius and Tremelius read it otherwise,
and so does your Translation.) You see the Sun of Righteousness though he set,
will arise. For he that shall come will come, and not tarry one moment longer,
then to fit you for his presence. Psalm. 112.4. Unto the upright there arises
light in darkness, for he is gracious and full of compassien. Christ will not
be always chiding. And see Isai. 60.21.19. The Lord shall arise, and his glory
shall be seen upon thee. Let believers that walk in darkness, comfort one
another with these words.

Now we come to the fifth and last point which is this:

When Christ the Sun of Righteousness arises, Healing in his wings

In opening this point, first we will explain this expression of Christ,
Healing in his wings: Secondly prove the point, and then wind up all in
Application.

The opening of the terms
First, to open this expression: And here we must show what is meant by Healing;
and then what by healing in such a place. Healing in his Wings.

1. What is meant by Healing. The Geneva trranslation reads it, Health under
his wings. But Tremelius translates it, Cum curatione, and so your Bibles, with
healing. Rich. Stock on the Text, p. 278.
Surely it intimates that all sinners are in a sick and languishing condition
without Christ, and that he is the great Physician of souls, which alone can
cure all your spiritual diseases, viz. your sins by pardoning, and renewing
grace.

But how is healing in the Sun?

Sam Torshell on the Text. p. 84.
As by the beams of the Sun the air is purged and sweetened,

2. What is meant by healing under his wings, healing in such a place?

I answer,

The Sir. and Arab. translates it, Health upon his tongue, thinking that a
fitter place, Antidotum verbi serpentis venenum expugnat.
because he came and preached life, and now intercedes for health for us. But
we must not be wiser then the Text, that says, In alis, In his wings.

Expositors differ: Some will have it taken from Hens, that cherish their
young with their wings. Others say, it is the same Metaphor carried on, and that
by wings is meant the Sunbeams. Let us examine them both.

1. Some will have it to be an Allegory distinct from that of the Sun, taken
from Hens that cherish their little Chickens under their Wings. Thus Austin
and others, Austin quoting this place, and Rich. Ward on Mat. 23.37. page 308.
both as the Wing gathers, defends, and cherishes the young: i. As it cluckes
and gathers the young together that were scattered before. So Matthew. 23.37. How
often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but ye would not. The Hens clucking, and spreading
her hovering wings, calls the Chickens together, that strive who shall come
first under her wings; The Lord Jesus Christ by his Word and Spirit, cluckes
and gathers the Saints to himself, and into sweet communion Johan. Stumpfius
in Postil. Alegor. Eva^g. part hyemali. page 1 26.
one with another. See Cant. 2.4. opened.
Cant. 2.4. He had me into his Wine-cellar, and his Banner over me was love.
The use of the Banner, Flagge, or Ensign in War, is (at the sound of the
Trumpet or Drum) to gather the Soldiers to the Company, or Captain to whom
they belong: Love is Christ's Banner, and the displaying and manifesting of that
(with the shrill Trumpet of the Word) gathers the Elect militant unto Christ
the Captain of their salvation, and into sweet communion one with another, John
17.23. 1 Cor. 1.13. Romans 3.28. Acts 2.42.46.
especially in these Ezekiel. 11.19. Hosea 3.5.
latter times.

2. As the Wing gathers, so it cherishes the feeble Chicken: The warmth of the
Wing hatches the Egg, and strengthens the young Chicken: Why thus Christ
receives us into his bosom, and into communion with himself to Psalm. 138.8.
Apoc. 3.2.
revive and cherish, and strengthen the things are ready to dye, and with the
P^llican he feeds us with his own blood; Come unto me (says Christ) and I
will give you rest, Mat. 11.28.

3. As the Wing defends the young, and that,

1. From the storm Gallina ingru^nte tempe state, sub al^s recipit pullos: ita
etiam Christus. Stump p. 128.
and tempest: So Christ is a refuge against the storm, and a shadow against the
heat, Isai. 25.4. and 51.16. This is the best shelter to the soul in time of
persecution.

2. From ravenous birds of prey, that watch to devour them; Christ guards and
defends us from all the powers of darkness, it is he keeps us from Quid est in
pennis ejus? Mal. 4. In protectione ejus, unde Psalm. 16. dicitur, Sub umbra
alarm tua^um pretige me. Augustine. Gallina pullos suos contra milvi, and
aliar^ avium rapacium impetum defendit: ita etiam Christus nos ab insidiis
volucrum infernalium tuto praestat. Stumpsius in Allegor. Evang. Part Hyemali,
page 127.
all danger, Psalm. 91.3, 4. He will cover thee with his feathers, and under his
wings shall thou trust. And 17.8. Keep me as the Apple of thine eye, Ephesians.
6.12.
Hide me under the shadow of thy wings. So that if you make it a distinct
metaphor, it holds forth the bosome-embraces, and providentiall dispensations
of Saints like Chickens under these wings. id. ibid. page 129. ad 132.
Christ.

Corn. a Lapide in locum.
Cornelius ae Lapide would have it to point out a further mystery, That as
Christ is the Sun of the Church, so the true Bird of the Sun, which is the
Phoenix They say that rare creature, for there is but one, lives about five
Ages, and then building her a Nest of sweet Spices, which with the heat of the
Sun and her Body kindle; there she Singing, Moritur me non moriente senectus.
burns, and from her Ashes Ovid metam. 15.
arises a new one to succeed her: sure I am there is but one Savior, and in
such a Nest he suffered on the Cross, and rose out the third day exceeding
glorious, With healing in his wings.

The flight of that rare creature (the Phoenix) into Egypt, is reported by
Tacitus, to happen under Tiberius: And Solinus tells us, That being taken some
thirty years afterward, it was by the command of Claudius shown publicly at
Rome, and the whole matter registered among the Acts of the Will. Burton in
Annot. on Clements first Epistle to the Corinthians. page 68. to 72.
City. Origin, Lactantius, Eusebius, Clement, with many others, speak
confidently of the A Cyril, Epiphanius, Ambrose in his Hexam. Tertull in his
Poem de judicio Domini; and his Tract de Carnis resurrect thus, Il lum dico^
ali tem Orientis pe^uliarem, de singularitate famosum, de posteritate
monstrosum, qui semetipsum libenter funerans renovat, natali fine decedens
atque succedens iterum Phoenix, ubi jam nemo, it erum ipse, quia non jam alius
idem. Vide etiam Joh. Alsted. Theolog. Not. part. 1. p. 217. and par. 2. p.
474. All these are confident.
Phoenix. Tert ullian thinks he has Scripture for it. For so that place Job
29.18. which in the vulgar is, I shall die in my Nest, and multiply my days as
the Palm, and in our Translation as the Sand, he reads thus, I shall die in my
Nest, and multiply my days as the Phoenix. And thus Beda and the Greek
Septuagint translate it.

We answer, The word Phoenix signifies also a Palm Tree, as well as that rare
bird, and there it can have no animal signification: So that this is a fallacy
of equivocation, from a community in Name, inferring a commmon Nature: learned
men bring many arguments against this Fiction.

1. Herodotus in his Euterpe, Tacitus in his Annals, and Piin. H^st. Not. l b
10. cap. 3.
Most Authors speak doubtfully of it, and Ionston Thanmatogr. Not cl 6. cap 27.
And many others.
many flatly deny it.

2. It would produce a vegetable production in Animals, and unto sensible
natures transfer the propriety of plants, that is, to multiply among
themselves according to the Law of creation, Genesis 1. For'tis said, that without
all conjunction it begets and reseminates it self.

3. It Is unity is repugnant to sacred Scripture, which plainly affirms, there
went of every sort two at least into Noah's Arc, Genesis 7.9.14, 15. Every foul
after his kind, every bird of every sort, went into the Arc, two and two of
all flesh, wherein there is the breath of life If the curious Reader would be
farther satisfied in this point, let him read that excellent Critic, Thomas
Brown, Dr of Physic, in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica, or enquiries into commonly
received Truths, Book 3 Chapter 12. P. 131.
.

Thus you see the first exposition, that by wing is meant a different metaphor
from the Sun, and the fancy of Cornelius a Lapide, that likens Christ to the
Bird of the Sun, calling him the true Phoenix that arises on us with healing
in his wings.

2. I rather think with learned Sam. Torshell on the Text Page 84.
Torshell, and Jun. and Trem. in Locum.
Tremelius, that it is the same metaphor followed, and poetically enlarged; For
as Christ is compared to the Sun, so the Beams of the Sun are called wings;
Sanitas in pennis hoc est in radiis, quia Sol spargit, and expandit radios
suos, ut Psalm 139. Hine Aegyptij sole^ pinxerunt, quasi Avem longas spargente^
pennas circumquaque. Musc. on the Text. Vide Pierium in Hierog. l. 20 cap. 2.
Pa. 239.
and that partly because of the Suns motion, which is exceeding swift, Psalm.
19.5. And he suddenly disparkles out his Beams, when he peeps from behind the
Curtains of a Cloud; and partly, because the Sun spreads his light in its
rifing, as a Bird his wings, so the Scripture speaks, Joel 2.2. The morning
spread upon the mountains, and Psalm. 139.9. If I take the wings of the
morning, viz. In regard of expansion, and dissipation, therefore are the Beams
of the Sun called wings. Now all this is true of Christ; He arises with
healing in his wings, viz. his sweet beams of Grace, his celestial influence
are his wings, and these wings carried him to Heaven, to prepare a place for
us; Christ's motions are swift, and he sheds his Beams of joy suddenly: Again,
he spreads his influences both in the soul and world.

1. In the soul, over all the faculties, mind, will, memory, and affections.
1 These. 5.23. The least true Grace is diffused over all the faculties.

2. In the world over Jews and Gentiles, the Church lies dispersed all the
world over, and of his fullness we all receive, Grace for Grace: Secondly, The
point proved. 1. Argument.
By this time you see what is meant by healing in his wings? Now 2. we will
clear up the point to you, that when Christ arises, he comes with healing in
his wings.

The Arguments shall be two, Christ is a most skillful, careful, and faithful
Physician, and then he cures, Corporally, Spiritually, and Politically.

First, Christ is a most skillful, careful, and faithful Physician Sanitas in
pe^nis ejus quia ipse solaturmaerentes, recreat afflictos, confirmat labantes,
jacentes excitat, ixatos mitigat, omnibusque denique omnia praestat officia
amicitiae and charit at is. Musculus in Mal. 4.2.
.

1. He is most skillful to know the state of his patients, with the cause and
cure of the malady. He feels the pulse of the soul, and knows what is in man,
Joh. 2. He is Cardiognostes, and cannot be deceived, Psalm. 103.3. He can cure
all diseases Omaipotenti medico nullum vulnus insanabile. Bernard.
.

2. He is careful and dilignent in visiting his Patients, Luke 1.68. He has
visited, and redeemed his people; Nay, by his Spirit the Comforter is with us
always to the end of the world.

3. He is faithful, and sinners may venture their souls in his hands. Heb.
10.23. He is faithful that has promised; When sinners ask a fish, he will
not give them a Serpent, he never deceives their expectations, that cast
themselves on him; He will give you Pharmaca insuavia sunt no^ tamen
abborremus, eo quod utilitatem ad ferant. So afflictions and mortifying the
flesh, though unpleasant, are good for us. Ada^ Sasbout. Homil. 3. in Genesis
3.19. page 579.
bitter Pills, and in very faithfulness, he must afflict you; but you may
safely trust him, he will not give you poison instead of Physic, fear him
not.

Secondly, Christ cures Corporally, Spiritually, and Politically, Ergo -- He
bath healing in his wings.

1. He heales corporally, healing in his wings to groaning bodies that lie at
the Gates of Death Duo itaque faciebat Christus, praedicabat Evangelium,
sanabat aegros: Prioribeneficio non admodum movebantur plerique, posteriori
vero quam plurimi. Musculus in Mat. 5.24.
. Mat. 8.16. He healed all that were sick; And thus God healed Abimileck, Job,
and Hezekiah, with many others mentioned in the Word; When he has farther
work for you, he easily rebukes your diseases, and plasters up your Tabernacle
of clay; He brings down to the dust, and raises up again: How often has
Christ set us upon our legs, to give us more time of repentance; He has shook
us over the Grave, and then numb^ed us again among the living, by Vita non est
vivere, sed valere. Seneca.
restoring health to us: Behold his power, his patience, his goodness to us;
Oh let us return according to these mercies received; When thou art sick, trust
not in Physicians but Christ, for when they leave thee, Novit Dominus
mutaresententia^, si tu nov^ris emendare vitam. August. in Psalm. 50.
Christ can cure thee; But above all, make a Mo^bus est utilis quaeda^
institutio, quae docet caduca asporaere, et coelestia spirare. Naz. ad Philag.
spiritual improvement of such visitations, that the So far went the
Religion of Heathens, that Ipsi Reges Peruanoru^ libent^ssime amplexabantur
aegritudines; Nuncios Coeli illas vocabant, quabus se dicebant ad Deos acciri.
Eusebius. Nieremberg. Histor. Not. lib. 8. cap. 13. Page 138.
sickness of thy body, may be the health of thy soul. You see Christ is the
best Physician of the body, the whole College of Physicians must put him
before them, and in all their un lertakings say this will help, if Christ our
great Dr. please.

Christ heales spiritually, with healing in his wings to diseased souls, that
lie at the Gates of H^ll; Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt.
He forgives, and subdues their sins, Mat. 9.12.
revives, and comforts their souls. Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upoa
me, and he has anointed me to preach the G^spel to the poor, he has sent
me to heal the brokenhearted, and preach deliverance to the captives, and
set at liberty those that are bruised. See Jer. 35.6, 8. Behold, I will give
health, and cure, and I will cure them, and reveal unto them, the abundance of
Peace, and Truth, and I will cleanse them from their iniquities, which I will
pardon, etc.

Cicer. Tusc. Sanabilibus aegrotamus malis, Seneca de Ira. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Even Heathens have acknowledged the sick soul of man may be cured; well, Christ
is that great Interna vulnera, Balsamu^ internum.
internal Physician, and Ministers, 1 Cor. 3.9. Romans 10.14, 15.
who are said to co-work with him, are the external. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. The
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all, apt to teach,
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledgement of the Truth,
and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are
taken captive by him at his will: 1 Cor. 3.6.
But all this while we can do nothing without Christ, we may thrust cripples
into the Poole, it is he stirs the water, Not we but Jesus of Nazareth cures
sinners.

But how does Christ heal them?

I answer; By his blood, Stilomu^s Pour^^ossi^^ing. p. 302:
and the blood of the Physician, says Sanguis medici medicame^tum aegri. Aug.
Austin, is the medicine of the Patient. Hear the Apostle Peter in his 1
Epistle 2 Chapter, 24. verse; By his stripes we are healed. The application of
that to the Conscience cures us; for, the blood of Christ cleanses from all
sin, and without the shedding of blood there could be no remission, no curing
of us; oh this was a powerful, and precious medicine indeed, it Clemens
Alexandrinus calls it,(...), viz. The remedyagainst all the venom of
corruption
cures all our maladies; Alchermes, Bezoar, Dust of Pearls, or Aurum Potabile,
are not so comfortable, or restorative to the weak body, as this blood to the
sick soul 1 Pet. 1. 18. Acts 20.28.
; This is such a medicine, that Heaven and Earth had not the like, or another;
You see how he cures souls, chiefly by his blood, other secondary means he
uses.

For 2. As Christ cures souls by his blood, Psalm. 107.20. He sent out his word,
and healed them. And this was the reason why the Sir. and Arab. read the Text
thus; He shall arise with healing upon his Tongue; For, Peace is the fruit of
his lips, promising, pronouncing, interceding; Till he speak peace by his
Sicut corpori Deus praeparavit medicame^ta ex herbis, it a animae praeparavit
medicamenta ex his sermonibus. Origin.
Word, there is no healing for us.

Next, Christ heales by his rod, he sends sicknesses into our flesh, God
afflicts us non studio nocendi, sed desiderio sanandi. Aug. Epist. 48.
; He wounds us to cure us; The fruit of afflictions to Believers, is the taking
away of sin, Isa. 27. Now fin is the souls sickness; The rod is a Teaching
rod; David found it good for him, viz. his soul, that he had been afflicted.

Lastly, I will send the Comforter to you, says Christ, Joh. 14.26. He will
help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. This is that 1 John 2.20.27. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22
oil, which Christ the good Samaritan poures into a wounded Conscience, to
assuage the grief of souls, and administer ease, and refreshment to such as
groan for mercy, Romans 8.16. In our greatest spiritual distempers, his Heb.
4.12.
Sumus quide^ nos valde infirmi, at spiritus sa^ctus adjuvare non desinit.
Chrystoph. Hosmon.
Grace is sufficient for us, he stays us with flaggons, and comforts us with
apples, when we are sick of Love.

You see Christ heales the soul spiritually, and how.

3. Christ heales Politically, be comes with healing in his wings when he
pleases, to divided and distempered Nations, deadly wounds of Nations may be
cured, Rev. 13.3. When we think a Nation is so full of wounds, and botches,
that it must needs perish, Christ can heal it. And it is his employment to
heal Nations, as well as bodies, or souls. Jer. 30.17. They that spoil thee,
shall be a spoil, for I will restore health unto thee, and heal thee of thy
wounds; Oh that God would say thus to these distempered, and distracted
Kingdoms, and oh that he would Dolorem medicinae spes salutis mitigat.
make us willing to be healed! No differences are too great for Christ to
compose; ours are intricat^; Ann. Dom. 1648. Julii.
our several opinions, and factions, and fractions, what are they but so many
diseases upon our Mother the Church of England? A whole College of
State-Physicians have been long in Consultation, many veins have been opened,
etc. Yet still she is sick, sick almost unto Death! Well, no Nation so
desperately sick, but Christ can cure it, and that easily, speedily, he can
rebuke the madness of the people, give our Senators wisdom, unite head and
members, hush the Nations, and make wars to cease; Sanitas gentium est
agnitis Redemptionis beneficiis, etc. Pignetus in Apoc. 22.2.
The leaves of that Tree of life, that has twelve manner of fruits, are for
the healing of the Nations, Rev. 22.2. Tho: Brightman on the Rev. Page 882.
This tree of life, with his variety of fruit, and medicinal leaves, is Jesus
Christ, it is he that will nourish, and heal the Nations professing the Gospel
Ezekiel. 47.12.
.

Thus it has been proved to you,

Mihi meritum d^est, non illi misericordia. Bernard Sermon. 14. and 61.
feet of free grace, He will have mercy, because he will have mercy; it is your
Saviors good will to heal you, we have merited nothing, can challenge
nothing, when he might think of hell, he thinks of healing; should he for ever
leave us rotting in our sins, Christ were just.

2. Believers find healing from Christ, Porro foliis fides co^fertur. in Rev.
22.2. Pignetus in Locum.
. He took our nature, says Austin, that he might heal it of all diseases,
and then takes the Elect, and unites them to himself, that they all may
partake of the Cure.

3. It Is his office to heal them, Isa. 61.1. He has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, and proclaim liberty to the Captives. Now when Christ was
Christus in Evangel. Johan. satis ostendit, quaenam sit patris voluntas, nempe
ut injunctum sib^ munus expleret. Calvin.
anointed, that is, furnished, and solemnly designed for this work, if for this
end God sent him from Heaven, surely we may conclude, he both can, and will
heal us of our sins.

4. There is no other eye will pity us, nor hand can help us,

5. and lastly, Pulchra est and elegans allusio, ad magnorum principum more^,
qui siquando humili and obscuro loco natam puellam, in uxorem ducturi sunt,
prius eam ab omnibus sordibus abluunt, au^o and gemmis ornant, denique moribus
nobilitate dignis imbuunt, ne principis mariti thoro, ullam maculam aut ignon
iniae notam ^spergat. Calvin. in Ephesians. 5.26.
. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. If a great Prince were to marry a beggar, void of Nobility,
or Portion, or Beauty, but full of vermin, boyles, and innumerable diseases,
would he not first cause her to be cleaned, healed, and adorned? Was Ahasuerus
so dainty, that the most beautiful Virgins in all his Provinces, must for 12.
months be purified, and anointed with oil, and sweet odors, before they were
admitted into the Kings House? And can you think that Christ will marry
finners, and never have them washed, nor cured, when the Heaven^ are impure in
his sight? No; he is of purer eyes, then to behold iniquity, and he marries
none, but such as he can, and will delight in, and no soul so loathsome, and
diseased, but he can presently heal it.

Take one Caution,

We are not Romans 7.23. 1 Cor. 13.12.
perfectly healed in this life, for it is not health in his wings, as the Geneva
translation reads it, but healing in his wings Vide Augustine Tract. 80. in
Johan. and de Civit. Dei. lib. 9. cap. 27. Calvin adversus Anabaptist. Art. 2.
And Luther de profectuin Christianismo, where he says a man is Christianus,
^ather in fi^ri, then in facto.
. We have no perfect health from Christ, only we are now healing, Christ is
in hand with the Cure, and will never give us over, till the cure is perfect in
Heaven. So then we conclude, the state of the best is to be cured in part, and
still lie under the Physicians hand. See Pemble of Justif. sect. 3. cap. 2.
Page 184.

Let us now wind up all in Application.

1. Is it so, that Christ comes with healing in his wings, with his hands full
of salves and plasters to us, then see, and bewail the natural estate and
condition of mankind; Morbi perniciores pluresque sunt animi quam corporis. M.
T. Cicero.
The diseases of the soul, are more, and more grievous, said Tully, then the
diseases of the body: The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint,
from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, there is nothing but
bruises, and running sores. We have b^^^^^ minds, lame wills, crooked
affections. See Bp. Abernethy concerning Physic for the soul, where he
numbers up 34 pestilent diseases of the soul, and their causes, symptoms, and
cures: and Dr. Tailor in his principles of Christian practice on Luke 5.31.
Page 552.
There Is the Tympany of pride, the Aposthume of self-love, the plague of
discontent, the stone of hardness in heart, the burning fever of lust, the
dropsy of drunkenness, the consumption of envy, the ague of inconstancy, the
lethargy of sloth, the apoplexy of security, the falling sickness of
apostasy, the palsy of timerousnesse, and the Gangreen of heresy, etc. And so
I might go on till I were out of breath, and you out of patience; Lord, what a
monster is man? Yea rather what a monster is a sinner, for man was made a
glorious Creature, but forbidden fruit brought these diseases; And when Si ad
aegritudinem animi accedat aegritudo corporis duplicatur infirmitas, duplicatur
dolor. Hieron. in Isa.
One with all these soule-maladies uncured, falls into bodily, behold what a
Map of misery, what a picture of trouble the man is, no health without, nor
none within neither; the Physician is ready to give his body for dead, and the
Minister his soul for damn d: This is sad indeed!

Oh that we could see our sickness, Mat. 9.12. opened.
for the whole (that is, such as dream themselves so) have no need (that is,
see no need) of the Physician, viz. Jesus Christ, but those that are sick,
deadly sick, sick at heart, sick all over; viz. such as now perceive their
sickness, such as now groan for mercy, and are quite weary of sin.

2. Here is terror for all those, Matthew. 23.37. When Christ offers to heal
them Hosea 7.1.
, then their iniquity is discovered, and like Babylon, they Non impotentes, sed
nolentes condemnabuntur. Bern. de Pass. Dom. cap. 32.
will not be cured, they have been drunkards, and they will not learn
temperance, they have been filthy, and they are filthy still, they are bad, and
will be no better: Mr Fenner Will. Fenner in a Book called selfe-murder,
opening Ez^k. 18.31, 32. Page 8. ad fine^.
, has exceedingly cleared this point, that the reason why wicked men are not
healed, why they do not repent, and come out of their sins, is not because
they cannot (though they cannot) but because they will not; For God damns men
for will-nots, not for cannots; They deserve to perish, says Musculus Merito
perit aegrotus qui medicu^ non vocat, sed ultro venientem resp^it. Muscul.
, that slight their Physician, who freely offers to cure them: These have
recourse to silly Empericks, and use other remedies that cannot help, as the
Medicines of spiritual Egypt, which are Si Deus secundu^ merita tibi daret,
damnaret te. Aug. in Psalm. 102.
merits, Jer. 46.11. Or Libertine Teachers, and Principles, Jer. 8.11. Or
finally, the comforts, and pleasures of this life, as well sinful, as lawful;
Some think to drown the cries of Conscience with Soli filij irae i^om non
^^nti^n^. Bernard. (...). 2^6.
carnal jollity, or multitude of employments; many that are Sermon-sicke, and
find some qualmes upon their hearts, hope to drink away care, and fling away
the pensive thoughts of sin, with their Dice, etc.

But all these are Physicians of no value. Remember this, there is a Time of
healing, (see Eccles. 3.3.) Beware of dallying with God, and letting it slip;
Be not so cruelly injurious to your precious souls, as to let it slip
unimproved; for then Qui aegrota^t animo, quo gravius aegrotant, hoc magis
abhorrent a quiet, et a medico. Plutarch.
(I tremble to utter it) you will be judicially blinded, and hardened of God, least
(or for fear) you should be converted, and Christ should heal you, Joh.
12.40. A sad place! And a Plorante medico ridet phreneticus, and plorantibus
amicis. August.
sad case to be past healing, and yet on this side Hell. To laugh at the
Physician, that shows you your danger, and weeps over you! To spit out divine
Physic, and fling away those Plasters, that are spread with the goare blood
of Christ, how can they escape, that neglect so great salvation!

3. Here is mavelous comfort, Dolores animae sunt animae dolorum, and a
wounded spirit who can bear?
no means of help in themselves, but look after Christ for ease; Many doubts
and Tentations are ready to perplex your hearts, I would feign stifle your
objections.

1. Object. sins, my diseases are grievous, my sins are heightened, and
aggravated sins, as being committed against light, and against love, against
means, and against mercies, etc. Can, or will Christ cure such evils?

I answer; Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, I Will give you ease, and rest, says
Christ. See Psalm. 103.3. He forgives all thine Iniquities (great and small) and
heales all thy diseases Verbum Dei Panacea vocatur a sanandis Omnibus Morbis.
: It is a wicked distinction of Rome, that divides sins into venial, and
mortal, because though some sins comparatively are greater then others, yet
no Non leve quo Deus laeditur. Salvian. de Provid. lib. 2.
sin, is truly little, or trivial, because committed against a righteous
Law, and Infinite Justice; nor any sin mortal, if by Faith, and Repentance,
you close in with Christ: Banish therefore all despair; say not with Cain, My
sin is greater then I can bear; my disease too dangerous to be cured! Thou
lie Cain, says Genesis 4.13. Mentir^s Came. August.
Austin; Where sin abounds, his Grace will much more abound; The more
dangerous thy disease, the more glorious the Cure; Now Christ will get him a
name: The sin against the Holy Ghost is not too hard for Christ to heal, but
it is ever accompanied with malicious willfulness, and all such will not be
healed: Suppose that sin capable of Repentance, and you must needs say, it is
also capable of pardon; Sanantur nullo vulnera cordis open; not true in
Divinity.
God ean make Scarlet and Crimson sins whiter then Snow.

2. Green wounds may be cured,

Yes: For God has said it, Ezekiel. 18.22. Isai. 65.20.
at what time soever you come, he will cure you. The sinner of an hundred
years old shall be accursed; that is, if he continue in his sin. Let not
the oldest sinner despair of mercy, and yet beware of customary sinning,
Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati. Aug.
Repent with the Thief in thy last hour, and thou art safe; when death is
killing thy body, Christ may be healing thy soul: however presume not,
remember that common but true saying, True repentance is never too late, but
late repentance is seldom true; and know the purchasing of heaven is like the
buying the Sybils prophecy, the longer we stand off, the dearer 'twill cost
us, the more tears, harder repentance, deeper sorrow; the sooner thy bones are
set, the less pain, etc. Qui promi sit poenitenti veniam, non promisit
peccon^^ crastinum. Aug.
He that promised mercy to the penitent, never promised a morrow to the sinner,
says Austin.

3. The next objection is this, have fallen again and again into the same sin?

This I confess is sad, Hosea 14.4. I will heal your back slidings, and love
you freely. Quoties ce cidit peccando, toties resurgit poenitendo.
Solomon says, The righteous man falls seven times a day: if that be spoken
of sin, and the same sin, yet it includes his repentance: Peccasti? poenitere
Millies peccasti? Millies poenitere. Chrysostom Homil. 2. in Psalm. 50.
for how could he fall seven times, unless he had even six? Only sin not that
grace may abound, try not experiments with your poor souls.

4.

Christ was a man of Christ was Homo doloris, say to him, Non ignare mali
miseris succurrito Christ!
sorrows, and was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin. He is
touched with feeling of our infirmities, and in all our afflictions he also
(as our head, and husband) is offlicted, he condoles and sympathizes with us;
Christ bears our sickness, says Isaiah, God has fitted him as with a Body to
be a Savior, so with a heart to be a pitiful Physician, Amarum peculum prius
^ivit M^dicus (...) vib^^ e^^er^t (...) rotus. Ita Christus, etc. Augustine. in
Psalm. 98.
he has tasted every bitter cup before us, and his very bowels yearn over us.

5. Oh but if Christ were at hand,

It Is true, his Body is there, John 14.18. Heb. 13.5.
I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you, says Christ. Psalm
34.18. He is near unto the afflicted in spirit: their eyelids may be glewed
up that they cannot see him, yet he it near them; even at hand, and his
presence is a little Heaven.

6. But others neglect me,

You all remember the Parable, Luke 10.34. Christ was that good Samaritan, He
therefore heales thee, and helps thee, because no heart will pity thee, no
hand can help thee but his. He wants neither love nor power to do thee good.
Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. When thou layest rotting in thy sins, none eye pitied thee,
nor had compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the
loathing of thy person in that day, Mihi meritum deest non illi misericordia.
Bernard. Sermon. 14. Nisi gratuita non est gratia. Aug. de great. Chr. cap. 23.
and when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, I said unto
thee, Live, Live. q. d. when thou wast in that woeful pickle, like Job on the
Dunghill, full of the botches of sin, loathsome to thy self, and all others
that were good; then was my time of love, then did I wash, anoint, and adorn
thee. A sweet Scripture, and suitable thereunto is that place, Psa. 27.10. When
father and mother and all forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.

7. O but when he does come, poor, blind, naked, and miserable? I answer:

Remember that place, Hosea 14.4. I will heal your rebellions freely. Luke
8.43.
One that spent all on Physicians, and found no ease, came to Christ, and was
cured for nothing. So here. Free Grace is not Fee Grace; Ascensus gratiarum est
descensus gratiae. Bernard.
it exspects no recompense, but requires thankfulness: What does Christ else
require of thee? David therefore was full of praises, Psa. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless
the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless
the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgives thine
iniquities, and heales thy diseases. Extol your Physician to the Clouds: tell
others what he has done for your souls, and send all your sick friends and
neighbors to him: This is all the fee he expects from thee.

To conclude all, Suffer now the word of exhortation, to come and creep under
the healing power of Christ's wings by faith: what will it profit you to Labor
ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.
have healthy bodies and diseased souls? And how will you do when both body and
soul are sick together, and one cannot help nor serve the other? One that has
spiritual life, and is void of spiritual health, may, and will get to heaven.
But Lord! what murmuring, what groaning, what complaining will proceed from
such a soul, tending to Gods dishonor, the souls discomfort, and others
disheartning? God requires Cheerfulness and Rejoicing, etc. This cannot be
done till health is procured: Ipsa vita morbus est, ipsa immortalitas vera
santitas. Aug. de Temp. 74.
if the cure be begun here, it shall be perfected in heaven: for death will
put an end to all diseases, and such shall cease from sin Vltimus and optimus
medicus morboru^ etia^ immedicabilium, mors.


These are the Motives. Now for the Means, and I have done.

Frequent the Ordinances, especially the Word and Prayer.

1. The Word, stand in Gods way, go into his Garden, among his beds of Spices,
where he is gathering medicinal herbs for thee, lie at the beautiful Gates of
the Temple. There is a searching, healing, and quickening power conveyed by the
preaching of the Word, Prove. 27.18. The tongue of the wise is health, he sent
out his Word and so healed them, Psalm 107.20.

Prima pars sanitatis velle sanari. Seneca.
2. Prayer, grovell in the dust at his feet, pant for mercy, lay open your
sores, and spread all your infirmities and grievances before him, and then
entreat him to cure you; Say with David Psalm. 41.4.
, Lord be merciful unto me, and heal my Soul, for I have sinned against
thee. Luke 7.7.
And what the Centurion desired for his servant, do thou beg for thy Soul,
Speak but the word, and my soul is healed: i. Nam qui cor pore aegrotus est
absque rubore morbum suum medico revelat, qui autem animo aegrotat, vitia sua
studiose celat, and nonnunquam virtutis specie palliat. Musculus in Matthew. 5.24.
Be large and free in confession. When you go to a Physician, you hide
nothing, you are ashamed of nothing, etc. So it must be here. To confess sin
is the way to find ease and mercy. Prove. 28.13 Psalm. 32.3, 4. Strangulat in
clusus dolor atque exaestuat intus. Ovid Trist. 5.1.
Whilst I kept silence, says David, my bones consumed in my roaring all the
day long. Cry out therefore with the blind man after Christ, Thou Son of David
have mercy upon me, and say with the Leper, a Lord if thou will thou can cure
me. Never did poorer creature beg thy pity; and behold, mercy is thy
delight, yea thou have commanded me to come unto thee, and promised I shall
find ease and rest in thee, I have nothing to plead for my self, but misery is
the proper object of mercy, Lord I am Misery it self, amd thou art Mercy it
self; yea, thou have power in thy hands immediately to do me good, do it for
thy Names sake: So shall my mouth be filled with praises, and my heart with
joy.

Do thus, and then wait upon God: For there is nothing to be done in this
cure, without Subsidium fidei est patientia, Bullingerus in Heb. 10.36. Deus
non exandit ad voluntatem, ut exaudiat ad salutem. Augustine. in Psalm 80.
Patientia nos Deo commendat, and servat, iram temperat, linguam fraenat, mentem
gubernat, etc. Ita Cecil. Cypr. Sermon. 30. de bono patientiae.
patience, and doubt not but the Sun of RIGHTEOUSNESS will arise upon thee
with Healing in his Wings. Amen.

FINIS.
September. 9o 1648.
Imprimatur

JOSEPH CARYL.

An Alphabeticall Index of the special points contained in both parts.
A
IN Christ's Abasements the Deity appeared. Page 248, 249 We must abide in Gods
goodness. Page 148, 149 Christ sheds his beams abundantly. Page 184, 185 God
an absolute and perfect good. Page 130, 131, 132 The two Adams much different,
Page 126, 127 Adams estate in innocence neither so good nor so sure as a
believers estate in the righteousness of Christ. Page 243 We should admire the
goodness of Gods Nature, Page 142, 143 Carnal ones shall admire glorified
Saints at the last day, though now they undervalue and despise them so much.
Page 92, 93 Adoration not due to Angels elect. Page 8, 9 Great advantages let
slip by enemies, when the Lord does infatuate them and their counsels. Page 4,
5 Affections will appear in expressions. Page 29 Affections requisite in such
as would win others, for diverse reasons. Page 29, 30 How to kindle affections
in others. Page 31. 32, 33 How to have affections kindled in our bosoms under
the Gospel-wooings. Six helps. Page 34, 35, 36 We must allure others to Christ.
Page 12. to 21 Sad to allure men to sin. Page 19, 20 The encamping of Angels
round about us, should make us sensible of divine care and goodness. Page 6.
to 12 Angels are numerous. Page 6 It Is the office of Angels to guard us. Page
6, 7 No guard like a guard of Angels. Page 7 Angels can do nothing without a
commission. 7 Angels must be imitated, not worshipped. Page 8, 9 Angels guard
us whilst in our ways. Page 9 Angels are present at our solemn Assemblies.
Page 9, 10 Saints after death like Angels. Page 10 Fali'n Angels lie unpittied,
unredeemed. Page 11 Elect Angels (...) joyce at our conversion. Page 10, 18
Antichrist assumes the Titles of Christ, and calls himself the Sun among the
Stars. Page 213. to 216 Rejoice in the Appearances of Christ. Page 260 Christ
has his times of arising. Page 247. to 265 To the world. 247. to 252. To the
soul. Page 252. to 254 The manifestations of Christ like the Suns arising, and
wherein unlike, with the Uses of all. Page 154. to 165 When Christ does arise,
he comes with healing in his wings. Page 165. ad finem Of Christ's Ascension.
Page 250 Christ good by Aspect and conjunction. Page 210, 211 In solemn
Assemblies Angels eye us. Page 9. 10 True knowledge has full assurance. Page
112 Astronomers say the Sun is good by aspect, and evil by conjunction, this
false of Christ. Page 210, 211 Of attention under the Word. Page 34 Light is
awakening. Page 200, 201
B.
Backslidings are curable. Page 286 In Baptism we may taste divine goodness.
Page 40 Christ sheds his Beams like the Sun, freely, suddenly, impartially,
and abundantly. Page 181. to 185 The Beauty of Christ is unconceiveable, and
indeed unutterable. Page 190. to 194 Small beginnings in grace should not
discourage us. Page 93 to 95 Believers estate in Christ hetter then Adams. Page
243 True knowledge betters us Page 114 Birds sing at Sun rising; so believers
rejoice at the appearance of Christ. Page 257 Of the bird of the Sun, and how
Christ is like the Phoenix. Page 296 to 271 Of the birth of Christ. Page 247,
248 True Blessedness consists in tasting Gods love. Page 22 Blind devotion
abominable. Page 116. 117 Most men blockish in spiritual things. Page 30 The
blood of Christ heals us. Page 275, 276 Christ heales Bodies as well as souls.
Page 273, 274 How the born of God sin not. Page 89 Childrens bread not for
whelps Page 158 Of bringing others into Christ. Page 12. to 21
C.
Many calumnies fastened on God, Christ, and all that are godly. Page 140, 141,
142 We are not capable of much grace here Page 77. to 100 Christ a most
careful Physician. Page 273 Christ changes us. 253 Childrens bread. Page 158
Christ an inexhaustible fountain of divine sweetness. Page 16. 17 Christ
teaches only his friends. Page 104 Christ like the Sun in 21. respects,
unlike in five. The Uses of that Allegory. Page 180. to 223 Christ is of a
communicative nature. 180. 181. How Christ communicates his beams. 181. to 185.
Christ at his Fathers command. 187, 188. Christ is exceeding great in power.
188. to 190. Christ is of a dazeling splendour, and matchless beauty. 190. to
194. Christ is the ornament of Souls, Nations, and Heaven it self. Page 194.
to 196 Christ's motions are admirable. Page 197 to 200 Christ is seen by his own
light. Page 203 Christ's influences may be felt when his face is hid. Page 204
Christ melts some, and hardens others. Page 206 Christ cheares up Saints with
his beams. Page 206, 207 Nothing makes day if Christ be wanting, and if Christ
shine, all other glories are drowned Page 207, 208 Christ gives sight as well
as light. Page 209, 210 Our happiness stands in union with Christ. Page 210,
211 How Christ shall deliver up his Kingdom to the Father, and yet reign for
ever. Page 211, 212 An old heresy that Christ dwells in the circle of the Sun,
refuted. Page 216. to 218 Christ a Sun or Fountain of righteousness, inherent,
imparted, imputed, Remunerative. Page 223. to 246 Christ has his times of
rising and discovering himself and his beauty. Page 247. to 265 When Christ
does arise he comes with healing in his wings. Page 265. ad finem Of Christ's
birth. Page 247, 248 Of Christ's crucifixion. Page 248, 249 Of Christ's
resurrection. Page 249, 250 Of Christ's ascension. Page 250 Christ a careful
Physician. Page 272. ad finem. Christ the true Phoenix. Page 269. to 271 The
happiness of Christians since Christ, above those that lived under the Law, in
five respects. Page 172 to 176 What it is to be clothed with the Sun. Page 220
Commission from God inables Angels to help us. Page 7 A positive command to win
others. Page 14 Bad company a snare. Page 62, 63 God a communicative good. Page
180 to 185 True knowledge communicative. Page 110, 111 Christ knows not how to
conceal his love from us here, as Joseph could not from his brethren. Page 81
We conceal nothing from the Physician. Page 290 Conference helps us to
remember experiences. Page 25, 41 Confession the way to absolution. Page 290 In
contemplation we taste Gods goodness Page 42. to 45 We should contemplate of
all Gods perfections and outgoings. Page 44 We must continue in Gods goodness.
Page 148, 149 Of converting others. Page 12. to 21 Of corporal taste, its
pleasure short. Page 37. and 74 Christ can heal corporally. Page 273, 274 We
co-work with God. Page 90, 91 Men greedy to taste the creature, not the
creator. Page 63, 64 Creep under the healing wings of Christ. Page 288. ad
finem Some will not be cured. Page 282, 283 Great cures wrought by Christ. Page
272 ad finem
D
The Damned do not taste one drop of divine goodness. Page 75, 76 Thickest
darkness expeld by Christ's shinings. Page 202, 203 David his great streights.
2. His flying so Gath to save his life. 2. His policy there, and the success.
2, 3. His thankfulness there for that deliverance. Page 5 Death destroyed in
an overcomming Christ. Page 249 Death makes Saints like Angels. 10. yea like
Christ. Page 223 Christ heales us and adornes us, because he would fain take
delight in us. Page 279, 280 In blackest desertions some strength from Christ
to upbold us, 204, 205. Christ's design in giving us grace, is, that we should
invite others, and enlarge his dominions. Page 14, 15 Christ a most desirable
good, who is able to give full content to the soul, and rich delight. 132,
133. To hinder Despair we get here some tastes of Gods goodness. Page 81, 82
The very Devils and damned in hell partake of Gods goodness, although they
cannot taste or perceive it. This is proved Page 121. to 123 Blind Devotion
abominable to God. Page 116, 117 True knowledge is diffusive Page 110, 111
Jesus Christ a diffusive good. Page 180. to 184 Directions how to win others to
Christ. Page 21. and 31 In experimental discoveries of divine sweetness, God
is best tasted. Page 48 Christ has his times of discovering himself and his
beauties to the world, and to the soul. Page 247. to 265 We must not be
discouraged at small beginnings. Kome was not reared in a day. Page 93, 94
Discouraging others is a fearful sin. Page 67 Christ's motions are
distinguishing. Page 200 Christ works diversely on diverse objects. Page 206 As
Dogs must not catch the childrens bread, so children must not fear the
Dogs whip. Page 157. to 161 Of drawing others to Christ. Page 12. to 21. and
29. to 34 Drooping Saints cheared. Page 72, 73 The sweet presence of Christ
drownes other comforts, as the Sun the Stars. Page 207, 208 Drunkenness a
beastly sin. Page 65 Naturally all are dull of hearing. Page 30 A duty to
invite others to Christ. Page 12. to 21. and 29. to 34 Long to die; for here is
but a taste of God. Page 85. to 99
E.
Christ never totally Eclipst. Page 209 Eja-culations under the Word useful
Page 35, 36 Some leave Christ, and run to Empericks. Page 282 Angels encamping
about us a sign of the Lords care. Page 6. to 12 Encouragement to Droopers.
Page 72, 73 Gods end in giving us grace, what? Page 14, 15 God can infatuate
his enemies, let all such be warned in time, Page 4 Reigning envy and sincerity
cannot dwell together Page 17 Christ equal with the Father. Page 188. 212
Erberies doctrine damnable. Page 227. to 230 Esteem nothing sweet or good any
further then you can enjoy God in it. Page 148 Estimation follows tasting
divine goodness. Page 69, 70 God an eternal good two ways. Page 134, 135 How
to evidence truth of grace. Page 20, 21. Examine if God be good to you. 144,
145. Examine your fear of God. 163. Examine your tastes of God. Page 69
Examples of many Saints that have invited others to holiness. Page 13, 14
Light is expergefactive. Page 200, 201 Experiences husbanded and revived, beget
trust, how to remember experiences. Page 22. to 25 True knowledge is
experimental. Page 109, 110 Wounding expressions flow from violent affections,
Page 29 and 31 Exultation a fruit of fasting, divine goodness. Page 70
F.
When Christ's Face is hid, his power is felt. Page 204 By faith Christ is
tasted and applied. 45, 46. Of the righteousness of faith. 239. to 244. Christ a
faithful Physician. Page 173 Of the fear of God: the kinds, marks, motives,
and helps of and to the filial fear of God. Page 161. to 164 If once we have
tasted how good the Lord is, we shall fear to forfeit him, or grieve him. Page
25, 26 They that fear God, shall be taught of him. Page 104, 105 Christ a
reviving Sun to such as fear him. Page 162 Christ will not expect large fees
when he has cured us. Page 288 Christian felicity stands in getting tastes of
God. Page 22 Not our fill of God here, we get but a taste of his goodness.
This truth handled at large, and objections scattered. Page 77 to 100 Your fill
hereafter if you taste now. Page 56, 57 In what sense we are said to be filled
here. Page 87, 88 Follow God in goodness, learn of him. Page 147 The folly of
Justiciaries. Page 242 Forms of godliness. Page 61, 62 Christ a Fountain of
light and life. Page 102, 103 God a free good. Page 129, 130 Christ shoots his
beams freely. Page 181, 182 All the fruits and graces of the Spirit are excited
and drawn forth by Christ's shinings. Page 205, 206 Such as will not taste the
Lords goodness, must taste of his fury. Page 55, 56 The reason of men's fury
against the ways of God, is, that they never tasted nor tried them. Page 68
and 69
G.
Of Gaining others to Christ, 12. to 21. and 29. to 34. Christ t^sted gall for
thee, do thou taste Nectar for him. Page 76, 77 Christ cluckes and gathers
believers into sweet communion with himself, and one another. Page 267, 268
God a general good to all. Page 120. to 124. and 183 A decent gesture becomes
an Orator. Page 33 The holy Ghost is not in us as a man in his shop: for then
our failings would be his. Page 90. 91 In the common gifts of the Spirit, some
taste of GOD. Page 46. and 59 The glory of God is infinitely beyond the glory
of elect Angels. Page 8, 9 Christ the crown of our crowns, the glory of glory,
the heaven of heaven. Page 196 Christ is true and perfect God. Page 229, 230
Godliness of life the best engine to work on others affections. Page 32. The
unparalleld Goodness of God, treated of at large. Page 118 to 149 The goodness
of God is seen in his Angels attendance on us. Page 10, 11, 12 The Lord as a
Creator a general good to all. Page 120. to 124. God in Christ a peculiar good
to the Elect. Page 124, 125 The Lord an Independent good. Page 125. to 128 The
Lord a free good. Page 129, 130 God an absolute, suitable, and complete good.
Page 130. to 132 The Lord is a most desirable and delectable good. Page 132,
133 God is an eternal good, a lasting, and everlasting good, both absolutely,
and relatively. Page 134, 135 11. Things inferred hence that God is good. Page
136. to 149 Christ arises when the Gospel is preached. Page 251 Grace has
this nature to becken others to Christ, and the end of Gods giving Grace is
this. Page 14, 15 Grace, and envy, cannot sleep in one bed. Page 17, 18 We
taste God in the sweet Graces of his Spirit. Page 46, 47 The Sun is very
great. Page 188, 189 Great sins are pardonable, and curable. Page 284 Grieve
not your good Father. Page 143 Grovell in the dust before God. Page 290 Rest
not in Truth of Grace, but grow in Grace daily. Page 95. to 99 No Guard like a
Guard of Angels. Page 7, 8 You may guess at Heaven by your joys here, Ex pede
Herculem. 99, 100
H.
Heinous sins curable. Page 283. to 286 Christ at hand; he is near unto
believers. Page 287 True happiness consists in Tastes of God. Page 22 Christ
hardens some in their sins. Page 206 Christ comes with healing in his wings,
he can heal, corporally, spiritually, and politically. Page 272. to 278 Why
Christ heales souls; The Uses of all. Page 278. ad finem. What Heathens have
said of the goodness of God. Page 118, 119 Christ is Heavens beauty. Page 196
^uesse what Heaven is by your comforts here. Page 99. 100 Heaven sweetened by
the miseries and combats of this life, that cloud our joys here. Page 86, 87
Heaven full of joy at the conversion of one sinner. Page 18 Why it is not
perfect Hell with believers in this life. Page 80, 81, 82 In Hell it self,
some footsteps of Gods goodness, proved. Page 121, to 123 And yet it is as true
in Hell, no tasting or perceiving the least drop of Gods goodness. Page 75, 76
Helps to retain experiences. Page 24, 25 God knows not how to hide his love
utterly from the Elect in this life, such is his love. Page 81 Nothing can
hinder Christ's workings, either in souls, or Nations. Page 257, 258 Some
strive to hinder others from Tasting the ways of holiness. Page 67, 68 True
knowledge ingenders Holiness. Page 114 Holy men may use some Policy. Page 3, 4
Honorable sinners shall be abased. Page 188, 159 True knowledge is meek and
Humble. Page 112, 113 The Lord gives us but a taste of his goodness to make
and keep us Humble. Page 84 Hypocrites may climb many rounds in Jacobs ladder,
and tumble down at last. Page 49. to 51 The most glorious Hypocrite comes far
short of the weakest believer in many things. Page 51. to 53
I
Elect Jews under the Law saved by Christ as well as we. Page 171, 172 Pity the
unbeleeving Jews. Page 177, 178 Christ Illuminates the soul. Page 252, 253 True
Illumination a fruit of Christ's Ascension. Page 103 Imitate God in goodness.
Page 147 Imitate Angels. Page 10 Impenitent sinners shall not be spared. Page
231 Imperfections in the best here; The point proved, reasons added, inferences
urged, and objections answered. Page 77. to 100 Of Imputed righteousness. Page
233. to 244 Of Christ's Incarnation. Page 247, 248 Incredulous Jews to be
pitied. Page 177, 178 God an Independent good, indeed there is no Independent
being besides him. Page 125. to 128 Inexhaustible fountains in Christ. Page 16,
17 Infatuation of Gods enemies, makes way for his peoples escape. Page 4 In
divine Influences of the Spirit, God is tasted and enjoyed. Page 46, 47
Inherent righteousness. 1. in Christ. 2. in us. Page 24. to 39 Innocence
condemned by the world. Page 230. 231 Comfort may come in an instant. Page 182,
183 Invitation of others unto holiness. Page 12. to 21 Joseph was a Type of
Christ. Page 193, 194 Joy in heaven at the conversion of one soul. Page 18
Glorious discoveries of Christ, at the day of Judgment. Page 252 How Saints
shall Judge the world. Page 82 Judge not of Christians by their possessions,
but by their reversions. Page 92 Christ will administer Justice to evil deers.
Page 245 The folly and danger of Justiciaties is great. Page 242 How we are
justified by works. Page 242
K.
Behold the King (Jesus) in his beauty. Page 190. to 194 Christ the King of
Saints, he is exceeding great, and glorious, as the Sun among the Stars.
Page 188. to 190 Gospel- Knowledge is not bare speculation. Page 101, 102
Knowledge a fruit of Christ's Ascension. Page 103 Saving Knowledge is
communicated to the friends of Christ, and such as filially fear, and obey
him. Page 104, 105 The true reason of our small Knowledge, is our little
practice, little love to Christ. Page 105, 106 Some have much superficial
knowledge, and are filled with clear notions, and bright speculations, and yet
are void of Divine Light. Page 106, 107 Six infallible marks of saving
knowledge, and the visions of Heaven. Page 108, to 114 A little experimental
knowledge, will go farther then a sea of notionall. Page 114. to 116 Without a
competency of knowledge, there can be no holiness, no Grace. Page 116, 117
L
Of lazy sluggishnesse in spiritual things. Page 60 How God is said to lead
into Temptation. Page 139, 140 Learn of God who is Goodness it self. Page
147 Where there is a spiritual life, there are all the spiritual senses. Page
102, 103 Get a holy weariness of this life, for here is but a taste of God.
Page 85. and 99 Christ is the glorious fountain of Light, filling the lesser
vessels with his glory. Page 180. to 223 Christ is seen by his own Light. Page
203 Inward light examined. Page 108. to 114 There is but a little taste of God
here, the full meal is in Heaven. Page 77. to 100 Why so little knowledge in
the world, in comparison of what may he had, and is obtained by many. Page 105,
106 The Lords day to be strictly observed, as a day dedicated to Christ, and
set apart for spiritual enjoyments, and improvements. Page 221, 222 Christ's
love is matchless. Page 231 The love of God is not utterly concealed from
Saints in their Pilgrimage. Page 81 Such as have low thoughts of believers now,
shall one day admire them. Page 92, 93
M.
The worlds madness in condemning Christ. Page 230 Christ's magnitude
unmeasurable. Page 189, 190 Malachy, what it signifies, and who it was. Page
151 The makings forth of God, are not perfect in this Administration. Page 78,
79 Erberie makes Christ a mere Man. Page 227 God does manifest his wisdom,
and power, in our preservation, for we have here but a spark of Grace, in an
Ocean of corruption. Page 83, 84 There is a time of Christ manifesting himself
to Nations, and souls. Page 247. to 265 Christ heales us to marry us. Page
279, 280 The matchless love of Christ to be admired. Page 231 There is but one
Mediator. Page 185. to 187 Meditation helps us to retain, and improve our
experiences. Page 25 By Meditation the goodness of God is tasted. Page 42. to
45. We must meditate of his Perfections, and outgoings. Page 44 How memory is
helped to conserve experiences, by prizing, writing them, conference,
meditation, and Prayer. Page 24, 25 Christ ever in the midst. Page 196, 197
Christians are here in their minority. Page 92 Their misery unutterable, that
are without Christ. Page 219 The Church is governed by a Monarchy, for they
have but one King which is Christ. Page 185. to 187 The Moonlight of reason
cannot make day. Page 207, 208 Rest not in sincerity, but get more Grace. Page
95. to 99 He that would get more of Christ, must freely communicate, of what he
has received. Page 17 The motions of Christ wonderful. Page 197. to 200 A
multitude of Angels to guard us. Page 6
N.
Christ the Ornament of Nations. Page 195, 196 Christ can heal Nations. Page
277, 278 Of Christ's Nativity. Page 247, 248 Neglect of winning others a sin.
Page 19 When others neglect us, Christ pittieth us. Page 287, 288 Our
happiness under the New Testament, above theirs under the old, in five
respects. Page 172. to 176 Christ nigh unto the broken in heart. Page 287
O.
The promise of knowledge is to such as obey God. Page 105 Observation of Gods
dealings, will make us trust in God for ever. Page 24, 25 The occasion of the
24th Psalm. Page 2. to 5 Occurrences tending to our deliverance, should beget
thankfulness. Page 5 It is the office of Angels to guard believers. Page 6 It
is Christ's office to cure us. Page 279 Oh! an Interjection paints out four
Affections, viz. Joy, Griese, Love, and Desire. Page 28, 29 Old sins curable.
Page 285 Saints under the old Testament, saved by Christ as well as we. Page
171, 172 There is but one Savior. Page 185. to 187 Oppression a great sin.
Page 66 How an Orator, may work on the Affections. Page 31 That Christ dwells
in the Orb, or circle of the Sun, an old heresy refuted. Page 216. to 218
Christ orders sin, and yet abides pure. Page 203, 204 In Ordinances God is
tasted. Page 38. to 45 Many want Ordinances, a sad case! Page 59 Christ the
Ornament of souls, Nations, and Heaven it self. Page 194. to 196 The same
Christ is a flaming Oven to the wicked, and a reviving Sun to such as fear
him. Page 156. to 161
P.
Dally not with Gods Patience. Page 246 Patience requisite to a cure. Page 192
How People may profit by the Word. Page 34. to 36 Of the Phoenix, and that
Christ is the true Phoenix. Page 269 to 271 Philosophy proves God is good. Page
119 Christ the best Physician. Page 272. ad finem. Pity the incredulous
Jews. Page 177, 178 Let Pilgrims be comforted that have the Sun of
righteousness shining before them. Page 222, 223 Christ as the Sun among the
Planets, he is ever in the midst. Page 196, 197 Plead before the Lord for
mercy. Page 290 Christ sheds his Beams plentifully. Page 184 All the policy in
the world cannot hinder Christ's risings, and manifestations, either in souls
or Nations. Page 257, 258 David's policy when brought before Achish. Page 2, 3
There is a lawful Policy. Page 3, 4 Christ can heal Politically, and recover
sick Kingdoms. Page 277, 278 The Popes insolency, in stiling himself the Sun
among the Stars, and assuming many other properties and descriptions of Jesus
Christ. Page 213. to 216 Prayer helps us to retain experiences. Page 25 In
Prayer we taste God. Page 39 Prayer the means to be cured. Page 290 How a
Preacher may work on his hearers. Page 31 Let not the beautiful Mother of
Gods Patience, bring forth the ugly monster of thy Presumption. Page 246
Prizing our experiences, will help us to remember them. Page 24 25 Wait the
accomplishment of Promises. Page 246 Clear Prophecies of Christ of old for
three Reasons; The Uses many. Page 165. to 180 We see many glorious Prophecies
fulfilled. Page 172 We must wait the fulfilling of Prophecies that are yet
unfulfilled. Page 178, 179 All Prophecies but scripturall, not much to be
heeded. Page 179, 180 Of the book of Psalms, and the occasion of the 34. Psalm.
Page 1. to 5.
R.
Christ spreads his Rays, like the Sun, freely, suddenly, impartially,
plentifully. Page 181. to 184 The causes of our great Rain and waters. Page 19,
20 Range not after broken cisterns, when the fountains are full. Page 22 Christ
for all his cures looks for no Recompense but thankfulness; Free grace is not
Fee grace. Page 288 Reckon on the rising of others with, but against Christ.
Page 261, 262 A Redeemer for men, not Angels. Page 11 Relapses dangerous, yet
curable. Page 286 Relics of corruption, and mud in the best heart in this
life. Page 83 to 100 Most Relish not heavenly things; The Reason why. Page 57.
to 63 How to Remember experiences for ever. Page 24, 25 The Remembering of our
experiences begets trust in God. Page 22, 23 There is a Remunerative
righteousness in Christ. Page 244, to 246 Repetition of Sermons urged, and
commended. Page 36 True Repentance is never to be repented of, unless that we
repented no sooner. Page 54 Tastes of God Reserved for the elect. Page 63 Rest
not in truth of Grace, but labor for more grace, else it is not true. Page 95.
to 99 Of ^^^ists Resurrection. Page 249, 250 Use Reverence in solemn
Assemblies, because Angels observe you. Page 9, 10 Our Reversions better then
our possessions. Page 92 Christ a bountiful Rewarder of his friends Page 244
Rewards prepared for such as win others to Christ. Page 18, 19 Christ the Sun
of Righteousness, 1. inherent in himself, 2. imparted, in us 3. imputed, 4.
Remunerative. All handled at large. Page 223. to 246 When Christ rises. Page
247. to 265 Though Christ set, he will rise again. Page 264, 265. When Christ
arises, many will rise against him. Page 261 Wherein the manifestations of
Christ are like the rising of the Sun, and wherein unlike. Page 254. to 260
Christ's rising is our healing. Page 265. ad finem Worship this rising Sun. Page
260, 261 The Christian Sabbath is Christ's day: in this sense it is Sunday, or a
day dedicated to the Sun of righteousness, though it ought not to be called
Sunday, but the Lords day, as John has Christened it. Page 221, 222. God is
tasted in the Sacrament: there believers taste and see how good the Lord is.
Page 40 Saints may meet with troubles in Gods ways, much more shall wicked
ones in the Devils. Page 3 Why Saints have not perfect hell here, but have some
taste of Gods goodness to sweeten our pilgrimage. Page 80 to 82 How Saints are
not perfect here. Page 77. to 100 In what sense Saints are said to be filled,
to be perfect, and not to sin. Page 87. to 90 Sampson a type of Christ. Page
198, 199 Our Sanctification from Christ. Page 232. to 236 Motives to labor for
Sanctification. Page 236. to 239 God alone can fill and satisfy the poor heart
of man. Page 131, 132 Only one Savior. Page 185. to 187 The sacred Scriptures
are full of affections, and require affections in Christians. Page 29, 30 All
the spiritual Senses accompany true life. Page 102, 103 Our head Christ is
sensible of our infirmities. Page 286 Sermons to be repeated in the family.
Page 36 Christ has his settings, prepare for them. Page 162. to 165 In what
manner Christ sh^ds his comfortable beams. 181 to 184 The shinings of Christ
described. Page 181. to 184 We are not mere shops of the Spirit, for then our
failings would be his, Believers are so acted by Him, as to act with him. Page
90, 91 Let Us be sick of this world, for here is but a taste of GOD. Page 85.
and 99 Men and women naturally sick, and in a crazie condition till Christ cure
them. Page 280. to 282 Satan's baits of sin are tasted by many to their cost.
Page 64. to 66 Some sin against God because he is good. Page 136 The Lord
tempts not to sin. Page 137. to 140 Sin ordered by Christ, and yet he abides
pure; he can touch pitch and not be defiled. Page 203, 204 How be that is born
of God sins not. Page 89 Great old sins curable. Page 283. to 285 Christ a
skillful Physician. Page 272 ad finem Slanders neither to be invented,
reported, nor believed, Page 140. to 142 God and Christ have been slandered.
Page 141, 142 Sluggishnesse an enemy to grace. Page 60 The spirit of slumber
has possessed many. Page 63 Wicked Society a snare. Page 62, 63 Some sofened
by Christ's shinings, others hardened. Page 206 God will not spare the
impenitent. Page 231 Sparkles of glory flew out of Christ's abasements. 248, 249
True knowledge is not bare Speculation. Page 101, 102 God in Christ a special
good to the elect. Page 124, 125 Christ the beauty of Souls. Page 194 He cures
sick Souls. Page 274. to 276 How the Spirit dwells in us. Page 90, 91 The
dazeling splendour of Christ. Page 190 to 194 The ^winkling Starre-light of
creature comforts, cannot make day if Christ the Sun be wanting. Page 207, 208
Stout Sinners shall be subdued. Page 158, 159 Christ Strong in his motions.
Page 198 Streights to the godly are but trials. Page 3 Christ disparkles his
beams, and gives comfort Suddenly. Page 182, 183 Of Christ's Sufferings. Page
230, 231 Christ is the Sun of righteousness, he is like the Sun in 21
respects, unlike in five. Page 180. to 211 An old Heresy that Christ dwells in
the Sun, refuted. Page 216. to 218 What it is to be clothed with the Sun.
Page 220 We set our Watches, not by clockes, but by the Sun; so we must s^
and order our opinions and lives, not by example, but Rule; the first may
fail, the latter cannot. Page 221 The Lords day is Sun-day, or a day dedicated
to the Sun of r^ghteousnesse. Page 221, 222 Superstition hinders our taste of
God. Page 61 In the Lords Supper we taste how good the Lord is. Page 40
S^^^aring a vain sin. Page 66 Heaven sweetened by our combat here. Page 86, 87
The motions of Christ swift. Page 199 What the Sybils foretold of Christ. Page
166. to 168
T.
Taste divine goodness in Angels attendance. Page 6. to 12 There is a
corporal or spiritual taste. Page 37 We must taste or try God and his ways.
Page 36. to 37 We may taste the Lords rich goodness many ways. Page 38. to 48
Whether unregenerate ones may taste God, and how their taste differs from the
taste of Believers. Page 49. to 53 Taste and try God and his ways for five
reasons. Page 53. to 57 Some taste not God in any mercy or duty for six
reasons, Page 59 to 63 Others taste how good the creature is, not how good the
Creator is. Page 63, 64 Many are tasting and nibbling at Satan's baits. Page 64.
to 66 Some hinder others from tasting. Page 67, 68 The reason why so many rage
against God and his ways, is that they never tasted their sweetness. Page 68,
69 Examine your tastes by the effects. Page 69, 70 Five motions to taste God
and his goodness. Page 74. to 77 A Taste and but a taste of God here. The
truth proved, reasons showed, inferences urged, and objections answered all at
large against Perfectionists Page 77. to 100 Tasting and seeing must go
together. Page 100 to 118 Tastes of God make us blessed, and help us to Trust
in God. Page 22. to 26 Christ Teaches only his friends, and such as fear and
obey him. Page 104, 105 God Tempts no man for he is good. Page 137. to 140
Tempting men to sin, a Devilish office, and a fearful sin. Page 19. and 67,
68 ^nesse is laudable. Page 5. and 146, 147. and 288 Afflictions to the godly,
are but Trialls. Page 3 Trouble for Saints, much more for sinners. Page 3 The
Troubles of this life sweeten Heaven, and should make us long to be there. Page
85, 86. 99 Experiences beget Trust. Page 22, 23
V.
Visions from God how known. Page 108. to 114 Of uncleanness. Page 66
Undervalued Saints shall one day be admired. Page 92 God a universal good.
Page 120. to 124 How Christ shines universally on all. Page 183 Unregenerate
ones may go far in seeming holiness, and yet be Reprobates. Page 49. to 52
A due carriage of the voice, sends an occult influence into others Affections
Page 32, 33 Saints void of sin, how? Page 89 Reprobates shall be utterly
destroyed. Page 159
W.
Trouble may be met with in Gods ways, and much more in the ways of sin.
Page 3 Angels guard us in our ways, not in our wanderings Page 9 The ways of
God are undeservedly evil spoken of. Page 53 Learn to Wait on God. Page 291
Set the Watches of your lives not so much by the clock of example, as the Sun
dial of the Word. Page 221 God gives us but a little taste of himself here,
to weane us from the world. 84, 85, and 99 Children must not fear the Dogs
whip. Page 160 How far wicked men may go in Religion? Page 99. to 52. Wicked
men's company is a snare. Page 62, 63 How Gods will is done here as in heaven.
Page 91 christ brings healing in his Wings. Page 265. ad finem. ^he Wing
gathers, cherishes, and defends the young. Page 267, 268 Christ's Wings are
his Beams or influences. Page 271, 272 Of winning others to Christ. Page 12.
to 21 The Wisdom of God manifested in our spiritual preservation. Page 83 A
Woman clothed with the Sun. Page 220 Carnal ones shall wonder at the sight
of a glorified Saint, with his Diadem on his head, at the day of Judgment.
Page 92 Christ's motions are wonderful. Page 197. to 200 Strong affections,
send out melting words. Page 29. and 31 The Word is full of affections, and
requires affections in all Christians. Page 29, 30 In the Word, we taste Gods
goodness. Page 38 The Word will c^re us. Page 276. and 289 How all the Works
of God are perfect, when grace here is not. Page 89, 90 How Good- works
justify us. Page 242 Let Us be sick of this world. Page 99 The world must not
judge of Christians by their Possessions, but Reversions. Page 92 Worship not
due to Angels. Page 8, 9 Worship the rising Sun Christ Jesus. Page 260
Writing down Experiences is the way to remember them. 25
Z
The Zeal of Saints shall judge the world. Page 82
FINIS.

