The last true News from York, Nottingham, Coventry and Warwick: Or all the
special Passages and Occurrences in these parts, from the 24 of August, to the
4 of September, 1642.

Amongst which is related the Commissions sent by his Majesty, under the broad
Seal of England, to the Earl of Cumberland, for the speedy raising of all the
Trained Bands, both of Horse and Foot, in Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cumberland,
Westmerland, and Northumberland, to serve the King against the Parliament.

As also of the great distractions in the City of York, at this present,
worthy of observation.

Sent in a Letter to inform those that stand well affected to the King and
Parliament, Sep. 4. 1642.

September. 7. London Printed for John Wright. 1642.

News from York, Nottingham, Coventry, and Warwick, Septem. 1, 1642.
SIR,
FIrst my respect, next I shall acquaint you with such passages or other
occurrences, as has come to me, either by observation or other intelligence,
in these times of distraction. August 24. A Post came to York, that 24. pieces
of Ordnance and 100000 li. in money, was landed at Newcastle, brought from
Holland by Prince Robert, for his Majesty's service. And a command came to
York to the Earl of Cumberland, (now made Lieutenant General of Yorkshire)
to send his Troop of Horse to conduct these Ordnance, and moneys to the King,
which was dispatched away with all expedition.

This day his Majesty caused his Declaration to be published, in Answer to the
Declaration of the Lords and Commons, For the Raising of all power and force,
as well Trained bands, as others, in several Counties of this Kingdom, to
lead against all Traitors and their adherents, etc. Wherein his Majesty
requires all his Commissioners of Array, Sheriffs, and all other Officers and
Ministers, to raise all the power and forces of their several Counties, to
assist the Marquess of Hertford, the Earl of Northampton, the Lord Willoughby
of Eresby, the Lord Paulet, the Lord Seymour, the Lord Dunsmore, Henry Hastings
Equire, Sir John Stowell, Sir Ralph Hopton, John Digby Esquire, and all others
in the Legal and necessary executing of his Commissions of Array, and in the
raising and conducting of such horse and foot, as shall be raised by his
Commission, and by force of Ar^s to oppose the Earl of Essex, the Lord Say; and
all other that shall raise or conduct any forces raised by pretense of
Authority of Parliament, and the persons of all such Traitors, and their
adherents, and accomplices, to arrest and imprison; to the end they may be
brought to a fair and legal trial, by their Peers, and according to the Law,
this he requires from them, as they tender the defense of his person, the true
Religion, the Law of the Land, the liberty of the Subject, and the just
privileges of Parliament. And for so doing, they shall be defended and secured
by him, and by the Law with whom, and with which, he doubts not, but that his
Subjects will sooner live and dye, then with the Earl of Essex, and his
adherents,

Thursday 25. of August, 8. great pieces of Ordnance with other carriages, was
conducted from York to Nottingham to his Majesty, also diverse Troops of Horse
accompanied them this night.

This afternoon his Majesty sent his Commission to the E^rle of Cumberland, and
that he was content his Troop should stay at York as was desired by the
Gentry of the County. Also that the rest of the Troops ^ehind, should be
h^stened to his Majesty with all expedition, and that the Earls Troop which
stays, should countenance and protect his Magazine going from hence, and in
case in his absence, any more Munition come from Holland, that they, together
with the Trained-bands, should secure it to the edge of Yorkshire, toward
Nottingham,

Also his Majesty desires that all his Field-peeces, may be conducted from
York to Nottingham, in regard he was so much opposed at Warwick and Coventry,
all the Troops remaining here, are gone this night toward his Majesty, and
diverse companies of Volunteers followed the next day.

Friday August 26. Sir William Savile, brought 24. light Horse to York, which
he has provided for his Majesty's service at his own charge, and has made
Sir Thomas Dallison Captain of them, and sent to Nottingham the next day. This
morning the Lord Fall land, the Secretary of State, accompanied with many
Gentlemen and Cavaliers, left this City and is gone to his Majesty.

Information came this day to York from Portsmouth, that Colonel Goring has
slain 400. men with his Cannon, which is good news to the Cavaliers.

My Lord Fairefax was threatened by some of the Cavaliers, that they would
pillage his house if he stayed there, so that he is forced to set a guard about
his house at Denton, yet all the Country about him, for 15. or 16. miles stands
for him, and will protect him against any violence, they are well-affected to
the King and Parliament, and especially the great Towns thereabouts, as
Wakefield, Leedes, Hallifax, Bradford, and Otley, and in Hallifax, when Sir
William Savile came there to raise some Volunteers for his Majesty, they turned
him out of the Town, and not a man would obey him.

Some Aldermen of this City, that are affected to King and Parliament, were
threatened likewise by the Cavaliers, and have left their houses in York, and
some others of quality, as namely, Alderman Hoyle, Alderman Vaus, and Sir Io.
Bourch^er.

Saturday 27. the Earl of Cumberland caused a Declaration to be published in
Print in his name, and in the names of the Gentry of York^shire, and to be read
in all the Churches of this County, thereby to incite and stir up the people of
this County, to be ayding and assisting to his Majesty, and to show their
willingness in contributing of money, for the raising of Horse and foot to
secure the county in his Majesty's absence, and to withstand Sir John Hotham,
if he shall make any incursion out of Hull into this County, but the Country
people are unwilling in diverse places, and I believe they will raise but a
slender sum.

Monday August 29. my Lord of Cumberland caused the percullis at every gate in
York to be let down, and to be made ready if occasion required, and the
Keys of the gates are every right brought to the Lord Major, who causes a
guard of the Trained-band to keep watch there.

Some Morter-peeces were this day cast in York by one Lanayon a Cornish man,
who lives in London, and has been practizing this two months, yet brought
nothing to perfection until now, great store of carriages is making here, for
the Cannon that came from Newcastle and other places.

The City of York is in great fear of being surprised by Sir John Hotham, for
reports came hither from about Hull, that 700. men are landed there, which were
sent from the Parliament, yet the third part of the City stand well affected to
the Parliament.

Tuesday, the 30 of August, Posts came from his Majesty at Nottingham, to the
Earl of Cumberland, with Commissions under the Broad Seal of England, for the
speedy raising of all the Trained Bands (both of Horse and Foot) in Yorkshire,
Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland, and Northumberland, for assistance of the
King, in regard the Message sent by the Earls of South-Hampton and Dorset, Sir
John Culpepper, and Sir William Uvedall, were rejected by the Parliamant.

This day one M. Robinson that lives near York, coming from London, was
apprehended by the Kings forces and carried away as prisoner, and is still
detained, great insolences are committed by the Cavaliers about Nottingham,
and in all other places where they make their Rand^vous, that it is probable,
if peace be not shortly concluded on betwixt King and Parliament, the
Commonalty of this Kingdom will be utterly ruined, for diverse men's Houses in
Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, and other Counties, are plundered, some burned,
others pillaged, and Women ravished, all which are the fore-^unners of the
misery of a Civil war, from which, God of his infinite Mercy deliver this
N^tion.

This day the Earl of Cumberland sent summons to the County of Yorkshire, for
all the Horse and Foot of the Trained Bands, to meet at Heyworth Moore, on
Friday, September. 2. Wednesday, the last of August, a Lettet came from Beverly
to the Lord Mayor of York, to look to himself, and the City, for Sir John
Hotham did intend to march with his forces out of Hull toward it, and that he
was made Lieutenant of Yorkshire by the Parliament, whereupon there was a great
meeting at the Town Hall for the defense of the City, and the Earl of
Cumberland was sent for, whereupon it was agreed by them that the 3 Troops of
Horse should be quartered in the City, viz. The Earls Troop, Sir John
Gothericks Troop, and Sir John Gibsons Troop, and the Trained Bands to be
exercised and in readiness^, this was the Fast they kept this day.

Thursday the first of September, the Earl of Cumberland sent for the Lord
Major, and the Court of Aldermen, and common Council of the City, to meet
ag^ine at the Towne-hall, but there was but a slender appearance, for above
half of the Aldermen and common Council men absented themselves, so that
there was a distraction in the City; and the Earl gave out speeches, that
seeing the City was divided, and a third part of it stood affected to the
Parliament, he would leave it, and betake himself to Pomfrait Castle and
protect himself, for if any assault was made upon the City, they should be
surprised, in regard all would not adhere to him, and besides it was not
defensible.

This day his Majesty sent for his Printer at York to come to Nottingham, news
came also to York, that the 8. pieces of Ordnance (that his Majesty sent for
from thence) lies still at Doncaster; and they can get no carriages for the^ to
convey them to Nottingham, also that some of the carriages belonging to them
were broken.

Friday second of September, was a great me^ting both o^ Horse and Foot on
Heyworth-more, out of the County of York, of the Trained-bands, also the
Trained of the City appeared there to show their Arms, the Earl of Cumberland
was there with the Lord Major of Yo ke, and after, view taken of their Arms,
they were all summoned to meet at the Common Hall by two a clock the same day,
there, to give in their names who would stand for the King and who for the
Parliament, and to take an oath, but not above half the City came there, so
that those that were absent, they would have all their names given in, and
those that refused to come in, and stand for the King, their houses should be
searched and their Arms taken from them, so that here is a great distraction
within this City, for the present I rest

Yours, Henry Dickenson.
York Septem. 4 1642.
FINIS.

