A REPLY TO A LETTER Printed at NEWCASTLE UNDER The name of an Answer, sent to
the Ecclesiastical Assembly at LONDON, about Matters concerning the KING, and
the Government of the CHURCH. With the Copy of the said LETTER to the Assembly,
in the name of JOHN DEODATE, D. D. ALSO, A Certificate from one of the Scribes
of the ASSEMBLY at LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1646.

The Animadvertors Epistle to all well-affected Englishmen, who are unwilling
to be seduced to believe lies.
Contrymen and friends,
SO soon as I received this printed Pamphlet from Newcastle, (which came to me
enclosed in a letter, dated Newcastle the 10. 1646.) from an eminent person of
that place, who advertised me, that it was all that the Printer had published
since his residing there,) I did forthwith repair to some members of the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, to acquaint them with it, desiring to know
whether they had ever received any such letter. And upon search finding it to
be a mere forgery, I thought fit to publish this Antidote to preserve the
people from being poisoned by it.

I have perused it: and must censure them very simple that will be seduced
with such a notorious fiction, invented by some profane Atheist: for none else
durst dare so often to blaspheme the Name of God to countenance such abominable
lies. A stranger he is indeed, but so unlike Doctor Deodate, that the good old
man will be full of sorrow to hear that a Press should be conveyed to
Newcastle to the King, to surprise him with such a scandal.

Take this cordial (therefore) to heart, which I have prepared to correct the
malignancy of that corrosive, and corroborate the simple-hearted people, who
are too apt to drink in such sugared potions.

Who this pretender of translating the Doctors letter, is, I know not; but this
I am sure that he appears a Cheater, a Jesuit, a Digby (what shall I say
more?) an Ormond, a mere Machiavil.. And therefore the scandals that he has
written against the Parliament and the Assembly, are no more to be valued then
what wise men expect from such: All which does amount to a very poor
justification of the Royal actions.

The Lord bring into the way of truth all such as have erred, and are deceived,
So prays he, who is,

Yours in the Lord. LUKE HARRUNEY.
Gracious street this 15. of December, 1646.
Some Animadversions upon the Letter pretended to be Doct. Deodates, but
written by a Malignant at Newcastle, to the Assembly of Divines.
AS the Printer at Newcastle pretends this Book to be printed at Geneva, so the
Episcopal Malignant at Newcastle pretends the matter of it to be Doctor
Deodates letterr from Geneva; by which they both approve themselves to be a
couple of cheating knaves.

And if any be not satisfied that this letter is forged, they may repair to
the Assembly at Westminster, and see that which is the right.

And although this might be a sufficient answer to it for rational men, yet
lest some poor ignorant souls should be overcome before they discern the
danger of the poison, I will pass some Animadversions upon it.

For that passage in the Marginall Note page 5. observe the Liar: Did the
Church of England flourish by the publishing of profane Books of sports on the
Lords day? By stopping the mouths of godly Ministers, cropping off both branch
and fruit of all godliness, and planting Popishly affected, covetous, and
proud Clergy in all the chief places of the Kingdom? The Pope indeed had a
flourishing party waging war against the Protestants and Parliaments of
England. This Metropolitan of our divisions was fomented by the Hierarchy; they
divided between the King and Kingdom, head and body, father and son, brother
and brother: a right Babylonish division.

The Scorpion stings himself, page 6. and 7. His note is still under
Episcopacie, which carried such a glorious face with their Cathedrals and
Courts, (as the Cardinals and Fry of Rome with their Abbeys and Monasteries?)
And therefore it was that they stirred up the King to force the Popish
Service Book upon the Scots: and when that could not be effected, they animated
him to raise an Army against the Parliament of England, and caused the Sheep
and the Pastors to goare each other, till the land wallowed in blood, yet still
as Bernard says, they have conscientia mala and tranquilla, no remorse, no
sting of conscience, nothing but a dead slumber, a damnable hardness of heart.

And whereas he magnifies the Kings benignity, as of the best of Princes; and
that he is the most absolute in wisdom to redress these miseries; I wish that
his Majesty may confirm the same by passing the Propositions of the wisest of
Counsels, the Parliaments of both Kingdoms presented to him at Newcastle.

In the eight page you may see what a disparagement he would cast upon the
Parliament and City of London, as if they should (by driving away the King) be
the cause of the war and bloodshed; when as his Majesty left them against
their will, because they desired and labored that justice might be executed
according to law.

There were many Popish and Prelaticall Tares sown in the Church of England:
And as God has hitherto, so I doubt not but he will perfect his work by the
Parliament, as his Angel with the sharp sickle to cut down that harvest before
it does attain Ripeness in these Kingdoms. Blame not therefore the City, and
the reverend Assembly (though they deserted those Vipers) to join in hand and
heart with the Parliaments, to preserve the Church and people of God.

And how ever the Libeller vapors for the Hierarchy, in the note of the eight
page: yet we know how opposite they were to Christ, and that by woeful
experience. Christ's commands to preach the word in season and out of season, 2
Timoth. 4. 2; But they forbad more then one Sermon a week, nay would have had
preaching but once a month. God commands the Lords day to be kept holy, Exodus
20; but they prevailed with the King to have sports and recreations allowed on
the Lords day. Gods word requires spiritual worship, John 4. 23; They forced
human Traditions upon the Ministers and people. And the first Bishops we read
of, were no more but Presbyters, preaching Elders, 1 Timothy 3; They proved
Prelaticall Tyrants.

It is true, as page 9. there have been many overtures for peace; but the
Prelates have so wrought into his Majesty's affections, that the Prelates and
evil Counselors of their faction, have still hindered the good issue, they
have still been the chief incendiaries. How many protestations have they forced
from his Majesty to stick to them, and not to leave them?

They would be held up, though three kingdoms be ruined, choosing rather to see
England, Scotland, and Ireland, all in a sea of blood, then the pomp of their
Prelaticall kingdom should be overwhelmed. These have always been the men
that have set the whole earth in a combustion.

Though they have unhappily engaged the King in their cause, yet let them know,
that there is no Law that allows their actions lawful by that power to
destroy the Land.

The King governes his people by power, not only Regal, but politic. If the
Kings power in England was Royal only then he might change the laws of the
Realm without consent of his subjects: But here the Kings government being
politic, he cannot wage war against his Parliament.

And surely (we may observe upon the notes, page 9.) there is a woe to these
Prelates, Papists, and Malignants, who have thus traduced the King, and caused
the war: And God will find them out with their Babylonish garments, and
wedges of gold; and not only strip them, but bring them to condign punishment.

And for the other note, of suffering, rather then resisting with arms; it is
true, we must let God work his work, yet we must do our duty in serving him,
every one in his own place, we must use the means.

And let me tell the Prelates; (which is no more but truth) The Court of
Parliament is so transcendent, that it makes laws, and inlargeth laws,
diminishes, abrogateth, repealeth, and reviveeth Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances, concerning matters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common,
Civil, and Martial. It is of that high Honor and Justice, that none ought to
Imagine any thing dishonorable, that proceeds from that high Court, Mitt.
Cap 2. Sect 4. 7. 10. 14. Cap. 4. de default, and Cap de Homicid. Cap 1. Sect.
13. Cap 4 And those that resist that power; resist the Ordinance of God, which
is a damnable Act. Romans 13. 2.

As for the adjurings, and conjurings, by the pretended holy groans, Sacred
Censers, and hypocritical ecstasies; I cannot look upon them as tending really
to a peace. And we may daly see how big the Malignants hearts swell with
poison, to foment (if it were possible) a new war. why do they plead for
humility, and yet kick against our fasts? What inclination of a good mind can
they have toward the people of God, whilst they burn in malice against the
Parliament, the Assembly, and the City?

So that (notwithstanding the Marginall notes page 11.) It is clear that the
Malignant party seek peace only for themselves, that they may be able to
raise a new war: and though the forger of this letter would lay the guilt of
all the blood that has been shed in this war, upon the Parliament, and their
party; yet it is most certain, that the Prelates, and Papists have been the
very cause of all this bloodshed that has been spilt in the 3. Kingdoms,
wherein so many thousands of Innocent people, have been barbarously murdered
for no other cause, but that they were Protestants; and could not profess the
superstitions Commanded by the Prelates Authority. And for the latter
Annotations in page 11, we may easily see that they are still the same
Incendiaryes as before, not repenting unto this very day, as is before expressed.

And for that excellent State of the Church, observed by the notes on page 12.
whence is it? Their Councelling of the King to these courses, so distructive
both to himself and Kingdom? Their Activity in cruel oppressions perpetrated
by them upon the Innocent people and exorbitant illegal and tyrannical
invasions upon the just Laws of the Kingdom, and natural Liberties of the
subject? Could these put the Church into an Excellent State? who can endure
such abominable untruths. These always were our blemishes.

But to conclude, He that will approve this piece of Newcastle forgery; must be
either a papist, or an atheist: A Protestant he cannot be except (to use his
own words) he be a Malignant, and a right Malignant too, even such a one who
seeks to foment a new War; from whom, good Lord deliver us

Amen.
An Answer sent to the Ecclesiastical Assembly at London, by the reverend,
noble, and learned man John Deodate, the famous Professor of Divinity, and
most vigilant Pastor of Geneva.
The Translators Preface to the simple seduced Reader.
READER,
MAy the Father of lights open thine eyes to see over this strangers shoulders,
and by this impartial Perspective, what thou, whilst kept down thus low by thy
new Masters, and through thy Seducers false Mediums, have not hitherto been
suffered to perceive, it being now purposely hid from thine eyes: Behold a mere
stranger, that notwithstanding his manifold Obligations, and personal
Engagements to a contrary Discipline in the Church, and different form of
Government in the State, yet overruled by the manifest Truth and Honesty of
the Kings Cause, breaks through all those Restraints of his Liberty (as far as
he may) to tell thee thus much plain English Truth: Behold here Genevas
veneration, and full vindicatio^ too of thine own Mother the Church of England,
as it stood under Episcopacie traduced here at home by her own Spurious brood
for Superstitious, Popish, Antichristian, what not? And this Apology directed
to the Assembly-men in answer to their Letter what ever it was.

Behold here again, a clear justification of the King, vilified by his own for
that for which strangers do admire him; His Clemency, his inclination to Peace,
his acts of grace, etc. Behold here the root of Gall, that which has brought
forth all these National mischiefs, the popular tumults and conspiracies
pointed at here, is the only evident cause of the Kings Divorce from the
Parliament. See here, by whom poor Ireland was deserted: one thing also thou
may here take notice of from these standers by, That the Glergy in their own
proper Sphere, may be as fit and as honest, and perhaps, in some respects more
able for the good speed of a Treaty, then those that do slight them with utter
Praeterition.

Last of all, behold here the loyal and religious Subjects only Militia, or
his own proper Magazine; to wit, the known Laws of the Land, that and prayer
and submission are the only defensive weapons allowed here by this Master of
Fence.

I say no more to thee, save only, that I do heartily pity thee, and therefore
I do still pray for thee, and for all thy fellow-bondmen, that God will bring
into the way of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived,

Amen.
Reverend, godly, and worthy Sirs, our dear Brethren and Companions in the Work
of the Lord.
IF proportionably to the grief we have conceived at your Letters; (wherein
you have expressed the most sad face of your affairs) we had but as much
ability either by our Consolations to assuage your sorrows, or by our counsels
to ease your butthens, or by any our cooperation to help your extremity: we
should think our selves very happy in so well corresponding with your
honorable, and most loving compellation of us: and right glad we should be thus
to requite you with our best and effectual good offices. But alas, as the
scantnesse of our capacity in this; kindso the Ignora^ceof the more inward
causes of so many miseries, and chiefly the perplex and dangerous nature of
matters now in agitation among you: All these put together, strike us quite
dumb we are as men wholly at a stand, able only (in a kind of silent
astonishment or holy horror) to admire, and to adore that finger of God, which
is now lifted up over you all.

But since, being by you so lovingly invited to it, we must needs at last break
off our silence: We are reduced to an extraordinary Suspense both of Minds and
of Pens, what to say first or last, or indeed what to say at all.

And now in the end, after long deliberation, least, as Jobs friends, we should
transgress by precipitate or unseasonable discourse: Behold our hearts and
mouths top-full of the Senses and Expressions of our hearty commiseration, our
eyes running down with tears of compassion, our breasts even swollen up with
sighs and groans at your calamities. These are they, God is our Witness, that
fill up the greatest part of our private prayers, of our public Devotions,
Fastings, and Humiliations: In all which we are resolved to give the Father of
mercies no rest, until your tranquillity being once more ordained in Heaven,
God do extend peace upon Earth unto you all like a River, and the fullness of
his Blessing, like an ever flowing stream.

Our affairs, yea the general interest of all the reformed Churches are so
closely involved in yours, and so mutually depending thereon, That your safety
once procured, assures us all of our own good Estates.

Therefore, especially during this grievous Tempest, which may seem to bring
about again the heavy times of the Saints great primitive Tribulation, we are,
in a manner, compelled with trembling hearts and lips, to power out our
lamentations into the ears of our most gracious and heavenly Father, no longer
now only preparing to contend by Fire, as he once revealed it in a Vision to
his Prophet Amos, Amos 7. 4. 5. but already for a long time really contending
by Fire indeed: And how then can we forbear from crying out? O Lord forgive,
cease we heseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small, and round
about all in a flame, by the fire of thy burning indignation. From this our own
Watchtower, untoucht as yet by Divine miracle: We have beheld this furious
conflagration, spreading it self all over; We have seen the Grisoen-Italian
Churches utterly defaced, the Gospel in Bohemia its ancient Seat, wholly
extirpated; the Palatinate devoured; the French Churches deprived of all humane
supports and resuges (like so many poor little Callow Birds, alive indeed, but
only during pleasure the) German Churches almost all over-shaken; yea, more
then half destroyed, your own Ireland swallowed up with an unexpected deluge of
Assassines and Robbers, one only thing was wanting to that huge heap of
public calamity; namely, that flourishing England (the very eye and
excellency of all the Churches, Christ's own choice, purchase, and peculiar; the
Sanctuary of the afflicted, the Arceonall of the faint-hearted, the Magazine of
the Needy, that Royal Standard of good hope) should by so unlookt for an
accident, without an external Enemy, or foreign Impression, become in a
manner its own Fe^o de se, and make an end of its self with its own cruel
hands.

What a sad spectacle is this to see that Church thus trodden under foot? To
see that glorious Fould of our Lord thus ransackt, yea worryed, not by the wild
Beasts of the Forest, not torn in pieces by the merciless paws of the Lion,
or of the Woolf, but utterly dismembered by its own unnatural sheep enraged and
exasperated one against another.

An horrid example this, and till now never heard nf among the reformed
Churches.

It seems, heretofore, like Christ's own true sheep, they were kept tame by the
fear of God, united by the same bond of Faith, knit together by the
apprehension of the common enemy: and so long they did both express and
exercise holily and faithfully their mutual charity, quiet and unity amongst
themselves: in all which they preserved themselves from the rage of the Wolf
by the Christian simplicity of their own conditions, by the innocence of their
pious lives, by the sunctity of their Religion, by the constant undantednesse
of their holy Faith.

But now we are wholly struck with horror at the change of that so glorious
Face of your Church, whilst we hear at this distance the loud report of those
deadly wars that are now flaming up between the King and his People: to see at
Daggers drawing indeed Brethren against Brethren, Parents against their own
Children, Christ's sheep pushing against and goring their own Fellows, nay
their own Shepherds: At all this we are utterly amazed, and would scarce have
believed, that in the selfsame pitched field, one and the same God and Father,
in the name of one and the same Mediator, at one and the same time, could be
invocated for help on both sides, to shed the blood of those, that for the
Major-part had hitherto by so many clear Demonstrations in the whole equal
course of their lives, equal in their Piety toward God, equal in their love
and loyalty toward their Country, approved themselves such faithful and srue
Brethren one to another. Strange, that these should now against their own
Bowels, turn all their war like power, far better if employed in the just
punishments of their own treacherous Neighbors, or toward the relief of their
dearest Brethren so long bowing the back under the weight of their bondage, and
even at the last gasp for help.

What marvel then, if these your cruel distractions have awakened; yea,
divided even to a variety the judgments and affections too of Christendom?

Neither do we our selves deny but that for a while we did somewhat stagger at,
and as it were fluctuate about it; yet that demur of ours did neither proceed
from prejudice against, nor from partiality toward either side, as not being
called upon by either, neither publicly nor privately, till now of late in
your reference unto us, which we do reckon as no small piece of honou, since in
your esteem, our judgment may seem of so much weight, as able to advance or
balance down either party, both being of such extraordinary quality.

We have contained our selves within the bounds of a conscionable judgment, and
impartial charity toward both parties, for indeed we are both Brethren; We
have neither way exceeded the compass of our own measure, but still kept a
mean, as rejoyeing on the one hand at those good things which we did hear were
entertained with the general applause of all good men; So on the other hand,
we could not but behold with grief those other Sinister passages that in
themselves did carry a more fatal appearance.

We were overjoyed at the issue of the Scottish troubles, that seemed at first
to presage a combustion, not unlike this of yours, and yet far sooner quenched,
for as by Gods own admirable handiwork (So by the never-enough-magnified of
your most gracious King, and by the Concord of that wary Nation) that fire was
in time put out, ere it did burst into a more open flame.

At the first report of these your own Commotions, our minds were possessed
with a good hope that all past offenses might with the same promptitude and
facility be forthwith repaired, and all matters composed.

So that what actions or counsels should appear amiss, might by the benignity
of the best of Princes be easily redressed, and consequently both Church and
Commonwealth without noise or blood shed, be kept in due order:

In pursuance of all which, we could not but admire the happy and glorious
beginnings of the Parliament, and the more then Fatherly affection of his most
gracious Majesty, evidenced by his enacting those Laws, from which for the
time to come, there was a clear hope of a Government full of equity, and freed
from all corruption:

An example not so rare, as indeed singular in this our wild Geneneration so
fertile of violent Powers and Princes. But all these our goodly hopes were
soon blasted by that raging storm and tempest of popular tumults among you,
that did force away both your most gracious Prince from his Parliament, as also
a great part of the Parliament from it self. Since which we have heard indeed
of many attempts and enterprises, many Propositions and Projects, but all of
them come to nothing, nothing is yet brought to perfection, nothing is yet
rightly settled or established.

The business of the Church might seem the chief object of your care and
solicitude: If it had been handled and debated at times, and with minds calm
and quiet: had the opposite judgments been compared and impartially weighed one
with another; such an orderly course might happily have purchased a lasting
Peace to your Kingdom, and also rendered unto your Church that most desired
Primitive face of the Apostolical times: Such was Episcopacy in its first
Apostolical vigor of Discipline and Government, the which as at the Synod of
Dort this very man did both acknowledge unto Bishop Carlton to be the best
Form of Church Government, and also did heartily wish for it in his own Church;
so does he sufficiently commend the happy effects of it above page 5. in that
full passage of his containing the Superlative Praises of the former
flourishing estate of the Church of England, as before these troubles it stood
under Episcopacie: The Restoration of which former good Estate, is again by
this Author at the latter end of this Epistle, page 12. earnestly wished and
prayed for.
but behold how quite contrary the event has fallen out? for the minds of
both sides being averse from, yea, violently bent one against another, this
very matter has proved the great rock of offense by exasperating the wound,
and tearing it wider and wider, by distracting more and more asunder the hearts
of each party, distempered enough already through former partiality and discord
of affections. Nay, if the report be true, these Church Distractions have
opened a wide gap to so many boysterors and private spirits, which we hear have
assumed to themselves the most mischievous Title of Independents, then which
Destructive Sect nothing could more undermine, ^^ea quite overturne the very
foundation of the Church.

Besides all that, we have bin extremely grieved at this, That the spirit of
division has so plentifully sown among you his pernicious Tares of Fears and
Jealousies, that they have not only fructified, but even overgrown all over
all manner of mutual trust, in despite of so many Royal protestations sealed
and bound up with so many most grievous Imprecations. But the very top and
height of all our sorrows on your behalfes, has been this, That all that
cursed fuel thus heaped on, is now at last kindled into bloody war,
lengthned on both sides by a multiplication of deadly feuds, So that during
such an universal combustion, what ever men's bare words, and never so frequent
Protestations other wise may pretend, yet the Royal Honor, Power and Dignity,
cannot but fall into utter contempt: and on the contrary, the licentiousness
of the most audacious and lawless, cannot but gather strength, and ont-grow
the other: and then consequently Piety must needs decay, mutual love and
charity must needs vanish away; and instead thereof, a kind of savage
disposition, yea brutish rage must needs invade at last the minds and manners of
the men of this Generation, who in process of time will no longer look upon
the old original causes that began the war, but rather upon the new mutual
injuries freshly done, or received in the very progress or prosecution of the
war between two parties divided, far more by an odious difference of
reproachful Names, as it were, infamous brands fixed upon each other, then
really by the cause it self. It had been far more easy unto us, and all good
men else, to deliver our judgments upon your case: had the Major part of
either side differed from the other, either in the more essential points of
Religion, or else dissented about the Fundamental Laws of the Commonwealth:
or had either party been oppressed Woe be to them that first began that war
whose Nonnecessity, yea Injustice strangers themselves can so far off so
plainly perceive and condemn too.
by the other in a direct way of open persecution, or had there been an
introduction of public tyranny against the laws through the baseness and
pusillanimity of the other party: But as for you, you have abundant cause of
comfort or seeurity against all these evils. To wit, in a fair, quiet, legal
Parliamentary way, not in a Martial way: therefore he mentions not at all the
power of Arms, but only the power of the Laws.
since by virtue of your own most just and powerful Laws, those Laws that
already have been indifferently agreed upon by the general consent of all
parties concerned, you may with ease prevent, or put all those forementioned
evils which in other Kingdoms may seem almost unavoidable. All these
considerations put together, have moved us for a long while seriously to
deliberate and advise what might be at last, the best expedient left to procure
an honest and sure Peace among you. Indeed we have been much scandalized, that
all the Mediations of several Kingdoms and Provinces in league with you, have
been tried and used all in vain: Howbeit it came into our mind to propound
this one Medium more, whether now at last there be yet any hope to obtain from
the Kings most gracious Majesty, and from the Parliament, that, of both sides,
Ecclesiastical persons may be chosen of unquestioned Trust, and Fame-proofe
beyond all suspicion, to whom this great business may be committed; Namely,
that comparing the chief points now in controversy, they may chalkout some
good way toward an holypeace. But first these men must by Gods good Spirit
themselves be dispossessed of all factious inclinations, that so they may
become fit Vmpires and Trustees of the public Peace, and impartial
Ambassadors of Reconciliation between both parties, and also able and studious
too by all their Speeches, Exhortations, and Sacred Obtestations to charm the
hearts that on both sides are so obdurate in War and Bloodshed.

This were the ready way, by thus interposing the Sacred Censer in the very
midst of these public flames, to quench all the heart-burnings: for who knows
whether at the devout Prayers and holy groans of Persons Sacred, thus
prostrate at the footstool of the Heavenly grace, the Divine power and glory
may not break out once more, and show forth it self by moving the hearts of
both Parties to lay down all hatred, and public enmities? The only way to
procure such sound Council of both sides, and to purchase again the precious
blessing of a general Peace, is especially when all humane helps fail, to
call in the Divine Assistance, which no man did ever try in vain. By these
good means that may be brought to pass (what cannot be hoped for from Civil
War, however the success prove) that by a voluntary Inclination of Minds,
the wound shall be so fully closed up, as that Love and Charity may in time
perfectly be recovered.

The good opinion which you have conceived of us, may suffer us to offer these
Considerations unto you. It might be immodesty in us to prescribe, or to advise
you any further: But no Law of Modesty can ever forbid us to wish, and to Vow,
and to beseech God for you, yea to appeal unto God, and to adjure you all in
his Name.

O then above all, take a speedy and special care for a sure and sound Peace,
what ever it be What would this Peacemaker have said if he had seen or heard of
so many Royal reiterated offers of peace wherewith the Sovereign has and
still does woo his Stiff-necked Subjects, Certainly, the more peaceable side
has always amongst good men had the Reputation of the better side.
it is to be preferred before any Civil Broils. Beware least the fortune of
War smiling upon you, draw you on, and tempt you to commit your great
Affairs to the Ambiguous Chance of Victory, then which nothing can happen more
deadly, yea pernicious unto the Common wealth. Roll away that huge Scandal
that lies so heavy upon the whole Christian world, yea wash and wipe off that
foul stain of black oppression charged especially upon the purest Profession
of the Gospel, as if still it did in a kind of Antipathy, or secret hatred,
oppose and oppugn all Kingly power, and Supreme authority. Mittigate and
assuage the exulcerated, and too-too much provoked mind of your King, and do
not compel Him to Pinacles and Precipices.

Rather bear with some blemishes and Corruptions from which no Empire could
yet wholly be free, no not in its most flourishing Estate. Account not those
Remedies the best, that are abruptly applied and accumulated; but those rather,
that being taken in by degrees, may in time, by little and little, go down
more easily, and digest the better, and so at last obtain a Confirmation. And
last of all, by the Bowels and mercy of Christ, suffer your selves to be
entreated, that we may no longer see that Wealth, Power, and Strength which God
has graciously bestowed upon you, employed, yea, utterly wasted in the fatal
Ruin of your own selves, but rather let it be stretched out to the Relief,
and support of so many of your own This was very good Counsel from a Stranger:
had the Subjects had the grace to follow it in time; then had there been an end
of the old War, and a happy Prevention of a new War, which, except stopped by
timely submission, can portend nothing but the utter National Ruin of Church
and State, which God in mercy avert.
most afflicted Brethren, even panting after your own Peace. f Of Ireland


May the God of Peace himself hear, accept, and grant these our sincere
Devotions; May God defeat all the P^o^s, and disappoint all the Machinations of
the Devil, and of Antichrist. May the same God restore your Kingdom and your
Churches to that High State and pi^ch of Holiness and of Glory, in which, on
the Theater of the Universal Church they have hitherto excelled and
out-shinedall the This full Testimony of the excellent State of the Church of
England (still as it heretofore stood under Episcopacy) outspeakes all the
former, and to this good Ejaculation from Geneva, no right,
Protestant-Malignant but will heartily say, Amen.
Churches upon Earth.

As for us, take in good part this our plain Sense delivered freely unto you,
in a Brotherly Confidence, and Pardon and Impute our delay of Answer unto these
weighty Reasons. The Report was here very strong, that you were now very fair
for a Treaty of Peace: Therefore we thought it fit to expect what a day might
bring forth, that so all our words and all our affections too, might overflow
with mere gratulations and full expressions of our Joys. But sorry we are,
that we have yet again been deceived with vain hopes. And now that we may
speedily recover and enjoy that Happiness we both wish and pray, with as much
Devotion as becomes your dearest Brethren, (who glory not a little in your good
esteem of us) That God will power down upon you his richest Benedictions,
together with a large Measure of his Wisdom, and Spiritual Strength.
Farewell, and prosper in the Lord.

The Copy of a Certificate from one of the Scribes of the Assembly to a
Minister in London.
SIR,
I Have perused the paper and examined the Records, and find that there was
never any such letter sent from Dr. Deodate in the Name of the Church of Geneva
to the Assembly: the whole letter now printed at New castle is an abominable
forgery, I find that we did receive a letter from the Church of Geneva in
answer unto ours sent unto them, but not Signed by Deodate but 2. others in the
name of all the Pastors and Professors of the Church and University of Geneva:
but there is no likeness between the one and the other.

FINIS.

