A DIALOGUE OR* A Dispute between the late Hangman and Death.
Hangmn. What, is my Glass run?

Death. Yes, Richard Brandon.

beheading upon a scaffold surrounded by soldiers

Hangman. HOw now, stern Landlord, must I out of door?
I pray you, Sir, what am I on your score?
I cannot at this present call to mind,
That I with you am any thing behind.

Death. Yes, Richard Brandon, you shall shortly know,
There Is nothing paid for you, but you still owe
The total sum, and I am come to crave it;
Provide your self, for I intend to have it.

Hangman. Stay, Death, thou'it force me stand upon my guard;
Me thinks this is a very slight reward,
Let Us talk a while, I value not thy Dart,
For, next thy self, I can best act thy part.

Death. Lay down thy Ax, and cast thy Ropes away,
It Is I command, it is thou that must obey;
Thy Part is played and thou go off the Stage
The bloudiest Actor in this present Age.

Hangman. But, Death, thou know, that I for many years,
As by old Tiburnes Records it appears,
Have monthly paid my Taxes unto thee,
Tied up in twisted Hemp, for more security;
And now of late I think thou put'st me to it,
When none but Brandon could be found to do it:
I gave the Blow caused thousand hearts to ache,
Nay more then that, it made three Kingdoms quake:
Yet in obedience to thy powerful call,
Down went that Cedar, with some Shrubs, and all
To satisfy thy ne'r-contented Lust.
Now, for reward, thou tell me that I must
Lay down my tools, and with thee pack from hence;
Grim Sir, you give a fearful recompense.

Death. Brandon no more, make haste, I cannot stay,
Thou know thy self how ill I brook delay:
Though thou had sent ten thousand to the grave,
What Is that to me, it is thee I now must have:
It Is not the King, nor any of his Peers
Cut off by thee, can add unto thy years;
Come, perfect thy Accounts, make right thy Score,
Old Caron stays, perhaps he will set thee ore.

Hangman. Then I must go, which many going sent;
Death, thou did make me but thy instrument,
To execute, and ^un the hazard to;
Of all thou did engage me for to do,
In blood to thee, how often did I carouse,
Being chief Master of thy Slaughterhouse?
For those the Plague did spare, if once I catcht'um,
With Ax or Rope I quickly had dispatcht'um.
Yet now, at last, of life thou will bereave me,
And as thou find'st me, so thou mean to leave me:
But those black stains I in thy Service got,
Will still remain, though I consume and rot.
Strike home* all-conqu'ring Death, I Brandon yield,
Thou will, I see, be Master of the Field.

EPITAPH.
WHo, do you think, lies buried here?
One that did help to make Hemp dear,
The poorest Subject did abhor him,
And yet his King did kneel before him;
He would his Master not betroy,
Yet he his Master did destroy,
And yet no Judas; in Records it is found,
Judas had thirty pence, he thirty pound.
FINIS.

