Sir John Digby's LETTER TO Colonel Kerr Governor OF PLYMOVTH, Persuading him
to betray his Trust, and deliver up the Town and Forts of Plymouth, to the
KINGS Party.

Together with Col. Kerrs Answer.

Wherein is expressed his faithful Resolution in keeping the Trust he has
undertaken.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple, January. 2. 1645.

The Copy of the Letter from Col. Digby to Col. Kerr, Governor of Plymouth.
SIR,
I Am troubled to understand, that through the ingratitude of those you serve,
you are like to be rewarded with the dishonor of having a person of much
inferior merit put over your head, an injury insupportable to any man of
Spirit, and which may offer you a justifiable occasion of doing a very eminent
Service to your Native King and Country; and which if you will embrace, to
deliver up the Town with the Works of Plymouth, I shall engage my self on my
Honor, and the Faith of a Gentleman, you shall be rewarded with Ten thousand
pounds sterlin, and have the command, if you please, of a Regiment of five
hundred Horse, with what Honors you your self shall desire. Sir, be not
scrupelous in taking the advice of an Enemy that desires heartily on these
terms to become your true Friend, and to serve ever for the future in all
occasions, as a most faithful Servant

John Digby.
Plimpton, 3. December. 1645.
For Col. Kerr, Governor of Plymouth.
Colonel Kerrs Answers.
SIR,
YOur motion to Treason I have seen, and detest it, it is below my Spirit for
personal injury (supposed only by an Enemy) to take National revenge, and for
a Punctillio of honor, to take advice from Hell, and be^tray my trust; I am
sorry that one so ingennous, as your self should abuse your natural parts only
to do mischief; yet I have no reason to wonder much at your persuasion to
Treasheiy, because I have had experience of the Endeavors of your Family to
corrupt others also. I remember the Gunpower Plot, the Letter your Brother
wrote to my Lord Roberts in this place for the same purpose, and his
negotiation with Major General Brown at Abbington. Surely those principles came
from Spain; but you should have told me also, that Spanish Proverb, To love the
Treason, and hate the Traitor.

Sir, If my Council may take with you, then I beseech you to consider the evil
Council you and your Party have given His Majesty, whereby the Kingdom,
especially those parts under your power, are become almost a desolation; And
when you have thought upon the sad effects of those Wars, then let your heart
tell you the truth, That much of the Blood and Rapine in this Country must lie
upon your account, and guilt may enforce you to seek for terms of
Reconciliation first with God, then with the Representative Body of the
Kingdom, whom you have so highly offended. Let not this advice from him whom
you call Enemy be despised, as you hope for mercy, and the respects of him, who
according to the National Covenant resolves to be,

Sir, Assuredly your Servant James Kerr.
Plymouth, 10 Dec. 1645.
For Sir John Digby General, at Plimpton.
To the Right Honorable Committee of Parliament, for the safety of Plymouth,
Pool, and Lyme.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
IT has been my endeavor, since I had any Command here, faithfully to
discharge the trust reposed in me, especially for the preservation of this
Important place Plymouth: and although you in your wisdoms have thought fit to
change the Government, I do contentedly acquiesse in it, and shall always be
ready to serve my God and the Kingdoms, according to the National Covenant in
any condition, I shall be thought worthy to be employed. My Neighbor Enemy Sir
John Digby, sent me on the third of this Instant this Temptation, whereof the
enclosed is a true Copy, by a Countryman of mine that resided in this Town; It
seems the fellow was an Instrument of theirs, for he went twice to Parley with
the Enemy without Order, and the second time received this Paper from that
Renegado Major Balfore privately, who conjured him with secrecy to deliver it to
me, and told him he might gain Five hundred pounds by the business. The
Messenger accordingly delivered his Message, but could not read it. I no sooner
saw it, but sent for the Committee, Mr. Wadden, Mr. Francis, Mr. Alsop, and the
Secretary, and discovered it to them. It was at first resolved, That I should
seem to comply with him, and by it to get advantage; but since that Resolution
is changed, and the enclosed returned in Answer; the Messenger is still in
Custody, and shall receive a Trial according to the Rules of War; And I desire
only that you will Publish my Integrity to the World, and I shall continue to
be for ever

Plymouth, the 12. of December. 1645. Your Honors and the Kingdoms most faithful
Servant, JAMES KERR.

To the Right Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons, for the safety of
Plymouth, Pool, and Lyme.
Right Honorable,
Upon Wednesday last was sevennight in the Evening, Col: Kerr sent for us, and
communicated a Letter he had then received from Col: Digby, by the hands of one
Thomas Read a Scottish Seaman, (whom he had then secured in his own Quarters;)
And when we had confidered the nature of it, we at first resolved to Deceive
the Deceivers, (if we might) but because some other accidents have since
intervened, we changed our Resolutions. We profess we found Col: Kerr
extremely troubled at this Treacherous notice, and exceedingly grieved that an
Enemy should suspect him capable of Treason: And we shall give this Testimony
of him, that we believe him a most cordial faithful Servant to the Kingdom
and this Place; and make it our Requests, That you will return him thanks for
his fidelity, and cause the Letter to him, and his Answer thereunto to be made
Public; which we conceive is an Honor too small for his Resolution in
resisting such a Temptation. So rest

Plymouth, the 12. of December. 1645. Your Honors most humble Servants, John
Bear. Justinian Peard. Tho: Ciely.


A Letter from Colonel John Digby, to Colonel James Kerr, Governor of
Plymouth, and the Answer of the said Colonel James Kerr unto him, were both
this day Read, and Ordered to be forthwith Printed; and that the Committee of
Plymouth do prepare a Letter to be sent unto him from this House, in testimony
and acknowledgment of his great fidelity, and that Five hundred pounds be from
this House bestowed on him, and paid unto him or his Assigns, by the Committee
of Plymouth; and that he be in an especial manner recommended from this House
to the Committee of the Army for some place besitting as a man of such approved
Faith and Integrity.

The Messenger that brought this Letter to Colonel James Kerr,has since
received his reward, and is executed by Martial Law.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

