DIVERSE Remarkable Passages OF GODS GOOD PROVIDENCE in the wonderful
preservation and deliverance of John Harington Esqu. Mr. Robert Ram Minister,
Mr. William Sclater, and Sergeant Horn, all of Spalding in the County of
Lincoln, who were taken prisoners by the Cavaliers of Croyland and kept there
the space of five weeks.

But are now lately rescued by the Parliaments Forces, the Town taken with
little loss, the forenamed prisoners set at liberty, and many of their
adversaries taken in the same Net they laid for others.

Whereunto is annexed a Copy of a Letter sent by Mr. Ram to Croyland, which
they pretended to be the cause of that their madness against him.

LONDON, Printed for I. Wright in the Old Bailey, June 3. 1643.

UPon Saturday the 25 of March being Lady day early in the morning, Captain
Tho. Styles, and Captain Cromwell, Mr. Will. Styles the Minister of Croyland
with about 80 or 90 men came to the Town of Spalding, which at that time was
utterly unfurnished of men and Arms, whereof they had intelligence the evening
before, by some of our malignant and treacherous neighbors. Near break of the
day they beset the house of M Ram, Minister of the Town, where they took J.
Harrington Esquire and the said M. Ram, and in a violent and uncivil manner
carried them away to Croyland, at the entering whereof all the people of the
town generally were gathered together to see and triumph over their prisoners,
which put us in mind of Sampsons entertainment when he was taken by the
Philistims. Some others of our Town they took the same time, but released all
save Edw. Horn, one of Capt. Escorts Sergeants; so we three were kept together
under strong guard, and about ten days after one M. Will. Slater of Spalding, a
man of 66 year: of age was taken by some of their Scouts and made prisoner with
us; our usage for diet and lodging was indifferent good all the time of our
imprisonment, which was five weeks; but some insolenoies we were forced now
and then to endure. Capt. Styles one day quarrelled with us for praying
together, and for bad us to do so, saying, we should pray every man for
himself, threatening to take away the Bible from us, saying, it was not fit for
Traitors to have the Bible, and by no means would permit us to have Pen, Ink,
or Paper, though Mr. Ram did earnestly sue to him for them, and protested that
he would write nothing but what they should see or hear if they pleased. After
we had continued there near 3 weeks, on thursday the 13 of April some
companies of our friends advanced toward our relief, whereupon about 8 a
clock that night we were all carried down to the Bulwark, on the North side of
the Town, where we continued amongst the rude Soldiers and Townsmen till after
midnight: but by reason our Forces fell not on that night, we were carried into
an Alehouse, where we continued till day light, and then were had to our
lodgings: but when our Companies approached nearer the Town, then we were all
brought forth again, and another prisoner one Daniel Pegg of Deeping added to
us, and carried to that part of the Town, where the first onset was given,
being all of us fast pynioned and made to stand in an open place, where the
Cannon began to play; but before the assault, a drummer was sent with a summons
to the Town, at whom they shot diverse times before his entrance, whom they also
detained and kept as a prisoner till the Town was taken, contrary to the law of
Arms. A while after we were all five of us set upon the top of the Brest-worke
(according as we had been often threatened before) where we stood by the space
of three hours, our friends shooting fiercely at us for a great part of that
time, before they knew us; Cap. Harrington took one of his soldiers mu^kets,
charging it with Pistoll-powder, and himself made three shot at his own
father, he and all the rest of the Soldiers on that side supposing we had been
Croylanders that stood there to brave them: when our friends perceived who we
were, they left firing upon us, and began to play more to the right hand of us,
whither M. Ram and Sergeant Horn were presently removed, which caused our
party to hold their hands, so that little more was done on that side of the
Town that day. Indeed their works were very strong and well lined with
Musketeers who were backed with store of Hassock-knives, long Sithes, and such
like fennish weapons, and besides without their works was a great water, both
broad and deep, which encompassed all that side of the Town, by reason whereof
our small Forces could do no good at that time, neith^r could they approach
nearer without great hazard and loss. The Minister of the Town M. Styles was
very active all the time of the fight on the West side, where he commanded in
chief, running from place to place, and if fearful oaths be the character
of a good Soldier, he may well pass Muster, which made us not so much marvel
at the abominable swearing which we continually heard almost from every mouth,
yea, even when the Bullets flew thickest. But as the fury of the assault began
to abate in those parts, so did it increase on the North side, whither
presently Mr. Ram and Sergeant Horn were posted, and there set upon the
Bulwarks for our friends on that side to play upon, who plied us with great and
small shot for a great while together, supposing M. Ram had been the vapouring
Parson of the Town: many of our dear and worthy friends have since told us how
many times they shot at us with their own hands and how heartily they desired
to dispatch us, but the Lord of hosts, that numbreth the hairs of our heads, so
guided the Bullets that of the multitudes that flew about our ears, and many
of them within half Musket Shot, not one of them had power to touch us,
blessed be the Name of our God. After we had continued 3 hours more upon the
North-work, our forces began to retreat, and then were we taken down, and
guarded to our lodging, Mr. Harrington also, and the two other prisoners which
had continued all the while on the West-vvork were bringing up to us, but the
Forces on the north side began to fire again, vvhereupon they were carried back
by a base fellow of the Town to those works, and then our forces on both sides
retreated. Upon this great victory, as the Croylanders vaunted, one Mr. Iackson
a Minister in the Town drew the people into the Church where he read certain
Collects by way of thankfulness for their good success: the most part of the
night following was spent in drinking, revelling, and railing upon the
Parliament and roundheads, as if they had offered some extraordinary Sacrifice
to Bacchus, in so much that there was scarce a sober man to be found amongst
them: and since we are fallen into the mention of M. Jackson, we cannot well
omit some passages of his: he was formerly a great incendiary in another place
some ten miles from Croyland, where he stirred up the people in a dangerous and
rebellious manner to take up Arms against the Parliament, and drew many of
good estates into action under the command of Captain Welby, but God was
pleased to rout that company without much loss of blood; upon the defeat
there, Mr. Iackson and others sheltered themselves at Croyland, where, what by
preaching, and what by private persuading, he was a chief instrument in
stirring up the people of Croyland to take up Arms and commit such outrages as
they did. The last Sabbath that we were prisoners there he preached, and in his
Sermon did mightily encourage the people to play the men, commending them
highly for their courage and valor in the former encounter, and persuaded them
by many arguments to go on in their resolution, saying, That the cause was
Gods, and that he had fought for them, and would do so still, and that all
the good people of the land prayed for them; he said also, that these holy
Stones pray for you, these holy Books pray for you, which your enemies tear in
pieces to light Tobacco withal, the holy Vestments pray for you, that holy
Table prays for you, which they in many places make an Hors-rack, yea the
Saints in Heaven pray for you; but of this enough, and too much. To proceed
with our relation, we heard no more of our friends coming to relieve us till
Tuesday the 25. of April, and then the Town was assaulted on three sides by
part of the Regiments of those noble Gentlemen, Colonel Sir Miles Hobert,
Colonel Sir Anthony Irby, and Colonel Cromwell: when the Forces advanced
somewhat near the Town, Master Ram was again called for and brought out of his
lodging, and carried with all speed to the North Bulwark, and there being very
straightly pinioned, he was laid within the Work upon the wet ground, where he
lay for the space of five hours, often entreating that he might be set upon the
Bulwark, by reason of the ^xtream numnesse of his limbs, and his extraaordinary
wearines with lying so long in that posture; but they would not suffer him, the
with reason we conceive was, for that our friends threatened to give quarter if
any of us were again set upon the Bulwarks. That Tuesday proved a very wet and
windy day, and so continued till Thursday morning, that most of our Companies
were forced to quit their moorish rotten quarters and to retreat, only some
small parties on the West and South held them in exercise day and night most
part of that time, though the weather was very extreme, and they had no shelter
to defend themselves from it. On Thursday in the afternoon all the Companies
were drawn down upon the three approaches or banks, by which the Town only is
accessible by land, who so plied the Croylanders upon every quarter that their
hearts began to fail, diverse of them stealing away into the Coverts and
moorish grounds on the east side of the Town, which they call ^on, so famous
for fish and fowl, and many more that night followed their fellows. On Friday
morning those few that remained set the best face they could upon so bad a
business, and seemed as if they would fight it out to a man; but before day
light they moved for a Treaty, which being granted, they sent their
unreasonable Propositions, which being torn asunder and scorned, our men
advanced and entered the Town without any opposition; some of the chief Actors
got away, yet some were taken in the Town, and many more since in many places
of the Country about; Captain Styles, Lieutenant Auburne of Lyn, Thomas Bower a
Scrivener of London, Master Jackson the Minister of Fleet, Master William
Balder, and some three or four more are now prisoners at Colchester and
Ipswich: some aer committed to the provost Marshall at Spalding. Of Croyland,
only one was slain, and one hurt. Of our men were killed five, and some
eighteen or twenty wounded, whereof some are since dead, their wounds being
incurable by reason of their poisoned Bullets; ten champt Bullets were found in
one man's pocket, some of their Muskets being drawn by our men had such Bullets
in them, and abundance of the same sort found by our soldiers. The principal
man we lost, was Master Nicholas Norwood, a Gentleman exceeding active and
zealous in this and other services; he died of a shot in the shoulder some five
or fix days after, was much lamented by all that knew him and his
forwardness in the public cause. Thus it pleased the Lord to deliver us out
of our imprisonment, and miraculously to preserve those that were appointed to
die, for which we desire to bless his Name for ever, and blessed be the Lord
for raising up so many noble Gentlemen and worthy friends, not only of our
Neighbors in the Counties round about us, but of other parts far distant from
us, who with wonderful courage and resolution engaged themselves to relieve
us, or to die in the place.

John Harrington. Robert Ram. William Slater. Edward Horn.


A Copy of the Letter sent by Master Ram to Croyland, which they pretended to
be the cause of their madness against him.
AS one that truly d^sires your peace and welfare, I adventure once more to
write unto y^u; My business at this time is to entreat you to accept of the
advice of a friend, who though but a stander by, perhaps sees more then you
that play the game: I beseech you consider how dangerously you run the hazard
both of your lives and fortunes in this course you take. Do you think that to
take up Arms, to make Bulwarks and Fortifications without Commission, to
disobey all Warrants and Commands, are not very high contempts? Can you imagine
that the Parliament, or the Committee at Lincoln will endure such affronts? Or
can you hope to defend your selves against such Forces as may easily and
speedily be raised against you? Surely your numbers and your preparations are
not so great, but that a small power may prevail against you; neither is your
Town so inaccessible, but that it may be approached many ways; a piece of
Ordnance will soon command and batt^r down your houses at two or three miles
distance, besides, it is possible in a very short time to famish your Town by
cutting off all supplies of Corn and other provision: perhaps you expect some
Forces from other parts that will come in to your aid; perhaps they which have
so promised, you will not or cannot be so good as their word, or if they be,
surely Croyland is not able to receive, at least to maintain any considerable
number of men. Good Neighbors, think seriously on these things, and do not
desperately ruin your selves and your posterity, but hearken timely to the
Counsel of Peace. I know your plea is, that you stand but upon your ^wne
guard, and defense of your selves and estates, so pleaded C. W. so pleaded
Grand so plead all that stand out against the Parliament; but the Parliament
allows not of such a plea, neither will it endure to be so contemned. Assure
your selves that if the Forces at Lyn, Cambridge, Northhampton, Nottingham,
Lincoln, Boston, and Spalding, be able to reduce you to the Parliaments
Obedience and Justice, you will not long escape them; my counsel therefore is,
that you will play the parts of wise men, lay down your Arms and submit your
selves, listen not to them that advise you to stand out, they will be the first
that will forsake you; let those that are named in the last Warrant present
themselves to the Committee without delay, it will be the best days work that
ever they did; and if they will be pleased to make use of me, I will do them
the best service I can, not doubting but that I shall obtain their peace upon
fair terms. Thus beseeching the God of peace to incline your hearts to these
motions of peace, I rest

Your faithful friend Robert Ram.
Spalding Jan. 31. 1642.
FINIS.

