A DISCOVERY OF THE GREAT FANTASY OR, FANTASTICAL CONCEITEDNESSE.

That is to say, Of the Antichristian Blindness of those, that out of a mere
false Imagination and Fantastical Conceitednesse, do hold themselves to be
Christians, Spiritual Divines, Deputies and Messengers or Spokes-men of
Christ, and take upon them, as Mediators, to save others, whom they call the
Secular Laymen; therewithal, reviling, traducing, condemning,
excommunicating, persecuting, exiling, and putting to death the true children
of God, for not yielding unto this Fantasy of theirs, conceiving, that
therein they do God great service, when they busy themselves in weeding the
ground thus, according to their Fantasies, and endeavoring to save the Angels
a labor against the time of the Harvest.

Together with a Discovery of the great Arch-Whore, and her Paramours or
Lovers, whereof the Spirit of God bears witness.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. in Goldsmiths Alley. 1642.

FANTASY, or, FANCY.
WHen the mind of man does not deny it self in all humility before God, and is
not guided and acted by the Spirit and light of God, but is wise and cunning of
it self, in it is own power or strength of Reason, and the spirit of the world;
then is the same mind revolted from God, and goes on in it is own guidance and
natural wisdom, and that is the Fantasy; which, under the name of Christ,
and palliating cover of the holy Scripture, pretends great matters; but
indeed is nothing but a mere juggling; even as Lucifer became such a Phantast
and juggler, when as he withdrew himself from the sacred government of the
eternal light, and essayed in his own high mindedness, to be something of
himself; where also he seduced the first man, that he forsook God, and his
command in disobedience. Therefore, O Man, turn thy self from this power of the
Devil unto the living God, through Christ the Mediator and Savior, lest by
this Phantasterie and self-conceitednesse of thine inveigled-Reason, thou
become and abide a Fantastical Juggler for ever in hell. For without the
Truth in Christ Jesus there is no salvation.

THE OCCASION OF THE ensuing Treatise.
WHereas in many Pulpits, as also in sundry writings of those that vaunt
themselves true Christians, and followers or successors of the Apostles, there
is nothing so common and ordinary, as reproachfully to abuse and traduce such
as do not agree with their self-conceited-fond opinions, by the terms of
Weigelians, Phantasts and Enthusiasts, and that with as much clamor and
bitterness as can be devised. It was thought needful to show those Praters
something of their own Phantasterie, whether it might please God to give them
Repentance yet, to acknowledge the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.23.
and to be freed from the snares of Satan (by whom they are held captive
according to his will) to grow sober again; and by shaking off and renouncing
their erroneous and fantastic spirit, Ezech. 13.3. Isa. 29.24.
to receive understanding and instruction. Which is likewise requisite for the
simple people and such as want true information, lest they do make themselves
pertakers with the sins of others, and participate of the plagues of Babel,
Revel 6.18. Ose. 7.8, 9.
but rather that they may save their souls as a prey out of

(...) and sleighting the commandment of God, and with pleasure and delight
arrogating unto himself a wisdom and knowledge of his own, He fell thereby off
from God, was captivated by the spirit of this world, and subjected to the rule
of Satan, who so infected him with his spreading poison, that the same did
cleave not only to himself, but likewise to all his posterity, whereby they
are corrupted body and soul to everlasting death, and become the children of
wrath, and are satanicall altogether. Ephesians. 2.

Yet seeing God ever good and gracious, Wisd. 1.13.2.3.
made not the Death nor took delight in the destruction of the living; but
created man to eternal life, and to his Image, that he should be like unto
him: But by the devils envy Death came into the world; therefore also God took
hearty compassion of Man, and of his Grace repaired this fall by his
everliving WORD with the promise of the seed of the woman, Wisd. 10 20. Genesis
3.15.
who also afterward was born man, and became an Attonement-offering; and
graciously gave such a light to man, Ephesians. 5.2. Ioh. 1. Ioh 8.12. Col. 3.4. 1
Ioh. 3.8. Ose. 13.14. Ioh. 1. Col. 1.15. Ioh. 9.5. Luke 2 39. Bar. 3.38.4.2 1
Ioh. 5.6.7.
whereby he was set upright again, and by the virtue whereof he was to fight
against the seed of the Serpent, and overcome the sinful desires of the same,
in the faith of the Covenant: For this woman's seed, the essential word of the
Father, is the light and life of men, which does destroy and overcome the works
of Satan within them; and this Word which was in the beginning, whereby all
things were created, and are conserved, is the light of men, which enlightneth
every man that comes into the world, all namely that receive it, and love not
the darkness of their carnal lust and sinful affections, as the works of
Satan, more then the light, but rather turn from them unto the light, cleave
unto it by faith, and suffer themselves to be guided and governed by the spirit
of it; such have power to become the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12.
and by the gracious inhabiting of this light, which is Christ, to be made
partakers of the Divine Nature. Colos. 1.27.
For this light, Christ, the essential Word of the Father; is the only
Mediator and the only means whereby the fall of Adam may be abolished, 2 Pet.
1.4. Hebr. 3.14. 1 Timothy 25.
the loss recovered, and man again reconciled with God: And this is that
dayspring from on high that gives light to them that sit in darkness, Hebr.
1.3. Luke 1.78, 79.
and in the shadow of death, that they may walk before God, in holiness and
righteousness, o all well-pleasing. Who so has this light in himself, 2 Cor.
4.6. Romans 8. 1 Ioh. 2.27. Act. 15.11. Ose 12 10. Col. 1.19.2.9. Ioh.
1.17.10.11. Ioh. 15.5. 1 Cor. 10.3.12.13.
the same is enlightened; and whosoever has his spirit in himself, the same is a
Christian and anointed; as likewise the Patriarchs and the Prophets had him,
and were saved only by him; who also did speak by them; With him and in him,
is all the fullness of the Godhead, and of him and of his fullness, all of us
must receive: He is the true Vine, and we are his branches, participating
vigor and life of him and his fullness, and without him none is able to do any
thing. He is that spiritual Rock, from whom the Fathers drank their spiritual
drink, and all the regenerate to this day, still eat and drink this spiritual
meat and spiritual drink, Ioh. 14.6. Ephesians. 4.21. Romans 7.6. Ioh. 4.14.7.37, 38.
not in a Fantastical or imaginary manner of sensual reason, but in Truth:
For in Christ there is Truth and Reality, and from thence do flow the rivers of
living water springing up into everlasting life, out of them that do believe in
him, and are partakers of his Spirit.

But whosoever has not this Spirit, the same is no Christian; Romans 8.10.
and whosoever does not in Truth eat and drink this spiritual meat and drink, as
the right and true bread of Heaven, Ioh. 6.53, 54. 1 Ioh. 5.9. Luke 16.23.
and water of life, the same has no life in him, but his soul must eternally
starve and perish, and his body must become an everlasting Darkness; and whosoever
has not this Light and Word of Life dwelling in his heart as in a
living-Temple of God, Ioh. 8.21.24.44.
the same is none of Gods, but a vessel of wrath, and of the spirit of
darkness, who sets him on to all evil, and at last does precipitate and cast
him into perdition.

Now although this be the only Truth, and altogether undeniable according to
the verdict of the Scripture of the old and new Testament, and that only and
solely by this light of grace and Truth, all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Act. 15.11.
and all other children of God were saved, Act. 4.11, 12. Ioh. 14. Chap. 6.19.
and yet are saved to this day; as also indeed there is no other Gospel, none
other name or way, wherein we shall or may be saved, but Christ the WORD and
Light of life, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.
who truly and really has his dwelling and abode in the children of God, and
as the well-beloved Son of God makes them to become gracious sons and
daughters of God, and partakers of the Divine Nature. Yet many there are that
boast and vaunt themselves the Ministers of the Word, though falsely, 2 Ioh.
5.7. Epist Iud. ver. 19. etc.
who most impudently and blasphemously dare take upon them, to deny and
traduce, nay like unto mad dogs, with fearful, and execrable barkings,
ballings, railings and calumnies, to set upon and persecute this gracious
inhabiting of Christ in his faithful members; warning and exhorting the simple
ones, to beware of such Men, and their Doctrine, whom they do call Distracted,
Mad, Phantastike, Enthusiasts, Dreamers, Inchanters, etc. as they would do of
the Devil himself.

On the other side, they are ready and forward enough to boast and brag much of
the story of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 12. Iam 2.19.
according to their heathenish-Arts and deceitfull-prating; sitting in the
Chair of Pestilence, Matthew. 7.21.
and puffing up themselves, like so many proud and garish Mountebanks talking
and glorying of Christ, His Person, his office, how he has satisfied for
mankind; how he has sent them forth as his own Messengers, Matthew. 24.
instead of the Apostles; 2 These. 2.4.
that whosoever hears them, does hear Christ himself; what they say is the
Word of God, and spoken as from heaven; Christ had said: Come unto me all ye,
etc. Therefore men ought to come unto them, hear them, for where else should
they find Him? Yea, that such as heard them, receive the Faith and holy Ghost
thereby, and none otherwise. They are forsooth the means, the pipes and
conduits whereby God does save men: by them God takes away the sins of men; By
them he makes men partakers of the body and blood of his Son: And he now that
believes them in all this, and forsaking Christ the living Well, does seek the
same in Christ's stead at their hands, and does honor and make much of them for
it; He it is, whom they commend for a true Christian, and one that has the
true and saving faith, albeit he live not accordingly, nor show forth such an
holy conversation, as Christ commanded, and his Apostles and other Saints of
God approved, by being themselves living patterns and examples thereof: O, say
they, that matters not greatly, and can do them no harm; let them but
acknowledge themselves poor sinners: the Priests have power to pardon, and
absolve them in Gods stead, and to take away the sins from them. Christ has
suffered death for them, that they need not live so exactly; what had his dying
availed else? Let them but be of good cheer; and apply his merit to themselves;
why the very Preachers themselves, although they do exhort others to a
Christian life and conversation, and sit in the chair of the Apostles, yet they
are not able to live thus; But the office which they are in, has that power
and virtue; that men should give heed unto it, and to their preaching and
speaking, not to their life and conversation, they were but men themselves,
even as others. By this false prating, the true spiritual knowledge of Christ
is extinguished, 2 Timothy 2.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 2 Pet. 2. Ezech. 13 10.18, 19, 22.
and nothing remains but an historical relation, together with the
hypocrisy and apish imitation; the children of men are utterly turned away
from Christ, and caused to walk in their vanities, and the lusts of the flesh
and corrupt reason, Genesis 18.21.
whereunto they are inclined by their old Adamicall-nature, and do nothing but
devise evil; and it is manifest, how, according to the course of this world,
they live worse then the Heathen, being altogether ruled, driven, and acted by
the spirit of Darkness, Ephesians. 2.12.
that has his work in the children of unbeleef according to his own pleasure;
and yet do persuade themselves, by reason of the promises of liberty, their
shepherds feed them withal; that for all that they are very good Christians,
and have the faith, if so be they do but frequently repair to them in their
stone-Churches, Pulpits, and Confession-chairs, and reverence the Ministry,
then all is well enough with them. Thus by the deceit of such men being the
instruments of the Devil, 2 These. 2.9. Ezekiel. 22.25.
and not Pastors but murderers of souls, they encourage and strengthen their
old Adam in his carnal lusts, and the sensual desires of their self-love,
every where and in all occasions, to seek and advance thereby their own glory,
ease and benefit, Ephesians. 4.17, etc,
directly against the commandments of Christ, against the doctrine and examples
of the Apostles, R^^ 6.12. Cap. 7.4. etc. Gal. 5.16. Cap. 6.7. 1 Pet. 2.12.4.3.
Matthew. 16.24. Luke 17.33. Ioh. 12.25. Ioh. 15.5. 1 Timothy 1.5.6.3.
who incessantly insist and urge that the old Adam, that is, the outward man,
together with his sinful lusts and deserts, shall and ought to be subdued,
crucified and killed; that man must deny himself, forsake all evil in his
heart, and taking his cross upon him, follow Christ; that we must cease to do
evil, fear God and do good, and Christ alone must give the power and strength
hereunto, by his Spirit; to whom being sealed by him, we must submit to receive
instructions. Tit. 2.12. Genesis 6.2, 3.

Behold and consider now how far these people are from Christ, and the true
faith, and how shamefully they do beguil both themselves and others, with
unprofitable imaginations and supposed opinions, Psalm. 50.16, 17
conceit and tongue-faith, comforting themselves from without in their
imaginary and Fantastical apprehensions, Isa. 29.13. Matthew. 7.26. Ioh 5.38.
with the merit and satisfaction of Christ, stroking and soothing thereby their
old Man, in his sinful courses; but cannot endure the Spirit of Christ,
stroking and soothing thereby their old Man, in his sinful courses; but cannot
endure the Spirit of Christ, or the inward Word of God in the Heart, as in his
Temple; reviling and traducing that gracious inhabiting, despighting and
gainsaying the holy Ghost openly; Hebr. 10.29.
and thus indeed rejecting the true foundation and cornerstone of the
everlasting covenant in their building.

This beloved, Luke 11.39.
is indeed a most false pernitiously and deadly foolish Fantasy whereby these
Fantastical Men, together with all that cleave unto them, Ioh. 17.10.20.23.
and seek for light in darkness, do precipitate and plunge themselves into
everlasting Darkness. For he that is not united with God by the inhabiting of
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. Hebr. 3.6. and 6.6.
the true and only light, in a true faith, must remain thus separated from
God, and enchained with Lucifer in darkness for ever. Therefore take heed and
understand yet at length ye children of men, 2 Pet. 2.1.
that, when your Preachers do deny and traduce the inhabiting of Christ in the
true believers, they do speak too presumptuously against Christ and against his
members (who by the inhabiting of the Spirit of Christ in them, Ephesians. 4.30.
or by the participation of the Divine Nature, are truly sealed and new born to
be the children of God) and truly the apple of his eye. 2 Cor. 1.22.


But of themselves, that deny this inhabiting of Christ, and that Christ does
not dwell in them, 2 Pet. 7. Ioh. 8.44.
not feeling him in themselves, and denying the Lord that bought them, it may
be truly said (according to the saying of Christ to the Jews) Ye are of your
father the devil, and the lusts of your father you will do: He was a murderer
and a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because the truth is
not in him. When he speaks a lie he speaks of his own. For this is manifest
by the likeness of these Scribes and Pharisees of the New Testament, with
these of the Old Testament which had the word of God not dwelling within them,
and called Christ a made man and an inchanter; and plainly showed by their
hypocritical and carnal course and conversation, Matthew. 11.30. Hebr. 10.29.
and the fruits thereof, that not Christ but Antichrist, which is the spirit of
Darkness, and the Prince of this world, did inhabit them, and wrought such
works.

Now consider yet further, dear Man, Isa 61.6: 1 Pet. 2.9.
that by reason of and from this inhabiting and anointing, all Christians are
children of the light, Priests of the Lord, a royal priesthood and holy
peculiar people of God, that ought to declare the power of him that called them
out of darkness to his mavelous light, and washed them through his blood,
and made them Priests, Rev. 1.6.9, 10. Romans 12.18. Gal. 5. Hos. 14.3. Heb.
5.13. Revel. 5.8. Numb. 16. 2 Chronicles. 26.16.
to present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, and to
crucify and destroy the works of the flesh, and the earthly members in their
lusts; to offer up the calves of their lips, as the fruits of the same; in a
praise-offering to God through Christ; and to present the censor of the heart
full of the sweet smelling savor of prayer. For as in the old Testament, none
were permitted to be a priest, and to burn incense before God, but Aaron and
his sons, that issued from him as from a Rock, so in the new Testament none is
a Christian but he that is cut out of Christ the living Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. Cap
3.16. Matthew. 16.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. Isa. 8.18. 1 Ioh 5.1.14. Matthew. 3.17. Ioh.
1.13. c. 4.24. c. 16.26. Hebr. 5.16. 1 Cor. 6.17. Ioh. 14.16, 17. 2 Cor 4.6. 1
Ioh. 2.
and built upon him, and none dare draw near unto God with his prayer, but he
that is regenerated of Christ. And to his throne of grace they all approach
with cheerfulness, that will obtain mercy from God their heavenly Father,
through the same mercy seat, Jesus Christ, by whom as the well-beloved, they
are acceptable before God. Ephesians. 1.6.

And upon this same ground also, all true Christians are not secular but
spiritual men, for they cleave unto the Lord, and are one spirit with him,
which Christ has given unto them from the Father, and thereby sealed them;
whereby likewise as by a showing light, there arises in their hearts the
enlightening from the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, assuring and
teaching them inwardly, and not only making their hearts sure, Gal. 5.16.
but working withal the fruits of the Spirit within them, such as are faith,
love, patience, peace, kindness, meekness, etc. and therefore they are
spiritual people, hating the works and fruits of the flesh; such as are,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, sorcerie,
enmity, strife, envy, wrath, hatred, variance, divisions, seditions, murder,
drunkenness, gluttony, pride, ambition, extortion, covetousness, and the
like; all which do mark out a secular, Ier. 7.
worldly and carnal man, where they are committed. But those that belong to
Christ, do crucify their flesh with its lusts, and desires; and as they live
in the spirit, so they walk likewise in the spirit; and are in deed and in
truth no secular or worldly but spiritual men; however otherwise by their
places and offices here, they may be Kings, Princes, Nobles, Citizens or
Pesants.

Mark then and try thy self, O Man, what fruits there break forth in thy life
from within, Matt 5.15.20.22.34.35.23.25.26.
and how thy heart is disposed inwardly in its thoughts and affections, whether
thou be a secular or spiritual person: Let not the prating of those falsely
called spiritual or Divines with their outward Church preachings, confessions,
and communions deceive thee; but go and try now thy own self, whether Christ
does dwell and live in thee, whether thou be in the faith, fit or unfit,
exercise love, yea or no, 2 Cor. 13.5.6.
and let not their pretended difference trouble thee, that they do call
themselves the Priests, spiritual ones, and men in holy Orders or Divines, and
these of thy Rank and Quality the secular and Lay People. The Devil, as the
spirit of Darkness, has taught them to devise this difference, whose
spiritual creatures they are; for he can likewise transform himself into an
Angel of light, 1 Cor. 11.13.
and is a spirit; why not then as well also his own Apostles and Ministers? but
as he is a spirit of Darkness, so are they spiritual ones of darkness, or
altogether worldly and carnal, whose belly is their God, and whose glory is
their shame; for that is one and the same before God, and their end will be
according to their works. Phil. 3.19.


But all true regenerate Christians, are spiritual indeed, and bring forth the
fruits of the spirit, let them be for outward office or charge, what they will,
Emperor, King, Prince, Noble, Citizen, P^sant, Preacher, hearer, they are all
of one spirit, one soul, Phil. 1.27. Gal. 3.26.4.5. Col. 3.11.
and lay hold on the unity of the spirit; and there is no difference, they be
all but one in Christ; there is neither Greek, nor Jew, neither circumcision
nor uncircumcision, neither Barbarian, nor Cithian, neither bond nor free,
neither servant nor master, maid nor mistress, and so also neither estates
spiritual nor secular or temporal, neither Laicus nor Clericus, neither
Priest nor Lay, but Christ is all in all, and Love the Bond of Perfectness,
does tie and knit them altogether into one spirit, also many members of one
body, whereof the head is Christ.

See now and consider the great Phantastery of those, Col. 2, 18.23.
that among such as would be the people of God, do vaunt themselves the
special Priests the spiritual ones, the powerful Ministers of Christ,
pretending, they teach the others in Christ his stead, provide, revive and
comfort their souls, with the assurance of everlasting salvation, pardon them
their sins, which God did take away by their means; nay they were the means;
whereby, as by a pipe or conduit, God did impart faith and the holy Ghost unto
men, and save them, souls and bodies, everlastingly, they must be present by
all means, if any does mean to enjoy a blessed departure out of this world; of
them and by them they are fed in their souls with the body and blood of Christ;
if they do but pronounce the word of consecration upon it: and when they
administer Baptism, that the same is the Regeneration; that they themselves
are the apple of Gods eye, the Messengers of his mouth; that he that hears
them, hears Christ himself, and by them God does teach and instruct mankind;
that God will do nothing without them, unless it were in case of extremity,
then he supplied their part himself, yet not indifferently with all, but with
such only, that had formerly honored and renounced them and their Ministry;
that none ought to stumble or take exception against their scandalous life, and
conversation; but look only upon their function and upon the word, that it
ought to be esteemed a great mercy of God, that he is pleased to give and
communicate his graces to other men, by such polluted stinking vessels and
conduits: that the doctrine is pure and sound still, be the Doctor never so
vile and rotten, nay though he were the Devil himself.

Lo the swelling and strange imagination, and the Phantacticall conceitednesse,
thus men are inthralled withal, by the deceit of the spirit of darkness, who
casts such a mist before their eyes, in their arts and sciences; that they
are not able to discern the light of the truth, for the thickness thereof; 2
Cor. 4.4.
but are fallen into these abominable Antichristian blasphemies against God and
his Christ, and seducing such as follow them into the same Phantasterie.

Silly and besotted men! how, I pray, shall they be able, to provide for
comfort and solace, their or other men's souls, when as we see them to be so
careless and superficial in regard of their own? Do they not live in all
carnal pleasures, in luxury, uncleanness, drunkenness, gluttony,
debo^stnesse, in greedy pursuit of vain glory, and filthy lucre, in pride,
envy, wrath, hatred, strife, contention, falsehood and deceit, walking
altogether after the flesh; How can they be spiritual, I pray? they are stark
dead in sin, and utterly stranged from the knowledge of themselves, how shall
they be able to show thee the way to life? How shall they teach thee that
knowledge of God, that is proper only to the anointing, which they have not at
all, but slander and deride rather. Their wickedness and vice, is the very
same the Prophets taxed in the Priests and Shepherds, and Christ and his
Apostles reproved in the Pharisees, and the learned among the Jews; therefore
read and peruse the same and thou shall find all things agree with the practice
of these falsely termed Divines or spiritual men, and that they prove yet worse
in all regard.

Blind-Guides alas! Matthew. 23.
how should they be able to speak comfort to any man's soul, and to allay their
fiery trials, agonies and temptations, 1 Pet. 2.25. Psalm. 23.
with heavenly cordials; the same lying not all in any man's power, for only
Christ and none but Christ, is the Archshepherd and Bishop, Ier. 31.25. Mat.
11.28, 29. Psalm. 107.9. Col. 1.27. 1 These. 1.3. Isa. 44.24. Ca. 45.19.22. Isa.
42.8. ca. 41.11. Romans 1.22. Ier. 23.24. Isa. 57.15, 16.
yea the Physician and the Physic it self of the drooping and distressed
souls: they can find no rest in any human comfort or babbling, but only and
solely in Christ; that uniteth them with God; and gives them life; for Christ
is our life, and he in us is that firm and undeceiveable hope of everlasting
glory. He it is that blotteth out our transgressions, for His sake, and
dispelleth our misdeeds, as a cloud, and our sins as a mist. Therefore, turn
away thy self from these blind leaders to Christ himself; for it is he that
redeemeth thee, and he will give his glory to none other, neither to those self
up-start carnall-Idols. He needs no deputy nor Vicegerent; but as he fills
heaven and earth, so he dwells in sin-broken hearts, as in his Temple, and
comfort the spirit of the humble and drooping, and has not need of any
other means or Mediator. 1 Ioh. 1.2, 3. Isa. 45.11. Isa. 44.2.
And the true Messengers of God do testify and declare this unto their
brethren, and direct the same to Christ himself, as to the well and spring of
Life: to Him that made them, and that was with them from their mothers womb;
and they do not take upon them to be his Vicegerents, as if they were able to
comfort or save the souls of men.

Who am I? 1 Cor. 3.
says St. Paul. I have betrothed you to a husband that ye should cleave to
Christ, as a pure Virgin; and not suffer your selves to be led aside by the
wiles of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.2.
from the simplicity in Christ, to be directed to such or such, or to call
your selves after them. Ye shall have no Father on earth, says Christ, namely,
of regeneration, but only the heavenly Father, who is the only true Father,
Matthew. 23.9.
of all that is called children in heaven and on earth. How then can ye call
these men the spiritual Fathers of your souls, Ephesians. 3.15.
which yet do more hinder then further you, in coming to the heavenly Father:
having taken away the keys of heaven; Matthew. 23.13.
they neither themselves will enter therein, nor suffer you to get into it,
shutting the gates against you, and frighting you away from it, with their
clamours and outcries; lest in any wise ye should draw near to your heavenly
Father, without their means and Mediatourship: for do but observe, I pray, how
Christ does answer the Pharisees as they demanded of him, when the Kingdom of
God should come; Luke 17.20.
that it comes not with outward observations or ceremonies: neither shall say
lo here or lo there is it, but the kingdom of God is inward and within Man; and
St. Paul says, The kingdom of God does not consist in eating and drinking, 1
Cor. 4.20. Romans 14.17. 1 Cor. 2.4.
nor in great swelling words, or artificial prating, but in power and in the
demonstration of the Spirit of God, it being righteousness, peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost; that Man is to serve God in this kingdom in spirit and truth,
God being a Spirit himself, Ioh. 4.23. M^tt. 6.10.23.
and requiring such worshippers as do worship him in spirit and truth: Ioh.
24.21.
Therefore also Christ has taught us to seek above all things the kingdom of
God, and earnestly to entreat and pray to God, that it may come unto us, and be
revealed in us.

Unto this kingdom of God, Col. 1.27.27. Matthew. 13.44. 2 Cor. 4.7. Ephesians. 2.21.
which lies already hid within thee, all the faithful teachers do direct thee,
when as they speak of Christ that great mystery within us, how thou art a
Temple and dwelling of the holy Ghost; how thou do carry the treasure in the
field, and in an earthen vessel, Deuteronomy. 30.11.
that the grace may be God through Christ the word of life, Romans 10.8.
which is near thee in thy heart, and in thy mouth.

What do our Phantasticks pray to this? O, say they, that is not to be
understood: these be Pauliniall Phrases, certain usual experssions: the
Kingdom of God ought to be sought with them in their vile stone Churches, where
you may hear them make, Cicero like, a number of quaint and curious
Declarations and discourses out of the holy Scriptures, after their manner;
according to the Idol Brain or Glosses of Antichrist and human learning,
every one as he is taught and principled by those humane sects; Where also in
the chancell or quire of their auticular confession, they do forgive the people
their sins in Gods stead, Matthew. 24.
and administer their Sacraments: there there they say, is the kingdom of God;
thither men are called and invited to the great supper, by the peal of the
Bells, and their pulpits; there they are the stewards of the mysteries of God;
what others say of the kingdom of God within Man, that is nothing to them, but
Phantasterie, Enthusiastrie, in man there dwells naught that is good; how
should the kingdom of God be within him? Men ought, say they, to repair and
frequent to their Churches, there is the house of God, the gates of heaven, the
City that he has chosen, where he has set up the memorial of his Name,
where the great supper is celebrated, where Christ is cried into men from
without.

See, beloved, how these men are carried and hurried by the giddiness and
spirit of Darkness, Art. 7.48.^.17.24. Ier. 3.16.^.7.4.
Lies and blasphemies. When the true children of God do speak of the kingdom of
God through Christ within them, and prove or redargue that Phantasterie, of God
dwelling in houses or Churches made with hands; (whereof the Jews were wont so
much to boast and glory, saying, here is the Temple of the Lord and the Ark of
the Covenant) and endeavor to withdraw their neighbor from such Phantastery
to the living God, Isa. 57.15.66.
whose Throne are the heavens, and the earth his footstool, and whose dwelling
is in a contrite heart; then the spirit of lies does belch forth in his
Phantasticks and giving out, the children of God do forbid, to come to any
Churches or Assemblies. For they are vexed, when the word of Christ is cast in
their teeth touching the false Prophets in sheeps clothing, Matthew. 24.
that say, Here is Christ, or He is in the wilderness, and in the chamber or
chapel; and when thereby their Antichristian Phantastery is discovered; But
beloved, be not thou daunted with such lies, for the children of God do not
forbid to come to Church, or to frequent the assemblies of the congregations,
such, namely, as are gathered in the unity of the spirit, this they are falsely
slandered withal, by the lying spirit, that swayeth these Phantastiques, only
they do point at the false and fond op^nion of these Bablers and Idols, that
would have men imagine and believe their Phantasteries, as if God had his
dwelling and abode in their stony rotten Churches, wherein the screech-owls,
Bats, crows, and sparrows nestle; there the kingdom of God were to be met
withal, persuading people that there God would hear them in an especial
manner, and what they do propound and tell men in these places, they ought to
receive and obey as the Word of God, and there none should dare to control or
gainsay them; thus and thereby laying waste and desolate the living Temples of
the holy Ghost, that is, the souls and hearts of men; thereof they say nothing,
or at best, but little, and in a very confused and intricate manner.

This indeed is insufferable to Gods children, and directly against the glory
of God; that there they should hear of the lies and calumnies of those
Phantasticks, and by their silence and connivence, as it were approve and
ratify the same before all the congregation, and to deny Christ and his glory;
and therefore they have reason to absent themselves from their meetings, seeing
their gainsaying or protesting against them, 1 Cor. 14.26.
would be held a great sin, although among true Christians, it should be
lawful to every one. But yet they have as good reason altogether, to speak
against these ways, thereby to withdraw the straying from such false opinions,
that they may possess their heart with God, Ioh. 4.21. Luke 17.20.
and seek for the kingdom of God, according to the doctrine of Christ, within
themselves, not suffering themselves to be tied to any place whatsoever. In the
mean while they do not despise the gathering of the congregations together,
whether it be a house of wood or stone; or in the open field either; nor do
they simply find fault with frequenting of Churches, provided it be done out of
a true love to Gods word, and to stir up one another with prayers to the praise
of God in the great congregation, and solemn devotions: as likewise that the
younger sort may be taught and instructed, 1 Cor. 14.23. Hebr. 10.24, 25. Ier.
7.4.
the elder exhorted and encouraged in their courses, and erring and stumbling
ones, be reclaimed, heartned and strengthened.

Therefore now lay this to heart, and rely on lies no longer when ye hear them
say: Here is the Temple of the Lord, we have the true Religion, here is the
kingdom of God; but amend your lives and doings, dealing righteously one with
another; and let this be a sure mark and character, when thy Preachers tell
thee that the kingdom of God is to be sought with them in their stone Churches,
in their Pubpits, in the Chancell of confession, and in the Lords Supper or at
the Communion, inveighing and railing withal against those that do not
condemn the gathering of the congregations to heart the Word (but only blame
and speaks against the false opinions, and maintain with Christ, that the
kingdom of God is within man, and that the Christians are the true Temples and
dwelling houses of God the holy Ghost) I say again, be sure then, Luke 17.20. 1
Cor. 6.19. Hebr. 3.6.
that such are the many Phantasticks, and false Prophets, Antichristian and
diabolical Teachers; and if thou suffer thy self to be deluded, and conceited
by their means; that, repairing to them in their Churches, in thy carnal ways
and conditions, and so hearing them, and fetching the pardon of thy sins from
them for money, an Alms or some other outward respect, thou have there
performed thy service unto God, art reconciled with God, have been in the
kingdom of God, and at his great Supper, and yet do not find the kingdom of
God in thine own heart and soul, but go on still in the old vanity of thy
carnal courses, Ioh. 14.21. 2 Ioh. 5.
according to the lusts of this world; then thou art a Fantastic as they, and
mig^tily deceived, for not those that heart the Word here or there from
without, but they that have it in their hearts, that keep and do according to
it, and live no more in th^mselves and their own desires, but in Christ, in
God, and according to the will of God, and likew^se do love one another from
the heart in all uprightness and sincerity; th^se are the children of God in
whom Christ does dwell as in his house and T^mple, Hebr. 3.6. 2 Cor. 3.16.
and guide and govern them by his holy and blessed Spirit.

As for those other, although they shall say, Lord have we not done great deeds
in thy Name; Have we not made excellent and powerful Sermons, driven out
Devils; have we not been constant daily and diligent frequenters of the Church,
have we not often confessed our selves and gone to receive the Communion, and
absolution and pardon of our sins, by thy vicegerents? this is the sentence
they shall be doomed withal; Get ye hence ye workers of iniquity, Matthew.
7.21, 22, 23.
I never knew you yet; for none shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
such as do the will of my Father.

Now to speak of the Bond of Brotherly love in the Unity of the Spirit, which
is the Bond of Perfectness, whereby the true children of God do love their
very enemies; and do good unto them; for when all things shall cease, yet love
is to abide still, and it is the only infallible character of the children of
God, and Christ's disciples; But God himself is love, 1 Cor. 13. Ioh. 13.34. 1
Ioh. 4 17.
and without him none can love either God, or his neighbor; Therefore true
Christian love proceeds from the gracious inhabiting of Christ, who by his
blessed spirit, Romans 5.4. Ioh. 16.
does power out the love in our hearts, which overcomes all crosses and
afflictions, and can be separated from God by nothing. Romans 8.35, 39.

Consider and see now, I pray, whether thou can trace out love in thy
Preachers; Verily, if thou do not sufficiently honor them, and fill their
hands; Luke 20.45, 46.
or if thou discover but in the least degree or wink that thou do not hold
and esteam of them, as of the Vicegerents of Christ, Matthew. 25.
and such as are able to pardon thy sins; or if thou agree and assent not unto
their Fantastic opsnions, but endeavor rather to draw and direct both them
and thy neighbor out of a tender and brotherly heart, unto that which is good,
even, 1 Cor. 11.3.5.
with Paul to Christ himself; and not assent to those Men or self-authorized
Vicegerents; thou shall soon discover what love there is in them; and by whom
they are inhabited; for they do testify it by the practice of their abominable
slandering; reviling, excommunicating, condemning, irritating and enraging of
the silly multitudes that the Word and the Love of God have no dwelling in
them. Ioh. 5.41.38.^
Take a view of Love throughout St. John's Epistle, and according to that
examine and try both thy self and Preacher, then thou shall be soon and easily
able to discern between upright Christians, and those Phantasticks or
hypocrites: and beware of giving credit to it, that any one can be a Christian
that walks not in love, 1. Ioh. 3.
for he that loves not, has not God abiding in him; and he that has not
Christ in himself, but notwithstanding his worldly course and conversation,
presumes to comfort himself in the immaginarie conceitednesse of a
false-Opinion-saith with the Merit of Christ, the same does deceive and delude
both himself and others. Therefore prove and try thy self, and learn to discern
and discover the Phantastery of th^se, that conceive they may love both God and
their neighbor well enough, without Christ's true inhabiting of them.

And by reason hereof now turn thy self unto God, the source or stream and
fountain of love; 1 Ioh. 4.17. Ioh. 6.44.
follow his drawings, whither both M^^^s, the Prophets and all the Apostles,
yea Christ himself, and like^ise all sincere and upright Teachers and Preachers
do lead and direct thee; Psalm. 8.5.
and so thou shall find the Love of the Father to arise within thee, by his
living Word; and thy heart seasoned and possessed thoroughly, Rom 5.5.
by this Love, as the holy Ghost; without which LOVE, it will be utterly
impossible for thee to love God and thy Neighbor; for all perfect gifts do
come from him as from the Father of lights. Iam. 1.16.


One thing more thou art to be minded of, viz. that these modern Phantasts do
mightily defame and vilify, as they conceive the true children of God, by
terming and calling them, Enthusiasts; But know, that Enthusiasta in the Greek
tongue does signify a man endewed with divine power, governed and acted by the
Spirit of God, as were in former times the Prophets and Apostles, and as all
Saints and holy persons yet are, according to the measure, which the Spirit
vouchsafes unto them, for which cause the World also does account and call
them distracted and stark mad f^ols and Bedlams.

Whereas indeed these are even they, whom Christ, together with his Father and
the holy Spirit, Ioh. 14.24.
is come in unto, having made there abode within them: that same Spirit
teaches and lead^th them, Ioh. 15.16.18.
whom the world cannot receive, neither see him. And he does dwell in them as
in a holy. Temple, and thereby they are partakers of the divine nature, 1 Cor.
3.16. 2 Pet. 1.4.
and members of the body of Christ, flesh and bone, of his flesh and bone; and
by this Spirit that abides for ever with them, Ephesians. 5.30.
and leads the children of God in the right path, teaching, instructing,
chastising, swaying and governing them, 1 Ioh. 3.
they know assuredly, that God is and abides within them. Those now that are
thus qualified are the right and true Enthusiasts: and are nowhit ashamed of
the Word. As for other matters that are falsely fathered upon them (as if they
used to set themselves into some secret corner or other, and wait there for
special Raptures and Revelations, till some spirit come unto them, and
instruct them in this or that, these and such like tales and fables) are the
forged lies of the Antichristian Phantasts that neither know themselves, nor
Christ, nor any true Christian. The children of God know of no other
revelation, Ioh. 14.21. 1 Cor. 1. Gal. 1.12. Ephesians. 1.19. Romans 8.20.
but such as Christ and Paul meant, and as is already alleged. He that has
not the Spirit of Christ, nor is acted and guided by him, is none of his and no
Christian, but an Antichrist and child of Satan.

Mark therefore and observe well, I pray, since these Phantasticks and Raylers
do of themselves confess, that Christ and his Spirit do not inhabit them; nay
dare moreover call it Phantastery, when, Paul says, that these are the
children of God, that are led by the Spirit, by whom they destroy the works of
the flesh; blasphemously denying and traducing the inhabiting of Christ; it is
more then evident, that all their Christianity, and all their vain glorious
babbling and prating of Christ, is but a mere Phantastery, an empty windy
Word-Selling which has neither virtue nor substance; and because they are not
Enthei, and have not God within them, therefore they are Athei, Godless
Athists without God; and not being Christ's, or anointed and illuminated, they
are Antichrists, Matt. 12.30. Revel. 18.2. 1 Ioh. 3.8.10. Act. 5.3. Cap. 13.10.
blinded and darkened, and not being a dwelling of Christ and Temple of his
Spirit, they are a Babel, the dwelling and abode of unclean spirits, and
hateful fowls, wherein the Devil dwells, who does likewise appear and show
forth himself from within them, by their outward works of carnal lusts,
covetousness, pride, envy, wrath, cruelty and persecution, what kind of Bud
and Antichristian-murthering-spirit does nestle in their hearts, and what a
false spirit does issue forth in their words, lo, thus they are judged out of
their own words and works.

But the time will likewise soon approach, that all these Atheists and godless
persons, shall become and turn to be the Devils Phantusiasts, when, namely, God
shall execute his judgments now upon them as upon the disobedient Jews, when
for terror and anguish of heart, Isa. 66.24. 2. Esdr. 13. Psalm. 54.
they shall lie and lirk in holes, and for the fire of hell kindled in their
hearts, and for the gnawing worm of their conscience they shall giddily tun
about, and howl like dogs, that they may not be satisfied, but faint and starve
in their souls, because they would not endure Christ the living water and true
comfort of the soul, Isa. 52.6. Ier. 2.13.
within them, and likewise forbad and hindered others from drinking, offering
them water for money out of their own corrupt and stinking puddles.

Thus then beloved, thou have heard, who are the great Phantasts and
Antichristian Juglers now adays, that do but apishly imitate that which is
true, and thus by their Fantastical imaginations deceive both themselves and
others, and fail of the way everlasting.

Consider now and try thy self well, Matt. 24.5. etc. 2 Timothy 3.1, etc. Rev.
17.13. Matthew. 7.15.
and beware of the false Prophets and Phantasts, who according as Christ and
Paul foretold, are risen in these latter times, not by single or few persons,
but in a numerous multitude, pretending his name, and boasting of mighty signs
and works; seek them out in Countries, Cities, Villages, try them well, and
beware of them, by their fruits thou shall know them: he that is not with
Christ both in life and Doctrine, and is not led and acted by the indwelling
Spirit of Christ, to show forth the living faith in love, and only to look in
Christ, but means to sooth up and dawbe over his fleshly lusts, in the ways
of Darkness, and the old man; with the merit and satisfaction of Christ,
saying, here in the wilderness, or there is Christ, and boasts of his
Christianity, the same is no Christian, but an Antichrist, a Lyat, a Phantast,
a Stage Player and an Ape; whose Christianity consists not in the Truth which
is Christ, but in a self made-imagination and outward-hypocriticall
peevishness. Therefore also it is nothing but Phantastery and deceit, whereby
men do beguild both themselves and those that follow them, and fall together
into the everlasting darkness.

Glory only be to God.
A DISCOVERY OF THE ARCH-WHORE AND HER Paramours (or Lovers) of whom the HOLY
SPIRIT of GOD bears Witness.
Jesus Christ, GOD and Man, having accomplished the work of the Redemption of
Mankind, has sent forth his Messengers into all the world to gather unto
himself a Church or Spouse out of both Jews and Gentiles.

These dispatched Messengers of God, have accordingly taught men with all care
and faithfulness, to renounce all earthly lusts and pleasures, to crucify
their flesh, to forsake all men, how wise soever, even themselves and every
thing else, that is not God himself, and in pure and single hearted Love, to
cleave unto their Head and Bridegroom Jesus Christ, as being betrothed unto
him, and to be only and altogether corrected, 2 Cor. 11.^1.3
ruled, led and taught in all submissive humble obedience, by him and by his
Spirit.

But as the Church began already in the Apostles days, besides their
Bridegroom Christ, to honor also his Ministers in his stead, to cleave unto
and follow them, and to call themselves after their names, a^though the holy
men did highly rebuke them for, and earnestly dissuade them from it, lest they
should be ^^^^way like E^e, ^ Cor. 11.
by the Serpent from the simpliciti^ or pla^^nesse of Christ; for as much as
they ought to be Christ's only and no Ma^s, and that God does catch the crafty
in the World, and con^ou^deth them with all their w^sdom. So after their
Departure is this Adultery broke forth publicly, and the Ministers themselves
have allured the Spouse of Christ unto themselves with sweet and stately
language and show of their office, and have not addressed them directly only
and solely to Christ their Bridegroom (to wait on his Spirit, for life, power,
instruction and government) but have offered themselves to provide for the
Souls, the Comfort of Eternal Salvation, in the name and stead of Christ,
thereby to win men with soothing and magnificent words unto themselves,
according as the Adultery of the Churches and their daughters as well among the
Papists, and their party, as among the rest, even to this very present, is but
too manifest.

Whereas it is a known business as well in many other places as in Popery, how
there has been devised a spiritual marriage between the Ministers and their
Parish Churches, which has its beginning in the call and ordination, is
consecrated, consummated and perfected by his saying or singing the first
Mass, and by the imposition of hands; Whence also they are not ashamed openly
to give out themselves for spiritual Fathers, as who like conduits presume to
get spiritual children by their Churches, calling them their Parish Children,
Confession-children.

And although some hundred and two hundred years ago God raised some Ministers,
by whom as by his Instruments he caused his Word to be set forth and published
again, and this Adultery to be made notorious and manifest. Yet nevertheles the
Churches would not desist from their wonted fornication, but being set free
once out of that painful Papisticall brothel-house of despair, they run, like
the Stag, even mad in a wild and unbridled Libertinisme, beginning anew to dote
on those Ministers and their followers; sought the comfort of salvation at
their hands in stead of Christ's, and setting aside their own Lord-Head and
Bridegroom (who only and solely ought to inhabit, rule and make fruitful
the soul) did cleave unto the servants and Ministers, and called themselves
after their names. And thereby they have plunged themselves into such horrible
Babylonicall division and confusion, that the true knowledge of Christ and of
his holy and precious life, is utterly extinguished, and the true Christianity
turned and changed into a sectarian confusion and most heathenish conversation,
where men go on every one according to the lusts and greedy desires of his
corrupt Adamicall flesh; for their own glory, lust, love and goods, snatching
at, hating, envying, devouring, slandering, condemning and persecuting one
another, and yet for all that still conceiting they have as good a share and
interest in the Merits of Christ as any.

This now is that painted Jesabel, with her glorying and glistering outside;
that great Babylon, with her so many names of Blasphemies, the Mother of all
Whoredom, with whom the kings of the earth do commit fornication; and being
made drunk with her cup of Abomination do storm and rage so mightily; and she
is carried and supported by the spotted Beast, and the beastly world rule here.

And what are her children, that she brought forth by her Paramours and
spiritual Husbands, but Lions, Bears, ravening Fowls, Woolves, Dogs, Foxes,
Swine, and the like, who every one and all do what they can to persecute the
Lamb.

For having ever resisted the Spirit of God, Satan the old Dragon has thereby
so rooted and strengthened his kingdom and palace in her and in her children;
that he governs and leads them at his own and absolute pleasure. Hence it
is come to pass that the Bond of Love, according to the unity of the Spirit,
is broken asunder among men, and Christ notwithstanding they boast and glory so
much of him among all Sects is still crucified by the Learned, in his word
according to the spirit and power thereof, and by the Mighty ones, in his
members.

And hence also have all the modern Wars and troubles their sourse and
beginning, which were hatched and broached by nothing so much, as by the
irritating, prating, urging, streporous and virulent squeaking before the Kings
and Princes of the Earth, of those three Dragon-Frogs, who seek still every one
for himself to be in better and higher grace and favor with the Whore then the
others.

But now it is manifest and apparent every where, how the Horns of this Beast,
wherein this Arch-whore drunk in Saints blood sits, I mean the Forces and
Armies that are abroad in all parts do begin to persecute this great confounded
Whore, devouring her flesh and laying her desolate, as it is put into their
hearts, until the words of God shall be fulfilled upon her.

And God has broken and cut asunder the Bands, and delivers men every one
into the hand of his neighbor, the one to fall by the sword of the other, and
the thrones of kingdoms to come reeling down to the ground.

Happy is he that marketh this, and lays it to heart; that goes out of
Babel, and does not make himself partaker of her sins, and abominable
whoredoms, lest ye receive part also of her plagues.

But the time is at hand that the Lamb of God will grow wrath, and lay down
his enemies for his footstool; resisting and severely avenging such long
practiced Murder, in his Word and Members, and contrarily glorify upon Mount
Sion; the woman that was thrust forth into the wilderness; the true Church
namely, together with her native Members dispersed and scattered as yet, among
all parts and sects, and so distressed by the brood of the Dragon; when as
Babel shall be made the habitation of ghastly fowls. Blessed is he that so
watches and walks as that the shame of his nakedness be not discovered, but
that he may appear in white Robes at the wedding of the Lamb.

Glory only to God.
FINIS.

