A DISCOURSE BETVVEENE A Resolved, and a Doubtful Englishman.
Resolved. HOw now neighbor, how are you now minded? have you brought in your
plate and money for assistance of the Parliament, against the opposers of their
and our privileges?


Doubtfuil. I am not yet resolved, yet I am sure I bear as good affection to
my Country, and to the Parliament, and am as much an enemy to their opposers as
you are, were I satisfied of some scruples begotten in me, not by my own fancy,
but by expressions of the Parliament it self, which if you did observe as I
do, I believe it would somewhat stagger your resolution.


Resol. What may those scruples be? I see no cause at all.


Doubt. The Parliament have declared the King to be the head of his great
Council the Parliament, which to my understanding argues him to be a very
considerable part thereof, and you and I, and all men see that no act of
Parliament is ever made but by the Kings assent, and if he assent not, it is no
act, nor passes as a Law to bind the people; which proves to me, that he has
in all things a negative voice, which also the King claims by the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom.


Resol. By which rule, If the Commonwealth be prejudiced by any new invented
mischief, and upon debate thereof in Parliament, the Lords and Commons (both
Houses) agree upon a remedy, yet if it suits not with the Kings mind, the
remedy shall not take place, nor no Law pass for removal of the mischief:
Nay by this rule, if former Kings, in former Parliaments have obtained Laws
for advance of Prerogative, and to the prejudice of the peoples liberty, the
people are likely to lie long enough under the burden, for Kings are not
likely to remit any part of their Prerogatives, nor to pass any Law against
themselves, though both Houses should conceive the same never ^o just and
reasonable, and so the Kingdom shall for ever remain under prejudices, and
intolerable grievances, without hope of remedy.


Doubt. I pray what remedy have you?


Resol. Suppose the King should himself lay a foundation for arbitrary
Government, and for that end strengthen himself by making a party throughout
the Kingdom; suppose he should raise forces within, and hire forces from
abroad, and thinking his force sufficient, should call a Parliament, as hoping
to overawe them, to make Laws suitable to his ends, but yet upon debate betwixt
both Houses they should conclude upon Laws quite contrary, and destructive to
his ends, when do you think the King would assent to those Laws?


Doubt. Never.


Resol. And so the Parliament shall have no means to preserve themselves and
the whole Kingdom.


Doubt. The Parliament has, but the King is the Head thereof, and till his
understanding and conscience be satisfied, what can they do? The King claims
not a power of making Laws without them, but denies them any power without
him, which being granted (as necessarily you must grant it) he being Head of
the Parliament, me thinks you should answer your self, and abate of your
resolution.


Resol. You, nor all the world shall ere persuade me that there is any
prescribing for prejudices in Government, and such by which the whole Kingdom
shall be in danger to be destroyed (as of necessity it must be, when one man
has a legal power to bind their hands) which I cannot yet believe, our
forefathers were wiser then so, they have not spent their blood so freely in
opposition of ambitious Princes, to preserve unto us the name only of freemen,
leaving us without a just means to preserve our selves in all causes where the
King would not assent, and though they had, it had been only the error of their
judgments, and cannot conclude as by any their constitutions which tend to our
ruin or enslaving: The people of England are a free people, and so
acknowledged to be by all the world, and where they find any thing in their
government, any way tending of it self, or interpreted and made use of by
politicians to their prejudice in any kind whatsoever; those things the
Parliament has full power to alter or remove, and to break through all
opposition, wherein the people are to give them all aid and assistance: for
though evil and prejudicial laws and customs had confirmed for thousands of
years, there is no pleading for their continuance against the mind of the
Parliament, the mind of the Parliament being the mind of the whole Kingdom,
and is so to be taken and esteemed, and is never otherwise to be known, but by
the Parliament only: and now it comes to my mind, I pray tell me what place
the King has in Parliament? Sure I am, that until very lately, the Kings
claim of being a part of the Parliament has not been heard amongst us: indeed
since he has absented himself from White Hall (for there was his residence
whilst the Parliament sat) the Parliament being the Parliament complete, and
the King the King, and that he endeavored to make void all their proceedings,
and to frustrate all their endeavors to preserve the Kingdom from the like
ruin which is brought upon Ireland, and to beget a doubting in the people of
the power of Parliaments, lest they should yield occdience to the Ordinance of
the Militia (the only means to give check to his designs) I say till very
lately it was never heard that the King was a part of the Parliament, nor never
had been I believe, but that it was the only way to stagger the minds of men,
and I see it is the only cause that you (and many others well affected to their
Country) do not contribute that assistance which the justness of the cause,
and necessity of the time do require. The King is the highest Magistrate, A
Magistrate and Officer of the Kingdom he is, but that any Magistrate has any
place in Parliament by virtue of his Magistracy, I do not conceive: The Kings
Office is chiefly to oversee that Officers, or Magistrates, or Judges do
perform their duties according to Law: The business of the Parliament is to
oversee all Magistrates, and to take an account of them all without exception,
as they shall see cause, and to place and displace, as concerns the welfare of
the people.


Doubt. The King has of right belonging unto his Prerogative the power of
calling of Parliaments, without his Writ they meet not, and therefore I
conceive he has a negative voice, for did he doubt their compliance with him,
or had he not liberty of assent, or dissent, he would certainly never call
Parliaments, being not to be called but only by him, and are likewise
dissolvable at his pleasure, all which the KING claims and affirms to be his
undoubted right, and I do do not hear or see any expression directly from the
Parliament that does contradict the same, or to my understanding prove it to be
otherwise, or that they do challenge so great power over all Magistrates
(whereof the King you say is one) or that they do deny him to be a p^rt of the
Parliament: sure I am in all their addresses unto him they prostrate themselves
in the humblest terms as your Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects, the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled; they style themselves
his Parliament, and his great Counsel, all which prove to my understanding,
that in him alone remains the supreme power, which you would seem to place
in them alone without him; and infer that they have power to call him to an
account for the defects of his government, which they have never affirmed: nay,
they are so far from affirming any such thing, that they decline, that it is
a maxim in our Law, that the King can do no wrong, and all the defects of
Government they lay upon evil Ministers that have abused his trust. So that
the supreme power being in the King when the Commands of both Houses and His
are opposite, that I yield my obedience unto him, is full satisfaction to my
conscience.


Resol. Do you not allow that the safety of the people is the supreme Law,
and the foundation of all Governments.


Doubt. I do.


Res. Do you conceive the safety of the people to be sufficiently provided
for, when it depends on the judgment and will of one man?


Doubt. I confess freely, I do conceive it is not safe that it should be so,
and I have oftentimes considered it, and do uudoubtedly believe that they can
never be better provided of their safety, then to be at the sole disposing of
the two Houses of Parliament, though the King should be no part thereof; for be
he the wisest man in the world he is but one man, and that great Counsel could
not be much bettered by any one man's judgment: I conceive also the prejudice
to be very great, that the King should have a negative voice, or have the sole
power of calling and dissolving of Parliaments, all this and more I see and
judge as clearly as you: and have wondered that Kings should be accomptable
only to God, and not to the power of Parliament: but what is all this to me
or to you (if you would rightly consider) who are subjects, and must, and ought
to submit to the constitutions of our Government (and how prejudicial soever
these constitutions are) we are not to interpose our particular judgments, but
to submit with all obedience, and that the constitutions of our Government have
placed so great and absolute a power in the King, I am induced to believe from
the two Houses own expressions, and the Kings claim uncontradicted, or not so
plainly, as that I understand it.


Resol. To my mind now, I see some reasons inducing the Parliament to use such
low expressions, and humble terms, which occasion in you (though not justly)
a disesteeme of their power, for you will find when you have considered all
you can, the King is only the supreme Magistrate, but the Parliament is the
supreme power, from which there is no appeal, And by Parliament I understand
the two Houses of Lords and Commons, and their force and power to be justly in
the Mayor part, and their Votes to be the reason of the Kingdom; One reason
may be the long disuse of the Parliamentary power, occasioned by a strong hand
borne over them by the KING, and most of his Predecessors, who have all
endeavored to abate their power, and thereby to advance the power of the KINGS
above the power of Parliaments, which taking effect by degrees, and getting
ground by long disuse, and abuse of Parliaments, abridging their privileges,
and oppressing many of their Members, so that now in our present age, men
esteem of the Parliamentary power, just as Kings would have them, and
according to their politicians interpretation, and cannot so much as guess
what their power is in deed and in truth; and when any man speaks of an
unlimited power in them, that they are neither bound to observe forms, nor
limited by presidents, nor Laws, but may lawfully proceed to do whatsoever
the safety of the people (whose guardians they are) shall invite them unto,
when they are told that their power is above the power of Kings, and that Kings
are accomptable unto them; That the King is bound by Law to call a Parliament
once every year, and oftener if need, be even by that Law which so provides,
An. 4. Edw. 3. and 36. That his assent is required, is but to bind him to see
that the inferior Magistrates put that Law in due execution out of times of
Parliament, and is only matter of form and complement of every act, instituted
at first by those our forefathers, who expected that our Kings would be ever
the best affected unto Parliaments of any men in the Kingdom, or that our care
would be such, that they should not long continue the worst affected; which
also was the cause that they were entrusted with the calling and dissolving of
Parliaments, not once imagining that these things should ever have been turned
to our ruin, which was intended for our preservation: Though no man can deny
these things to be just and reasonable, yet when they are spoken to the people,
they grow angry, and are offended, and think it to be no less then treason:
and therefore I conceive the Parliament in their addresses unto the King have
used such language as you have recited, lest the people should have thought
they had usurped an authority above what was their due, and being thereby
exasperated, might (though to their own ruin) have quarrelled at all their
proceedings, which I am induced to believe, because I have observed the
Parliament have revealed their power but by degrees, and only upon necessity,
that necessity might make the people know that that power was just and
reasonable, as fearing the peoples weakness could not digest those strong and
sinowy truths, whereunto their stomachs had not of long time been accustomed,
though indeed it be the only food that makes us firm, and resolute, and true
Englishmen.


Doubt. These things which you allege carry some color in them, but surely
did the Parliament judge of things as you do, they could not in my judgment
have done themselves more good, nor the Kingdom more right, than to have used
(in all their addresses to the King) such language as had most properly
expressed their full power, and his Office, for how else shall the Kingdom
ever rightly understand that Relation which the Parliament has unto the Common
wealth, and that relation which the King has unto the Common wealth: for admit
I should approve all that you say or have said to be reasonable; whether is
more safe for me to be guided by your opinions, or the expressions of
Parliament, which incline me quite contrary to your opinions: in this case you,
nor no reasonable man in the world can blame me if I stand suspended till the
judgment of Parliaments by clear expressions give weight to your opinions;
for by their judgments, clearly expressing their power what it is, I stand
ready to be concluded; for I allow their Votes to be the Reason of the
Kingdom; but until then, as my judgment, so is my practice also suspended,
and will not afford that assistance which you express, and is the case of many
more besides my self, and in my poor opinion we are not to be blamed.


Resol. You may yet receive further satisfaction by considering the general
indulgence of Parliaments toward their Kings, using them as indulgent Parents
do a son whom they love, endeavoring by all means to preserve their honor
and great esteem with the people, passing over years of iarrings, and using
all endeavors to win upon them with tenderness of love and honor, hiding
their own just power under humble and low expressions, lest the people knowing
their great interest therein, should too hastily call for justice, and grow
implacable for injuries received, and so prevent them in their more mild
intentions of keeping open a passage for an erring Prince to return with
honor. This me thinks I see in their expressions, and how ill soever they have
thrived thereby, it merits abundance of love, but they have hatred paid them
plentifully for their good will, and I wish that mercy be not their undoing.


Doubt. I cannot think you judge rightly herein; for you endeavor to excuse
them by an indulgence, which seems to me an infirmity, for the power of the
Parliament is indeed the power of the people, and the people entrust the
Parliament with all their power, how great soever; and being so great as you
have declared, according to the same, the Parliament (in my judgment) should
have proceeded, I cannot see how they can dispense with the same so, much as in
a merciful or favorable expression; can they show any favor or indulgence
but at the peoples charges, if in terms they give more, they give more to the
King then is his due; are not the people thereby lessened in their power, and
the Kings Prerogative advanced to their prejudice, they are surely more
contentious then you would make them; you are too resolute upon your own
judgment.


Resol. And you too doubtful upon yours, that where your own reason and
judgments concludes you may justly; yet dare not aid your Country in a case
of so great necessity: but we are startled at terms which your self see
through.


Doub. The Reasons I have given you must satisfy me, and will do thousands
more till we have further satisfaction thereon, you or any (but the Parliament)
can give, how slight soever you make it.


Reso. Truly I am sorry for it: and do wish you had full satisfaction in all
the particulars; but it is a sad case that you would hold yo^^ ^^nds in your
bosom, while every man's hand is required to the work, and all (...) ^ough,
and I heartily wish that all England do not repent this niceness.


Doubt. If all England should have cause to repent this which you call
niceness in us, and that the want of our contributions should be the loss of
all our liberties, and the ruin of the Kingdom, who shall be blamed justly
therefore?


Resol. Who say you?


Doubt. Neither I, nor none of my mind, who stand ready to be concluded by the
Vote of Parliament, declaring that high Assembly to be the supreme power, and
the Kings Office to be, as you have expressed, but until that be done. I pray
do you tell me who is to be blamed if the Kingdom be lost for want of our
assistance.


Resol. There is not any of the particulars whereof you see me as yet not to be
satisfied: but if you would diligently observe the several Declarations set
forth this Parliament, you shall find every one of them cleared sufficiently,
to satisfy any ingenious man, and to leave you without excuse.


Doubt. I have read them all most diligently, and hear and there in them I do
discern some expressions inclining to your understanding of their Power, and
the Kings Office, but withal I find the same that I also have mentioned, and
if those proceed from indulgence in them, as you suppose, that is yet but your
supposition, nor are their affirmations briefly recited, and but touched upon
occasion of dispute betwixt them and the King, sufficient to settle my
understanding, their other indulgent expressions (as you call them) standing
unrecalled.


Resol. What would you have?


Doubt. I will tell you, when I shall see the expressions I have mentioned, by
the Parliament acknowledged to be but indulgent expressions only, hoping
hereby to win by love upon the King, and to preserve his honor.

When they shall by sound Reasons prove themselves to be the supreme power,
that they are bound only to observe the supreme Law, the safety of the
people; that the King is accomptable unto them for performance of his office,
and the like businesses appertaining to a supreme power, and Vote the same to
be received as agreeable to the constitution of the government of England, and
not to be argued against by any condition of men whatsoever, upon the highest
punishment. Then shall you see that I, and such as I am, will as really comply
with their commands, as you, or any the most Religious man in the Kingdom.


Resol. You see the Parliament takes the more gentle way of borrowing, and does
not command you so much as to lend, and yet they prevail nothing with you.


Doubt. If they are the supreme power, I had much rather my money should be
compelled from me by way of Subsidyes, equally to be rated upon all men alike
which is the old and good way of the Kingdom, and can never fail to yield
sufficient supplies for preservation thereof, whereas you would find that the
voluntary affections of the people will never hold out to furnish for
perfecting the present works which they have in hand; if they are the supreme
power then I conceive the present war to be just, and being just, I shall as
willingly adventure my life and estate in prosecution thereof as any man
whatsoever is, and this being really my mind, I do not see how you can blame
me.


Resol. You should do well to petition the Parliament for to publish to the
whole Kingdom, their judgments in the particulars wherein you remain
doubtful.


Doubt. I pray you pardon me for that, you are in good esteem, by reason you
have testified your continual assistance, which my conscience would not permit
me to do; and therefore if it do appear to you and others of your judgment
to be a work tending to the good of the whole Kingdom (as to me it seems it
does) and the only means to rectify the judgments of all men, and to unite
their affections. I then conceive it would be an acceptable service for you to
present a petition to that end.


Resol. For our part we are fully sattisfied that what the Parliament has done
is most just, for that we are assured they will do nothing not agreeable unto
equity and justice, and you see they have done, and daily do proceed to do
the works of the supreme power, which were it not their right they would not
do, and therefore for us to trouble them in your behalf, which perhaps when
we have prevailed with them to declare their power, you would have one pretense
or other to hold your moneys, which I fear is too dear to you to part
withal, though the Kingdom should perish for want thereof, and am no whit
doubtful but the Kingdom will in short time be fully settled without your
aid, to the perpetual shame of you, and such as you are.


Doubt. I believe you will find your selves deceived, I confess you are most
of you truly honest, and sincere lovers of your Country, but indeed if you
well consider, you shall find you are not principled to deal with those
polliticke adversaries you have, you are too apt to slight their power, their
friends, and means to do you mischief; and you are too too confident of your
own; you do not see far enough into the affairs of State and war; you
look only at the present, and seeing no want, you think there never will be
any, you think to dispatch your work in short time, and so apply your selves
to your trades and getting of moneys; whereas your Adversaries resolve it
should be a business of years, for so they gain their ends, though it be
seven years hence, it should serve their turn. They know you must be wasted,
and poor, and friendlesse, before they shall effect their designs of making
you slaves, and therefore it behooves you to free your selves from this too
much conceit of your own force and means, and not so slightly to reject that
use you may yet make of men of my condition, but as willingly incline to give
us satisfaction, as we (being by your procurement satisfied) shall be ready to
join heart and hand with you, in any thing that you shall make appear to be
just; and howsoever you are confident that the Parliament will do nothing but
what is just, yet it will be much more profitable for the Kingdom, that the
Parliament be pleased to argue the reason of their just power before they use
it: and for your selves, in acting the power which they oftentimes put you in
trust withal upon sundry occasions, it will be much more pleasing to your
selves, and any that are to be commanded by you, when you shall be furnished
with sufficient arguments to prove the things you do or command to be just,
rather then violently to compel men upon their power, not yet manifested fully.


Resol. If we should petition the Parliament, would you join with us therein?


Doubt. Truly for my part I will, and I believe many more that as yet have done
no service for the Parliament, for I conceive so much good will come thereof,
that either a good peace will soon follow thereupon, or a more resolute
prosecution of the War, for if men were once settled in their judgments
concerning those useful points in Government; then would every man see who it
is that is the cause of all, and be able to discourse of all the differences,
and see plainly wherein they were injured, and be enraged with just anger
against the Authors and maintainers thereof: Whereas whilst they continue
divided in their understandings and affections, and unsatisfied in the true
state of the cause of this War, it will be prosecuted so coldly, as you will be
continually wasted, and vexed to see the unavoidable miseries that will fall
upon you, and all your posterity.


Resol. Give me your hand, I see my error, but do you conceive there are many
in the Kingdom so ingenuous malignants as you are, that would gladly be
satisfied?


Doubt. I verily believe the greatest number that you call Malignants are such,
and that you will soon perceive, if you can prevail with the Parliament for
satisfaction concerning their power, and to punish all opposers.


Resol. Well, I Will about it instantly, for I see apparently it is the only
means to unite all sorts of men into one resolved association, against all
tyranny and oppression, and that without union the politicians will destroy us,
all our money, and plate, and horse, and ships, and strong holds, and all our
ammunition will not do us so much good as unity amongst our selves, all our
petty differences in Religion fomented by our Machivilian adversaries of
purpose to divide us must be laid aside, and we must be united as one man,
against whomsoever shall oppose the just and supreme power of Parliament: I
see we have not been used to deal with such policies, we must advance our
spirits and hundred fold yet, before we shall be able to reach their designs,
and we must give our heads no rest, till we be able to meet them at every
turn, and not only so, but to prevent them with stratagems, and to circumvent
them with policies.


Doubt. You make me glad to hear you thus resolved, and if you and your
friends make progress therein, all the world will not be able to wrong you;
and one maine thing you must ever have in mind, and that is, you must be
extremely mistrustfull, for in a civil War, as this is, there will be such
juggling, such treachery, and continual betrayings, that you will be
perpetually abused, except you be extremely jealous, I might perhaps better say
watchful; and where in any man, without exception, great or small, you find
the least abuse, never cease till you have gotten him our of all employment,
let no excuse, nor no pretense serve the turn to re-admit him, but punish him
to the full; if you do not this to extremity, you shall be perpetually bassled
and slighted, and shall never master those whom you employ, nor have any use of
them, but waste of time, and money, and they in the end will master you;
therefore look to it in time, and call him no more Malignant that has given
you this Council.


Resol. I will not: but my friend, my brother, We had need I see of such heads
amongst us, and I shall endeavor to procure your satisfaction to the full,
that our cause and us may deserve your continual counsel and assistance, of
which I make no doubt: And so for this time fare ye well.


FINIS.

