THE Petition in the Name of the Inhabitants of the Cities of London and
Westminster, And the Borough of Southwarke, In the behalf of themselves, and
of Millions in this Kingdom, distressed in point of Conscience.
WHereas your Petitioners having formerly contributed, freely and literally to
the King and Parliament in conjunction, deo now refuse further to contribute or
pay, conceiving them in opposition; as by reason His Majesty's person was
invaded in battle at Keinton (contrary to the many Declarations of taking of
Arms for the safety of His Maiestiesties person) so in regard theat is no
express care of His person and honor in your late Ordinance, for the
assessing the Twentieth part in London, nor in your Declaration for levying of
moneys in the Counties.

And whereas this their refusal is merely out of Conscience, according to
that information they have concerning the Divine constitution of particular
Kings in their several Kingdoms, and of Subjection to them both Active and
Passive, and of the Damnablenesse of Resisting; from

First, The Word of God: Dan. 4.17. and 25.32. where thrice in one Chapter it
is said, That the Kingdoms be Gods, and he gives them to whom he will. 1 Samuel
26.9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless. And the same blessed spirit which calls David the Lords Anointed,
Psalm 89.20. does call Cyrus a Heathen Prince the Lords Anointed also. Esa
45.1. Romans 13. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no
Power but of God; The Powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation (Yea we acknowledge in our Book of Common
Prayer that King Charles is Gods Minister, and that he has Gods Authority, and
so fighting against him, we fight against God himself.

Secondly, M. Calvin and other Protestants, their exposition on Romans 13. and 1
Pet 2.

Thirdly, The Harmony of Reformed Churches concerning Magistracy.

Fourthly, The Doctrine of the Church of England in the Books of Homilies
delivered, concerning civil obedience.

Fifthly, From the Laws of the Land, which declare it to be Treason to Levy
War against the King in this Kingdom, and to encounter in fight, and kill
such as are assisting to the King, or come to help him, or to aid in those
cases.

And the Action of the Earl of Essex was adjudged Treason, though he pretended
nothing but removing evil Councillors from the Queen. Now that which is
evil in its own nature cannot be the subject of any Command, nor induce any
obligation upon any man by any Authority whatsoever. Remonstrance May 19. And
we may not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3.8.

Sixthly, Also in regard of the late Protestation, relating to the said
Doctrines, and to His Majesty respectively, which Protestation, you have bound
your selves to maintain, and all those that do any thing in pursuance of it.

You would at least be pleased in your present undertakings for Religion, and
for the Law of the Land, and the Liberty and Property of the Subjects, to
proceed in the way of Religion without violence to the Conscience, in a case
that concerns no less then Salvation or Damnation (As you profess your
tenderness of the Conscience even in matters of Indifferency) And that first
your Authentical Divines (D. Burgess, M. Marshall, etc.) may publish
something for the resolving of Conscience in this way clearly out of the Word
of God, and home to the Action of Keinton, taking notice also, That his Majesty
took up Arms for the maintenance of the Laws, concerning the public worship
of God, and for the privileges of and freedom of Parliament, notoriously
invaded by Brownists and Separatists; and that now He continues them also for
the necessary defense of His Person, manifestly in danger since the battle at
Keinton. To which (satisfying the Premises) your Petitioners (far from
contemptuousnesse and obstinacy against the clear Word of God and Lawful
Authority) shall ingeniously condescend; and readily make payment of these
several Rates accordingly.

And pray for, etc.
A Discovery of the juglings and deceitful impostures of a scandalous Libell
against the Parliament: Published in the form of a Petition to the Houses of
Parliament, In the Names, etc.
THE Author of the Libellous paper, styled, A Petition to the Houses of
Parliament of the Inhabitants of London and Westminster, and Bourough of
Southwarke, in the behalf of themselves and of millions in this Kingdom,
distressed in point of conscience, like the Devil disguises himself in
Samuels mantle, and takes upon him the form of an Angel of light, pretending
conscience, and falsely personating the honest inhabitants of those Cities and
that Bourough, who remain to all posterity and future ages, justly and
worthily renowned for their love and zeal to Religion, the liberties of their
Country, and to the Parliament, the great and chief conservator of them under
Heaven. But you may discern him by the cloven foot by which he enters into
his Petition, deviding it self into two apparent lies, one that he has freely
and liberally contributed to the King and Parliament conjoined, and the other,
that his Majesty's Person was invaded in battle at Keinton.

The grounds of his pretended conscience are of like nature manifestly
fallacious; for first, in his Scriptures cited by him, as the Devil did in
tempting our Savior, he changes divine truth into a lie by curtailing it: For
it is true, God gives Kingdoms to whom he will, but it is not all the truth,
for God also gives them in several manners, with several sorts of power, Some
Kingdoms he gives to one man alone, and invests him with absolute power that
his will is law, which is commonly called an Absolute Monarchy: But such power
he has not given to the King of England (as this man would have us believe)
His Majesty in his Declarations disclaimes it, and pretends to no other power
then to govern according to the Laws made by the supreme power of this
Kingdom, residing by divine providence and ordinance in the three estates,
which are coordinate, and not subordinate in authority, though the trust of
convening them, be by them committed to the King, in confidence that he will
according to Law, call them together when there shall be need thereof for the
Kingdoms good; and in the mean time, see to a just execution of the Laws
made by them: And when Parliaments are conveened, to them belongs the care of
the Kingdom, and of the Laws, and the examining, punishing and reforming of
whatsoever is done against the Laws and Kingdom by the Kings personal
command or pretense of his authority. And farewell Religion, Law, Liberty, and
all good, if the Parliament be and continue obstructed as now it is, from
questioning, examining, or punishing and reforming things done against Law, by
color and countenance of the Kings Personal will (which is subject to be
deceived, misled, corrupted) to the prejudice of the subject. And they have
also power to provide and prepare for the Kings royal assent further Laws
profitable for the Kingdom. And he that resists these powers of Parliament,
though it be the King himself, or by color of his command, resists the powers
ordained of God, and the ordinance of God, See the vindicatiof Psalm. 105.15.
lately published, and the revindication thereof.
falsifies the late Protestation, and shall receive for it (if the word of God
be true) damnation without repentance.

For the annoynting of Kings, before Christ exhibited, it was commanded and
used, as the annoynting of Priests and Prophets, because tipicall of the true
anointed Jesus Christ, in his Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical offices. But
now thereis neither rule, use or necessity of any such annoynting, Christ and
his members being the only anointed of the Lord under the Gospel. Romans 13.
commands every soul (even Kings where they be not the supreme power) to be
subject to the higher powers: so as the King of England is, and ought to be
subject to the Laws, which are the powers established by the 3 estates, for
the regulating of all persons and things within the Kingdom, not alterable by
the Kings power which is subordinate and given him by the Laws, and by them
supported and conserved unto him. And this Scripture speaks only of powers:
Legal commands have power in them, and are to be subjected unto, but illegal
commands are the sins and weaknesses of the personal will of the King, and
are not to be submitted unto, and the author of this Libell has by chance
stumbled upon a reason for it, where he says, that that which is evil cannot
be the subject of any command, nor induce any obligation upon any man by any
authority.

It is certain that King Charles is Gods Minister while he executes the Laws
which are the immediate issues of the supreme power the 3 estates, and so he
has Gods authority, but where he proceeds by a deceived and misled will
against the Laws, he is says the Lawyer, the minister of the Devil Bracton:
Minister Diaboli.
. And to fight against such as take up Arms against the Parliament, to protect
themselves and other offenders against the Laws, and to hinder and obstruct
the said lawful powers and privileges of Parliament, is to fight for God and
the powers ordained by him: and such as take up Arms against such powers of
Parliament, though they have the personal commands of the King for it, do
fight against Gods authority, and against God himself.

Secondly, from Calvin and the harmony of reformed Churches concerning
Magistracy, nothing can be produced in any wise, contrary to what I have said;
and if this Author had expressed what they say, it would have evidently
appeared, and both their writings and practices clearly confirm it, and the
Doctrine of the Church of England cannot be conceived to fight against the Laws
and politic Monarchy of England. But this deceivers wicked purpose to delude
his readers, is further expressed by his hiding himself in generals, and
shunning the clear directing and convincing light of distinct knowledge.

Thirdly, The law declaratory of Treason is the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 2.
Which first declares it to be Treason, to compass or imagine the Kings death.
Secondly, To levy war against the King, etc. The first provides for the Kings
safety in his Person: and the other for his Kingly power, that it be not
obstructed by the hand of force and violence. And as to rescue the Kings Person
out of the hands of enemies or thieves by force of Arms, and to fight against
them that wickedly captivate and carry him away, is not any offense against the
first branch of this Statute: So to raise Arms and to fight against them that
resist and obstruct his most eminent power which is in his Parliament and Laws,
is not any offense against the latter. And they that by wicked counsels seduce
the King from the Parliament and from his Laws, and his care of seeing them
executed, to the danger and damage of his Kingdom, and from his Oath by which
he is obliged to both, and draw him to adventure his Person in most imminent
dangers, to protect them in their rebellion against the Law and just punishment
thereof by the high Court of Parliament, are clearly Traitors within the first
branch of this Statute. And they that take up Arms to obstruct and oppose the
Laws and justice of the Kingdom, and the due execution thereof, are evidently
Traitors within the other branch thereof, which is meant of the King in his
politic capacity Rex est Nomen officij.
, his legal Kingly authority, most eminently exercised, and apparent in his
high Court of Parliament: This latter clause being distinct in sense and
meaning from that former concerning his Person. And I confidently believe,
every man not wilfully blinded by malice against God and goodness, will easily
grant that the King may be more certain and assured of safety in White Hall,
and of Angellicall protection in the way of his Kingly office and duty, then in
the hands and power of the Dammees, that for their wicked and damned base ends,
pretend to assist and help him in ways contrary to his office, and
destructive to his Kingdom and people.

Fourthly, The Earl of Essex in taking up Arms against Queen Elizabeth, to
remove such from her as he counted his Enemies, offended against the said
Statute, because upon a private quarrel against some Peers and great Officers
near about the Queens Person, he being a private man without legal
authority, and contrary to Law took up Arms and raised force to go to the
Queens Court, to the apparent endangering of her royal Person, and so it was
in Law, both an imagining of her death, and a levying of War against the Law
and her regal power. But how impertinently, yea maliciously this is applied to
the Parliaments present case, is manifest to him that has but half an eye.
The difference between the King and Parliament is no private quarrel, the
Parliament which is no private person, but the highest Court of justice in the
Kingdom, the representative body of the Kingdom, to whom the preservation of
the Kingdom, and of the peace and safety thereof and of the Laws, does
properly and primarily belong, discovering sons of Belial, wicked men
practicing to undermine the Parliament and our Laws and liberties, by false and
scandalous aspersions cast upon the Parliament, and lying suggestions against
the power of Parliaments, and against the proceedings and privileges thereof,
whispered into the ears of the King, to seduce and draw him away from his
Parliament, and his affections from his people, to improve his Personal
illegal commands, to resist and frustrate the lawful proceedings of his
Parliament against them, to withdraw the great Seal from them, and the members
of either House of Parliament from their attendance upon the service thereof,
and to raise a force against the Parliament, not only to shelter themselves
from the hand of justice, and keep the good subjects from all use and benefit
of the Laws, and destroy their properties by forcible pillaging and plundring
(which every man sees to be the ends of their said practices, and therefore
first in their intentions) but also Alexander like, by the Sword to cut the
gordian knot they could not otherwise untie, I mean to destroy this perpetual
Parliament, before the grievances of the Kingdom contracted before by their
wicked counsels be redressed, that the reformation intended and desired, shall
never receive birth and perfection, distilling into the Kings mind a wicked and
irrational conceit, that a perpetual Parliament and his Kingly office and
power cannot consist. The Parliament I say to defend themselves and the
Kingdom from these diabolical designs and practices, and to bring these
grand-Delinquents to justice, and rescue his Majesty out of their hands, took
up Arms, and at Keinton and else where made use thereof. Shall the Parliaments
performance of their duty and trust become Treason or unlawful? by what Laws,
reason or sense? Is it no Treason for an inferior Court to raise force, to
execute the Process thereof, though the King express his Personal will ever so
strongly even under his great Seal to the contrary? and shall it be unlawful
or treasonable in the supreme Court to do it, which has power to stay and
check the proceedings of all inferior Courts, which the King cannot do by his
Personal command.

Hereby may appear that the Parliament has proceeded in the way of Religion
in this great case, and this Libeller has his desire, but that he cannot see
the wood for trees; and there is no need of troubling such able Divines as he
Names to convince his ignorance, they are or may be better employed. And for
Brownists and Seperatists, it is notorious that the Kings taking up Arms is so
far from being against them, as it is the only cause that wholesome
provisions for the right governing of the Church are not made and settled, that
they may be suppressed and wholly rooted out, and that they are fomented,
encouraged and increased daily, by the continuance of those Forces in
obstruction of the Parliaments power and proceedings against them. If a right
discipline according to Gods word, and a painful preaching Ministry were
once settled in this Kingdom, such Sectaries and Schismatics would be quickly
subdued.

To the two most honorable Houses of Parliament, the representative body of
the most glorious legitime, and Christian Kingdom of England, the humble
Petition of some Well affected Patriots dispersed here and there.
WHereas there is a Petition spread abroad, pretending the number of millions,
alleging distress of conscience, who in all likelihood never felt any, except
in the fear of a pure Reformation, as may appear by their verbal arguments,
abusing the Scripture to their politic end, (viz.) Dan. 4.17.25.32. 1 Samuel
26.9. Psalm. 89.20. Isa. 45.1. with the Book of Common Prayers, attributing to
the King Gods authority; from which they urge a literal appearance to their
own overthrow, and the enslaving of all to more then Turkish servitude: Not
understanding, or considering that Cirus is only styled God Anointed in a
figurative phrase, for the service of Christ whereunto he was destined, even
the restoration of the Temple; otherwise no more the Lords Anointed, then was
Eglon King of Moab, whom Ehud stabbed to the heart, for the deliverance of Gods
Church and people, Jud. 3.12.19, 20, 21. Then grossly distorting that of Romans
13. for though it be only a direction unto particular Christians, that they
should not (living under such government or ordinance) abuse their Christian
liberty to the scandal of profession or the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.12, 13, 14, 15,
16. yet would these politic glossers, hereby overrule the irrational rabble,
if not to a rebellious opposition against, at the least, to an absolute
disdain and desertion of Gods ordinance ( Romans 13.1, 2.) a necessary counsel
and indissoluble, by the people elected, and the King established, as the only
soul and intelligence of the English State, the last remedy and only security
against those pernicious seducers, and crafty politicians which always aim
more at their own ends, then either at the public good or their Masters
honor; authorized thereby (if our Divinity and reason fail us not, Prove: chapter
25.5. 1 Cor. 7.27.) not only to the declaring of Law, but the executing of
that, which being according to the divine Law and our municipall right, (no way
thwarting the principles of nature or universal reason) does best conduce to
the enfranchizing of the Gospel and worship, from all servile bonds and
superstitious obligations, the establishing of the subject in his true and
native liberty, the King and his Progeny in a constant glory and durable
felicity. And whereas these deceitful workers, 2 Cor. 11.13, 15. pretend the
divine constitution of particular Kings in their several Kingdoms. This
shadow of reason they have greedily catched from the superficial Pamphlets of
Court parasites, who being infected with that Popish error, (in the cacozelous
imitation of the Aaronicall Priesthood, which was first practiced by that
flattering Pope who anointed Charles the Great unto the Empire,) and then
madded to astonishment, with the eye dazeling splendor of Courtly glory, they
would of a King create a demi-god, though to the utter subversion of the
Churches rights, the English glory, and the scope of Scriptures (as shall be
maintained against them in a fair dispute at the forfeiture of life upon
defailance) Thus (we say) infatuate and made furious, they would foster in the
people a pernicious opinion of the Kings superiority, not only to the State (as
it is now established) But to the Church also, which is Gods anointed, truly
so called according to the tenor of the old and new Testament, Psalm.
105.14.15. 2 Cor. 1.21, with 1 John 2.27. and the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8.
for whose liberty, protection and edification, the King (as chief member of
the same) is tied by the tenor of his Baptism, for the maintaining of unity
and uniformity, according to the Law of charity, and a sincere conscience
regulated by the word, to improve all the power and prerogative wherewith be is
vested, Isa. 49.7, 23. with 1 Timothy 2.2. Though these profane Esaus, renouncing
both their Baptism and birthright, would make gracious Princes, of nursing
Fathers, to become hard Masters, tyrannizing over the Church, by their
Praelaticall vassals, who, ever contrary to their office and the Kings
authority ( Ezekiel. 34.4. Heb. 5.2, 3.) are found to have shorn the sheep of
Christ's pasture to the quick, under pretext of suppressing some silly
fantastical Sectaries, who in their obstinate self particular humors are more
shame then assistance to the Parliament, and insensibly side with the Caviliers
design, being much more justly and effectually to be quelled, by a sincerely
judicious Synod, and found government suitable to the word, then either by an
high Commission or any servile and typhonicall Synod derived from the Kings
Supremacy. By this means also do they wickedly endeavor to reflect some
guilt upon you, If in the pursuance of the most just and holy resolutions
(which) being qualified according to the expression aforesaid, under correction
we conceive that the King is bound in conscience, ( rebus and Statutis ita
stantibus, not only to assent and embrace, but also to promote with all his
prerogative) his Majesty should receive any Personal damage, though against
your wills and ardent Petitions, and the express desire of all those, that are
not for their own interest very ill affected, to his true honor and safety;
whereas by all reason and Scripture it appears, that all the blame is to be
laid upon those, who seek to seduce him, so wilfully to adventure himself, in
such society as threatens the wrath of God and destruction upon him, 2 Chronicles.
25.7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. with 2 Chronicles. 25.21, 22. And to bolster up their
traitorous babble, contrived to the ruin of Kingdom and State, they allege
the Doctrine of the Church, in the Book of Homilies, as if the Authors or
publishers of those godly Treatises, could determine of a case, which rightly
stated, never till this time, came within any English man's supposall; And so
either very simply or very subtly, do they urge Mr. Calvin's authority with
the Harmony of reformed Churches concerning Magistracy, All of which Divines,
give as much authority (over the Church) to their Aristocratians, as they
acknowledge can be due by any condition, to the most Catholic Crown or triple
Tiara; And for the present have and do stand in such an opposition to Absolute
Monarchy, that if their resistance be but lawful, ours now, must needs be
absolutely fit and necessary. Yet let us once see a free Synod, and in this
particular we will stand to the Arbitration of those Divines which shall be
rightly chosen, and sent from the reformed Churches. Then do they presume to
give sense to the Laws of the Land against that Sovereign (as of late in some
cases we have seen) Authority of interpretation, which now resideth in you (as
we think) by the peoples election and (Kings confirmation of you, as the only
competent Judges of the Laws, between himself and his people, then not only
dissenting but diffiding.

Lastly, They are not ashamed to urge the Protestation, which some who refused
to take it, do absolutely aver: That no man ever intending their course or
way, could at any time receive or vow to perform, except guilty, either of
acauterized conscience or blockish stupidity. We therefore seriously pondering
the deplorable condition both of Church and State, And that not one of a 1000
but from self interest, assisteth the King in this ruinous quarrel; the
insatiable desires of which assistants our lives and fortunes can never
satisfy, as the Malignants themselves shall find, when upon success, they
feel them increase as they are replenished. 2. How the mushroome or mongrell
Gentry begin to emulate their inferiors, and what they cannot effect by
emulation, they endeavor by malice. 3. That their zealous ambition to rule the
Puritans, mortally exasperates many to the slaughter of those, who when they
are dead cannot be ruled. Fourthly, That calumnies go high in reputation
whilst accusations are at a loss, and liberty of language stands upon her
trial, the most hateful thing to a crew of tyrants, because the most
necessary to a Commonwealth, as that upon (which the liberty of life
depends. 5. That the Church can never be settled by any Papal power derived
from the Crown Imperial, (to which it is by Law annexed) without offering
dangerous and damnable violence to 1000000s. of consciences. 6. That now we
must be made truly free, or else tied to an absolute servitude. 7. That union
in Religion and uniformity in Kirk government agreed upon in both the Kingdoms
with his Majesty's approbation, can never be accomplished till you either
reduce into Scotland the presidentiall Prelacy, or admit a lawful and
canonical Presbitery into England. 8. That his Majesty's Person is in danger,
not from you (who seek nothing but his glory and preservation, though in a way
contrary to his humor and appetite.) But of those Swords that now seem to
defend him, whose mercinary souls upon any pang of passion or private hope, may
easily be provoked to a bloody enterprise, from which we daily pray that God
may always deliver his gracious Majesty. Thus pausing upon the premises, and
well weying that Kingly ordinance is of God, (who is never the author of
confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33. but always of peaceful order, be it popular,
Aristocraticall or Monarchical each of which still remaining in its formality
an humane ordinance 1 Pet. 2. And of its own nature also alterable) and that by
wisdom only Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. the Scripture securing their honor and
authority, only upon their piety toward God, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. and administration
of justice in all equity toward man, Jer 22.15. threatening them with certain
ruin, ready every way to run in upon them whenever they shall abuse their
power to Idolatry, injustice or tyranny, 2 Chronicles. 24 17, 24. with Chap. 22.4,
7. Job 12.18, 19, Psalm. 107.40. Heb. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Isa 40.23. with Dan 4.23,
24. Though profane politicians by adulations superbiate Princes to the denial
of this, whilst in a formality of words they seem to confess it, making them
in very deed to arrogate all unto themselves, the acquiring and retaining of
Kingdoms to their wicked arts and policies; by the which arrogance, Princes
often bring ruin upon themselves, Isa. 10.7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17. Isa.
47.10, 11. Ezekiel. 20.2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 9 Wicked sycophants abusing those
Scriptures to patronize tyranny, which the spirit intended as strongest
provocations unto piety, in the maintenance whereof Principality may always
remain, so secure and impregnable, that Soldiers shall only serve to adorn
its State, not secure the Person: And doting politicians, Isa. 19.13. not
discerning this, attribute often to the iniquity of people what redoundeth unto
Princes by the just judgment of God, Chap 25 27. Therefore in a tender care of
the Kings safety, and for the preservation of our Religion and liberties, We
humbly crave that you would be pleased to proceed on unto that exact
Reformation which you promised, manger the underminings of spirtefull
Rhetoric, whose fraudulent contexture and artificial concinnity catches the
common sort, even to the ruin and infection of our Kingdom (as anciently has
appeared in the thrice renowned Graecia) if your wisdom and constant
resolution prevent it not, by rendering to his Majesty (as so many noble
Ephories by him so graciously established now in England) a more glorious and
durable Kingdom, And such as the most prudent Theopompus choose to leave to his
own posterity, notwithstanding the bitter repining of female ambition lodging
in his bosom,

And your humble Petitioners shall continue their prayers, etc.

