The pretended High Court of Justice VNBOWELLED: Being a Caveat for TRAITORS,
OR, TREASON CONDEMNED AND Truth Vindicated. With several Reasons presented to
Oliver Cromwell, four days before the Massacring of his Majesty proving the sad
sentence passed upon his late Sacred Majesty, the 27 of January 1648. unjust
and contrary both to the Law of GOD and these Nations. Together with his
Majesty's SPEECH to a precious Jewel then sitting as one of his Judges, though
formerly a servant to His Sacred Majesty.

Never Published till this day of England's Redemption.

London, Printed for Thomas Hairman, 1660.

The pretended High Court of Justice unbowelled, and their injustice laid open
to publck view.
THis Court called the High Court of Justice, was erected in 48. and the better
to carry on their design in cutting of the most loyal subjects, they began with
the Head of the People his sacred Majesty, in the scarlet die of whose blood
they first dipped their cruel hands and hardened their hearts. The manner of his
Trial was as follows. viz.

The Court being erected, the Counselors were appointed to draw up the Charge
against his Majesty, was Dr. Dorislaus, Mr. Ask, Mr. John Cook Solicitor.
Serj. Danby, Serj. at Arms. Mr. Brougton and Mr. Phelps Clerks to the Court.
Col. Humphrey Sword Bearer.

There were produced 35 Witnesses who were sworn in this pretended Court, to
give evidence against the King, most of which were persons of small estimation,
as a Cobbler, a Tyler, a Painter, a Husbandman a Barber, a Feltmaker, a Weaver,
a Glover, a Smith etc. not above 3 or 4 Gentlemen amongst them.

The sentence against the said King January 27 1648, which was read by the said
Mr. Braugton aforesaid Clerk.
Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an High
Court of Justice for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England before whom he
had been three times convented, atnd at the first time a Charge of high
Treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the
Kingdom of England, etc. as in the (...) which was read throughout.

To which Charge, he the said Charles Stuart was required to give his Answer,
but he refused so to do; and so expressed several passages at his Trial in
refusing to answer. For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge,
That the said Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public
enemy, shall be put to death, by severing his head from his body.

This Sentence ( says Bradshaw the President) now read and published is the
Act, Sentence, Judgment and Resolution of the whole Court. To which the
Members of the Court stood up and assented to what he said by holding up their
hands.

The King offered to speak, but he was instantly commanded to be taken away,
and the Court broke up.

One thing worth observation is, that his Majesty (being in the Court and)
taking notice of Sir Henry Mildmay, said, O you are a precious Jewel, he being
formerly a servant to his Majesty.

The true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head, according to the
Sentence given as aforesaid. Sir Hadress Waller, Colonel Dean, and Colonel
Okey, were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for the Execution of the
King, according to his Sentence, given by the (pretended) High Court of Justice.

Painted Chamber, Monday January the 29th 1648. Upon Report made from the
Committee for Considering of the Executing of the Judgment against the King,
that the said Committee have Resolved, That the open street before Whitehal is
a fit place: And the said Commitee conceive it fit, That the King be there
executed the morrow, the King having already notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrent to be drawn to that purpose,
which Warrent was according drawn and agreed to, and Ordered to be engrossed,
which was done, and signed and sealed accordingly, as follows.

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of Charles Stuart King
of England, Jan. 29. 2648.

Whereas Charles Stuart King of England, is and stands convicted, Attained and
Condemned of High Treason, and other Crimes, and Sentence on Saturday last was
pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by the severing his
head from his body, of which ^^^^ce Execution yet remains to be done. These
are therefore (...) require you, to see the said Sentence Executed in the open
(...) ^re Whitehall upon the morrow, being the 30. day of this instant Month
of January, between the hours of Ten in the morning, and Five in the afternoon
of the same day, with full effect; and for so doing, This shall be your
sufficient Warrant: and these are to require all Officers and Soldiers and
other the good People of this Nation of England to be assistant unto you in
this service. Given under our hands and Seals.

To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Hunks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and to
every of them. Sealed and Subscribed by,

John Bradshaw President. Thomas Gray. Oliver Cromwell. Edward Whaley. John
Danvers. Mich. Livesay. John Boucher. Hen. Ireton. Tho. Maleverer. John
Blackeston. John Hutchison. William Goffe Tho. Pride. Henry Smith. Vincent
Potter. William Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. Will. Cawley. John Bark stead.
Isaac Ewer. Va.^ Walton. Peter Temple. Tho. Harrison. Joh. Hewson. Per. Pelham.
Richard Dean. Rob. Tichburn. Hump. Edwsard. Dan. Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will.
Purifoye. Adrian Scroop James Templer. Aug. Garland. Edmon. Ludlow. Hen.
Martin. Joh. Alured. Rob. Lilburn. Will. Say. Anthony Stapley. Gregory Norton.
Tho. Chaloner. Tho. Wogan. Simon Meyne. Tho. Horton. Ioh. Jones. Ioh. Mor.
Hadress Waller. Gilbert Millington. Chapter Fleetwood. John Venn. Greg. Clement.
Ioh. Downs. Tho. Wait. Tho. Scot. John Carew. Miles Corbet.

In all Fifty eight, Ordered, That the Scaffold on which the King is to be
executed, be covered with black.

The Warrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those
parties to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him according to
the Tenor thereof about two a clock in the afternoon, of the said 30. of
January 1648.

The Fatal day of the said Execution, being Tuesday January the 30. 1648. His
Majesty continued in Prayer all the morning, and receives the Sacrament. Just
at ten a Clock before noon, he was conveyed on foot on foot from St. James's
Palace to Whitehall, guarded by a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before, part
behind, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, his private guard of Partisans
about him, and Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, next to him on one side, and Colonel
Tomlinson on the other; being come to Whitehall, he continued in his Cabinet
Chamber at his Devotions, refusing to dine, only about 12 a clock he eat a bit
of Bread, and drank a glass of Claret wine; from from thence he was conveyed
into the Banqueting house, and the great window enlarged, out of which he
ascends the Scaffold, the rails being hung round, and the floor covered with
black; His Executioners disguised with Vizards, yet was his Majesty not
affrighted: He showed more care of the people living, then of himself dying:
for looking round about upon the people, whom the thick Guards of Soldiers
kept a distance off, and seeing he could not be heard by them, omitting
(probably) what he purposed to have spoken to them, therefore turning to the
Officers and Actors by him, he delivered himself in a short (but excellent)
Speech, which being ended, he meekly went to Prayers, and after some heavenly
discourse between him and the Bishop, having prepared himself, he lifted up his
eyes to heaven, mildly praying to himself, he stooping down to the block as to
a Prayer-deske, and most humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut of by
the V^zarded Executioner, which was suddenly done at one blow. Thus fell King
Charles, and thus all Britain with him.

The true Copy of a Letter sent by Ed. Barber Freeman of England and
Clothworker of London to Genesis Crumwel after his Majesty had received the
sentence of Death, for the saving of his Life. Directed to the Right honorable
Oliver Crumwel L. Genesis of the Forces raised by the Parl. of the Common-wralth
of England, etc.
My Lord,
MAy it please your honor, I cannot but write these few lines unto you,
concerning the Parliaments dealing with the Kings Majesty, whom although they
have condemned to death, yet I hope will never put their Judgment to execution,
but look back to their former promises and Engagements, which they have made to
God, his Majesty and this Nation, with their hands lift up to the most high
God, that all the world should see that they intended nothing against his
Majesty, but his evil Counsel, for the Liberty of the Gospel and the freedom of
the people, and that they would make him a glorious King, etc. Now I beseech
you consider the practice of Joshua (that glorious type of Christ) to the
Gibeonites Joshua 9.14, 15, 18, 19, 20. And the men took of their victuals, and
asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord, And Joshua made peace with them,
and made a League with them to let them live, And the Princes of the
Congregation, swear unto them, etc. And the children of Israel smote them not,
because the Princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of
Israel; And all the congregation murmured against the Princes, But all the
Princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God
of Israel, Now therefore we may not touch them, this will we do to them, we
will even let them live, least wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we
swore unto them. And the Princes said unto them, let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the Congregation, etc, Yet the
Lord had commanded that they should be utterly cut off and destroyed, as Deuteronomy.
7.1.2.16. When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the Land whether thou
go to possess it, and has cast out many Nations before thee etc. seven
Nations greater and mightier then thou. And when the Lord thy God shall deliver
them before thee, thou shall smite them and utterly destroy them, thou shall
make no Covenant with them nor show mercy unto them and thou shall consume all
the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee, thine eye shall have no
pity upon them, neither shall thou serve their gods, for that will be a snare
unto thee, etc.

Yet durst not Joshua destroy them because of his oath, etc. And afterward the
Lord brought three years samine in the days of David for Saul's Bloody house.
In slaying the Gibeonites; And would not be appeased but by sarisfying the
Gibeonites which was done by hanging seven of Saul's Sons, 2 Samuel 21.1. to the 6.

And King. 2.6.13. to the 23. there is a Remarkable passage of mercy Captives
in time of misery where the King of Israel said unto Elisha the Prophet
concerning the Syreans taken p^isoners, my father shall I smite them, shall I
smite them, And be answered thou shall not smite them, would thou smite them,
whom thou have taken captive with thy sword. And with thy bow, set bread and
water before them that they may eat and drink. And go to their master, and he
prepared great provision for them, and when they had eaten and drank he sent
them Away, and they went to their master, I could have wished it had been so
done to the poor Scots that were brought here to London, see the Armies of
Syria came no more into the Land of Israel, see what kindness, and mercy
wrought upon them, this is the way to please God and purchase peace and love,
and unite the Nations, And not to render evil for evil but to follow that which
is good, Deuteronomy. 32.35. to me says the Lord belongs vengeance and recompense,
and Prove. 25.21. If thine enemy be hungry give him bread to eat, and if he be
thirsty give him water to drink for thou shall heap up coals of fire upon his
head, and the Lord shall reward thee; compare with Romans 12.17. to the 21.
Recompense to no man evil for evil provide things honest in the sight of all
men if it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men,
dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for
it is written vengeance is mine. I will repay it says the Lord, therefore if
thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink for in so doing thou
shall heap coals of fire on his head, be not overcome of evil but overcome evil
with good, etc.

Again when the Lord says, Ecol. 5.4.5. when thou vowest a vow unto God, as
you have done many times, defer not to pay it for he has no pleasure in fools,
pay that which thou have vowed; Better is it that thou would not vow, then
that thou should vow and not pay, etc. Consider these things I could not but
commit to your honors consideration, and the Lord give you understanding and a
heart to do according to the engagements, that the wrath of the Lord break not
forth against this poor bleeding Nation to the utter ruin and destruction
thereof, for breach of vows and Covenants, for I fear because of oaths the
Land mourns, And Jer. 48.10. cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully, And Nehemiah 5.9. to the 15. the Prophet rebuked the Nobles and
the Rulers for their usury oppression exhorting them to restore their evil
gotten goods, as verse. 11. which they promised to do, verse 12. upon which the
Prophet shook his lap and said so God shake out every man from his house, and
from his Labor that performs this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and
emptied and all the Congregation said Amen, and praised the Lord, and the
people did according to this promise, etc.

But so have not you come short of this to the dishonor to God, and the shame
and reproach of this Nation, and instead of performing that promises you flew
upon the spoil like Saul-Sam. 1.15.13. to the 19. etc. And I believe God has,
and will shake many of you until ye repent for the Lord is overturning, As Eze.
21.27. I will overturn overturn, overturn it, and it shall he no more until he
come whose right it is, and I will give it him, thus committing you to the most
blessed guidance of the Almighty God I rest your honors and the Nations
faithful Servant.

E.D.
This lettet was delivered to the Lord Genesis Cromwell but never any answer given.



FINIS.

