A DISCOVERY OF Six women preachers, in Middlesex, Kent, Cambridgshire, and
Salisbury.

With a relation of their names, manners, life, and doctrine, pleasant to be
read, but horrid to be judged of

Their Names are these.

Anne Hempstall. Mary Bilbrow. Ioane Bauford. Susan May. Elizab. Bancroft.
Arabella Thomas.
1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not
permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as
also says the Law.

And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for
it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.

Printed, 1641.

The six women Preachers.
Anne Hempstall, Joan Bauford Elizabeth Bancroft,
and Mary Bilbrowe, Susan May, Arabella Thomas.


IN ancient times have I read of Prophetesses, but not until of late heard of
women Preachers, their only reason or cause of preaching was, that there was a
deficiency of good men, wherefore it was but fit, that virtuous women should
supply their places, they were (men they did mean) good for nothing, but to
make their texts good by expounding the language of the Beast, but they
themselves would preach nothing, but such things as the spirit should move them.

The first and chief of this female and Sacerdoticall function, was one Anne
Hempstall, living in the Parish of Saint Andrews Holborne, near London, and in
the County of Middlesex, upon a certain time, she having a mind, said she was
moved to be zealously affected, called an assembly of her bibbing Gossips
together, whose thoughts were bent more upon the strong water bottle, then upon
the uses or doctrines which their holy sister ^ntended to expound unto them,
but being come to the house of this Anne Hempstall, zealous Nan spoke to them
after this manner.

Beloved sisters, this last night I dreamed a strange Dream, moreover me
thought I saw a vision, in which Anna the Prohetesse was presented unto my
view, the splendor of whose countenance did cast me into a trance, wherein I
lay until the next morning, and the morning being come, I could conceive no
interpretation of my Dream but this, that I should imitate godly Anna, by
preaching unto you, as she prophesied to others, her speech struck them all
into an astonishment, at which, this profane Anne cried out, Now does the holy
Ghost descend down upon you, Wherefore give ear unto me, then did she begin
to talk, and speak unto them that which first came into her mind, but the
chief matter of her Text was this, That woman's hair was an adorning to her,
but for a man to have long hair, it was a shame unto him, which the Scripture
it self cried fie upon; long did she preach, and longer I dare avouch then
some of the audience were willing, for some of them had as far home as White
Chapel, wherefore her longitude might cause a brevitude of her sucking the
Aquavitae bottle; two hours being expired, and the bottom of the stool
beginning to look open-mouthed with her furious stamps, she gave them as much
peace as in her lay, and so concluded.

Mary Bilbrowe, one of the audience, being of the Parish of Saint Giles in the
Fields, desired them to be all with her the next morning, and after Sermon,
they should have a good fat pig to breakfast, besides a cup of Sack or Claret
to wash it down, they all agreed unto it, and making use of all the Rhetoric
which they were borne unto, they gave her thanks, and so for that time a Bottle
of Ale or two being devoured, they departed every one to their own houses. The
next morning, they met altogether at the house of Mary Bilbrow, whose husband
was a good honest Bricklayer, and so soon as they came within the doors of her
house, she brought them all into her Parlour as she called it, and instead of
stools and cushions, she had provided before hand, three bricks a piece for
them to sit upon, her reason was this, she thought they would not fit much,
because women to good instructions love standing, her Pulpit was framed very
substantially of brick, so high, that scarce any thing, but her standing up
tippet could be seen, she began there very devoutly to make an ex tempore
prayer, but before she had scarce spoke twenty words, her daughter came
running in very hastily, telling her a Gentleman at Bloomsbury staid to speak
with her about urgent occasions, which hearing, she lept out of her prayer
into this serious meditation, I think it be the Gentleman I was withal at
Salisbury Court, whom I promised this day to meet with all, whereupon she left
her Pulpit, spread the cloth, and brought her Gossips in a pig according to her
promise, who fed heartily, and so departed, so much at this time for Middlesex
female Teachers.

Now give me leave to take water, and go to Gravesend, and so further into
Kent, where I shall tell you of one Joan Bauford in the Town of Feversham, who
taught in Feversham, that husbands being such as crossed their wives wills might
lawfully be forsaken.

Then was there one Susan May of Ashford in the County of Kent also which
preached in a Barn there, that the Devil was the father of the Pope, The Pope
the father of those which did wear Surplices, wherefore consequently the
Devil was the Father of all those which did not love Puritans.

There was likewise one Elizabeth Bancroft in Ely in Cambridgshire, where
Bishop Wren first going to place Altars there, preached behind the minister
upon a Saturday, that it was fit upon Sunday to Sacrifice the Popes Bird upon
his own Altar.

Then lastly there was one Arabella Thomas a Welsh woman, which lived in the
City of Salisbury, which preached, and in her Sermon said that none but such
painful creatures as her self should go to Heaven, for those Ministers which
did not preach twice upon every Sabbath day, she said that very shortly the
black Raven by day, and the white Owl by night should scratch out their eyes.

Thus have I declared some of the female Academyes, but where their University
is I cannot tell, but I suppose that Bedlam or Bridewell would be two
convenient places for them, is it not sufficient that they may have the Gospel
truly and sincerely Preached unto them, but that they must take their Ministers
office from them? if there had been such a dearth of the Gospel as there was
in the Reign of Queen Mary it had been an occasion some what urgent, But God
be praised it was not so, but that they seemed to be ambitious, and because
they would have superiority, they would get upon a stool, or in a tubb instead
of a pulpit. At this time I have described but six of them, ere long I fear I
shall relate more, I pray God I have no cause, and so for this time I conclude.

FINIS.

