XIV ARTICLES OF TREASON AND OTHER MISDEMEANORS, Exhibited to ISAAC PENINGTON,
by Master Chamfield, alias Captain Cloak-Bag, against Edward Dobson, the
Malignant Stationer without Newgate.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, for Edward Dobson. 1643.

Articles of Treason and other misdemeanors, exhibited to Isaac Pennington by
Master Chamfield, alias Captain Cloakbag, against Edward Dobson, the Malignant
Stationer without Newgate.
I. IMprimis, That the said Edward Dobson, has and does refuse to go out with
the said Captain to fight the Lords battails against the Lords Anointed,
saying, that he is resolved to undergo any corporal punishment, rather then to
fight for a Riddle; which he accounts our fighting against the King, and yet
fighting for him.

2 That he being told of the death of the noble Lord Brook laughed, saying, Now
the Brownists Dagon is fallen, their Idol; and again smiled, speaking in the
Nose, The Glory of Israel is departed.

3 That the said Malignant, has been always forward by Disputations,
Arguments, and the like, to maintain (to the great prejudice of out Cause which
we fight for) that Churches are more convenient, decent, and fitting for us to
preach and exercise our gifts in, than Chimney-corners, Hollow-trees, Woods,
Sawpits, or the like; and that the said Malignant has been the greatest
offense to our uprightness, that ever happened without the Gate of our New
Jerusalem.

4 That he being told of the Trenches which we were digging at the Six
Windmils, answered, that they were the fittest places for such giddy brains to
lie in, and said to our great disparagement, that when Prince Rupert came, we
would all turn Round like those Windmils.

5 That he has oftentimes threatened to publish a Book entitled, Flagellum
Scismaticorum and Brownisticorum, or, a Scourge for Schismatickes: Upon the
Frontispeece of which (as he said) should be the picture of a Weathercock and
a Windmill, a Weathercock for New England, and a Windmil for old England, and
that he would have ensculpt, the picture of a man kneeling down to a Windmill,
calling it the Brownists Devotion.

6. That he called the new elected Ensign of your said Captain Thomas Andrews
Grocer, Choleric Cock-braind, Codpiece Tom; and asked him who was drunk the
last night of the first Month when he carried my Colors to the Exchange; and
said, that a Knave in grain was the fittest to carry the Colors of our
New-Militia, which was lately buried in Houndsditch, and all this he said for
no other reason, but because my Ensign called those Gentlemen that came to his
shop the Kings Rogues, and said that the King had none but Rogues about him,
which alas he said out of conscience, having lately taken the late Oath and
Protestation to defend the Kings honor.

7. That he has often spoken against our Rebaptism, affirming that our going
to Hackney-Marsh with our clean shirts and smockes to be baptized in the
little River there, which we call our Jordan, is unlawful; Alleging for his
proof the saying of popish Augustine, and Protestant Perk ns, whose opinion is,
as he said, that being once baptized (though according to the custom of the
Church of Rome) is a sufficien testimony of our outward Reception into the
Church of Christ and that other baptism is needless and frivalous.

8 That he has Philosophically and vainly maintained by arguments and
disputations, that Brownists and Roundheads do commonly begert Children with
long vissages, long ears, and Long Noses, long vissages the emblem of
simplicity, long ears that they may ouer-reach the shepherds voice when he
calls for a feast amongst the rich Saints; and long Noses that they may the
more easily smell the sweet saviors of the holy plumbroth.

9 That he is a great admirer at that which we despise and contemn, Namely wit
and Learning which are flat popery, and the very marks of the Beast, and that
he did often and frequently speak against our new Gospel, which teaches us
(as he says) to rebel and resist the King and likewise against the ministers
that brought it over from New England, the Land of Canaan, As Mr. Peter's, whose
zealous Doctrine we have stayed so long to hear on a Fast day, that we have
even bepist our our selves again, and also against Mr. Case, whom he calls my
Lord Majors Trumpeter, M. Marler the button maker, against Mr. Till who though
carnally blind yet a spiritual seeing man, ye and feeling too, for he his
lately betroathed to a sister in matrimony. But J cannot thus pass by Mr.
Peter's, a man that has done so much good for us, especially by his
indefatigable pains in every parish in London to find out those our many Babes
borne out of the estate and covenant of Grace (though by this Malignant called
Bastards) and convayed dilligently to New England, by whose means the ob^ects
of our own vilednesse are taken away from our our perpetual remembrance.

10 He has most abominably spoken against the Practices of our Lay Divines as
Mr. Green the feltmaker, Spencer the Horserubber, Quarterman the brewers
Clarke, and John Gaile the Sowgelder of Wallingford, who have been very
laborious to edify us our and wives in the truth, and that he has lately
beaten at his shop one of our chief Divines, Namely Nicholas Tew the Girdler at
the exchange, who teaches at Whitechappel in a Chamber every Saboath day, and
as if that were not sufficient to fill up the Measure of his wickedness, he
afterward fell to buffet him, and then (most tyrannically) turned him over to
be buffetted by Satan.

11 That the great Malignant Stationer does many times speak against that
which we call distrayning, calling us Israelites and those of his opinion
Egiptians, saying that we do rob and spoil them of their silver and Gold plate
when verily we do but borrow and take it without their consent.

12 That he did strongly endeavor to defend the Bishops and their calling to be
(as he said) by the Iustitution of Christ proving it out of the first of the
Acts, and that he did usually a nights before his going to bed, sing the Common
prayers, which we call the Common Mass, in the Tone and Tongue of the Beast,
and that he did speak against our silencing of 60. Divines, saying, that when
we had put out the Candles we might at play at blindman buffe, both the City,
Close, and invisible Committee, and that when the lights were out, we might
fall co the holy sisters in the dark, when in sincerity we need not, for we can
do it fast enough in the light.

13 That the said Malignant did commonly say that we did rob the wicked to
cloth the godly, and instanced, our taking Cloth from the Drapers in Paul's
Churchyard, and that he did liken our teaching, to the wild and frantic
preaching of Brownists or Anabaptists in Germany, and said that in the End, we
would serve the Malignant Citizens as they did the Germans, first rob them of
their goods, and then of their lives.

14 That he did usually reproach our Outlandish Teachers, calling them
New-English Canaanites, Ridiculous Lecturers, and saying, that they did
commonly pray blasphemy, and preach treason, Rebellion, and sedition, which (as
he said) were the chief causes of our miseries, and did liken them to the Poets
of old who made Comedies to please the people, Populo ut place-rent quas
fecisset fabulas. Terent. Pro.
Sermons, and said that they were the Locusts spoken of in the Revelation, that
came out of the bottomless pit, also that he did call my Lord Mayors worship
the Lay Antichrist, because he had (as he said) usurpt the Keys and the sword
which was an evident mark of the man of sin. And thus have I (with the
advice of my brother Potter, being both of us the new devised
Common-councell-men for the parish of Sepulchers) presented unto your grave
worship, fourteen Articles of treason against the said malignant, desiring in
the names of our selves, and all the Seperatists of the said parish, that the
said Dobson be put to answer to all and every of the said Articles and
accusations that so such proofs and proceedings may be made against him, as
may be correspondent and answerable to the judaicall law; with our expositions
and notes upon the same.

A Catalogue of the Names of those Cananites, and Ridiculous Brownists, who
have subscribed to prove the Articles above mentioned.
Stephan Evans, alias Prince of Morocco, Knight of the Burning Pestle, Salter,
and Tub-preacher, on Snow H ll. Mattocks, the arrant honest Baker, whose Cake
is Dough. Samuel Shewell, alias, Blew-Coat Sam. Francis Eland, alias,
Horse-doctor Frank. Birt the quondam Sadler, alias, railing Rabshekah, or
Round-Breeches. Grennill, alias, Sergeant Famine. Coxe, alias, Coxecombe.
Captain Cloake-bag. Francis Patriarch. Primate the Letherseller, alias,
Camelion. Thomas Andrews, alias, Shit-Breech-Tom. Simple Robin, the zealous
Roundhead.
The said Edward Dobson having gotten a copy of these articles thought good to
declare them to the world, and to show that he being by the instigation and
complaints or the above named Rabble and their associates cast in prison, the
next day was brought to the Parliament to be accused by them (as he conceived)
of loyalty, and being committed to the safe custody of six roundheads or rather
Jews, in the committee of the Court of wards, Prince Ruperts dog came into the
said court, and (and whilst they were busy in expounding scripture and
consuting the pope in plumbroth) snatched him from the invisible committee, to
the visible City of Oxford,

Ab omni Peccato, malo, and infortunio,
Ab insidiis Diaboli, and dissidiis Retundi,
Et ab aeterna damnatione,
Libera nos Domine,
FINIS.

