A DISCOVERY of a horrible and Bloody TREASON AND Conspiracy: Against the
Protestants of this Kingdom in general, but especially against diverse of the
Nobility, and many of the honorable House of Commons in Parliament, and also
against some of the Citizens of LONDON.

Which Discovery was brought to the House of COMMONS on Monday November. the 15.
th 1641.

With a Plot by the Earl of Worcester in Wales. As also a Relation of a
Search at Worcester-house in the Strand.

Together with an Order made by the Lords, for the Apprehending of all Priests
and Jesuits, w^thin this City and Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS. 1641.

TREASON discovered: OR An ample and real Relation of a late horrible Plot and
Conspiracy against the Protestants of England, and in general the Citizens of
London in particular.
BEing intended to murder diverse of the Nobility and many others of the
Honorable House of Commons in Parliament, taken by confession, and examined by
the Parliament, the 15. of November. 1641. being Monday.

The Jnformation of Thomas Beale a Taylour living in VVhite-crosse-street in
Goodman VVarners house, delivered in Parliament on Monday and Tuesday November
15, 16. 1641.

On the Sabbath day last the said young man, late at night passing through
Moore-Fields near the City of London did overheare certain fellows talking
and whispering together about their intended plot and machinations, the one of
them saying that he had received 40. shillings in hand to murder diverse
persons eminent in the house of Parliament, which he would shortly accomplish,
and another of them also made report that he had also received a larger sum me
to do the like enterprise upon some great persons of the higher House, which
pretended Plot of theirs, they verily expected should have taken effect on ye
Thursday night following, had not the Providence of Almighty God miraculously
prevented the bloody designs of those cruel and merciless Papists: For it
happened that those miscreant Traitors espying the said young man in the dark,
and fearing by him to be discovered made at him with their weapons and
grievously wounded him, intending to deprive him of his sweet life, which they
had effected, had not the Divine Providence of God prevented in his good time
by his escaping from them.

In which Conference of theirs he also overheard them to whisper about some
great plots or treacheries in Wales now intended against England, and that the
three next shires adjoining to Ragland Castle, were lately come in with all
their forces to the assistance of the Earl of Worcester.

And the said young man coming before the Parliament house, really and truly
did relate the said former passages with great modesty and honest Confidence,
moreover alleging that they intended the murder of many protestant Lords,
with many other Gentlemen such as Mr. Pym and the like, and that the Papists in
Wales intended to seize into their hands all the strong holds of Cheshire and
Lancashire with the adjacent parts, and that in that hurly burly and Combustion
the plot was so laid and contrived, that by the Papists at the same Jnstant,
the City of London should have been surprised, and all the Protestants
throats cut,

Upon which Relation the Houses of Parliament sat very late on Monday night
last, and the Lords and others of both Houses were conducted to their Lodgings
and houses by most of the trained Bands in Middlesex the same night.

On the morrow very early, both Houses met, where upon serious deliberation, it
was immediately concluded that the House of the said Earl of Worcester
situate in the Strand in the liberties of Westminster, should be by strong
watch guarded both by land and water, and that strickt search should be made in
the said house for the apprehending of the persons of Father Andrews and
father Jones in the house of the Lord Herberts, Son and heir to the foresaid
Lord of Worcester and diverse other suspicious persons, supposed to be
Confederate in that wicked and most Diabolical design, who are thought also
to be lurking in the said house, which search was accordingly performed the
same day about eleven a clock in the fore-noone.

The said Father Jones escaped out of a back door into the Savoy, and father
Andrews was taken in the French Ordinary over against the Lord Herberts house
and is now in custody.

There are diverse warrants gone out to the Lord Major of the City of London,
for the apprehending of diverse other suspicious persons.

Die Lune 15. November. 1641.
An Order of the Lords for the Apprehending of Priests and Jesuits.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament; That Father Jones, and
Father Andrews, and all other Romish Priests and Jesuits shall be forthwith
taken and apprehended by his Majesty's Justices of Peace and others his
Majesty's Officers, and put into safe custody until the pleasure of this House
be further known, and then the in names shall be returned unto the Lords in
Parliament, and that any man that shall discover any Popish Priests or Jesuits
and procure them to be apprehended; shall be rewarded by the Parliament.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

