THE Disease of the House: Or, the STATE MOUNTEBANCK: Administering Physic To a
Sick Parliament.
With the Merry Conceits of JOHN CAPON, his Antidotes Playsters and Salves to
cure Rebellion.
His Prologue on the Stage.
Come, come, Me have an Antidote can Cure
Your Body; me mak't n^w head, set it on sure
One, two, dree, four, five Generation,
This Paper here, help your sick Nation.
Pa, pa, Ne Purge ne more, begar it is ill --
And to let Blood will de whole Body kill:
Me have a precious Drugge in this same Box,
Will Cure a Rebels Itch, and help de Pox,
Consumption of de State, and Commonweal,
Back of mine hand, me can it presant heal.
If guilty Conscience trouble you for blood,
Take me dis Pill, begar it is very good:
For Perjury, for Steal, for want of Grace,
Me can you Cure in dis very place:
Come Fairfax, N^ll, come Bradshaw and de rest,
Here is a Medicine, gives you presant rest;
The price is small; one penny, two, or dree,
To Cure you all; and ease your Misery.
Aug. 21


NOD-NOL, Printed for the Health, Of the Common -wealth. 1649.

THE Disease of the House: Or, the STATE MOUNTEBANCK: Admmistring Physic To a
Sick Parliament.
With the Merry Conceits of JOHN CAPON, his Antidotes Playsters and Salves to
cure Rebellion.
Doctor. ME f^el de Pulse of de State, begar sick, sick, sick; desparate sick;
no Head at all; it swoons in mine hand; mafoy me have Antidote me apply to de
Neck will cure presant; this is a Grand distemper in the Brain; begar all mad
mad, mad, all England be very Lunatic; you find your self not well; you give
your Money to Knave, Jack a nape, Committee, Rogue, Thief, Cheat you, Cozen
you, Gull you, make you believe de Moon is green Ch^ese; le Rogue, le Traitor,
le Thief; Fie fie, fie! I Cure you for halfpenny value; apply mine Plaster to
your Neck and heal you presant: Where is my man Capon there, why Capon I say;
bring hither the Receipt for Rebels; begar me Cast her Water, find every Member
in her Body Diseased, full of Malignant humor; be predominant in de Liver;
make her fume and lightheaded, inconstant, ^a^^^ing, and given to change, and
m^tability. Fie, fie, fie; Why C^^^^, bring hither the Antidote.


Enter Capon with a Halter. Capon. Here Master, here is that Cures all Diseases
in the curning of a hand: there can be no better cure for Rebellion, Regicide,
and a guilty Conscience; I am sure Judas ^as as holy a man as any
Parliament Man of them all, and as thriving a man, and he made use of this
Medicine; Nay, I Will besworn upon a Book, I have known it Cure a hundred; Apply
it but under your Ears, in a morning, or evening, you will with one snick-up
find ease presantly: I am a Doctor my self, and have Traveled East, West,
North, South, in all Foreign parts for my ^xperience, know the Nature of all
Diseases in all the Countries and Commonwealths in the World: This is
Probati^^ est; it is a precious Drugge, good for any thing: 'twill Cure an
Apostatiz^ Achitophel, and diverse others have made special use thereof, and
found ease presently. Come away Customers, you know not the Virtue of this; it
will Cure the rottenness of your members; ease a guilty conscience; or the
aching of your hearts; the bloody-issue; the consumption, and dizzinesse in your
heads; 'twill allay the heat of your inordinate affections, the lust of your
eyes, the evil dispositions of your souls, the perfidiousnesse of your hearts,
the covetousness of your minds, and all ill quallities; this helps the
toothach, the lying of the tongue, equivocations, oaths, and perjuries, and
all the properties of an evil infected and seared conscience; this is a
Medicine for a troubled mind, and helps rebellion, aches, humors
inflammations, botches, scabbs, plurifies, and the king's evil; and all other
infections of the State, or any member thereof.


Mountebanuk. Run my man Ian, fetch me de Viol Cure de head of Madam le
Parliament; Disease be predominant; must vomit up all; begar me will fetch up
all presant? de womb contain all de malignant humor, devil and all; swell,
swell, a pox all de Treason and Villainy, begar she shall disgorge all: Foh,
foh, foh; mafoy, she stink all de World over: Run my man Ian, in the Shamber,
bring de (...), de purge, de plaster, de instrument; begar me dissect her, me
open all her villainy least she infect all de World with plague, pestilence,
war, famine, dearth, heavy judgment; Sin be de grand Cause, Heresy, Idolatry,
Sacrilege, Covetousness, Perjury, Oppression, Cruelty, Murder, be de reason
to mine all de Land; hang up Cromwell, hang up Ireton, hang up Bradshaw, hang up
Cook, Harrison, etc. Begar, all Rogue, all Shack-nape, Shark-dogge, be de
father of her destruction, kill de King, rob de Shurch, wrong de People, Pill,
Poll, Sess, Excise; begar, be all their Trade, nothing but Rob, Steal, Theive:
all Knave, all Knave, no honest, ne Religion, ne Justice, ne Truth, ne Love, ne
Sharity, all be bad, bad, bad, base begar, very base; Me try one, two, three
Potion for recover her health, me make her spur; begar, her spur nothing but
blood; me give her a Purgs, begar, her shite yellow as Gold; Foh, foh, foh, me
give her another stool, begar, her shite Silver; give her another Pill,
squitter, squitter, squitter, free quarter, excise, (...), sessement, nothing
but slavery: Me bid her speak, begar her speak nothing but de Lie equivocate,
forswear; ne says, ne belief at all; me think her do as her say, begar, her do
nothing but deceive; her tell me of Liberty, her mean Slavery, bondager cheat,
theive, lie, deceive, fie, fie, fie! Me tell her that her be very sick, bid her
pray, her pray to de God of dis World, de Devil: begar, her have all the tricks
of de base Whore, me squirt physic in her Breech, begar, she let her tayse fly
in mine face; Me tell her what is good for her health to Cure her, her send de
Pursuivant with Warrant seal with bees-turd, her send de File of Musketeer,
lay me fast by de heel in Newgate, me Petition, petition, petition, one, two,
dree, four month, her ne hear, ne consider, ne sharity, base, base, base,
nothing but lie; Mafoy vous (...) Larron, grand Rebelle Anglatear, Traitor,
Tyrant, Deif Dissembler, Eypocrit, Shanging; ne peace, ne quiet, ne Religion,
ne Law; begar, not so much grace as will serve for prologu^ to roasted Turnip,
be baggage-shade, bish-whore, wit^^, sorceror, I^^zab^l, sta^ve de poor people,
^e made, (...) tr^^e, worse and worse, and none; rich but (...); begar, have
all ^y Goods, die Goods, Kings Goods, Queens Goods, ^ouse, Land, Shurch, all,
all, all, be still co^etous more and more; Me can no live, come to mine house,
take mine money, ^^ke mine horse vorde States vat State^ a po^ of dat State;
one, two, dree, vou^ Rogues be de State, de Commons of England; begar, be
Common cheat, thief, pick-pocket; Why Ian Capon, where be de Instrument? begar,
me will rip up her bowel, show you all her garbage of iniquity; do make God do
wat she list; do make ^hak-fool of de Common; pretend one ding, do anoder* Why
Ian Capon, Where is Ian Capon there?

Enter John Capon with Instruments. Now Ian Capon, where have you been so long?


Capon. O Master! I have been a hearing News; I met with them addest blade that
ever you knew; I asked him, What News from Westminster?


Mountebanck. Wat did he say?


Capon. Why a said they were all Knaves; nay worse, I dare not speak the words
I heard him say, for fear of Reason.


Mounteb. Treason thou would say.


Capon. I say Reason Master; What is Reason with other then, is Treason with
them; the 7 deadly sins are become their Virtues and all the Ancient modern
virtues, whether Moral or Divine, are become their vices; the Divil's turned
loose, and all is topsie-turvy; there be them now, that can preach, cry, and
turn up their eyes with such pretended Devotion and Sanctity, that the very
Elect themselves stagger in their judgments; they make no more with dissembling
with God himself, lying, cozening, and cheating one another, then I do to sell
Antiables, it is but a folly to seek to cure her; for there is no hopes, God
has given her over, the prince of the Air rules her, and reaches her all
Evil, Rebellion, Murder, Robbery, and the like; hell's broke loose with her;
nay, the Devil is so powerful in her, that he intends to destroy Monarchy all
Christendom over, and pretend Liberty; liberty to bring filly ones into bondage
and slavery, and tie, and bind them fast unto them with the Chains of their own
Sins, that so they may bring in Confusion, till all becomes a Chaos, and fire
^s own Frame, or Nest, as it has formerly destroyed others; and then they will
run to the hills, and wish them to fall on them, to hide them from vengeance,
but all in vain: Bradshaw then will be deceived; Cromwell at a loss; Fairfax rue
his former simplicity; and Cook roast himself without any CHARGE of the Commons
of England: Can your Wills be Laws then? what prerogative? what power? what
commonright, liberty, or justice can be expected then? what peace of the
people, when they have turned all the Land into a consuming malignant flame
about their own ears; Now Jack Cook, what say thou to this? this may be
thought a Fable; Bradshaw, this will one day make a greater noise then thy Drum
in Grayes-Inn to waken your seared Conscience; then Cromwell, how soon will thy
Nose be consumed, when the fire is in it already? and how just will it be, that
it should burn thee downwards, as far as thy rotten dissembling heart; when
thou have unheaded thy King, and destroyed that Scepter held in the hand of
God: prithee, who shall answer for all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines,
Burnings, Spoils, Desolations, Damage and mischief of this Nation then?
CHARLES STUART, or Noll Crumwell and his Agents; the Evil Counselors, or the
treacherous Estates? Who must answer for all and every the Premises then? there
needs none to cry justice, justice, there; no false Witnesses need to be hired;
no proceedings, examinations; all will be laid as open as the Sun; and you must
expect (without your sudden and true Repentance) no better Judgment, nor
Sentence, but Go ye cursed Hypocrites into everlasting Flames, prepared for the
first Rebel, and all his Angels.


Mountebanck. Ian Capon my man, make no more Sermons, but truss up de
Antidotes; begar, me have no Cure, de Disease be desperate, wicked, abominable;
Me go to France agaen; forwarn mine own Country; this be dying Nation, lost,
lost, begar utterly lost, lie in a deep Lethargy, be incapable of her own good
or recovery: Farewell, farewell, me have no more to do here: Truss up Ian Capon,
truss up de Instrument, de Plaster, presant.


Capon. As soon as you will Master, for methinks I smell fire and brimstone
already, lets away for heavens sake; From the Devil and the Roundhead, Good
Lord deliver us.


Mountebank. Aloon; aloon; a pox de Devil is here, me po longer stay, me take
no Money here to day.


John Capons EPILOGUE, and last Farewell to the perfidious JUNCTO. Capon.
Farewell dull Commons, for evermore farewell,
I cannot stay; these have made England hell:
I am in torments, whilst I here do stay
Amongst those whose lust does bear the greatest sway.
May pox and plague, and Egypts Furyes cease
On all their bodies, and some worse disease
Hunt their red Souls, and their high pride fling down,
That murdered Charles, and trampled on his Crown,
May agues, aches, gowts, and burning-seavers
Consume their members, and do their endeavors
To rot their flesh, till blaynes and sores grow in it,
That they may spend all their wives Smocks in lint;
Let no Physician, or learned Doctor spend
A Pill, but what may send them to their end:
May all their Acts (like Almanacks out of date)
Find no sooner Birth, but sudden Fate;
Furnish the Privies, or Tobacco light,
To save the peoples fingers when they S --
Serving for Plasters to lay over their sores;
Eat through their flesh, and glue up all their pores:
Some new disease, that breeds good store of Lice;
Devour their bodies; may their bones make Dice,
For their own Children, to Game away their M^^n^,
And the Re-mainder let them spend on Queans*
And when they beg their bread from door to door.
Meet with that Charity, themselves have to the poor:
And when they die, 'cause they were never true,
Pray God forsake them; Devil claim thy due.

Your Friend and Serv^^^, John Capon, Doctor of Physic.
FINIS.

