THE Doctrine of Unity, OR An ANTIDOTE for the City of LONDON and therein for
the whole Kingdom besides, AGAINST DIVISION A certain SYMPTOM of
DESTRUCTION. With a Caution for Malignants of the same City.
Ecce quam bonum and quam jucundum est habitare fratres in unum.
NOva rerum facies; Nay, and we men too as well as things have put on new
faces. It is a difficulty to find one man that has not changed his opinion
or metamorphosed his manners since the beginning of Parliament, some varying in
some things, others in all, but all in some: Some turn to the King, others to
the Parliament, and some turn round. So that we men who should be stable
firm and constant in our judgments and opinions, are now grown effeminate and
change with every new moon: nay, and it is well, if not before: where can you
find one of that gravitie and perseverance, who can give you this account that
he has been always one? No, we have most ignobly degenerated from that virile
and unshaken spirit, that every Heroic mind ought to carry along with it. And
though it be plausible for a man sometimes mutare sententiam, upon better
ground and reason; (for no man ought so to sacrifice to his own Net or to adore
his own judgment or opinion, as not to be counterpoised or over-ballanced by
better and more clear principles of reason) yet for a man (like a
weathercock) to have no certain station; but to vary according to the
incertaine blast of fame, or the several opinions of those many companies and
associates he meets with all; is extremely fanaticke and ridiculous. And I wish
that there were not to many amongst us (dangerous men) who in these dubious and
uncertain times know not (in case a storm should arise) where to cast Anchor;
who by their division and opposition have talked themselves quite beside their
reason; having no dependence but upon a future incertaine opportunity, which
they are ready to embrace whenever it shall offer it self, be it on which
side it will. The most prevalent party shall sway their judgment; and as the
doubtful success of war shall appear to either side (whether seemingly or
certainly) to crown their endeavors, so will these men like an over or under
charged balance, go up or down. And these are they who cry down siding
faction and sedition. (and justly to) while in the mean time they are the most
dangerous men, who know not the treachery that is lodged in their own hearts,
but hang upon the tenter of an uncertain event, whether agreeable to or against
conscience. And who more likely (what ever they pretend) to blow the miserable
and unhappy coal of sedition and division amongst us, than such who watch
their opportunity to raise themselves by the ruin of others. Neutrality
always carries with it an eye of policy, And though I cannot but acknowledge
my self an enemy to the Cavalliers, yet I must profess to the whole world,
that my conscience instructs me, that I have more reason to dread the former,
than the latter, by how much the more a clandestine and unknown enemy is to be
feared above an open and professed one.

And for my part, I desire to stand neuter as to either of these. But now give
me leave to inform our grave and wise Citizens (for the spring approaches in
which we must expecta 2d attempt, if not before prevented by a seasonable
acco^modation) upon what pin the danger of this famous Metropolis hangs; and
that is, upon the imminent hazard of fraction and division, the certain
carecter of ruin and confusion. It is the Divils position (too too much
practiced now adays by his Agents and instruments) divide, and overcome. No
way like that to faci^ate a conquest. For as in a great Arm (...) let the body
keep entire and undevided; many thousands happily will not overcome them, but
disperse and divide them into smaller bodies, and then that force which might
be before almost invincible, may now be put to flight and be routed (if not
destroyed) by a petty inconsiderable Army. Or as it is with a man's hand, one
finger by it self has but little strength it it, but take the whole hand
together with the united some of all the fingers and then it will prove very
strong and potent. So it is with this City, while it remains entire without
rents and divisions, all jointly combining for the good of the public, it is
like an impregnable Fort, not to be taken by a far greater power then the
Cavaliers dare lay claim to: But if once divided then it is laid open and
made obnoxious to the might and power of the Enemy, and is easily overcome, you
know who said it a Kingdom divided within it self cannot stand; and if it
were possible that hell could be divided it would come to utter ruin and
desolation: of such power and force are schisms and divisions. This is that
which is the odium of Heaven, the delight of hell, and the ruin of us poor
mortals. This is that feed which the Devil and Antichrist so w^^^^ scatters
throughout the whole world raising (...) against (...), p^^ner against power, a
Kingdom, City and Country against themselves. Were it not for this no people
or persons could ever be made miserable. O then worthy Citizens, (whose piety
and zeal to the public, will be for ever admired and renowned in succeeding
ages.) Unite your selves by a strong tie and obligation, to serve your King and
Country. And let not the policy of the subtle adversary divide you one from
another: consider that it is the Devils stratageme, more practiced now than
ever; and if you ruin not your selves, it is not any external force or power
can hurt you. Union in a good cause is the joy of heaven, the envy of Hell,
and the happiness of men. It Is that which now puts a Price into your hands of
being for ever happy. It Is that, and nothing else under heaven, that can secure
you from the Common adversary: seeing that there are so many fratres in malo,
combined together against you: does it not concern you to become fratres in
bono? wherefore let us all join in a solemn vow never to diserte the cause
until heaven crown our desires with a blessed issue. It Is for out Religion,
then which, nothing on this side heaven more precious. This is that which
through the divine assistance gives wings to the soul, and makes it sore
aloft, never suffering it to be at rest, until with a holy impatience it has
got into, and reposed it self in Abraham's bosom, while all other terrene and
sublunary happiness whatsoever, is but like to golden chains, cloggs and
fetters binding us over to these uncertain vanities, dividing betwixt us and
heaven, depressing and detruding the soul into the lowest center. This is that
which sweetens and adds a pleasant s^ pour to all other fading and momentany
happiness: were it not for a future expectancy of heaven, what would the short
ini^yment of a petty inconsiderable nothing avail us; what a small difference
then betwixt us and bruits; or rather what a great difference would there be;
for they (which were made only for the service of man) would after this little
minute or moment of life past, be in far better state and condition then the
reasonable soul: for they shall return to their first principles, nothing,
but poor man be for ever, even to the utmost extremity miserable. If we give
away our Religion, we renounce our God, fell Heaven, and depart from all
possibility of our succeeding eternal happiness, and the soul must have a
being, if not above, yet below, if not in blessedness, yet in perpetual woe.
O then let us resolve to unite our selves in a sacred combination; and rather
divest our selves of all we are, have, or enjoy; then part with this precious
gemme, which will be our surest and most faithful friend when either we
forsake the happiness of the world as certainly we must for so heaven has
decreed it, Statutum est omnibus semel mori: or when it shall leave and desert
us, as casually it may, for there is no stability or constancy in any temporal
happiness. Again it is for our Parliaments, and in them for our laws,
liberties, and properties; if we maintain not the former, the latter will
quickly be forced from us. The policy of State erected Parliaments as the
ultimum refugium (in case other powers neglected their duty, or abused their
authority in prejudice of the public) for the subject to fly to, for redress
of their heavy pressures and grieuances, and these always have been the
certain propps and pillars of State, and the Patrons of our Laws and Liberties:

And if we shall now foolishly like Esau, part with our glorious Birthright for
a poor mess of Pottage, sell our Parliaments for a trifle, what will become o^
us and our whole posterity. They are the only evidences we have to show for
all we enjoy, and if we loose these, no other assurance whatsoever can secure
our Titles. As the Sun is to the Earth; The Physician to the weak Patient or
(which is yet more) the life or soul to the body of man, such and of the like
consequence are our Parliaments to us. While the Son appears with its
resplendent raise the earth fructifies and is beautiful, but if that should
hide or withdraw it self, how would the glory of the spring flagge and hang
down its head for want of that glorious luster: and the earth become sterill
and barren, bringing forth nothing but combersome weeds and fruitless
Thistles. And while the weak patient is ruled by the skillful Physician, and
follows his prescriptions, so long the violence of his disease does abate, and
there is great hopes of a recovery; but let him discontinue his course of
Physic and desert his Physician, and immediately he falls into a desperate
relaps, and becomes worse then ever.

And lastly, while the life or soul of a man is united and continues with the
body, so long it is active and moveing, but when once the soul has left it is
habitation and is departed, the body then perishes and decays and moulders
away into its fi st principles. Just thus it is with us; while we enjoy the
Sunshine of our Parliaments, and desert not this great Physician which is as
the very life and being of the State, so long prospire succedunt omnia, the
State flourishes, the King is happy in his people, and the people blessed in
their King. The King enjoyes his just Prerogative, and the people their
Liberties, and properties. But if once these be taken away, or but discontinued
for a time, then multitudes of State pressures and unsupportable burdens crowd
in upon us, the Law then loses its strength and vigor, and the Subject his
liberty and property, then forct benevolences and loanes, a far greater
plague to the purse than the twentieth part, will be imposed upon us. Then will
the Tyranny and Arbitrary power of the Lievetenants and deputies Lievetenants
be again revived amongst us, then shall new imposts and excises again vex us;
n d new found courts and Corporations, far worse then the old, poster us,
then will the grand Project Ship Money, and coat and conduct money (of which
now there may be greater need then ever) (the great drayners and exhausters of
the subjects store) be again set on foot to undo us. Then will Monopolies
(the ruin and bane of a state) like pests of lice and Locusts swarm amongst
us, then shall we have a High Commission Court, and Star Chamber again, to
exercise a power and jurisdiction above and besides the Law, to plague us with
grand penalties, for our small offenses, and then should a Proclamation crate
Law, and be of as good authority as my Lord Coke, or any of our year Books;
and Magna Charta, be as a dead letter, not able to defend the Subjects Liberty
or property, thus would it far with the State, I and much worse, if we were
but once courted out of our Parliaments, and which is above all our condition
would be as bad, if not worse in the Church; then would the Pontificiall power
Lord it over us again, and excommunicate praying and Preaching, or those that
use it, without that they will follow the Episcopal strain, crying up the
Kings Prerogative, and pre^ching down the subjects liberty and property; as if
the Kings honor and substance did depend merely upon the ruin of his people.
No contientious Lectorers, or pious and laborious Preaching Ministers should
then be tolerated. No, the pride sloth and covetousness of the Prelacy and
these are inconsistent, they cannot possibly stand together, but the one will
detrude and depresse the other. Then should we have the rabble of innovations
introducted, new disciplines, I and new doctrines too broached; Jesuits and
Seminary Priests, with their factious and damnable religion nou^ished; I and
we our selves too poasting headlong to Popery. To be short, all things both in
Church and state would change their habits and become new; nothing then sh uld
be tolerated, but which should have the spetious and fair pretense of a
refined government, or of a more pure and glorious religion; whereas the mere
bent and aim would be gradually to introduct an Arbitrary power in the State,
and pompous superstition and Popery in the Church. Now our Parliaments are as a
Hedge wall or fence against such encroachments or usurpations, which while it
stands secures us from all these but if we unwisely suffer this pertition to be
broken or trodden down, then all these heavy burdens and miseries, threatening
ruin to our Religion Laws. Liberties and properties like an invation of the
vast and irresistible Ocean flow in upon us. O then worthy Citizens (you whom
succeeding ages will honor, and dignifie with the style of your countries
Patriarchs) tie your selves together in the bend of Union, and resolve never
to desert the Parliament, least Heavkn as a just judgment upon so vilde a
defection, deprive you and your posterity of the future happy enjoyment, of so
great a blessing. Your Religion, laws Liberty, and property (the compendium of
all temporal happiness) do now lie at stake in this unhappy contention, and
if you would be stripped and divested of all these (without which life is but a
burden, and that as a prologue of eternal infelicity) ye most exact and
compendious way to accomplish it, is by erecting a Wall of division amongst
your selves. And if you would mainetaine and defend these (as it concerns
every one to do, who would not inslave himself and his whole posterity) the
only means (under God) of preservation and continuation of our present
felicity, is by a sweet concord and union, wherefore take your choice either
divide and destroy; or unite and preserve and over come; either will perfect
its work amongst us. But rather then live to see the former, may Heaven be so
proprious to me as to close mine eyes, that they may not attest the just
judgment of so unworthy an Apostesie, or be sensible of the misery.

But yet to draw more close and near unto you worthy Citizens, this City is
the Metropolis, the only renowned and famous City of the whole Kingdom, that
which has bread and raised so many great and glorious lights both in Church
and State: the most faithful and tender M^ther to a vigilant and dutiful
child that ever England had, where have you found men raised (even from the
most low and indigent condition) to those vast and almost unfadomable Mines and
Treasure of wealth, that many men have attained to through their sedulous care
and industry in this City? Some of your Families being Noble, others matched
with Nobility, and thousands of you attained to great dignities; and I may
justly say that this City never failed any man of his great reward, that has
been true and faithful to God and his own soul.

O then do not by fraction and division amongst your selves, go about to
destroy this great and glorious City; your noursing Mother that has bread,
nourished, and elevated you above the vulgar condition, no greater or more
crying sin against nature and gratitude then this; to be a cause or means of
the destruction of that, which has been thy life and preservation. Matricide
of all other crimes, is the most unnatural, most detestable, do not to spare
a poor patrimony (which thou art not sure thou shall preserve neither) sell
thy glorious Mother to utter ruin and confusion, least one day the ruins and
desolations of this famous City rise up in judgment against you; it is
division only that can raze and overthrow it, and unity alone that can and
will preserve and support it.

Again, as this City is the greatest, so it is the richest and most wealthy
City in all the Kingdom, this is as it were the Apotheca repository, or
Treasury of the Kingdom; where the common Stock or Treasure, is reposited or
laid up: and is from hence as occasion calls for it, disbursed, scattered and
diffused into the whole State. Now would you keep and preserve the Stock and
Treasure of the City, the only way to do it, is by unity, division (like a
thief) will rob and spoil you of it, and make the Cavaliers master of all
you enjoy this is their hopes, and you are their envy; they long to enrich
themselves by your Coffers rapine is their pray and livelihood; and they know
here is good plunder. I here is that, that will make abundant restitution to
such who pretending they have lost that they never had, do in these troubled
waters, make a rich booty of poverty; and labor to patch up a decayed fortune
by the ruins of others, I this will make a full satisfaction to the Cavaliers,
if they could attain it (which judgment I beseech God divert from this poor
distracted City) for their ill service to the public. And let not those that
are Malignant in the City (out of I know not what vain hopes) promise to
themselves a greater freedom or security in a common Plunder then others, and
so be wrought upon, to betray this great and glorious City to utter ruin and
destruction; for let them know it is a mercy that none yet could meet withal, to
spare even their own faction; and why should they then feed themselves with
such idle and almost impossible possibilities. Besides the souldiary is for the
most part the scumme and ^^ffamanicke of the heady, rude, and untamed multitude
(made many degrees worse by that desperate and bloody profession) and therefore
it is not to be expected that they will show favor to any, when they have
sufficient power; and fit opportunity to be cruel, or if they would show mercy
(a rare and unusual qualification with men of that profession) do you think,
or can you discover so much folly in your selves to believe, that they would
stand to dispute or enquire who are Malignants and who not or to sever the
Goats from the Sheep, and to spare the former, but destroy the latter it is the
extremity of folly to conceive it, their necessity, and cruel desire of spoil
and plunder, would not permit them to make any demurre or distinction, and
rather then they would suffer one Roundhead (as those men of blood are pleased
to style all such as are faithful to God, loyal to their King, and true to
their own souls) to escape free from the hand of violence (such an odium they
bear in their hearts to all honest men) they would rob and plunder their
own friends; and make such (as a just judgment upon so horrid a Treachery)
prove actors in their own ruin, why then if this be true, as I believe every
wise and judicious man will easily (without much persuasion) conceive so, let
this abate and conjure back again that dangerous destructive Spirit of
division that is risen amongst us, we raised it, and the Devil foments and
increases it; and (if we be not the more vigilant and careful over our selves,
and labor while it is time, to reconcile and make up our fractions and
oppositions) will never be at rest, or cease blowing of this Coal, until he
has made an unquenchable flame and fire amongst us, let us not then nourish
the Devil. Brat, or foster such a Scorpian in our breasts as will sting us to
death, and undo us and our whole posterity for ever.

Again, this City is the B^^^ of malice, against this do the Cavaliers bond
all their aims, as being their principal Opponent, and maintainer of the
cause in question. It Is you brave Citizens that have freely (to the great honor
of your Nation) disbursed and expended your Treasure for the good of your King
and Country; and have withheld nothing, neither estate, nor persons, which
might conduce to your Countries welfare and happiness (for which Heaven grant
you an eternal reward) I say it is you, and you alone that have been the
maine propp and support of the cause of God, of our religion, of our
Parliaments, Liberties, and properties; and therefore you cannot but expect
that this should swell and increase the envy of that faction against you, and
more inflame their blood to a revenge upon you, then upon any part of the
Nation besides, of ways the more potent and noxious the enemy, the greater is
the heart of malice and envy against him. Now this likewise should engage you
to a strong and indisolvable Union one with another: by how much the greater
their malice is that malig^e you; by so much the more should your love and
entire affection be augmented amongst your selves. when rapinous and devouring
wolves heard and fllock together, that is not a time for innocent and
harmless Sheep to be divided and strayning one from another.

Lastl^, this City is as the center or middle point, or as the heart or life of
the Kingdom, upon this is the eye of the whole Nation, the good or ill
success of this City has an influence upon the whole common wealth; and if
the Cavaliers once getting footing here (which Heaven forbid) twill not then be
difficulte to make a Conquest of the whole Kingdom, and that bei g brought to
pass, we know that then we are ad arbitrium Principis, at the arbitrary will
of our Prince for all that we enjoy; then that position of the Civilians (one
of the main grounds of our present contention) would be good law. Voluntas
regis legis habet vigorem, the will of the Prince, is a law, then would all
depend upon our Sovereigns pleasure, we could make no certain claim or title
to any thing under heaven; and what assurance can we hope to get of that
ei^he^* (...) when (...) Religion shall be forced from us. Now on you noble
Citizens, and on you alone, under God, does all the future happiness of this
Nation depend, if you faint the whole Kingdom will presently fail, fall, and
come to utter unavoidable desolation. Consider with your selves that this is a
blessed and honorable opportunity that God has put into your hands, and who
knows but for this very cause God increased your store, and reserved you and
it for this occasion, to be the means of preservation of your King and
Country, and in them of your Religion, Laws, and Liberties. What greater
renown or honor can possibly befall you then this, to be the supports and
patrons of so great happiness to your Country? to preserve a bleeding,
fainting, dying Kingdom from utter confusion and desolation. In your hands,
under God, is wrapped up our very life and happiness, and you have the honor of
the blessed opportunity of continuing and maintaining both, and what engagement
can be greater, or give fuller satisfaction to the most vast illimited
ambitious desire in the world? O then, let this likewise move you to continue
firm, stable, and united one toward another, considering that your fractions
and divisions will not only destroy your selves, but expidite and post on the
ruin of the whole Nation, and if by your division you shall work out your
own confusion, and by con^equence undo the Kingdom, no doubt the desolations
of poor deplorable England, will one day be accounted upon your score, and
rise up in judgment against the City. O then for the Kingdoms your own, and
your posterity sake (which are all bound up in this opportunity) embrace unity
and follow peace one with another, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God
of peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13.11.

Romans 16. ver. 7. I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.


FJNJS.

