THE DECLARATION, VINDICATION, AND PROTESTATION, OF EDWARD DOBSON, Citizen, and
Stationer, of LONDON.

Wherein is showed the many illegal and unjust impri^onments which the said
Stationer has suffered, through the mali^ious and envious informations of
Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and other seditious Sectaries: contrary to
the Laws of God, the Liberty of the Subject, and the Laws of the Land, all
which have been Protested, and Covenanted to be maintained with Lives and
Fortunes.

Together with the manner of his coming from Worcester to Northampton, and of
his barbarous usage there, by the Governor and others, contrary to the
Declaration published in the names of the two Kingdoms, upon the sincerity of
which he did depend.

Also a Relation of his illegal imprisonment upon a pretended suspicion of
bringing a Saw to the Irish Lords (as is most scandalously published) for their
escape out of the Tower.

Poenas profundi, frauds Capitisque Rotundi,
Et Judae suavium det Deus ut caveam.
Deliver me, O God, I pray, from all that is amiss;
Hells punishment, Roundheads coz'ning, and from a Judas kiss.
Possumus quod jure possumus.

Max. Leg. They have sworn falsely in making a Covenant.

Hosea 10.3, 4. november: 6th BRISTOLL, but indeed London Printed in the Year,
M.DC.XLIIII.

The Declaration, Vindication, and Protestation of EDWARD DOBSON, Citizen, and
Stationer of LONDON.
IF (according to the old Proverb) Loosers may speak by authority, then may not
I be silent, considering the many pressures and oppressions the arbitrary and
tyraunicall Government usurped by my Fellow Subjects, but exercised over me,
and other His Majesty's loyal Subjects, by reason whereof we are fallen to as
sad, if not sadder condition, then the Athenians under their thirty Tyrants.
Those then that would have beheld these men at the beginning of this
Parliament, and have marked with what zeal and have they went to Westminster
to cry Justice, Justice, against the Earl of Strafford, for bringing an
arbitrary and tyrannical government into Ireland, would have little thought
that ever they themselves would have exercised the same government in England
over their Fellow Subjects, as now they do? So that they stand not upon the
Quid, but the Qualis, what persons: For, so long as themselves rule, they are
content. It seems that they have learned some Maxim of humane policy, To
hate and decline that in others, that they may, with the more security, and
less suspicion, accomplish the same to themselves. This arbitrary and
tyrannical government does very ill beseem a Prince, the Earl of Strafford in
Ireland, or any other Noblemen; but does become Weavers, Basketmakers, or such
kind of Mechanics in England very well. So the Irish Rebellion is called a
horrid and bloody action, a cruel war: but the English and Scotch Rebellion
is styled a holy and just War, the good Cause, a fighting the Lords Battles,
the maintenance of Religion, Laws, and Liberty. So the Kings tax of Ship Money
was counted an illegal imposition, a heavy burden, and a great grievance,
because it was taken without the consent of the three Estates in Parliament.
But the taking (though in the same manner) the twentieth, and fifth part of men's
estates, besides Excise, plunder, and other illegal Taxes, are no burden, no
grievance, but a great ease to the people. So the Oath ex Officio (though
legal) was a great burden and oppression to men's consciences, because it
betrayed Off^nders into the hands of Justice. But the Scorch and English
Covenant, (though forced with the greatest severity) or rather the French
League, is no offense, no scruple at all, but a great ease to men's consciences.
So the silenci^g ignorant, illiterate, seditious, and factious Ministers by the
Bishops, was styled a Prelaticall persecution, an Antichristian Tyranny, and a
stopping the mouths of Gods faithful Ministers. But the silencing,
imprisoning, and plundering of learned and pious D. Featly, D. Holdsworth, M.
Vdall, and many other Orthodox and Protestant Divines, unblameable until these
th^s, is nothing (with them) but the suppression of Popery, and Popish
Ministers; for such they term^ all who hold and conform themselves to the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church established by Law. And thus have they
learned (like the Jews) to put darkness for light and l ght for darkness; to
call evil good, and good evil. It is not unknown to the world, how by their
scanda^ous and lying Pamphlets, they labor daily to possess the people of the
Kings intention to bring in Popery. And what is this, think we, but only that
they in the interim may with the less suspicion, and more security, bring in
Atheism, Heresy, and all Sects and Schisms which have been ever since
Christ. How have they trampled under Feet the Temporal and Ecclesiastical
Laws? As by imprisoning of men's bodies, plundering and taking from them their
estates, and robbing their King of his Forts, Towns, Navies, Magazines, and
Militia. How do they obey Christ, who says, Render to Caesar (though a Heathen)
the things that are Caesar's, when they take all from him? It is not, give to
Caesar, but render implying, that Kings live not upon the gifts and alms of
their Subjects, but that they have as great, if not greater right to their
Revenues, as Subjects to their goods. With what conscience then can the two
Houses usurp the Militia, which (by the Scripture) has for many years
belonged to the disposing of Kings, as appears by that Text in 2 Samuel 18.1.
David the King set, or made Captains over Fifties, Hundreds, and Thousands. It
does not say, his great Council, or his Parliament; nay the word Parliament is
not to be found in all the Scriptures: and we know that Parliaments had their
original and being from Kings. What monsters then are they, that would
undermine, depose, and destroy those that gave them their being? Are they any
better then vipers, who eat out the bowels of their mothers? I speak not this
of a free Parliament: there was never any King deposed or wronged by a free
Parliament, neither is it de Jure in the power of a Parliament; for God says
plainly, By me Kings rule, or reign, Prove. 8.15. He does not say, by
Parliaments, or by the peoples authority; nor are they accomptable to their
Subjects in case of error, or faults, but only to God, as is most clear in
King David, who though he sinned against man, yet appealed only to God,
saying. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, etc. Psalm. 51. I have
sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.13. And whereas King Richard the second is
instanced and objected: I answer, That the deposing of King Richard, to the
scandal of this Nation, was an act of high Treason upon the fairest relation.

I will now speak something concerning the abuses of the Church, and then of
my own. And first, let us consider the sacrilege, profaneness, and many
insolences offered in Gods house by the Parliaments soldiers, as they are
commonly called: as their hewing and hacking down the stone-workes, as if they
intended to build their Babel with the ruins: their breaking down the railes,
spoiling the Communion Table, pulling down Pulpits, as if they intended to set
u a tub, or barrel to preach in: and which is worst of all, their picking the
poores box, and stealing their bread from off the shelfe, which is their prime
aim at their first coming into the Churches to plunder. And as if the ills
that they had already done could not be safe but by attempting greater, they
proceed further, by laying violent hands on the Ministers, tearing the Surplice
off their backs, trampling the Book of Common Prayer under feet, the abuse of
which ought to be punished (according to the Laws) with great severity. Yet
have not the two Houses of Parliament declared their dislike, nor punished any
since the Kings departure, as ever I could hear. The Philosopher says, Qui
vitia non prohibet, jubet and approbat, Those that conuive at vices, and do not
punish them, approve of and command them. But let us consider further, what
non-fence, false Doctrine and blasphemy is preached up and down the City by
these orbicular Independents, lumps of ignorance, and silly fellows in black,
most of them being ignominious and contemptible Mechanics. It was Ierobohams
sin, in making the meanest and vilest of the people Priests: and I pray God
that it be not the two Houses sin, in suffering the meanest and the vilest of
the people to preach, and to make themselves Priests: even such as are,
Tinkers, Weavers, Brewers, Bakers, religious. Sowgelders, and Button-makers.

But to leave this, and come to the illegality of my own imprisonments. The
cause then of my first imprisonment was, for selling a Book entitled, A
Declaration of the Practices and Treasons attempted and committed by Robert
late Earl of Essex against Her Majesty, etc. This Book was published by the
authority of Queen Elizabeth, and the whole State, in the year 1600. For this
book so lawfully licensed was I most unlawfully sent to Newgate by Isaac
Pennington the Traitor, and pretended Major, as the King styles him: during my
imprisonment in Newgate, one Clarke, a pretended Constable, with his rabble,
forces the key of my shop from me, then goes to my shop: and because he could
not open my shop door quickly, breaks it open, and falls to plundering; where
he took a sword and gold belt, a Set of Pictures, Sir Edward Deerings
Speeches, twelve of the aforesaid Books, and a Bible, saying, that I was a
Malignant, and that they were Malignants goods (for such they make those and
their goods that have any thing to lose) and that he would carry them to the
Lord Majors, but whether he did or no, I leave to his own conscience which
best knows: I am sure I received them not again, although I have used all
possible means that may be. Now whether this be the Liberty of the Subject, I
appeal to all the world? or whether there be such a thing as liberty left us
in London, unless liberty to plunder? or if when they say liberty, they do
not equivocate, and mean imprisonment, bondage and slaverie? For they have
Maxims ex contrariis, to fight for the King and yet shoot great Cannon shot at
him: destroy his Person, and yet preserve the King: that treason cannot be
committed against his Person, but his Power, which Power the two Houses are:
and therefore D. Lopus and Parry, who attempted to destroy Queen Elizabeth's
Person, were not traitors, but died very innocent; and the learned Judges who
condemned them as guilty of high treason, did them great injustice: so did the
Judges who judged, the Earl of Essex (this man's Father) guilty of high
Treason for attempting and endeavoring to take away evil Councillors from
Queen Elizabeth, as appears by the Earl of Essex's Defense, and their Reply.
The Defense, For my part I intended no hurt to Her Majesty's Person, but only
to take away her evil Councillors, etc. The Reply. The Judges delivered
their opinion in matter of Law upon two points: The one, That in case where a
Subject does attempt to put himself into such a strength as the King shall not
be able to resist him, and to force and compel the King to govern otherwise
then according to his own royal authority and direction, it is manifest
rebellion. The other, That in every rebellion, the Law extends as a
consequence, the compassing the death, and deprivation of the King, as
foreseeing, that the Rebel and Traitor will never suffer the King to live or
reign, which might punish or take revenge of his Treason and Rebellion. And
therefore this is not only the sense of the Law, but even common reason and
experience teaches as much: For the Subjects never obtained a superiority
over their King, but immediately followed the death and deposition of the King,
as in the example of Edward the second, and Richard the second.

But to return to any own occasion: I wonder what Clarke or any of these
holy, pious, and religious plunderers (who rob men in the fear of the Lord,
and under a color of Religion, and long Prayer, devour Widows houses) will
answer Christ at the day of Judgment, when he will say, I commanded you that
you should not covet, rob, nor plunder your neighbors: Why did you? Why truly
Lord, I was told that they were Malignants, and that their goods were Malignant
goods: blendes Lord, I had an Ordinance of Parliament for what I did then. Let
them see whether their pleading that their neighbors were Malignants; or that
their Ordinance, or rather Patent to plunder, will bear them out at that day,
for the breach of Gods Commandments. But these frantic Brownists and wild
Ambaptists have learned new Maxims of Divinity, as first; That the dominion of
things is founded in grace, and not in nature, from whence they conclude, that
they may rob the wicked as (they say) the Isrealits did the Egyptians. Secondly
that the wicked are usurpers and that they only have right to the creatures,
being (as they style themselves) the meek of the earth, but not to insist on
these things, and come to the second cause of my imprisonment, which was; For
beating one Nicholas Tew, an Anabaptist, for saying, The King had none but
Rogues about him, and for asking him, with what conscience he could say so, he
having taken the late Protestation to defend the Kings Honor? For this (by the
information of the said Tew and one Thomas Andrews an arrant honest man) was I
apprehended, and had before Isaac Pennington, my old friend, who committed me
to Woodstreet Compter, and the next day was sent with a Rabble to the
Parliament House, from thence I made my escape to Oxford: after my departure
they plundered me of all the Ware in my Shop, to the value of above one hundred
pounds, besides my wearing Clothes, and (contrary to the rules of good
huswifery) left not so much as an egg in the nest, for the hen to sit upon:
not content with this, they make a further gradation to perpetrate their
impieties by murdering me in my reputation, and scandalizing me in their
Libells, giving me a nickname, more befitting the inventors. But it it is not
strange that they slander me, when they stick not to slander the footsteps of
Gods Anointed, their King, neither is it any marvel that they rob me, when
they fear not to rob God, by robbing Churches, and Churchmen, their lawful
King, and all the true Nobility: but by whom are they thus robbed? But by those
who despise all Arts and Learning, like the fox that contemned the grapes
because he could not reach them. When they had thus plundered me, they summon
my own mother, and brothers, to make Oath, whether they knew of any more estate
that I had, either in money, goods, or debts. O monstrous: Tyrant: I can the
Pope, can Antichrist use more Tyranny over conscience, then these? To make a
mother take an Oath to ruin and undo her own child by discovering his estate,
that they may rob him? And thus they deal with men's servants, compelling them
by their unconscionable Oaths (Judas like) to betray their Masters, making
them take Oaths to discover their Masters Estates, being contrary to the
Covenant of their Indenture, of keeping their Masters secrets. Thus themselves
being treacherous, false, and perfideous, to their King, would have servants
be so to their Masters. Now those that refuse their illegal Oaths, and
Covenant, they imprison; as they have done a young Apprentice of M. Smiths, for
refusing to be unfaithful to his Master, by betraying his Estate, for them to
plunder. In like manner deal they with the Kings Soldiers, their Prisoners,
Either take our Covenant, or else lie in Prison, and be starved, for you shall
have no maintenance or allowance from us, not so much as of your own Estates
which we have plundered you of. And thus they dealt with me when they put me in
the dungeon in the Gate House at Westminster. Now I say, that it is a quaere;
whether an Oath or Covenant extorted in this nature obliges, and binds the
conscience? The Schoolmen conclude negatively that Extortum non est tenendum;
And in my opinion, it binds men to nothing but to repentance. Again, it is
another quaere, whether an Oath or Covenant can be imposed upon the consciences
of His Majesty's Subjects, without his assent, or without the consent of the
three Estates of a free Parliament? The Common Law concludes negatively too. An
unlawful Oath it is thought, may lawfully be broken, though not lawfully
taken. Herod sinned in keeping his Oath, so did Iephthah in keeping his Vow.
And I wonder why they should call it the National Covenant? Sure they mean,
the Covenant of the S^ismaticks and Browni^^s of the Nation; for Protestants
will not take it willingly. Not to insist upon this. I have been imprisoned,
and under Custody ten times since the King went a way, but not as an evil
doer; and that is my joy, my comfort. Only for a pretended Malignant, and
because I knew not how to depart from my allegiance, for denying to contribute
money to destroy the King and Kingdom, For refusing to be under the tyranny
and slavery of my fellow Subjects, and to forfeit the freedom and liberty
purchased to us by our great Ancestors with the labor and industry of so many
years. For these causes and for these crimes have I been plundered,
imprisoned, and robbed. Nor am I like to have remedy, or to be bettered, but
rather worse: For they have safely done so many evils already, that they will
still do more. But to pass by this, Let us loyal English consider how happy
we are in our King over other Nations? They fight for their King there, our
King fights for us here. Was there ever King so ready to lay down his life for
his Subjects Liberties, as our now King Charles? Who is like to the good
Shepherd, that will lay down his life, for his sheep, as appears by his
readiness to hazard his life and sacred p^^son in defense of us his poor
distressed Protestants groaning under the bloody and cruel persecution, of
Papists in Ireland, and Brownists, Sectaries, Puritans, and Roundheads in
England. Saint Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus. But the King fights with
beasts in England, unreasonable beasts; who would have the Bishops preach and
keep hospitality, and yet will allow them no means They say that the Bishops
would bring in Popery, but they would bring in Popery themselves. For they
would take away all the Clergies means, and make them all begging Friars.

But to return again to my own occasions. I was no sooner discharged out of
the Gatehouse, but one Thomas Weaver, one of the Earl of Essex's Lifeguard,
meets me in Thames street, and after some greeting, would needs have me to
prison again, without any Warrant. I endeavored to persuade and convert this
Weaver, but all was in vain: for I had no sooner cast the beam out of his
eye, but the shuttle got into his brain: and so I left him.

I now come to speak of my coming to Northampton from Worcester, which was thus.

I hearing of a Declaration published in the names of the two Kingdoms, the
second of February last past, 1643. for the acception of all those that would
come in, and having diverse occasions (my mother being dead) to come to London,
I relied upon the sincerity of this Declaration, and came accordingly from
thence to Northampton. No sooner was I come to Northampton, and presented my
self to the Governor, Colonel Whetham, a quondam-Baker in London, but
immediately I was stripped, and robbed of fifteen pounds, and after wards
scandalously abused in a lying London-Pamphlet, that I had a Crucifix about my
neek. Indeed the bringing so much money was enough to make any man a Papist, a
Malignant, a Spy, or what they please. Something must be said for the unjust
and perfidious taking away my money and goods, else the robbery would be too
gross. From thence I was sent to London, and examined by the Committee for
Examinations, and promised by them my money: about a fortnight after that, I
went to petition for my money so promised, and was for peti ioning committed to
the Gatehouse, where I lay five weeks without any relief. This course usage
made me to think that the aforesaid Declaration was nothing but a stratagem or
policy of the new State to get men's persons as well as their estates into they
power, and then use them as they please. I wonder what Sir Edward Deering got
by coming in to them? nothing surely, but was made (as they have made me) a
religious beggar. We might well think, that those that break their oath with
their King, will scarce keep faith with us, they having learned the Jesuits
Maxim, Fides non est tenendacum Haereticis and Malignantibus. Not long after
this I was again apprehended by one Cox and Hunt, two wiseakers, upon a
pretended and forged suspicion of bringing a Saw to the Irish Lords, and was
had without any Warrant to Guild Hall, from thence without any examination or
Mittimus brought to the New-Prison in Maiden-lane, and from thence to the
Tower, before the pretended Lieutenant Isaac Pennington, of whom I demanded my
accusers, but they were not to be found. After they had detained me some seven
or eight days close prisoner, not letting me all that while lie in a bed, they
send one Plucknut, a shark, to say, I was not the man that he saw go into the
Tower with the Saw, he was a tall black man, and had a black beard: upon these
words I was discharged. Now I appeal to all the world, whether this be
according to the Laws of God, or the Laws of the Land, which they have so
zealously covenanted to maintain. It is said, Acts 25.17. It seems
unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not examine the crimes against him; and
our Savior dismissed the woman because her accusers did not appear, Joh. 8.10,
11. Besides, it is against the Laws of the Land, as appears by Magna Charta,
9. Hen. 3.29. in these words, That Justice shall be delayed, deferred, or denied
to no man. But why do I speak of Law or Gospel, to these who regard neither?
Who have not the fear of God before their eyes. Romans 3, 18. Who fear not to
resist, disobay their King. God commanded his people to submit to the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar, a heathen, and an Idolatrous King, and threatened diverse
punishments to those who did resist, disobay, and not submit to him, as is most
clear in the 27 of Jer. 8, 11. and called him and King Cyrus his Anointed,
though Heathens. If then God would have his people to submit and obey
Nebuchadnezzer, a Heathen and an Idolatrous King, certainly then much more
would he have us to submit, not resist, and obey our Protestant and Christian
King, who is not addicted to any of those personal vices which many of his
predecessors have been. Lastly and to conclude, I do declare and protest for
my Vindication, that notwithstanding the many slanderous untruths, that I am a
Protestant, but not of the Amsterdam, Geneva, or New-Eengland Cut: I am for
Monarchy regulated according to Law, The Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
established by Law, and hope to see the King, like Solomon upon his throne, and
with his countenance to scatter these cursing Shemei's, these railing
Rabshake's and round breeches, like dust before the wind.

Finally if the King prevail, all his loyal Subjects will be happy: but if
the worst should come, and God should punish us for our sins by letting Rebels
prevail; yet, Malo vinci cum Caesare, quam vincere et regnare cum Pompeio. I
had rather fall, be overcome, ruined, and undone with my King, the Nobility,
and loyal Gentry, fighting for the true Protestant Religion, the Laws of the
Lands and the Privileges of Parliament; Then to conquer, overcome, rule, and
reign, with Essex; fighting for Schismatiks, Heretics, Sacrilege, Rebellion,
and Treason.

FINIS.

