A Discovery of Treason AGAINST THE KING, AND PARLIAMENT:

Together with the whole KINGDOM:

BEING The true Copy of a Letter found about a Priest lately apprehended at
Clarkenwell in the County of Middlesex.

WHEREIN Many of their treacherous and hellish Plots against the Kings Majesty
and this whole State are fully discovered, with their practices against the
Parliament, and the Protestant Religion.

LONDON, October. 29. Printed by R.A. and A.C. for G. Smith. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter found about a Priest lately apprehended at Clarkenwell
in the County of MIDDLESEX.
FAther Rector,
Let not the damp of astonishment seize on your most dear and zealous soul
concerning the proceedings of this Parliament, for you must know the Counsel
is engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative in case the Parliament will
resemble the Pelican, which takes pleasure to dig out with her own beak her
own bowels.

You may remember how the late famous and mortal Statesman, the Conde
Gundamore, said, King JAMES rockt him asleep with a fancy and sweet sound of
peace to keep np the Spanish treaty. Likewise we were bound to some eminent
Statesment of our own country, to gain time in procuring the advantageous
cessation of arms in the Palatinate, and in the North of the Spanish Nation in
vilifyihg the Hollanders, demonstrating to the King, that the States were most
ungrateful to his Predecessors, that the States were more obnoxious then the
Turks, and perpetually hindered his loyal Subjects, and had usurped the
regality of the narrow seas, in fishing upon the English coasts. This great man
had but one principal means to further his great designs, which was, that
none but the Puritan faction, which plotted nothing but an anarchy, and his
confusion, were averse to the most happy union. We steer on the same course,
and make great use of an anarchicall election, and have prejudicated the Great
One, that none but the Kings enemies and his are chosen of the Parliament: and
that the Parliament avowes, that they will begin with the least, and will not
give over till they have extirpated him and his posterity. On the other side,
the sincere parties that are to be admired for their indefatigable industry,
incessantly forment revenge and jealousy in most of the Parliament Men,
especially they work upon the pride and vainglory of such as have been
imprisoned, possessing them, that they are the only martyrs and Worthies of the
countries. London is a much distempered as Florence; for the Companies are at
odds, and the Common Council have opposed their Magistrates against the old
custom, which has bred a great deal of heart-burning in the city, so that
twice a day we can divulge what we list in Paul's, and upon the Exchange, you
shall see the same sword that has wounded us, being drawn upon the same wound
with an oil that we have, shall make us whole. And this shall be done in
Parliament, in charming the wisest and temperatest: with the violent sort we
take a strange course, by working upon their passions, and inebriating their
fancies with probabilities and presidents, that favorites may wrestle with
Parliaments for a time, but at last a Parliament will overthrow their backs: we
encourage them with all the wits we have, to fall upon some great persons here
Ais Majesty, and persuade them that now is the time or never, the King being in
such necessity, insomuch that we assure our selves, God has forsaken and
infatuated them, that they shall not only strike against the same rock but sink
and rake in the bottom of the sea of destruction.

We have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our faction,
and we have added two bulwarks more. For when K. JAMES was very violent against
Arminianisme, and interrupted with his pestilent wit and deep learning our
strong designs in Holland, and was a great friend ^o that old rebellious
heretic the Prince of Orange; now we have planted the sovereign drug of
Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their heresy, and
will flourish and bear fruit in due season.

The foundation to build up the bulwark must be mutation; our mutation will
cause reluctation, which will serve for as many violent diseases as the Stone,
the Gowt, Toothache, speedy destruction, or perpet^all insufferable anguish of
the body, which is worse then death it self.

There are other matters in hand of consequence which we take to consideration
and tender care, which is the state of the Puritans, for they are impudent
subtle people.

I cannot but laugh to see how some of our coat have counterfeited themselves,
you would scarce know them if you saw them. It is admirable, how is speech,
apparel and gesture they act the Puritans. They abused our sacred Patron
Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest.

I hope you will excuse my merry digression: for I confess to you, I am at
this time transported with joy to fee how happily all instruments and means,
as well great as small, do cooperate to our purposes.

But to return again to our main fabric: In the first place we take into
consideration the King honor and present necessity, and we show how the King
may free himself from his wardship as Lewis the 11. did, and for his great
splendour and luster, he may raise vast sums, and not be beholden to his
subjects, which is by way of imposition and Excise: we instance the
Low-Countreyes, and show what a mass of money they raise to pay their armies
both by sea and land merely out of Excise.

Then our Church Catholics proceed to show the means how to settle this Excise
which must be by an Army of horse and foot; for we have made it sure: they
shall be Forraigners, and Germans, who will eat up the Kings revenues, and
spoil the countries wheresoever they come, though they be well paid; what
havoc will they make then when they have no pay. If the country be too hard
for the soldiers, they must consequently outrage, which is equally
advantageous to us.

FINIS.

