A DAMNABLE TREASON, By a Contagious Plaster of a PLAGUE SORE: Wrapped up in a
Letter, and sent to Mr. PYM: Wherein is dicovered a Divellish, and Unchristian
Plot against the High Court of PARLIAMENT, October 25. 1641.

The true Effige of M. I. Pym, Esqu. Burgess in he High Court of Parliament
for Tavistock in Devonshire.
Read in this Image him, whose dearest Blood
Is thought no price, to buy his Countries good,
Whose name shall flourish, till the blast of Fame
Shall want a Trumpet, or true worth, a Name.
depiction of John Pym, English Parliamentarian (1584-1643)

Printed for W. B. Anno Dom. 1641.

(?)depiction of John Pym, English Parliamentarian (1584-1643)

A Damnable TREASON: BY A PLAGVE-SORE: Wrapped up in a Letter, and sent to Mr.
PYM.
ARe ye still involved in such inveterate malice (O ye the breath of Romish
Dragons) to cast your poison at our purest Fountains! O greedy Caterpillars:
why do you seek to devour our choysest Plants? Do ye not know that in
striving against Gods dearest Saints, ye do but with too great pains weave
out your own Destruction; for God beholds all your mischief, and saves the
righteous from the cruelly?

How bold was this attempt of inhumanity, and filthiness in the very abstract.
And that attempted not from some secure place, or Our-side of the City: but
near the very heart, and in the face of the City, at Ludgate: where they might
have but cast up their eyes, and looked upon that famous Monument of Queen
Elizabeth, the Memorial whereof may strike them with terror to all Ages. But
see the suttlety of this Damnable Project, compiled without all Christianity.
Whether it was a man, or woman, spirit of Devil. This without all doubt is
certain, that the filthiest puddle of Hellish Corruption, cannot be more
detestable A Man in the shape of a Devil, or the Devil in shape of a Man,
became visibly the only Actor in this unclean Conspirasie. And whether
because to hide his shaggy hair, or to transform his vissadge, he comes not
in his hat, but with a Mounteere on his head. This thought he, will in some
Case keep me, that I may the farther presume to be kept from Discovery.

And for his Messenger he takes not such an one, who had any knowledge of him;
lest so unconstancy should move discovery: he takes away such suspicion, and
called a sturdy Porter, whom he thought (being ignorant of what he did) would
effect this matter as it was intended: which that he should be the more ready
to perform, he rewarded him with 12. pence, which made the Porter to be very
ready to undertake the delivery, and do the message, little knowing (without
all doubt, as is conceived) the great and filthy burden that he was to carry.
The Gentleman habited, but Dunghill, nay, filthy Actor takes into his polluted
hands a Letter which he delivered incontinently to the Porter, with such
Relations, as if his actions had bin real.

The Letter was to be delivered to the Honorable Mr. Pym, and at the Parliament
house; there was the aim of this conspiracy even to undo us all by depriving
us of these worthy pillars of our Kingdom.

But thought he, perhaps Master Pym may not be there, what then? what shall be
done? if this porter deliver the letter carelessly, Master Pym being from the
House, this may perhaps not take effect, therefore, porter (quoth he) if thou
do not see Master Pym himself, leave the letter with the doore-keeper,
(directing him carefully to deliver it to his own hands;) this was plotted to
the end it should be opened; and vewed by the whole house.

Thus the porter went to Westminster to perform his message O poor man, thou
never carried'st such burden, a fair letter full of filth.

When he came to the Parliament house, he delivered the letter according to
the direction. Which Mr Pym received very courteously, little imagining what
was within the letter; who sitting in the house of Commons, incontinently
before the Honorable Assembly brake it open in the view of the whole House;
which being opened! (Oh who can parallel so unchristian an action, did Hell
ever before broach the like? Behold, admire and wonder. O the filthiness of
this invention, did ever letter enclose the like? who could ever have thought
that any christian should have forged such an invention.)

IN the Letter was enclosed a filthy clout, with the contagious plaster of a
Plague sore upon it; would not this have started the stoutest Hector or
Hercules, would not this have made the stoutest heart to tremble, when a man
should open it in the presence of such an assembly, a letter full of nothing
but a poluted clout in the corruption of a plague sore; but yet oh noble
Senators, hold up your heads with comfort for God is with you.

The wicked Lines that were writ in the LETTER.
To my honored friend, John Pym, Esquire;
Mr. Pym,
Do not think that a Guard of men can protect you, if you persist in your
Traytorous courses, and wicked Designs. I have sent a Paper-Messenger to you,
and if this do not touch your heart, a Dagger shall, so soon as I am recovered
of my Plague Sore: In the mean time you may be forborne, because no better man
may be endangered for you.

Repent Traitor.
What a bold, wicked presumption was this, thus to abuse that Honorable, and
worthy Gentleman; whom I pray God, ever to protect, with comfort, peace,
honor, safety, in this life: and in the Life to come, eternal Glory? What
would such as these do, in case they might have their will who dare thus to
breath out their poison against the Honorable Assembly!

O wretched abusers, to call him Traitor, who is so good a Subject. But as a
Liars tongue is no slander; so such poisoned Aspes cannot hurt, whom God
preserves. Does not the whole Kingdom talk with one voice agreeing, that we
are happy in such as he, whom God preserve amongst us?

Was ever such a Paper-Messenger sent before: by which, what rational man in
the world will not say, that such Popish Inventions come from the Devil.

But let me ask them why they do presume, that to threaten to prevail with
Sword, or Punyard? Is not God the Guide of all things, he can turn your own
swords upon your selves, ye Hellish Plotters, and destroy you utterly with your
own weapons, in the midst of your greatest Glory.

See your own vanity: are not your two days past; and yet God has blessed,
and preserved them all from your hands; and so I trust he will for ever.

God overturne at his own time, and in his own way, all those Wicked, and
Damnable Plots of the ungodly Papists. But ever let this Blessing light on and
go along with the Honorable Assembly, in all their Consultations, and Decrees:
that God may be thereby glorified, Reformation wrought, Peace and Tranquillity
settled, and the whole Land become the People of the Lord for ever.

The true Relation how he was descryed.
SEarch being made (by Command from the House) for the finding out of this
wretched fellow, who delivered the Letter to the porter. They came to the Inn
where it was supposed he lay, as he was described by the Porter, and a Boy: who
also casually looked upon him when he sent the Porter. This boy coming to the
Inn puts on a Tapsters Apron, and ran up the Stairs into his Chamber, with
a good spirit (as he was directed) that so he might see whether it was the
man, or not, Anan, anan, anan Sir, says he, what lack ye: who being in Bed;
said, he did not call, but being to go out early that morning, before it was
day: he therefore called for a Candle, which was brought him. Then the boy
looked upon his nose, and saw a Wart, of which before he took notice. as also a
red Ribond about his arm; of which, he gave information to the Constables, he
were there ready, and to apprehend him presently, who denied it. But the Porter
and the Boy accused him: he being asked, if he had taken the Oath of
Allegiance; he said, he never knew what it meant.

But in fine, he is committed to the Gate House, and when it shall please the
Honourabls Assembly to bring him to his trial: I pray God that his providence
may so rule the matter; that what mischief, plots, Innovations, or popish
Treacheries, lie hid under his knowledge, may, by him be discovered, and all
other whatsoever, in Gods good time; which God grant, for his Christ, his sake,
Amen.

FINIS.

