THE DIVINE DREAMER: OR, A short treatise discovering the true effect and power
of Dreams; Confirmed by the most learned and best approved Authors.

Whereunto is annexed The Dream of a young Gentleman, immediately before the
death of the late Earl of STRAFFORD.

Printed in the year 1641.

TO THE VIRTUOUS CARINDA.
MADAM,
IT was your pleasure not long since to admit me into your Ladyships presence,
where I took the boldness to begin a discourse of the Planets, and to declare
the power of them: which conference d^d arise from the death of Sir Thomas
Wentworth, who departed this world in his Clymactericall year. A friend of
mine being at the place of execution, heard a pitiful Lady warble forth a
mournful duty; and as soon as her eyes beheld his head parted from his
shoulders, she uttered these words with tears in her eyes, (O what wit,
treson, harms) which being examined, were the true letters of (Six Thomas
Wentworth) without adding or taking away of a letter. Well might she
confidently affirm what she said, since none will deny, but that the cutting
off the head spoils the wit. I have according to your Ladyships command, sent
you this dream of the Lord of Strafford, in regard formerly you have been
pleased to lend an ear to my tedious relation; the which is included within a
small treatise, styled, the Divine Dreamer, together with the service

Of your Servant GONZALO.

The several Heads.
1 THE definition of a Dream.

2 How Dreams presage good or bad fortune.

3 That sad Dreams and joyful proceed from a good and bad diet.

4 That Dreams do predestinate sickness and diseases, and that by several
causes.

5 That some Dreams are as well grounded upon the grace of God, as natural
causes.

6 That some Princes have been admonished by Dreams, both of their own and
peoples welfare.

7 A Dream of Sir Thomas Wentworth, Lord Strafford; wherein his nature and
fortune is gathered, from his name and title, and made known by a Dream.

The Divine Dreamer.
IN the first place I shall set down the definition of a Dream: A Dream is
that which appears to us while we are sleeping; not by the function of the
eyes, but by imagination. Some Dreams leave a man joyful and well disposed at
a thing: Contrariwise, there are others sad and offensive, that for diverse
days after such dreams, procure a melancholy languishing both in Soul and
Body, making a man unable to receive any delight.

Many have presaged by these dreams both of good luck and bad, which soon
after should happen unto them. Some ignorant people have not spared to say,
that they are the souls of deceased persons, or Angels, that do advertise men
of such things as shall ensue unto them. My purpose is not to discourse if the
sonles of the deceased have at any time returned into the world, I leave that
to be decided by learned Divines; but will discourse of the causes natural,
both concerning pleasing dreams, and such as are turbulent and offensive.

Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen say, that there are diverse kinds of meats
which do engender and cause sorrowful dreams, as Beans, Pease, Coleworts,
Garlic, Onions, Leekes, Chestnuts, and all opening roots, the flesh of a
Boar, or old Hare, and Beef, all water-fowles, as Duck, Goose, and the like.
All troubled wines; nor is there any doubt to be made, but that commonly,
according to such meats as we use in our feeding, raising humors answerable
to their several qualities, that dreams are begotten of the same nature. All
these meats before mentioned, with many others, which I have omitted, do
engender evil humors, and are choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholy. It is
necessary then, that the body that has been used to such kinds of meats,
should likewise be of the temper of the said humors, and that the manners and
actions of the soul, should follow the temperature of the body, Galen is of
opinion, and has written a book thereof expressly. Likewise such men as have
sustained some great loss, either in their honors, body, goods, parents,
kindred or friends, and oftentimes in their dreams they have very strange,
fearful and mournful apparitions: For many times it comes to pass, that men
dream in the night time, seeming to speak, see, understand, negotiate in the
precedent days affairs, or else on some thing whereto they bear much
affection: But by meats that are easily digested, causes pleasant dreams.
Such as eat anniseeds after supper, or when they are going to bed, or have fed
with Saffron, or drank with Burrage or Balm, he will not only have a subtle
spirit, but also will dream very acceptable things. There is a certain
Unguent prepared by Apothecaries, which is called Populeon, in regard of the
juice of Poplar leaves, if the temples be rubbed therewith, and chafed with the
liver, veins, the branches of the great Arteries, and the soles of the feet,
it is not only the provocation of sound sleep, but it causes also
delightful and facetious dreams. Cicedamus says, that himself made an
ointment compounded in this manner: the fat of young infants taken out of their
graves, the single of Persley, of Aconitum, of Pantaphilon, wherewith if some
women and weak persons had chaste their brains, it is almost incredible to
speak what and how many things they did persuade themselves to see; one while
matters of delight, as Theaters, Gardens, Fish Ponds, Ornaments, and the like;
so they imagined they lay with him or her of whom they were most desirous.
Otherwhiles they seemed to see Kings and Magistrates with their guards and
attendants; yea, all the glory and pomp of mankind, with many other excellent
things, as we see in paintings far greater then ever Nature made them. At
other times they did see heavy sights, as Ravens, Scritchoules, Prisons, Dens,
and Torments.

Having spoken concerning the qualities of Dreams occasioned, and proceeding
from sustentation, and also some things externally applied, I will now speak
of such as do predestinate sickness and diseases, and that by natural
causes. Hippocrates says, that if a man do dream that he sees f^e, it
notes the Dreamer to be abounding in Choler, or of a Choleric humor and
disposition, whereby he is very apt to fall into hot and burning diseases. He
that dreameth he sees smoke or mists, or profound darkness, is much disposed
to melancholy sicknesses. To dream of rain and moisture betokens the
abounding with good humors. To dream of storm, hail, or ice, signifies the
redundance of phlegm to to be most cold, the constitution of the air has
such power over humane bodies that it impresseth both in the body and the soul
the present qualities and dispositions thereof. Galen declares that a man
dreamed that his left thigh was transformed into a Marble stone, and within a
short while after by a dead Palsy he lost utterly the use of that member. A
Wrastler dreamed that he was in a vessel full of blood, and so deep therein
that scarcely the top of his head could be seen. Galen gathered by this
dream that he had great need of taking some blood from him, by means
whereof he was cured of the plurisie. Others dreamed that they were bathing
themselves in a Bath of hot water. The Physician prognosticated upon this
dream, that the Patient must be freed from this disease by judicatory swimming
which thereon followed, and thereby he won great reputation; whosoever dreameth
that he is pressed with a great burden, there is no doubt but his animal
faculties are oppressed by a great multitude of humors: contrariwise, such as
dream they fly in the air, run, leap, and dance, denotes a light body
exempt from the superaboundance of vicious humors. Such as dream that they
are in dunghills and such like filthy places, they must needs be possessed of
noisome humors, but they to whom it appears that they are conversant in
pleasant, sweet, and delightful places, good humors do abound in them, and
it is a sign of health.

Besides these forenamed dreams, I will not here insert that there are none
but such as are grounded upon natural causes, but on the grace of God,
especially he gives advice to some men to express such things for the
benefit and good of others: as happened to Galen the Physician, who had a man
under his care that had an artery in his ancle bone half cut in sunder,
whereby he lost all his blood before any remedy could be applied to him: he
writes that he was advertised in his sleep that he should cut the artery in
sunder and the ends would retire to each side, and so lock together again,
when he awaked he executed what his dream had represented to him, and by
that means he cured the man. We read likewise of an Angel that appeared in
the form of the goddess Pallas to Antonius (Physician to Augustus) admonishing
him that though Augustus was sick, yet he should not fail to be present in
the battle, which was on the morrow to be given by Brutus and Cassius, and
that he should there abide in his tent, which he would have done, but that the
Physicians persuaded him to the contrary, for it came to pass that the enemies
soldiers won the tents, where questionless they had slain Augustus if he
had been present there; So by this dream he prevented his death, won the
day, and remained sole Monarch of the Roman Empire: under his Reign was borne
the Redeemer of the World. Quintus Curtius declares in the life of Alexander,
that when he maintained his siege before the City of Tire, he being entered for
succor of the Carthaginians, who said they were descended of the Tyrians,
concluded to raise his siege as dispayring ever to surprise it, but in a dream
a Satyr appeared unto him, after whom he followed, as he fled before him
into his Chamber. His Interpreters told him that this was a certain
forewarning to continue his siege for longer days before the City, and that
he should surely take it, which fell out to be true; and this long before had
been foretold by a Prophet who said that a Greek should govern in the Country.

The Scriptures are full of Dreams whereby diverse Princes have been admonished
both for their own and peoples welfare, as Abimelech King of Gerar, who was
possessed of Abraham's wife, supposing she had been his sister, only he was
forewarned sleeping, that he should attempt nothing against her modesty, lest
he incurred the judgment of God, and he obeyed. Another Egyptian King by
Dreams which Joseph interpreted to him whilst he was in prison, found
nevertheless the assistance of God to shun his own ruin, and the death of
his people, by a barrenness in his Kingdom, which should continue for seven
years; after as many years of rest: by reason whereof he made such provision
of grain, that he had sufficient to serve the people during those foretold
seven years; whereas else he had wanted provision for his people. Katherine
de Medicis, Queen of France, and wife to Henry the second, dreamed the very
same day before the said King was wounded to death, that she saw him very
sickly, holding down his head as he walked down the streets of Paris, being
followed by an infinite company of his people that lamented for him: hereupon
she most earnestly entreated him (and as is said) with wringing hands upon her
knees, not to adventure into the rank of Tilters on that day; but he giving
no heed to her words, the last day of the feasting for the marriage of Madam
Margret, sister to Emanuel Phillibert, Duke of Savoy, for her honor; and
turning to break a Lance against a bold and valiant Knight (to wit) the Count
of Montgomery, happened to be wounded: for in the Lances breaking on both
sides, a shiver or Splinter entered by the sight of his Helmet, and struck very
far into his head. The King died soon after of this wound, aged about 40
years, leaving his Kingdom lamenting his loss: we may observe the dream of
this great Princess, and how it happened, whereof doubtless God gave
premonitions by his good Angel, both for her good, and the whole realm of
France; but the King more desirous to follow the vanities of the world, then
the good advertisements of his wife, by his decease the people of France
suffered many calamities. His son Henry 3. three days before he was murdered at
S. Cloa, beheld in a dream all his royal ornaments, to wit, his linen
vesture, Sandals Dalmatium robe, mantle of azure Satin, Crown and Scepter,
bloody and made foul with the feet of religious men, and other people, and
that he himself was angry with the Sexton of the Abbey of S. Dennis; and albeit
all good advice was given him, according to the danger of his dream, stands
securely upon his guard; yet so it fell out as a thing permitted by heaven,
that he could not avoid that fatal chance, but was slain, whatsoever strong
guard was there about him.

Calphienia wife to the adopted father of Caesar, having dreamed that she
beheld Caesar slain and massacred, gave him notice thereof, but he instead of
converting of it to his benefit, despised the dream, and went to the Senate
house, the day following where the dream sorted to woeful effect.

I cannot omit the dream and revelation of Ioane d'Arke, the Virgin that
dreamed, that she her self should be the only means to put Charles the
seventh in possession of his Kingdom. After he had acquainted her father and
mother with her dream, she is brought to the Lord Baud^icate, and habited like
a man, is presented to the King. The matter seemed ridiculous to the King, he
takes upon himself the habit of a Countryman, this Maid being brought into the
Chamber goes to the King, and salutes him with a modest countenance, and
delivered to him the charge which she had received of the God of heaven, and
told him that she should be the means to place the Crown upon his head, and
relieve Orleance that was besieged by the English. The King was persuaded to
give her a Troop of one hundred, and a good horse. She puts her self into a
man's habit, and like a valorous Captain goes toward Orleance, and relieveth
the Town with victuals without resistance. After she was in Orleance, she
sends a Letter to the King of ENGLAND, and his Troops, and wishes them to
depart without shedding any more innocent blood.

Ioane d'Arke a second time relieveth Orleance, and brings in fresh provision,
she makes choice of 1500 men, and enters the Fort of Saint Loope, the virgin in
the foremost of the ranckes, crying Saint Denis, the next day they took two
other Forts, on the third day, the English made the French recoyle, but the
virgin encouraging her men, and marching courageously was shot in the arm;
(tush says she) this is a favor, nothing amazed, she takes the arrow in one
hand and her sword in the other, and enters the Fort, in these three days the
English lost eight thousand men, and the French not one hundred, and as a
remembrance of their victories, the Statues of Charles the seventh and Ioane
d'Arke, are placed upon the Bridge of Orleance, kneeling before a Crucifix.

Charles the seventh is crowned at Rheins all Champaigne yields unto him, and
the King that was in great danger of loosing his Kingdom, is now an absolute
King.

I shall in the last place relate a Dream of a young Gentleman, which of late
happened, the truth of which is fresh in my memory, this Gentleman being
disquieted with the thundering of Pieces, which his Imagination told him was in
the air, and not upon earth, looking toward the heavens, he did conceive that
he saw a great Army ready to encounter with another, and observing the Leaders,
he perceived one to be a tall black man, the other low of stature, the tall
black man ran with his Rapier against the same, and transported thus with
fury, he stumbled and fell, and as he fell diverse arrows were shot, some out
of the North, some out of the South, some out of the West, some out of East, as
if all the four quarters had blown no other blasts, after this appeared
diverse like ghosts, walking with Crosier staffes who seemed to harden and
encourage the Soldiers, yet their arguments could not win them to give battle,
these in the twinkling of an eye lost their pure witness, and showed
themselves in black with Miters falling from their heads, next to these
followed a troop of Shavelings, some carrying Crosses, others praying with
Beads, but on the sudden a pillar of fire appeared, and they vanished, and
all the heavens seemed to be disturbed looking downward he saw a grave old
man sitting in a Chair of State upon the top of a mountain, having a Septer
in his hand, with a Treple Crown on his head, having with him diverse habited
in long roabs and red hats, that seemed to hold the chair, whilst his eye was
busied in the view of them, a thunderbolt fell and cleft the mountain which
swallowed them up, then he seemed to pass through pleasant fields, and the
first he met with was a young Cavalero, the next he met withal was a poor
soldier, now thought the young gallant that he should learn what was the
variance between these troops, but before the gentleman could speak to him,
the soldier made toward him, and like a bold ruffian demanded his purse who
was a little unwilling, yet having no remedy to prevent the taking thereof did
deliver it, and in requital, the soldier said, Come you to hear news? in
brief it is thus, our General being dead our armies were disbanded; and
having uttered the words, vanished, and in his room entered a poor Country
man who was very desirous to learn whether he met with any soldiers that had
driven away his cattle, for he pitied this poor man, but could give him no
comfort in regard his money was taken away from him: the gentleman passing on,
came to a great house that was fortified with bulwarks, trenches and well
manned, and on the side of it was an arm of the Sea, but in regard he could
not give the word he was not admitted: as he passed by he perceived one that
was looking under a tree to take the true height of a Star: falling into
conference with him he told him what a vision he had seen, and would neeeds
know what this black man was that fell from heaven; the Astronomer told him if
he would have a little patience till he had laid his Mathematical Instruments
aside he would show him his full proportion: whereupon drawing forth a small
glass out of a box that expressed such curiosity, as if many Artists had
assembled together to compose it; no sooner was the box opened, but the beauty
of that which was contained therein, made the young Gentleman stand and admire
whether that which his eye beheld, was the work of Art or nature, or both.

Having taken a small ribband which was of a skin color, from the sides of the
box, he drew forth a glass in an Ovall frame, set round with Diamonds and
rubies, the middle thereof was made of Topaz, and so exactly cut, as it
sufficiently expressed the skill of the Lapidary. On one side of the glass he
could perceive this tall man habited like a Prince, on the otherside like a
mourner, and by him an executioner, with this inscription over his head in
great letters (worser ruled not traitors head must off) now Sir said the
Astronomer cast up each Letter of this inscription, and you shall find out his
name and title, the which he presently and readily undertook, by transplacing
the Letters, and found it to be Sir Thomas Wentworth Lord Strafford: It was no
small wonder to him, to see that his Lordships name and title should so truly
divine his nature and fortune, no sooner had this astronomer showed this
glass, but he vanished, and making a horrible noise at his departure, the
Gentleman awaked, and sell again into a sweet slumber, and soon after gave
this Relation to diverse.

I am of opinion with Volaterans, that many times a person going to his rest,
not cloyed with bad affections, nor superfluity of food; but being virtuously
minded, and healthfully disposed, his soul in sleeping may foresee things to
come* for the soul, which of it self is divine and celestial, being not
offended with any evil cogitations, or over-bad meats, is at free liberty, and
best performs her actions when the body sleeps, not being busied with any
other matters.

FINIS.

