DIVINE PHYSIC FOR Devout Souls: OR, Four Serious Words to the most Grave and
Solid Christians, that Scruple at The Book of COMMON PRAYER. VIZ. I. To serve
God by a Liturgy, is part of the public worship of God. II. The forms of the
general part of the Liturgy, used in the Church of England, compared with
such forms as we find in Scripture. III. An help to scrupulous Consciences
touching some things most excepted against in the other parts of the Rubric
appointed to be used on particular occasions. IIII. We ought not to refuse the
Rubric or Common Prayer because it is imposed by Authority from men, but
therefore to use it.
BY A Moderate Son of the Church.

LONDON, Printed for R: I: and are to be sold by Sam: Speed at the
Printing-presse in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

DIVINE PHYSIC FOR Devout Souls: OR, Four serious words to the most grave and
solid Christians, that scruple at the Book of Common Prayer.
I. To serve God by a Liturgy, is part of the Public Worship of God.
A Liturgy is Liturgia, a Public Service, (...), est opus facere publicuns,
vel public, (...), a form of Public or Common Prayer; Divine Service. 2 Cor.
9. 12.

(...), is to minister and execute a public work, service, or office, Acts 13.
1. 2. when Barnabas and Simeon, and other Teachers were in the Church at
Antioch, they ministered to the Lord, (...), they performed the Public Service.

Leigh in his Critica Sacra (whom I think, none that know him will deny him
zealous enough to the Presbytery) brings in Causabon, page 157. who for Greek
Learning has scarce his equal in this our age, saying, Exercitat, 16. cap. 41.
(...) has been used Ecclesiastically, for whatsoever religious ministration
(even for sole parying) when there is no occasion of Sacrifice, which seems to
be two things, Heb. 10. 11. Every Priest stands daily, ministering and
offering oftentimes the same Sacrifices.

1 Ministering, (...) performing the work of the Liturgy, or public Service.

2 Offering Sacrifices, (...), concerning which, Erasmus affirms, that by
sacrificing is meant the using of their gifts to Gods glory, and the salvation
of the Church, in Prophesying and teaching the Doctrine of the Gospel,
Cartwright on Rhem. Test.

I do not speak of the Liturgy to be used by the Magistrate in the forms of
Civil Government, Romans 13. 6. and other places; nor of the forms of words
used by the Angels in their ministration, (which surely can be no sin for us,
if commanded, to use in ours,) Luke 2. 13, 14.

But this I say, that Saint Paul as a Minister of the Gospel, did perform his
Liturgy-work, Romans 15. 6. as well as his Preaching work, verse. 16. and exhorts
Timothy, and in him all Christ's Ministers in the public Worship of God, first
to use a Liturgy, or Prayer in common, for all men, as a thing that is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.

II. The Forms of the general part of the Liturgy used in the Church of
England, compared with such Forms as we find in Scripture.
1 THe beginning of the Book of Common Prayer is, First, to read one of several
places of Scripture there asserted, taken out of the Word of God.

2 The next thing is an Exhortation to stir up the Congregation to Prayer,
which Christ did to his own Apostles when he went to Prayer in the Garden, Luke
22. 40 and 46. thus David stirred up the people by Arguments, and then went to
prayer, Psalm. 106. and much might be said more for this, but I think none will
deny it, that know any thing of God.

3 The next thing is, a form of Confession of Sins, and I shall give you some
other forms in Scripture, that for the matter of them are the like.

One Form of Confession is, the thirty ninth Psalm, which was a form appointed
by God himself, to be read in the Church of God; That it is a Confession of
Sins is plain, by the reading of it, and that it was a Form appointed by God,
to be used in the Church, I prove by the title of it, which is the very Word
of God. and in the Original in the Hebrew Bible, as well as the body of the
Psalm, To the chief Musician, even to Jeduthun, (...) Jeduthun was one of the
Ministers of the Church of God, appointed to minister his part of the Liturgy,
or Public Service of God, 1 Chronicles. 25. 1. and verse. 6. and this Psalm was a
Form appointed to be used by him in the Church of God at the public
Ordinances.

Another Form of a Confession we find that Ezra used, Ezra 9. 6. to the end of
the Chapter, and the like Dan. 9. at the beginning, and several others in
Scripture.

4 Then follows the Declaration of Gods Mercy and Grace, in the absolving of
penitent Sinners, by the form of an Absolution to be read by the Minister,
which has a good warrant, if we consider the like form used in the Church of
God by the sons of Korah, appointed thereto by the Lord, Psalm. 84. by the title
of which it appears, that they did use it as part of their Liturgy, (...) A
Psalm for the sons of Korah, who were Ministers appointed to minister their
parts of the Liturgy of the public Worship of God, 2 Chronicles. 9. 19. and this
eighty fourth Psalm does highly exalt God for his mercy and love to penitent
Sinners that cry after him, make him their strength, and trust in him.

5 The Lords Prayer was given by Christ himself, teaching them by his own
unerring lips to use that form, Matthew. 6. Luke 11.

6 There are in the Liturgy many short Prayers, and Collects for several
things, and touching several estates and conditions of people; and the like we
find in the Scriptures of many short prayers that have been used in the Church
of God, and warranted by the Lord, Nehem. 11. 17. several Ministers were
appointed to their parts of the public prayers, so, Acts 4. 24. to verse. 31.
is set down an express form of a short prayer used by the Church of Christ, and
the Lord gave a clear testimony of hearing their prayer. So also the Apostles
had a short form of Prayer used for those that they laid their hands on, that
they might receive the Holy Ghost, Acts 6. 6. and 8. 15. And so again we find
a form of a short Collect used by the Prophet Habbakkuk, Chap. 3. and the
Apostle St. Paul exhorts expressly, Ephesians. 4. 6. In every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.

As a Caution to admonish all men to take heed of mocking, or scorning at the
short prayers in the Liturgy, I shall here insert a notable example of a
lamentable Judgment of God upon one John Apowel, mentioned by Dr. Beard, and
Dr. Tailor, in their Book of the Theater of Gods Judgments, p. 147. out of the
Acts and Monuments, p. 2103.

John Apowel, hearing one Master Malden reading some of those short prayers in
the Liturgy, mocked him with contrary jeers, and flouting terms as he went on;
and when Mr. Malden was saying, Lord have mercy upon us, etc. Apowel in his
scoffing was terribly affrighted by the Devil, who appeared to him, and his
hair stared upright on his head, and the next day he grew worse, and in great
horror cried out night and day, The Devil, the Devil, O the Devil of Hell, now
the Devil of Hell, there he is.

7 Glory be to the Father, etc. And praise the Lord, and after prayer to say,
Amen. These have good warrant from the Scriptures, where we find the like
expressions, Hallelujah, praise the Lord is often in the Psalms, Psalm. 41. the
last verse, this form is set down, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from
everlasting, and to everlasting, Amen, and Amen; and this was a Psalm appointed
of God to be used in public by the Minister of God, as appears by the title of
it. And to the same purpose is the conclusion of Psalm. 82. and so again the
conclusion of Psam. 89. used by Ethan in the public Congregation, and Psalm.
106. the last verse, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from ever lasting to
everlasting, and let all the people say Amen, praise the Lord.

8 The Hymn to be used before the Psalms of the day, is that very form which is
the 95 Psalm; and the Psalms of the day daily to be read, are the Psalms of
David, in order, morning and evening, until the whole book be gone through,
once every month.

9 The Lessons (except a very few) are all out of the Bible, the first Lesson
out of the old Testament, and the second out of the new, every day, as the
Priests under the Law read in the order of their course, out of the old
Testament Luke 1. 8.

10 That excellent song of St. Ambrose called Te Deum is highly approved of by
almost all Churches, and it bears much resemblance to the 1 Psalm, and the 92
Psalm, entitled a song for the Sabbath day, joined both together; And the
Minister has choice either to say that, or Benedicite, which is extracted from
Psalm. 136. and Psalm. 148. for the morning service, and for the evening service,
there is liberty or choice for the Minister after the first Lesson, either to
say the Magnificat taken out of the 1. Chap. of St. Lukes gospel, verse. 46,
etc. or the 98 Psalm. at length, both which are forms recorded in Scripture.

11 After the second Lesson is to be said the song of Zacharias the Priest,
taken out of St. Luke the 1 Chap. beginning at verse 68. etc. or the 100 Psalm
at length, for the morning: And the song of Simeon, taken out of St Luke Chap.
2. verse 29. etc. or the 67. Psalm at length, for the evening, all which are
forms expressly taken out of the holy Scriptures.

12 The Creed, or profession of faith to be made in the Church of God, is a
clear Christian duty (which is excellently contracted in each of the Creeds, in
our English Liturgy, that called the Apostles Creed, and the Nicen Creed, and
Athanasius Creed.) To satisfy any soul that would be further informed herein,
let them read, Romans 10. 9, 10. 1 John 4. 2. Deuteronomy. 26. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Heb.
10. 23. Luke 9. 26. And there is scarce a Church in the world, but owns some
form of profession of Faith, and there are very few Christian Churches but do
own the Creeds in our Rubric.

13 Now for the Letany so much scrupled (by many) by reason of the often
repetitions therein, of the same thing; (for as for the matter of what is
prayed for; I think all sober men will say, that it is not inferior to any
prayer that was ever made by mere man. Therefore touching the same thing often
to be repeated in saying of it) this I can say, that the like is to be found in
Gods holy Word. Such like repetitions of the same words we find, Psalm. 130.
the whole Psalm, yea our blessed Savior Christ himself, when he had prayed in
the Garden in his bloody Agony, Mark 14. Chap. He prayed, what his words were
are set down, verses 35, 36. who afterward repeated the same words again, as
appears, verse 39. And the poor Publican that only said, God be merciful to
me a sinner, and smote on his breast, repeating that, was Justified before
God, Luk 18. 13, 14. And I appeal to any soul that has had near communion with
God in secret prayer, if in the breathings of his soul, in which he has had
the highest raptures, and been most earnest with God; he has not often made
repetitions of his most hearty groans, and desires to God in the same words,
for pardon of sin, for Grace, for a clearer manifestation of his presence; Oh!
with what affection have groans been from the soul, crying, mercy Lord, mercy,
mercy, Lord be merciful to my poor soul, grace Lord, sanctify my soul by thy
grace; help Lord, help, some dram of grace, some discovery of thy self to my
poor soul.

14 We are to pray for the Kings Majesty and the Royal Family, and for his
Majesty's Council, and for the Bishops, and for all in Authority, under his
Majesty; which is a clear duty, to which we are exhorted by the word of God,
and directions given therein 1 Timothy 2. 2. (St. Paul exhorts, that prayer be
made) for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

15 The ten Commandments, are the writings of Gods own hand, containing the
whole moral Law, Exodus 20. And the Lord not only there, but often in other
places of Scripture gives a great charge for the reading of them.

16 The Epistles and Gospels appointed by the Rubric are taken out of the
Bible, and each of them suited to the season and time for which it is directed
to be read.

17 The Blessing to be given at the dismission of the Congregation, is of
Divine authority from the Word, in which we may find both command and
example, and a form also not much unlike that used in our Liturgy for the
substance of it, only that was for the Church before the coming of Christ, and
we live in the times after the coming of Christ; a Form was commanded by Moses
from God, Numb. 6. 23, 24, 25, 26. On this wise ye shall bless the children of
Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his
face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And examples we have of that
practice continued in the Church, by the Prophets and Ministers of the Lord,
confessed by David, Psalm. 118. 26 We have blessed you out of the house of the
Lord.

III. An help to scrupulous Consciences, touching some things most excepted
against in the other parts of the Rubric appointed to be used on particular
occasions.
1 TOuching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, There are chiefly two things
scrupled at by some.

1 That (as some object) all that come, yea the ignorant and scandalous, are
admitted to the Lords Table, contrary to Jer. 15. 19. and 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 2
Cor. 8. 5. which is a false charge upon the Rubric, and the Discipline of the
Church, for by the Canons of the Church, none are to be admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper until they be instructed in the Principles of
Religion, and confirmed by the laying on of the hands of the Bishop; and every
Minister that has Cure and Charge of Souls, is to take especial care that none
be presented to the Bishop to be confirmed, but such as can render an account
of their faith, Canon 61. Anno Dom. 1604. and touching such as are scandalous,
the Rubric directs expressly in the Preface to the Holy Communion. That if any
be a notorious Evil-liver, so that the Congregation by him is offended, or have
done any wrong to his Neighbor by word or deed, the Curate having knowledge
thereof is to admonish him, in no wise to presume to come to the Lords Table,
until he have openly declared himself to have truly repented, and amended his
former naughty life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied. And Christ
himself teaches every individual Member how to carry himself toward an
offending Brother, Mat. 18. 15. 16, 17.

2 Another scruple by some is, about Kneeling at the Lords Table, because it is
said, Christ sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him, Luke 22. 14. whereas
neither Sitting nor Kneeling is the essential part of the Sacrament, as they
are not the essential part of Prayer, but for decency and order, which ought to
be observed in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 40. we find prayer sometimes used
kneeling, as Dan. 6. 10. He kneeled upon his knees three times a day and
prayed; and we find Prayer sometimes used sitting, Nehem. 1. 4. I sat down --
and prayed before the God of heaven; and as it is hard to determine exactly the
posture of Christ's Body in his Agony in the Garden, which Saint Luke calls
Kneeling, Luke 22. 41. He kneeled down and prayed; and Saint Mark calls falling
on the ground, Mark 14. 35. He fell on the ground and prayed (though most
probably it was a falling down on his knees on the ground) so it is hard to
determine exactly what that posture was, which the Disciples were in, when
Christ delivered to them the Sacrament; for though it be said, Luke 22. 14. He
sat down and the twelve Apostles with him, yet Saint John says, that at that
time, John 13. 23. There was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his Disciples; but
kneeling being by an Ordinance of the Authority of this Land commanded at the
Lords Table, it is decent for us to submit to that Ordinance, and it is our
duty to conform thereunto, 1 Pet. 2. 13.

2 Touching the Sacrament of Baptism, two things are chiefly scrupled about it.

1 Some do scruple at the Baptizing of Infants as persons not fit subjects (in
their sense) for Baptism, though they be the Children of believing Parents,
born within the pale of the Church; but being the Children of Believers, they
have a right to be Baptized; which I prove by several testimonies and reasons.

1 They are the Holy Seed, as they are the natural Children of the people of
God, Ezra 9. 2. And if the root be holy, so are the branches, Romans 11. 16. if
the father be a baptized person, and continue in the Church, so the children
are to be baptized; for the children of believers (of Christian Parents) have
an interest in the Covenant of Grace, being children of the Covenant Acts 3.
25. The seal of the Covenant of Grace (the sanctifying seal whereby they are
dedicated to God) belongs to them by Christ, for whether is greater, the gift,
or the Altar that sanctifies the gift, Matthew. 23. 19. they being the children
of believing Parents, are through Christ to be Consecrated as ((...)) holy
things, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and to have a right to the clensing Ordinance, for what
God has cleansed, none should dare to call unclean, Acts 10. 15.

2 The Children of Gods People had right under the Law to Gods seal of the
Covenant of Grace in Circumcision, Genesis 17. 10, 11, 12. therefore much more
have they right now under the Gospel, to Gods seal of the Covenant of Grace in
Baptism, by which all the privileges of Gods People are much enlarged, and
made more glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8.

3 It is against Gospel light, that those that are judged to have received the
Holy Ghost should be deprived of Water Baptism, Acts 10. 47. of which thing
there is as good testimony in behalf of Infants, as for men of riper years,
Jer. 1. 5. Luke 1. 15.

4 The very design of the Ordinance of Baptism is, to declare the person
baptized to be a disciple to Christ, Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach
((...)) Disciple all Nations, Baptising them, declare them to be Disciples by
Baptising them. And Infants who were Circumcised at eight days old were
declared to be Disciples, Acts 15. 10. therefore Infants have right to water
Baptism.

5 Those that are to be judged believers, ought to be baptized. Believers are
fit subjects, for baptism. Acts 8. 37.

I prove them believers plainly thus.

1 They are such as the Kingdom of God does belong to, Mark. 10. 14. Luke 18.
16. John 3. 5. which cannot be, were they not believers, for unbeleevers are to
be cut off from the Kingdom of God, Luke 12. 46.

2 They have hope in God, even while they are sucking at their mothers breasts
in their infancy Psalm. 22. 9. which none can have but believers, for Heb. 11.
1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for.

3 Christ himself does with his own unerring lips declare them to be
believers, Mat. 18. 6.

These privileges are of Gods free grace vouchsafed to them, Romans 11. 28. as
touching the Election they are beloved for the Fathers sake, (...) for their
Fathers sakes.

6 There is command in Scripture for Children as well as others to be
baptized, because the promise reaches to them with the Parents, Acts 2. 38, 39.

7 There is examples of Baptising Infants as well as others, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2.
and other places.

2 Others do scruple the Cross in Baptism, whereas the very Ordinance it self
baptizeth the person into the Cross or death of Christ; Romans 6. 3. And for the
making of the sign of the Cross with the finger, on the forehead of the person
Baptized; It is declared in the 30 Canon Anno Dom. 1604. That the Church of
England since the abolishing of Popery, has ever held and taught, and so does
still hold and teach, that the sign of the Cross used in Baptism, is no part
of the substance of the Sacrament. For when the Minister, dipping the Infant in
water, or laying water upon the face of it, (as the manner is) has pronounced
these words, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, the Infant is fully and perfectly Baptized. So as the sign of
the Cross being afterward used, does neither add any thing to the virtue or
perfection of Baptism, nor being omitted, does detract any thing from the
effect or substance of it.

3 Touching Confirmation by laying on of the hands of the Bishops. However it
be a scruple to some, yet we find it an Ordinance used to persons after
Baptism in the Apostles time, Acts 8. 17. Acts 19. 6. and it is reckoned up to
be one of the foundation principles of Church discipline Hell. 6. 1, 2.

4 Touching the Catechism appointed by the Rubric to be taught, some scruples
are made about some things in it.

1 That it should be said, that by Baptism a Child is made a member of Christ,
a Child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven; By which is meant
only in an outward relation, as all the Circumsised Jews were the people of
God. Thus by Water Baptism, we are made outwardly in our bodies mystical
Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15. Know ye not that your bodies are the Members
of Christ, and so also we are by an outward right, made the Children of God, 1
John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God; But it does not yet appear
what we shall be, by outward profession in appearance they were so, but what
they were inwardly and spiritually, that appears not to men certainly in this
world; And so again, By water Baptism we are made inheritors (by an outward
right) of the Kingdom of God, that is to say, of the Church of Christ, Colos.
1. 13. Who has redeemed us out of Darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son. God does it by a visible separation of us from the
Heathen, and Kingdom of Satan, by Water Baptism, as the Lord promised Ezekiel.
36. 24, 25. I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all
Countries, and will bring you into your own Land. i.e. into the pale of the
Church by Water Baptism, Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye
shall be clean.

2. The next scruple is, about the engagement of the Godfathers and
Godmothers, who do promise and vow those things, in the childs name, which
are to be promised in Baptism; to understand which, it is to be considered: 1.
That the Childs right to Baptism is from the Parent. 2. The people of God have
right to come before the Lord, and enter into Covenant with him for themselves,
and Children (yea, for the poor ignorant sucking infant) by virtue of the
Covenant of Grace through Jesus Christ, as plainly appears by these Scriptures,
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. and Deuteronomy. 31. 12 13. And 3. The Parents entering into
a Covenant with God for their Children, it is but right it should be
established by two or three witnesses, Mat. 18. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 1. 4 Some do
scruple that part of the Creed, where it is said of Christ, He descended into
Hell, because when Christ dyed his Body was buried in the Sepulcher, and his
Soul was that day with God the Father presently in Paradise; both which is
confessed, yet is that also true, that Christ descended into hell, not that he
descended into the Papists feigned Purgatory; but he descended into (...), the
estate of the dead, so the word signifies, in his Human nature; and he
descended into Hell, by his Divine Power, accomplishing the effect, and triumph
of his Death over Hell, and he descended into Hell by his terror of soul in
the Garden, and on the Cross, and he descended into (...) the Grave, so it is
frequently rendered, by his Soul from Heaven to his Body to be coupled again
with it, to give it life, and raise it up again from the dead.

5 Touching Matrimony, the greatest scruple that is made in the forms thereof,
is about the Man's saying to the Woman, With my body I thee worship, which is no
more but te colo, I embrace thee, (and so it is in the Latin Service) as if a
man should say, With this Ring I thee wed, with my body I thee embrace, and
with all my worldly goods I thee endow.

6 The chiefest thing scrupled in the Visitation of the Sick, is, about the
Absolution, because it is said to the penitent believing sick Person, when the
Minister judges him to be such a one; By his authority (speaking of Christ)
committed unto me, I absolve thee from all thy Sins, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; but this is done only declaratively and
with a Proviso provided that he be such a one as is expressed in the Prayer
immediately going before these words, on which they have a dependence, (viz.)
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to absolve all Sinners
which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee all
thine offenses; and upon this ground if the like Person be such a one, the
Minister does declare, By the Authority committed to him, he does absolve him.

7 Touching the burial of the Dead, some do scruple, that at the interring of
every Corpse it is said, We commit his body to the ground, earth to earth,
ashes to ashes, dust to dust, in sure and certain hope of resurrection to
eternal life; whereas none can have such sure and certain hope touching any;
and some have lived so profainly, and even to the last have not given any
testimony satisfactory of their repentance, so that there is little hope of
their interest in eternal life at all. But this scruple arises from a mistake,
for it is not spoken of the body of the deceased particularly, but of the
bodies of the Congregation, that is to say of the faithful; as we say, Our
Father, when there are sometimes many unbeleevers and carnal men in the
Congregation. And it is not said in sure and certain hope of his Resurrection
to eternal life, but indefinitely, in sure and certain hope of resurrection to
eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ (i.e.) to those that have an
interest in our Lord Jesus Christ, which rather is to be referred to the
faithful, than to the present interred Corpse, except he be one of that number,
even such a one concerning whom the Minister then declares, That Christ shall
change our vile bodies (not his Body, except he be one of that number) that it
may be like unto his glorious body.

8 Touching the Thanksgiving of Women after Childbirth, the greatest scruple
is about that part of it where it is said, The Sun shall not burn thee by day,
nor the Moon by night, supposing that not to concern the Woman to whom it is
said; but it is Scripture, and it cannot be denied but that the rest of the
Psalm is very suitable; why then should this be scrupled, seeing it is part of
the same, for the whole is the one hundred twenty first Psalm, which is all
appointed to be read, and that which God has put together in his holy Word,
let no man think much that the Church does not put asunder. And besides, these
very words scrupled are a precious Promise for the Woman to lay hold on, and
for all that believe, for it is made to every faithful soul, That neither the
Sun of Prosperity shall annoy them with scorching heat of presumption by day,
nor the Moon of Adversity, hurt them with the cold vapors of despair by night:
it is (in a word) Gods promise of protection to them night and day.

9 Touching the Commination of the Curses to be read by the Minister, and the
Peoples saying, Amen, much scrupled by some, me thinks when they read, that God
did expressly command the like in the Scripture to be done, by his own peculiar
people, we should all be satisfied in it. Now that God did so, is plain by the
twenty seventh Chapter of Deutrenomy.

IV. We ought not to refuse the Rubric or Common Prayer, because it is
imposed by Authority from man, but therefore to use it.
SOme pretend that they cannot in conscience use the Common Prayer, because it
is imposed by a Command, which is a very bad Principle, for if Authority
command that which is not sin, it is sin not to obey that which is commanded,
therefore says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

FINIS.
Charles R.

Our Will and Command is, and We do hereby authorize you forthwith to Print,
Publish, and disperse, a Certain Book, Entitled, A Collection of the
Petitions of diverse Counties of this Our Kingdom, Subscribed by the Gentry,
Ministers, and Freeholders of those Counties, on behalf of Episcopacy, the
Liturgy, and Church Government, and for the establishing Our Rights, and the
Liberty of the Subject. And for so doing, this shall be your Warrant.

Given at Our Court at York, the 20th. of May, 1642.

