A DISCOVERY Of many, great, and Bloody ROBERIES: COMMITTED OF LATE BY
DISSOLVTE AND Evil affected TROOPERS.

Jn several places of this Kingdom, but chiefly about the City of London.

Since the late disbanding of the Army in the North.

With a Relation of the Times, Places, and Persons, on on whom these Roberies
were committed.

WHEREIN Is inserted the Description of a bloody Combat, fought between 9
Troopers and 6 Butchers, meeting on the Highway, and what ensued. With diverse
other Outrages, and Abuses, acted by them within this City.

Printed at London for John Thomas, 1641.

A Relation of diverse Robberies of late committed by diverse ill-affected
Troopers, both in the Country, and near the City of London.
Joyful news it is to all good men, that a general peace is concluded
between England and Scotland, warlike weapons are laid aside, and each embrace
the other in amity and unity; which news cannot be more joyful then
profitable, generally I mean. But some particular wrongs and injuries are acted
by those, whose thoughts are bent upon nothing but mischief, their actions
being governed by the malice of the Devil, some I say, prove themselves Rebels
to peace, they having no foreign Nation to make known their valor, or fight
against. They to keep themselves in action, most basely pillage their own
Countrymen; as if they had left them only to gather goods, and to provide
means, against their coming home again, which proclaims them Traitors to
virtue and goodness: and if they look not to it speedily, it will be their
own ruin.

Complaints fly abroad every where, no man almost dares trust himself to the
high ways, for fear lest he lose his purse, or his life, which is dearer. I
have some such actions to declare, as will cause some laughter, but more sorrow.

The Robery which was said to be committed in the North, Knowles being the
Ringleader, I omit, it being divulged already, although not perfectly, but as
I understand, the Author, or Poet, has foolishly recanted his Relation, with a
tongue thou best: but politic Tailor is resolved to prove his recantation more
false then his relation: he had better bin then in his fool^ Coat, acting
Iack-pudding, then to have been partaker in that robbery. But I leave him, and
proceed to my own relation, of some roberies, lately committed by Troopers
since their disbanding.

At Kingstone upon Hull 5 Troopers met with 7 Clothiers, whose purses were
cramb'd with such Angels, as they adored, the troopers did set upon them with
their Pistols charged in one hand, and their swords ready drawn in the other:
the Clothiers were not so well armed; wherefore for safeguard of their lives,
they yielded their purses, the sum of all which money came to about 400
pounds, which weight of money made the troopers light-hearted: but it continued
not long, for 5 of the Clothiers kept aloof off, marking whither they would
go, whilst the two went for Pistols; which when they had got, they being well
horsed, pursued the troopers, and overtooke them, which the troopers
perceiving, were amazed: because not long before for joy of their purchase,
they had discharged their Pistols, wheresore without any resistance, they
returned the Clothiers their moneys again, who gave them ten pound a man for
their horses, and so they departed.

At Barwick, one John Hawkins a trooper, and an Irish man met with 6 Maids, and
robbed them all? but of what, their Maidenheads.

In Cambridgeshire 14 Troopers traveling from Yorkshire, made a resolution to
receive pay of the next company they met withal, which were a company of
Farmers coming from Cambridge, whom they gagged, lest they should cry out,
they took their moneys and clothes, bound them hand and foot, and then being
naked, not having so much as a shirt on, they tied them to trees, and so left
them, and as yet cannot be found out, the loss of the money grieved the
Farmers not so much, as the cold lodging they had that night.

How nine troopers set upon six butchers.
Six butchers traveling toward the North to buy cattle, one of them said,
what if a company of Troopers should now meet with us? the rest answered, they
cared not if they did, they had not rid above one mile further, but 9 Troopers
met with them indeed, who told the Butchers they must have some money, they
answered, they must get it first, whereupon the Troopers rid at them with their
swords drawn, the butchers they resisted them very valiantly, insomuch that
the troopers retreated, whereupon the butchers took courage, and renewed their
blows, the Troopers thought they had set upon 6 Devils, they were so
bastinadoed by them, Men were wounded on both sides: but the butchers so well
behaved themselves, that the troops were forced to trust to the swiftness of
their horses, which one stout butcher perceiving, being vexed they would fight
no more, with all his might he threw his sword at a troopers horses legs and
almost cut of one off his legs, nor was he contented then, being so much moved,
but a lighting from his horse, and snatching up his sword again, he pursued
them, and cut and mangled three of them so much, that they fell from their
horses, is men being void of breath, the other 6 rid into the wood, or else he
vowed (by the help of God) to have done the like for them all, his name was
Thomas Ashley: who although he were in many places wounded, he regarded it not,
but went forward, until they all came to their Journeyes end, and then were
their wounds dressed: and since, I hear well recovered.

Of a Coach that was robbed near Islington.
The Troopers have not all reformed themselves since they came from the North,
although some few have; for some of them play their prancks now in and about
London: for nigh the Cake-house toward Islington, it being a dark night,
fourteen troopers met a Coach, in which were 3 or 4 Gentlewomen, and a
gentleman, having bin at a wedding, they knocked the Coachman out of the box,
and then got up to the Coach to the Gentlewomen, and took all their money out
of their pockets, their rings from their fingers, their handkerchers from their
necks, their hats from their heads, and from each of them their best
petticoates, and from the Gentleman a plush cloak, a golden belt and Rapier,
and took care withal that he carried not home too much money with him, they
took from them in all, as much as came to sixscore pounds, and then bid the
Coachman got up into his box again.

Another coach coming from Warford to London, wherein was a Countess, and some
other Ladies, was stayed in the highway before the Sun was set, by 3 troopers,
who pillaged, and took all their money, rings, and Jewels that were about them,
and let them go.

A Gentleman that lived in Buckingham shire, coming to London late at night,
met a company of troopers near Islington; who set upon him, and took his money
being in a cloak bag behind him, wherein was a 100 pounds, and they took his
horse also from him, which he valued at 30 pounds.

A Captain living in Covent Garden, was lately robbed of 14 l. by 8 troopers,
near the corner of Hide-park, who I hear since are taken, and lie now in the
Gate House.

At the corner of Hide-park since, was a Ladies coach robbed by a company of
troopers, who took what money and rings they had about them.

One Master Hackney at the Mearemaid in Cheapside, and two others, coming
lately from Islington, being after day light was shutting met 4 or 5 troopers,
who took their cloaks and hats, and what moneys they found about them.

One Mr. Meredith being on Sunday night the 3 of October in Vhite-crosse
street, going to his lodging at Bun-hill, near to the six Windmils, met with
3 fellows in bufcoats, who seeing of him, bid him stand, putting their rapiers
to his throat, at that time he had received 11 pounds for rent, which they bid
him deliver, or else he should lose his life, which he did according to their
demand, with which they were not contented, but took also his cloak, and
thirty shillings more; which he had in another purse: and also his watch, and
beat him very much, which caused him to go back to the watch, who presently
pursued them: three they took upon suspicion; but as yet they are not sure
they are the thieves.

Upon monday night being the fourth of October, seven Troopers met with Sir
Robert Mansfield beyond Kentstreet in Southwark and set upon him and his men;
and over-comming them, took away fourteen pounds: it being noysed abroad, they
were hard pursued: they seeing, resolutely drew their swords; which one goodman
Dyar perceiving, rusht in amongst them, whom they wounded in the arm and hand:
notwithstanding the thieves fled and got away, and are not yet to be heard of.

Many more noteable robberies have bin put upon troopers, of all which I dare
not, nor cannot say they are guilty, but one more remarkable Exploit I have to
relate.

A Company of them gathered themselves near Clarkenwell, one of which had got
a Constables staff, the rest Halberts, like watchmen, and when they met with
any, they must come before the Constable, and he must examine them; and after
examination, they must by no means, if they had cloaks, carry them away with
them, or money in their pockets. The Constable (because the times were
dangerous, and many Knaves abroad) must keep it for them, faining a place
where in the morning they should enquire for them; but as yet the Constables
house could never be found. Very many this Year have been so cheated. But now
the watch is broke up, some of the Bill-men being at this time, as is reported,
in the white Lion Prison, the Constable is fled, but J hope shortly that he and
all his Accomplices, if they leave not these lewd courses, the penalty of the law
will leave them at the Gallows, where I shall leave them.

FINIS.

