A DISPUTE BETWIXT AN ATHEIST AND A CHRISTIAN: THE ATHEIST being a Flemming,
The CHRISTIAN an Englishman.

Published according to Order.



London, Printed, 1646.

TO THE READER.
THe subject being the height of Gods workmanship, might boldly claim
entertainment from the clearest speculation, were it here answerably figurated,
and though my dear affection to my Countrymen persuades me to run the hazard
of their censures, rather then omit an opportunity to tell them their errors,
yet that could not persuade its young limbs to expose it self to the Press,
but a friend discovering such papers by me, told me, with or against my will he
would publish them: and seeing no remedy, I thought to excuse it in its
imperfections, it being but in its natural color, writ and conceived in as
short a time as such a Discourse could well be uttered: yet if there be a
mistake it is but in a name and not in the dependence on it: But this apology is
to the civil interpreter, and not to such Pragmaticks as shall read it, to
take occasion to show their little wits in abusing it and the Author: But if
its good fortune carry it into the hands of a favorable constructor, to him I
shall reckon my self obliged in the condition of an humble servant.

G.G.

P. 5. l. 22. here r. there p. 8. l 18. herefore r. therefore p. 9. l. 12. is
r. in p. 9. l. last Menews r. Menarcs p. 24. l. 18. futra r. foutra p. 28. l.
1. ten r. 5. p. 31. l. 10. Capland r. Lapland p. 33. l. 3. Aukia r. Aulia p.
37. l 5. celerines r. selicities p. 41. l. 18. Ely r. Elroy p. 42. l. 5. puffed
r. parted l. 16. Motes r. Moses l. 18. Rabines r. Rabbis.

Errata.
Page 1. line 13. for you r. yours, p. 3. l. 1. for and r. or p. 9. l 12. there
is r. in, p. 21. l. 6. creatures r. Cheators, p. 14. l. 2. of masters, r.
Mistresses, p. 31. l. 18. of Marsela r. Messina, p 37. l. 5. sign r. fire, and
l. 9. our r. on, p. 38. l. 6. for the r. their, p. 40. l. 16. as hears r.
asures, p. 45. l 18. We r. so, p. 49. l. 2. of have r. leave, p. 50. l. 3. of
vain r. various, p. 50. l. 10. of proportion l. appurtenance.

A DISPUTE betwixt an Atheist and a Christian: The Atheist being a Flemming:
the Christian an Englishman.
Christian. BEing in company at an Ordinary with one, whom by his discourse I
gathered to be some Ethnic, or Atheist: I could not but require from him his
faith and the title of his Religion a And notwithstanding the unusualnesse of
that custom, I (with some Ceremony for my boldness) entreated him to permit
me a question.


Atheist. Any that you will ask, and is in my power to resolve, shall be
answered.


C. Then let me entreat you to satisfy me in the principles of your Faith,
and Tenants in your Religion.


A. That shall I with all my heart: though likely not agreeable unto you.


C. I pray let me hear them: and though they are not mine they may be made so
by such reasons as are beyond my answer: For indeed I look on my Tenants as
well with the eye of Reason as of Faith.


A. Then I will with the more willingness impart unto you my Creed, which I
conceive to be grounded on natural Philosophy.


C. I shall be glad to hear what they are, and the rather, because you will
mayntain them by natural Philosophy: which I conceive to signify true and
substantial reason: For I have no artificial to answer by.


A. Truly I have spent the greatest part of my time amongst the learned; and in
particular among those men accounted the wisest of England, (of which Country I
conceive you to be) and do find a correspondency in them with me in the most
of my tenants, which I can sum up into this for your answer: that I do
believe in an universal Providence that governs the things as well of the
greater as of this inferior Globe: and of the Souls eternity: and after this
life in a place of unspeakable felicity. And indeed I am not afraid of the
gnashing ing of the teeth which is spoken shall happen to the bad after this
life in the old law, nor yet of the trouble of the conscience which in the new
Law is supposed shall be to those of the same damnable condition: And indeed I
rather think Moses to be inspired with a wit above the rest of the Egyptians
bond men then with a spirit.


C. Marry I am sorry to see a man of so much gravity as you are, and a
pretender to so much learning, to have so little true knowledge: But in truth I
rather pity then am enraged at the opinion you have of the Father alone, and
not of the Christian, Jewish, and Mahumetan Religion: For as the old Law was
the foundation of the new, so is the new the Quarry from whence all Christians
take the Material that build their several Tabernacles: and also all the
Mahumetan Sects draw from both new, and old so that the old being the
foundation of the new, it must follow, that Moses was the ground of them both:
And so the Jews to this day adore him as the only instrument (under God) of all
their temporal and spiritual comforts. And do you think, that amongst so many
several Nations, as are Professors in the one, or the other, of them (there is
scarcely a Prince or people to be found but looks for his souls comfort (which
you confess to be to Eternity (but by Moses, Christ, or Mahumet) that there
should not be found men of as searching an understanding as you, and some such
pretenders to knowledge as you are? Yes; be confident that the very antiquities
of these beliefs are (if there were nothing else) sufficient to prove the truth
of them, and the divine power of Moses, whom you will have only wise, in a
natural way, and not in a divine, then there rest of the Princes of Israel.


A. The Principal thing that you seem to maintain your belief in Moses
withal, is the number Believers in him, and the long continuance of the same:
In answer to that I say that that Plea will, hold nothing: For we will make it
the case that is now betwixt the Church of Rome and the Church of England For
the Church of Rome being ancienter then the Church of England, why then are you
not of it, if you will go for long received opinions.


C. First, for the Church of Rome: If that were of greatest Antiquity, it might
work much on me; But Christ says, If an Angel from heaven should teach you
any Doctrine but that which is written in Scripture, believe him not: and we
have not the opinion of the Bishop of Rome, as we have of an Angel: And
therefore, if we are commanded not to believe an Angel, we ought not to credit
a man. For we have the Scriptures among us, and as learned, and wise men, both
for temporal, and spiritual wisdom, as the Bishop, and Cardinals of Rome
are: And the Scripture being of more Antiquity then the Romish Religion from
whence he pretends to take it, the Church of England being grounded on that,
and not on man's imaginations (as the Church of Rome in what it differs from
ours, is the more ancient Church: And it is authentically proved by several
Authors of our Nation, when, and at what time the Tenets of the Church of Rome,
which differ from the Church of England, were brought into it, and by what
Council: most of them being within nine hundred years. But we confess there
was a Church in Rome before there was one in England, and Rome, to be the place
from whence the Faith was generally established in England: But sense, the
corruption that was drawn in for the advantage of the Romish Church, has
altered it, from the pureness of it, at its converting ours to the Faith:
which was the cause that we fell from it, to the state we now are in, which is
the same with its first institution.


A. Well then, let that pass: But for multitude, there is a greater number of
Mahumetans, then of your profession: and therefore according to that Argument
you should fall to that belief.


C. I say no: For the Scripture says, We must not follow a multitude to do
evil.


A. Why we agreed on confuting or proving by reason the truth of the Scripture:
Therefore I Will bar that as a Plea: But answer me to the Argument with your
reason.


C, Well then I say that there is as great a multitude of Christians as of
Mahumetans, for although most part of Asia be Mahumetans, yet almost all Europe
(except some few in Greece and Hungaria) are Christians: And for Africa, the
Kingdoms of Pretty Janni, with the Territory of the Spaniards and Portugueses
here, and converts of America, may compare with the remainder Mahumetans.


A. Well, but for the antiquity of your Religion what can be said, but that; if
you would plead for that: and because that great and mighty Princes have
received the Faith, and lived, and dyed in it, you say that is the sign of the
truth of it.


C. I say one sign.


A. Well, I shall answer that one, and your other after; and first for this:
Whereas you say that it is a sign it is the truth, in regard of the long
continuance of the opinion of Moses inspiration, with a divine and heavenly
spirit, and so consequently of the Law he writ, and of the truth of it: I
answer. That look on the people of America, and those of Japan, and all the
people of the South Sea, and you shall find they will tell you, that their
Faith has endured ever since the World was (no History being able to
contradict) but the Scripture does speak of Baals Priests that launced their
flesh, and cried out, Baal hear us; and of the Heathens that lived about the
children of Israel, which made their children to pass through the fire to the
God Moloch, and many such like customs are spoken of there, to be used among
the Heathen, which at this day are used amongst those of America, and the other
places abovesaid, which proves the Antiquity of their Customs, and therefore
should they be followed? No an ancient custom is nothing to prove the truth or
co^veniency of a thing, but rather the weakness of those that live so long in
sottish ignorance.


C. You speak now of a company of barbarous simple people.


A. To you they may seem so, but not to themselves, nor to some others, and
they have greater reason to condemn Christians for barbarousnesse, then we to
condemn them: For the acts of the Spaniards have been so inhumane with them
they, have overcome, that it is certainly known there have been 1100000 of
harmless Indians in America cruelly butchered without cause or offense given
by them, as their own writers report. But as the Persians seemed to the
Grecians to be barbarous, so the Grecians seemed no less barbarous to them,
and as all fools think wise men to be so, or else they would learn of them to
be wise; so all wise men think fools to be so by their foolish acts: and who
shall judge this controversy? neither party, but the stander by. And if it be
so, why then shall we not take the opinion of the ancient Philosophers, as of
Diogenes, and others that lived that course of life, that they took not care
for to morrow, which is the custom amongst them, and for a civil kind of
humane courtesy, they equalled them in all passages, being as is reported by
the first discoverers the most gentle and courteous people living. And indeed
my opinion tells me, that the Irish men in their Rugge and trouses, which is
their constant wear, are not so barbarous as the French, who alter their habit
oftener then a Cameleon does her color. But go into China, a place generally
accounted to have as subtle in habitants, and as great multitudes of them, as
are in any petticular Dominion of the World, their Chronicles informing them
their Religion is as ancient as the creation of the world, and that they record
to be of above 6000. years continuance, counting the year as we do, and they
have as good oportunities for their knowledge of the truth as we, for they say,
Printing is as ancient with them, as History with us: Therefore if you will be
of a Religion, or an opinion, because the wise are of the same, the learned are
of the same, a multitude are of the same, and the Ancients were of the same,
then you may be of the Religion or opinion of the Chinians, and according to
your own rule. In England the more Southeasterly you go, the wiser the people
are, as the French are wiser then the English, the Italians wiser then the
French, and the Grecians wiser then them: then consequently it must follow, the
people of Turkey and of Persia, and the Mogores Country men, to be wiser then
the wisest of Europe, and the people of China lying most Sontheastesly (without
you will come home again by America) to be the wisest of the World, and
therefore to be followed in custom and Religion.


C. Although I do not so much stand on the Antiquity of the Religion (I
profess) as I do on the reasons that I can give to prove the verity of it,
yet dare I maintain its antiquity maugre all opposition: For the story of China
(to pass over that of America) I say, I conceive, that the Religion there
(according as it is reported) is the simplest Religion in the World, their
supposed gods being always in their houses, made of wood or clouts, to which
they worship and do reverence, which is contrary to ours, for we worship him
that made us, and they worship that which they have made, and were they so wise
as the report goes of them they are, I cannot think they would do such
ridiculous things, therefore the report of their wisdom seems as strange to me
as the rest of the tales told of the greatness of their cities, and other
unheard of things, which seem as strange to me as tale of the world in the
Moon: But the reporters are Jesuits who speak for their profits, as Demetrius
did, and therefore are not to be believed: For to get Princes to maintain them
there is hope of their dominion over that place, they heap to themselves
masses of treasure, for the allowance is very great that they have to build
Colleges, and for bribing officers, to give way to them there to make
converts, and for their own maintenance, which the Castillian and Portingall
profits in all the East Indies could scarcely maintain, although very great,
besides the bounty of many a private person for their souls health, in gaining
a soul, which they may do in maintaining a Jesuit to preach to those Pagans:
And although you may say that the Pope is so good a husband that he will not
let his disciples sow their seed in barren ground, a Country that is poor, and
can produce no profit: I answer, that it must be a poor fish Saint Peter
refuses to catch, but if he can have from him that expects the draught when the
net is drawn, as much as if they were all Salmons, what cares he if they prove
all Menevves.

But for your quoting the opinion of my Countrymen, who think that the nearer
you go to the Equinoctial Line, where is the greatest heat, the riper you
find the fruits, and consequently the brayns of the men: It is no strange thing
in our populous Nation, to find men of several opinions: and such as are not
able to judge of things themselves; therefore they depend upon the opinion of
others: as in this particular. The experience of every common Seaman that
trades betwixt the Tropicks where the heat is most refulgent, can answer for
the ignorance of those men's fancies: who knows there are none so barbarous and
uncivil, as those men are, and I know it will be said, that it is for want of
conversation with the rest of the World: But I say, if they be naturally so
wise, why did they not teach, and not learn of others. But to the contrary,
they have converst with the Portingall Nation, for these two hundred years,
and yet are almost as ignorant as they were at their first acquaintance, which
shows their indocible natures to civility.


A. Why this opinion is generally mayntained by the Learned of your Countrymen?


C. Not by the truly knowing men: but such as read much, and know but little,
what is either for their own honor, or that of their Country: but read, and
believe rather what is written by a Forreigner then search into the ends of his
Writing: For they interpret them to mean nothing, but as they say, as the
Papists do the Scripture: when it says of Christ to the Bread, This is my
body: without looking into the mystical meaning of the word: For by this very
opinion many are drawn into all manner of beliefs, which are enjoined by the
Catholics of Rome, before they are a ware: For they or their Disciples write,
that the Italian is the wisest man of Europe, as being borne the most
Southerly: And if it be so, then it must follow, that the Fope being that
Countryman borne and bred up in the Center of Italy; and chosen from amongst
the wifest of that Nation, must be concluded the wisest of the Italians: And
therefore fittest to command in Temporal things as a Prince: and in Spiritual
as be is inspired above any other man, as having the power of Saint Peter: So
that the divine Power meeting in the wisest natural man, makes him most
capable for government, of any living as a Prince and Priest, and suppose him
so: For according unto this rule it must needs follow: and then what man is
there that desires not the wisest Prince to govern him, and that had not rather
take to the opinion of the wisest, in point of Religion, then of a man
inferior in judgment: So that according to that rule, he must be your Prince
and Priest, therefore true policy of State would forbid this opinion, fearing
the Worm under the leaf: And take this for your Answer: and Fool for the
badge of my Countrymen, that are of this judgment.


A. Well then: I stand not so much on those points, you think you have
answered: But what say you? was not Abraham as much in favor of God, as man
could be, (for so Moses tells us) and yet he writ no Scripture: no, nor told
any thing of Paradise, or of Adams eating the forbidden fruit: And therefore
why should you believe that these things were true? the World being three
thousand years old when Moses wrote the Law without belief in which, and the
Messiah that was promised by Jacob should come of the Tribe of Juda, (for which
we must take Moses word; who wrote this many years after Jacob dyed) no flesh
can be saved: according to Scripture: For nothing will bring one to Heaven but
the belief in him: And then you must condemn all that dyed before Jacob: in
which number you must include many whom you account. good men: As Adam, Abell,
Enoch, Noah, Nahor, Abraham, Lot, Isaac, etc. For the Scripture never says they
heard of his coming: and then what correspondence has this together: and what
encouragement have we to serve him, who condemns the righteous, with the
wicked: and so many thousand Millions of men as were born and died before
Jacob, knowing not for what, there never being a rule prescribed for them to
walk by.


C. Well, this has discovered your rotten inside: and declared by your
profane handling of the Scripture your proper name Atheist: But yet I shall
answer what you say.


A. I told you I would not argne without you would forbear passion: For the
name of Atheist, that was used of old time by Plutarch of Chaerova, and others,
unto such as believed in no God; which you cannot say by me, For I do: and in
his universal Providence, and extol him for his justice and mercy: in making
so many Creatures as they are, to show his power, and then his mercy in saving
them: But for the tale of Moses, and that of the New Testament, I rather
suppose them the act of some cunning Prince then of a godly Prophet: And
nothing does so clear it to me, as the example that is evident in those Princes
and people which are his Disciples, who make the Scripture the color of all
their wicked Enterprises, as Moses and his Tribe did to get the command over
the Jews.


C. Well: I perceive then that you are an Atheist: but a refined one, one of
the new stamp:you believe in God, but not in Christ his Son, nor the holy
Ghost: but according to our opinion, he that denies the Son and holy Ghost;
denies the Father, and therefore is an Atheist: But to answer your first
opinion and question; Why did not Abraham as well write the Scripture as Moses?
I can answer you: Why did not David a man after Gods own heart, build the
Temple as well as Solomen? but because it was the pleasure of the Lord that
Solomon should raise a Trophee of Honor to his Name for ever? So, why did not
Abraham lead the Children of Israel into Canaan and write that which Moses
writ, but because the Lord had a mind to show himself to be a great God, and
above all others, and his power over Pharaoh, and the unbelieving Egyptians by
the hand of his servant Moses, who brought the Children of Israel over the Red
Sea, and out of thraldom, that they might Know that he was the Lord, and Moses
his Propher, which by Abraham could not so well have been shown, for that the
Children of Israel had neither number to testify his Works, nor affection to
value them.

And for the injustice you tax God with in condemning the Righteous with the
Wicked: I answer, That if you will a nature, you must allow a God, or
Providence which is good, and all things to have their being from him: as the
World, and all things that be in it, Man being then in it, must needs be made
by him; And if so? then must he have power over soul and body: And having so,
you may allow the Election of him either to salvation or damnation, both being
just: For if six men be condemned, and three of them get the Kings Pardon, are
the other three unjustly dealt with? Or if a man hire two, and give one as much
as he promised and the other more, is he that has his due unjustly dealt
with? I say no: but they ought all to think well; those that have their
deserts, and those that have above then: So then allowing God this power, as
every man may do what he will with his own; Then may you very well believe,
that the good which were before Jacob, were saved, as being elected in
Christ, as the Scriptures say, before the beginning of the World, and many of
the other, by the mercy of him that made them.


A. This is no answer to me, for now we argue to prove the likelihood of the
truth, or falsehood of the Scripture, and you quote Scripture in your Argument:
But answer me with reason, how could they according to your Scripture be saved,
that believed not in the Messiah, and how do you prove by your Scripture, that
any that lived in the times before Jacob, knew of his coming?


C. I say where you will use Scripture against me, you may allow me Scripture
to answer you, and it was promised from the beginning, that the feed of the
woman should break the serpents head.


A. This is nothing because as aforesaid.


C. I shall refer that to judgment, But the Prophecies of the Scripture with
the mavelous things that have been done by the believers in it, show plainly,
that there is no truth but there, no Religion but there, no hope of salvation
but there: And first for the Prophesies, The curse of Noah on Cham, wherein he
says, A servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren, which is meant of
himself and his posterity, to Iaphet and Sem, and then again of Ismael the
son of Abraham, where it is said. His hand shall be against every man, and
every man's hand against him, Both which we see verified at this day, for at the
division of the world between the sons of Noah, Africa fell into the
posterity of Cham, which people are at this day the greatest slaves that can
be, they being servants to servants, and sold generally as horses, to those
that will give most for them, it being the only trade into America to carry
the natives of Congo and Guiney Countries of Africa thither: where they work
in the mines and at the sugar mils, or any vile work which no others will
undertake, in which their labor they became vassals and subject to the
servants of others: And for the Ismalites carriage it is well known to those
that pass from Aleppo to Jerusalem or Bagdet, or from Grancaro to Jerusalem,
or to any other part of Africa, for though they are generally in the Turks
dominions, yet can none of his Subjects pass to the places abovesaid without
drawn swords of the Ismalites in their teeths and about them, for a reward for
their peaceable passing.

And then for the wonders that have been done by the believers in this Law,
look on Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Samson, David and his Worthies, and the Prophets
and their incomparable acts are without number. Therefore seriously consider on
what I have said, and turn from that wicked condition you are in, to my
faith and my belief, that I may love you as a brother, and not hate you as one
wicked, and an enemy to God and your own soul. Come, let me persuade you.


A. First for the Prophesies you speak of, and the truth of them, and how they
are verified in the sons of Cham and Ismael. I answer, that the same
condition are the sons of Sem in, who are said to possess Asia, and not a
few of those of Europe, for first, look on the great Turk and on his
possessions in Eu open and Asia, and then the conditions of those in his
Dominions, who are all slaves, and the great Officers in his Court, and the
rest of his servants and Soldiers being slaves themselves to him, have their
slaves also under them, which may be called slaves to slaves. And on the
Tartarians, Persians, Mogulls, Chineans, Japanders, all the East Indians, in
all which Countries you may find multitudes of slaves to be sold, and few or
none of Africa amongst them, and in Africa there are many places where there be
numbers of slaves of other parts, as in particular, the City of Argier, where
there are not so few as eight thousand of your own Nation, and as many of the
Spanish, French, and Italians, that live in as great bondage as any in the
World; And for that of Ismael, as much as you can say of his posterity, may be
said of the Owsecockey on the Gulf of Venice, and many of the Scythians, and
Grim Tartars: and for the men of might you speak of, look on Moses, and on
Romulus, both beginning of nothing, both cunning, both honored after their
deaths as Gods; both valiant and hardy men: the like comparison may be made
between Joshua and Theseus, Gideon and Scanderbeg, Samson and Hercules, David
and Corelanus, etc.


C. In your answer to me in this point of Ismael, and Cham, you do not
disprove the truth of Scripture: For though you instance the thraldom of other
Nations, you do not deny but that the Children of Cham are generally slavish:
and though you answer (but poorly) the condition of the Ismaelites, with that
of the Owsecockey, and Tartars, and Scythians, yet you do not deny, that the
Prophecy is made good in them: as if a man be told he shall break his neck, if
it happens that another man comes to the same end as well as he, his Fortune
is not mistold; therefore be satisfied of the truth of the Scripture, and let
me persuade you to believe it.


A. I am not yet resolved, nor will by your fallacies: but keep steadfastly to
my opinion to the last: and whereas you say your reasons are beyond mine, I
suppose not, and your persuading me to your opinion and judgment works not on
me, because you are of it: For I should rather choose any thing then the opinion
of an Englishman, a people compacted of the worst of all Nations, the scorn of
the World the best of you all being bred up Apes from your cradles: and have
nothing in you, but what you learn of others: traitors to your selves and
Country, naturally simple, giddy Coxcombs, pernicious, treacherous, uncertain
people, such as for uncertain profits will sell your God and Country, and
their Honor with your own and your Posterities: The worst of my expressions
are too good to bestow on you, therefore forbear to urge any more your
frivolous demands.


C. You barred passion, and yet use it in the unworthiest manner; not like a
Gentleman: For can there be any thing so offensive to me as the abuse of my
Country, a place dearer to me then mine own honor, your words are general,
and extend to all persons, my self, and friends; For speaking to the English
in general, you except not me, but include me, and all that have relation to
me: Therefore since you have gone so far from the principle we first disputed
in, you must give me the same privilege and leave to demand proof of what you
say, or an account of your words on your knees, or with your sword: And know
that I grant you an unusual favor, in permitting you leave to prove it by
perticulars.


A. I was never brought up a sword-man, but yet in regard I have said I will
maintain it, and if I prove my allegations true, then will there be little
cause of offense in you, in regard I shall make you know what you never knew
before, and so be the cause of your improvement in knowledge.


C. Come to the perticulars.


A. Whereas I have said that you are a people compacted of the worst of all
Nations, it is most easily proved to you by the general opinion of your own
Nation, by whom I have heard your Pedigree derived; some from the Normans,
others from some other part of France: some from the Netherlands, others from
high Germany, Denmark, Swethia, Westphalia, Norway, etc. and to prove the
unworthiness of your Progenitors of those Nations, nothing is so evident as
their parting with their Country, to undertake others uncertain and unknown,
for you prove it by your undertaking war with a Forrainer, which you always do
with the worst of your people, which by press you force from the honester sort
to undertake such dangerous designs: This with the courteous entertainment you
give to strangers, as Mountebanks, all sorts of creatures of other Countries,
which are most welcome and most esteemed confirms your bastardy, for were you a
people of one stock you would stick together as Allies and Kindred, against all
foreign opposition, but to the contrary you adhere to forrainers, though to
the total overthrow of your Nation, as in the correspondencie is had between
the great ones of your Country with most Princes, who know of all the chiefest
passages of your State, sooner then they are peoclaimed in your own Country,
nay, oftentimes directed beyond sea, and acted there, and in my remembrance the
business of Rochell and the Isle of Ree, when you had opportuninles to advance
the English Standard farther into France, then ever Henry the fifth carried it:
for had he the assistance of Burgundy, you had the assistance of Spain much
greater? Had he one French subject for him? you had three French Protestant
Subjects for you: And though the Kingdom of France be greater by Britany and
other places then it was then, yet was the Kingdom of England greater by Wales,
Ireland, and Scotland then it was at that time. But I being then in France,
knew how the proceedings would be as well before they begun, as you did when
they were ended, and the same I can say of the last voyage to Cales, and let
the loss of Rosingen Lautor, Wayre, Poolway, and Poolouroon in the East
Indies, with all the English authority over the Islands of Banda to the Dutch,
testify the simplicity and corruptnesse of your Nation, for as they were lost
by surprise in time of peace, so might they have been commanded back again
without infringement of the league by the English fleet, with much ease, But as
I have been credibly informed, a bribe to D.B. of ten thousand pounds. with
some other petty sums caused you to quit further claim to them places, at this
day worth unto the Hollanders three hundred thousand pounds per annum, a
people that scorn and trample on your Nation where ever they meet you, as in
the East India, Straits, and German Sea, which, you say is yours. Greenland, a
place first discovered by the English, and possessed in the name of your King,
where his Arms were erected, which they pulled down, and so vilifying him and
your whole Nation with cowardlinesse, simplenusse, and all ignominious
expressions which that foul mouthed people could utter (making themselves
masters of that trade) and at Amboyna in the East India, racking, beheading,
chaining you on ships, without meat or drink, when you were scorched with the
fiery heat of the sun, throwing you into dunghils, easing themselves over
you, with all manner of revilings against you, which were testified by many
sufferers in the calamity at your Council Teble, The dishonorable Treaties
you make with your neighbors; so much to their advantage and your prejudice,
such as the meanest Nation scorn to accept of from their enemies, and the
French-mens actions are patterns for you in all your undertakings (excepting in
their respect to their own Nation) nay, the principal Ladies of your Country
cannot go without a French Gentleman Usher to lead them, and their husbands
are so opinionated of them, that they think their Ladies are never perfectly
bred until a Frenchman teaches them to hold their legs, and carry their
feet, and place their lute, while he touches it after the French fashion, And
your gallants are generally so Alla mode that they leave not any thing undone
that may make themselves and their Masters perfectly French, which your Doctors
that are good at the Morbus can well testify. Are you not a people pieced
together with the stuff of other Nations in all particulars? As for example, a
French man comes sometimes into your Court, and for a great while knows not
whither he be in France or England, there is such a simpathy in the nature of a
Frenchman with an Englishman, he finds no difference in the inclination of
his own and your Country women, only a more pronenesse to embrace the true
French made then they are, In so much that it is a proverb now in France, when
it is required by way of question to know how a man shall be suddenly rich: It
is answered, go into England and futra the women, and you shall command the
substance of the man, and for the staple commodity of France, you shall have in
exchange the riches of England, for the way of trade to know how to put off
your commodities, you need no better instructor then every common wit of
England, who will tell you, there is no being a Gentleman there without his
mother has had the pox, or some other of his female predecessors, and the
pride of that Nation who desiers the title Gentleman, will cause your income to
be more worth then the revenue of four the chiefest Heralds in England, you will
hear them say, oh that my daughter were all a mode, that she were all a mode,
It would be as much worth to her as two thousand pound portion: Then it is but
saying, I lately came from France, and am true Paris, you shall strait be
entertained by the good man, to be governor of himself and all his family,
where for pleasure and profit your place will be far beyond the greatest
Confessor of France, and when you have got into your possession a good
convenient sum, and left the Rickets and Conuulsion in the family, and made
their noses stand China fashion, you may give them the slip over into your own
Country, and there pass away the rest of your days in jollity with their
money, and the scorning and deriding of their Nation.

And is not your Language borrowed from French, Spanish, and Italian, High
Dutch and low? your people generally sons of some one of those Nations in
condition: as so much imitating of one of them, that one knows not the Gentry
of your Country, to be other then of one of the Nations aforesaid. And for
their diet, they must have one of those Country Cooks; which sometimes for
falling from one Prince, and adhering for a greater bribe to another, costs
them the setting on. For a Spanish fig can trip a Frenchified tongue, and a
French scent can spoil a down inclining Courtier. But to let pass farther
repetitions, I shall stand to the hazard of your satisfaction by what I have
already spoken, and refer it to your judgment whether I have not sufficiently
proved you giddy, fantastical, simple, covetous, treacherous, apish people.

C. For what you say of our Nation in general for particular faults of it is
rashly done: For though (I must confess) that we are guilty of many
over-sights in State-government as you have declared, and of much lightness in
some of our people, yet ought not all to be condemned for the errors of some
particular men: For although it has been the fortune of these latter ages of
England, to be mistaken in choice of Council: yet former ages have found this
Kingdom furnished with as choice understandings as any of the World, and a
this present with private persons of as much knowledge as any of Europe: but
Paris has been preferred to dignities before Ulysses: you know that the
fairest body has a fundament, and the best built Cities their sinks; and in
the fairest field of Wheat, there is some cockle and brake come up amongst it:
So is it with us in our large and fruitful Garden of England, we have some
unwholesome herbs and weeds among us, and those that are so Frenchified,
Dutchified, Italianated and Spaniolized, we account as the filthy excrement of
our Nation. And although you have painted out the condition of some of my
Countrymen to the life, yet forbear a general censure: For that is, as if a
man in authority to choose where he would, if he light on a Whore to his Wife,
the whole Nation of women from whence she was, should be counted naught,
because you will say, if there had been any good he would never have been
cookaled: or if because one had played the thief, all the Family should be
condemned to death. Or as the silly Frenchman that concluded all the Citizens
of London Cuckolds, because he lay with a Whore in a Hat. Or as my simple
Countriman that seeing one or two streets in Paris, Let a man be in Paris five
years, and judge between it and London, he cannot be competent because ten
years greatest employment in London cannot make him know all the town
perfectly well.
would judge betwixt it and London: For going into Paris drunk, and passing
through the fairest street of the City into an Inn, where after the French
manner he so pox't his, flesh, that being conveyed to a Doctors for cure, that
lived in the midst of the City, where sometimes for air he looked out at the
window, and could see nothing but houses, which he took for six or eight weeks
together: After being in England, and speaking of the greatness of London, he
start up and swore, it was but a Village to Paris: for he had been there five
or six months together, and let him be where he would, or look which way he
would, he could see nothing but houses and meant And for our language which you
term mixed and idle learnt, and made up of other tongues, I do aver it to be as
copious and noble a Tongue as any of Europe, and it and the best of Europe, to
have all one stock: For although there is a kind of an agreeing with French
and Dutch in many of our words, yet really is it not borrowed of either, no
more then they of us: But as in truth the stock from whence the best French,
Italian and Spanish is taken was Latin; so have we from thence taken such
expressions, as our Scholars in their Writings have thought fit to introduce,
instead of some Saxon words, not altogether so fit for expressing their
meanings, which causes the neernesse betwixt us: And for our affinity with the
Dutch, it is cause is almost the same: For the Tutonick tongue being the ancient
Language of Germany, from whence the Saxons our Predecessors came, as did also
the Netherlanders, so that we as well as they retein much of our ancient and
first tongue the Tutonicke: which causes them, and some other Simpletons to
imagine, that we borrow of them. And for the mixture of our people, I Will not
deny but that some families are as uncertain of their Predecessors as you have
discovered: but the body of our Country is clear and unmixed, and of a more
pure stock, then any of Europe being descended of the Saxons, the noblest
people of Germany. And you say that the Danes and Normans have corrupted us,
and left their posterities amongst us: It Is denied that either is here in any
number considerable: For the Daues they were destroyed, or drawn quite away
from hence. And for the Normans, that but five descents before were Danes, and
came out of Denmark, their numbers at this time, and when they were most here,
were not any thing considerable: and were they, you see that they and the
Normans are all one: William of Normandy being but the fifth Prince born out of
Denmark: they being all one there can be but one mixture, when as France, Spain
and Italy, since the Saxons first coming into England, have been at the least,
seven or eight times overrun, as out of Germany, Swethia, Norway, Denmark,
Mauritania, Tingitania, and the Saracens, as also they have intermixed
themselves, one with the other, by invading one the other, displanting and
planting as their fortune admitted: the cause with the particular months,
years, and Generals under whose conducts these people so victoriously marched
are omitted, as not proper for this Discourse: But those Country histories may
satisfy you in the perticulars I have mentioned.

And for noble undertakings, no people of any particular Country of the
Universe has ever atteined to those glorious Enterprises, both by Sea and
Land, as have done our Princes and people: To omit the Conquests of King
Arthur, which with the 4000 ships of War of Edgars, the Saxon Monarch with the
Licenses given by them for Danes, Netherlanders, and French to fish on the
British and German Seas, sufficiently prove the British authority over them:
which Galfridus Monumetensis Printed at Heidelberge, Anno 1587, which was over
a great part of France, Island, Ireland, Gothland, Orkney, Norway, Denmark,
and Master Lamhard adds Swethland, Semoland, Windland, Curland, Roe, Femeland,
Witland, Flanders, Cherilland, Capland, and particular acts of our Kings and
men at Arms before King William the first, and since in our neigh bouring
Countries as in Spain, France, Portugal, the Netherlands, Russia, Barbary,
etc. And magnanimous proceedings in the second holy Wars of our Kings, Princes,
and Noblemen, King Richard in his passage only, taking Merssena, and the
Island of Sicily: mangre the power and resistance of the French Army in it, and
strength of Sicilians, with Calabria, Cyprus, and after Jerusalem: which places
he bestowed on such Friends, as he minded to perpetuallize his servants. Many
of his Successors of England succeeding him in his Princly undertakings in that
War: who were the first Generals that circumnavigated the Globe, was not
Drake and Candish: and although Columbus is said to have discovered America
first, yet certainly Master Thorn and Elliot of Bristoll found Newfoundland,
which is part of America, before Columbus, the Islands Lacaios. What Nations
have adventured themselves so far to the Northwest as they, in such Alps of
Ice, such high-grown Seas, such threatening and rolling high mountainous waves?
as you may see in the Journall of Sir Thomas Button, Baffin, Hudson, Davies,
and twenty others of our Countrymen, which for brevity I for bear to name: See
the particular acts of Captain Smith is enough to persuade you, that there is
more courage in one English heart, then in many thousands of other people: a
man that in single Combat beheaded three Turks, and after in Virgmia in
America, he ventured single with his Pistol in one hand, to take the King by
beard with the other, although a thousand tall Indians were about him, and
forced him for fear of death (if he had denied) to furnish the English Coloney
with Corn and other provision that they wanted: Private Captains of this
Kingdom have ransackt and spoiled Portorico, Spaniola, Cuba and Jamaco, with
their Cities and Villages, as also all the Towns and Cities of the Coast of
America, as Nombre de Dios, Portabelo, Campech, Sanct. John de Aukia, Santa
Maria, Coro, Agupalro, Puerto de Cavallos, Truxillo, Cartagena San Josif in
Trinidado, Sant Thomas Santos, Sant Vincent, Bayae, Farnambuck, the Town and
Island of Margareta and Coche, in the South Sea, Sant Jago, Africa, Lima,
Guatulco, Chinchapaita, Puva Aquatulco, Puerto de Natividad: All the Islands of
the Coasts of Africa, as Saint Thomas, Isles de Cape Verdi, Isles of the
Canaries, Azores, with most of their Cities and Forts. This is to be the more
valued in regard of pivate men's undertaking and performing the same, as you may
see in the Voyages of George the Noble Earl of Cumberland, Sir Walter Raleigh,
Sir Francis Drake, Sir John Hawkins, Sir Martin Frobisher, Sir Robert Dudley,
Sir Anthony Sherley, Sir Amias Preston, Master Thomas Candish, Sir James
Lancaster, William King, Christopher Newport, Andrew Barber, and the wonderful
adventure of Captain John Oxnam. And although that the Dutch have when they
have bin five to one, come as Joab did to Amasia in pretended friendship, and
so smote us: there is a far greater value set by the East India Natives, on
the English for their valor and magnanimity, then on those Grasse-eating
Butterboxes. The English when they have been aware of them (in the City of
Bantam) several times when have been seven or eight for one (on their
beginning quarrels in their drink) made them retire with the loss of their
honor, and some of their lives and members, in spite of their beards, to the
great admiration of the Javeans: and the Mogor the greatest Monarch of India;
by his using this saying, has made it a Proverb, That one Englishman will be
at three Hollanders or Portugalls, and one Portugal will be at three of his
Countrymen. What people have done such service in Sea Fights, as have the
English, in the Interim, of the taking of Ormus, when the English did as
gallantly as ever men did. There was one Philips with a Pinace of sixteen Tun
with thirteen men and boys, and two Falkings in her, took a Portugal Ship
with seventy five Fortugalls, ninety Negro men, women and Children, forty Chall
men and goods in her, to the value of twenty thousand pounds, which is
testified by the takers of Ormus, and to be seen in that Journall. The valrant
Acts of John Cook, William Ling, David Jones, Robert Luckey, four youths that
rescued themselves from captivity by killing thirteen Turks, and bringing the
Ship away for Spain, and there sold her. The Acts of John Fox, Captain
Nicholai, Master Mallam, John Rawlins, etc. and a late fight of Captain
Ransborow, that fost but one man, and killed two hundred Knights of Malta and
Negro slaves. These are but touches on the little strings. The Acts of the Sea
Worthies in the days of Queen Elizabeth only, being but struck upon would
drown all the undertakings before or since in that kind, and that you may know
how much the gallantry of a Prince, infuseth bravery into a subject, see how
Sir Anthony and Sir Robert Sherley, in her days obtained the favor of the
Persian King, so much that they were employed as Ambassadors to all the great
Princes of the World, from him and from diverse others: The title and power of
Sir Robert conferred on him by the Pope and Emperor, excelling all they ever
before granted: as in his Patent you may see at large. In her days, Sir Jerome
Horsey was sent twice into England from the the Russia Emperor, and to many
other Princes from him: As also Sir Edward Scorey, and John Caudre from the
Tartar, and two others from the German Emperor, which at present I cannot
name. Take notice that these Acts were for the most part of them done in the
Reign of the gracious Queen Elizabeth: out intestine Wars discover the valor
of our Nation to be yet remaining. Therefore be of another opinion of us, and
think that it was Alexander that caused the Graecians to conquer Asia, and
Bajazet that led the Asiatick to the conquest of Greece. And though your abuse
of my Country has caused this derogation from our first discourse, yet has
it not made me forget it: And however your thought has been of our Realm and
people, I hope you will not now so scorn it, as to keep still in a known
error, because it is an Englishmans reason that contradicts it, but rather
imagine them, at least as much deserving as other people if you will not allow
them a greater privilege.


A. I must confess that what you say is more then I ever heard, or would
trouble my self to look after, for what I have read or heard, it has been from
the Frenchman or Spaniard: And that has been so unworthy a Character on your
Nation, that I thought the trouble of looking after them would be the worst of
studies.


C. It Is there report that begets the same opinion in some of my silly
Conntrymen, for the Generallity it is of France, Spain, or Holland, will scarce
allow an Englishman reason enough to make a sign or spirit to fight with a
Pigmey, in their discourse they so undervalue us, which begets in me a stronger
opinion of their magnanimity and ingemuity, for it is the nature of men never to
regard or disreputate our men spirited: but a noble, heroic, wise Gentleman
shall be sure of enemies as often as he is talked of, that will lay a thousand
aspersions and false calumnies on his Gallantry: So a beautiful brave woman by
the rest of her sex shall be scandalized with many a false imputation, when one
ugly, though notoriously bad, shall not once be ill spoken of, and you see they
never meddle with the Scotch, Irish, or other such mean people, which may
persuade you it is their envy of our high celerities and unmarchable worth.

You know there is a Proverb That ill will never speaks well: and we can look
for no better from those people, then is to be expected from a mortal enemy,
as those on whom we have with so much ease, so often trampled on: But the
vvisest and greatest of them know that the meaner the people are, that
conquer, the greater dishonor receive the conquered; and therefore have given
to us our due, in their acknovvledging of us: As in particular Francis the
first (whom the French confess) the gallantest of the Kings, at his being
taken prisoner by Charles the fifth, declared; that as he was the second French
King, ever taken prisoner, so was his unhappiness far greater then the first:
For he had fell into the hands of the base Spaniard, and his Predecessor into
the hands of the noble English.


A. Well then imagine your reason of as much force with me, as if it came from
some other Countreyman. But there is nothing yet said by you, but what I
suppose I have answered: but I have much more to say in defense of my argument,
that I think you will not deny to be sufficiently reasonable for me to keep to
my own principle.


C. Let us hear it.


A. I desire to know from you whether you did not suppose the old Law, once to
be the true Law?


C. Yes, I did so.


A. Then on what ground do you alter your belief?


C. On the promise in the old Law of our Savior Christ, who is borne King of
the Jews, and came and suffered in the flesh, to give unto all true believers
in him, eternal salvation.


A. What ground have you to believe that he is the Christ, expected and
promised by the old Law?


C. The Testimonies given of him by his followers in the New Testament, wherein
is set forth his descent, his conception, his birth, his wisdom, his
holiness, his uprightness, his power, his miracles, his pains, his
sufferings, his burial, his resurrection, and his glorious ascension, in that
heavenly manner, that might persuade any reasonable creature of his divine
nature, and godly power.


A. First, I desire to know, whom you think most knowing in your Law of
Christ, and most able to interpret the dark meanings written in it.


C. That man that is wise, learned in the Scriptures, and converseth often by
prayer with his heavenly Father, to move Him to inspire him with the spirit of
interpreting his Law.


A. It Is not the Mahumetan that knows the meaning of the New Testament, not yet
the Gentile of the old, what say you is it?


C. No.


A. Well then you must allow the Jewish Rabbis to have the best abilities for
the interpreting the Old Scripture, for they are endued with all those gifts
that you have mentioned should be in Scripture Interpreters: and who altered
the Old Law? was it not the Gentiles whom you count unfit Judges in the Law?


C. Although that many Gentiles were believers, yet were not they the only
cause of the Christian faith, for we have it from the Son of God, and his
Acts compared with the Old Testament as hears us, That he is the only
redeemer: And the Old Testament says, Those that sat in darkness should see
light, and if the Jews hearts had not been hardened, to cause a suffering in the
Son of God, the Scripture could not have been fulfilled, nor salvation given
but by his death.


A. For those acts which you pretend were done by Christ, there have beeen many
which have pretended themselyes to be Christ, as in the History of Josephus you
may find written, with most of the Acts in his time (though but of a private
man if he did do any thing that was a disturbance to the Commonwealth of
Judea. And he that you so reverence and esteem is scarcely spoken of by him,
what is said of him is, that there was a Prophet, if we may call him so, (whom
many called Christ) that did great things, which by many is supposed to be
inserted by some Christian, because there is so little spoken of him by
Josephus, who gives an account of all acts whatsoever done in his time, though
of never so small consequence, and he being borne before and dying after him,
it is strange he said so little, if that his miracles were so great, and if they
were you may see as great in the history of the Roman Saints, that you will not
believe: And since many Jews that have pretended themselves to be Christ; As
first, David Eli, who gathered the Jews together in Haptham, to war on all
Nations, and win Jerusalem, he affirmed, God had sent him to free them from
the Gentiles, and that he was the Messiah. The King of Persia sent for him,
and imprisoned him in the City of Dabasthan, but he three days after, when
the King and his Council sat to take order for his further safety came amongst
them, the King asked him how he came thither, he said by his wisdom and
industry, the King bid lay hold on him, his servants answered that they could
hear him but not see him, he went away, the King followed him to a river, over
which he stretching his handkerchief, puffed, and was then seen of them all he
in vain pursued him with their boats, for the same day he went ten days
journey from thence to Elghamaria, and so proceeded, until that on a bribe
given by a Turkish King of 10000 pound to his father in Law Smaldin, for which
one night as he slept he beheaded him, This is as strange an act as ever was
done by Christ: And are there not many more which I can name, that have done
great and strange things? yes, Benbarchosin, Benchoab, Motes. Lemlen, R. David,
etc. and yet were few of them believed, because the Rabbis received not their
signs. And whereas you interpret the Old Testament to figure at the coming of
your Savior in a mean obscure way, and only for a spiritual Kingdom, they
say that he must be borne unto the Kingdom of Jerusalem, as well as to the
Kingdom of heaven, and come in glory and power, and take off the yoke that the
Jews are so much oppressed with, and give into their hands the temporal and
spiritual power, exalting them above all the people of the earth. And I have
heard a Jew that has gone to dispute with a Christian, and he out of your own
Scripture has so pussed him that he knew not what to say, for the first
Question has set him up, which has been to bid him prove by the New Testament
(your own book) that your Savior came of the seed of David, and of the loins
of Juda, which he could not do: For the Genealogy of Matthew, Chap. 1. only
proves the descent of Joseph, and not of Mary, of whom came your Christ,
which you say is not part of the man, for you say, she conceived with the
Holy Ghost; therefore this descent is left uncertain, and until you prove that
you shall draw me to believe (if in any) the Old before the New Law.


C. For your comparing Christ with an imposture it is most blasphemously done
of you, For what are these you name? are they better? seeked they not their own
ends more then Gods? and the salvation of the world? did not they desire to be
Kings, or to have rule and power over other men's bodies, souls, and estates?
did they not make disturbances in the Country? and would have hindered Caesar
from his right? which were sufficient badges of their impostury. And to the
contrary ours came and preached love, unity, and concord among his believers:
and gave to Caesar though a Heathen his due, He for all his Cures asked
neither shoe to his foot, not clothes to his back, and notwithstanding them,
had not wherewith to hide himself, as he declares, and is testified of him:
And for Josephus he was a Levit, and Christ coming overthrew their profession
amongst his believers, and took away their tenths and benefits they had by
their Priesthood, and should he have left that testimony of him as he
deserved, it would have wrought so much on the wise following posterity of the
Jews, that they would have cried with those that saw his works, There was never
such a man, not such things done in Israel: Which is cause enough for him to
speak so little of him, that did so much: And could any after death, raise up
the body as he did? No; you find that in the death of those false Christ's
(which our blessed Savior speaks of, after death has passed, then end their
devices, but his acts were greater after his death, then before, as in spite
of his Watchmen to raise up his body, and joining it to his soul, and then
appearing amongst his believers, and conferring the spirit of wisdom and power
on his Apostles, then passing to Eternity with soul and body: And what you
have heard betvveen a Jew and a Christian is nothing, for it shows the Jew
pragmaticall, and the Christian ignorant. For as the first Chapter of Matthew
shows the Genealogy, of Joseph, so that of Luke shows that of Mary: For
though it be not Mary's in particular name, yet is it most clear that Joseph
had not two fathers, therefore one must needs be accounted Mary's.


A. What you say is something, but not sufficient to satisfy me, I Will take the
words of your own Scripture to condemn you, which are, A good tree is known by
his fruit, and can a man gather figs of thistles, or grapes of thorn trees? We
may, I say, if there were that truth as you pretend there is in Scripture,
would it not show it self in the professors of it? But to the contrary, there
is so much iniquity in you Christians, that take you from the meanest to the
greatest, all orders and sects whatsoever, and there is nothing but deceit,
covetousness, whordome, adultery, drunkenness, swearing, gluttony, false
heartedness, extortion, pride, Sodomy, incest, lying, stealing, all things in
greater proportion then amongst the Turks, Ethnicks, or the most vile of any
profession that now is or ever was. Is not Religion the color for the vilest
procedings that are? do not the Princes and States of Europe cloak with that
their murder, plunderings, rapine and oppression in the vilest manner? Is not
that the pretense for the martyring of many souls by the Pope and bloody
Inquisitors, and Religion is generally so slightly set by by your selves, that
from one accounted a very honest man, but of the Brownist Sect, I heard say,
that rather then the Pope or English Bishops should come to be established in
the Kingdom where he lived, he would that the Turk should prevail over it,
they being three the most eminent professors of Christ, I marvailed much at his
saying, in respect as well of the temporal government as the spitituall: But
recollecting my memory, I thought that he might as well say so, as the rest
believe, and do as they do, and to discover to you how much the heavens frown
on your chief deceivers (that is the Clergy and Priests of each Christian
Sect) and in particular in your Country where they are allowed to marry, there
is scarce a grand child, or child remaining through the Kingdom of England of
any order of Priesthood, that is either noble, rich or virtuous in any great
measure (though there are not so few as 100000 beneficed men at all times in
your Kingdom.) Therefore take this for your absolute answer, that I will not
be like that simple Courtier, who being in much honor and esteem with his
Prince and Country, for a bribe and hope of better preferment, sels his
present and future certain honor and profit for expectance of greater from
another, and so loses both: No, I will be sure of the pleasure is certain, and
enjoy my self while I may, and run the hazard of that bug-beare Hell.


C. To see how far you would secure your self in your folly and ignorant
opinion, you will take occasion to condemn (for some pretending Christians)
the whole number of the believers in Christ. For indeed those that you have
discovered, are but pretenders to Christianity: For the marks that are by you
described, are the marks of the beast, which is on them, and by which you may
know they have drank of the waters of the Whore, and are become intoxicated
with it, and so do these mad things (as it is said in the Revelation, for the
Scripture tells us, There is but one Faith, and one Batisme, which is, there is
but one way unto salvation: and except you be of that you cannot be saved: Now
that way is set down in the ten Commandments in the old Law: And all things
added to them (except the belief that Jesus Christ's coming in the flesh, and
suffering, is sufficient for our original sin, and breaking those
Commandments) is humane and by man invented, nor shall any equivocation, or
mental reservation, be a sufficient Plea at the day of judgment for the
transgressors in those ways, you have set down, nor shall Christ's Name stand
them in more stead at that day, then your opinion shall do you: And for what
you say the Brownist said, as touching the Turks Dominion over England, I
suppose it was not his hatred to his Country, nor his King, that caused him to
say so, but his desire to keep his body (the Temple of Christ) entirely to his
worship, without the suffering any superstition to enter thereat, which he
might imagine he could not do so freely under the Pope or Bishops, as under
the Turk: For may be he had heard, that he allowed of liberty of Conscience:
And though sometimes he took the tenth child to make a Turk, and left nine to
him, yet he might think that they would have never an one to his disposing,
nor himself neither. And for your Item to the Courtier or State servant, I like
that well, but not your resolution on it. But the day permitting no long
discourse of this subject, I shall give you checkmate, and so leave you.

I perceive your keeping to your opinion is, for love of the worldly liberties
you gain by it, for the way to heaven you find too strait and narrow to pass,
but I tell you that is a fond fantacie of yours, for experience tells us daily,
that there is a hell in this life, as well as in that to come, and that which
makes you fit for it, is the same that makes you suffer in this: For first,
suppose you steal or murder, in the one you satisfy your want, and the other
your desire of revenge, but have not both these sufficient obstacles to deter a
man from either: Is not expecting death a quarter of a year before it comes,
and then death it self, which cuts off all your worldly enjoyments enough? Is
not the palsy, dropsy, and sottish humor of a common drunkard, a worldly
punishment greater then the pleasure that caused it? And in the greatest
worldly delight sweet Lechery, is there not the greatest worldly punishment
follows it? if you extend your desires in that beyond the liberty the Scripture
gives you, for are your desires vain, you must needs meet with some of your
own humor, and then a minutes sport sometimes causes a years pain, but if by
accident you escape one time, you must be paid at another, for it is now grown a
proverb, That when a thing seems strange, they say it is as impossible as for a
common whore to be without the pox, and the least proportion of that is greater
then the greatest pleasure you obtain by your transgression with those common
prostitutes, for there is no love in the action with them, which (men say)
makes the felicity in that kimde so great, does not deafness, blindness,
feebleness, and all manner of decrepitnesse, baunt the body of man in this
world for that sin, whereas to be good, and to observe the Commandments,
brings a heaven to a man on earth, for there is not the least discommodity
attends the observer of them, and since there is no commodity coming to you by
this belief, consider the great discommodity if it were but may happen for it:
For I Will put it thus to you, were it a million to one, whether there were a
hell or not, considering it is but your opinion which brings you no profit, nor
true worldly pleasure, why should you run the hazard of that eternal damnation
for an opinion only, and to speak truly there is not that action so vile, but
by true faith in Jesus Christ may be forgiven, according to the saying of the
Scripture. Therefore let not the fear of the strictness of the Scripture
deter you from a true belief in it and the holy Trinity. (*)


Ball'd twill be termed by some, when may be they
Did never write, or scarcely good sense say:
And though it is writ to please, yet likely he
That writes; by such shall hardly censured be.
Imprimatur.

JOHN DOWNAME.


