DISTRACTED ENGLANDS LAMENTATION, Dangerously lying upon her sick Bed: With
her last refuge for Cure, unto the wholesome Physic OF REPENTANCE and
HUMILIATION.

Repent for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Matt. 2. To end this War, Weep, Fast, and P^^y




July 14. 1646.
Imprimatur,

John Downame.



JULY 27. LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in
Smithfield. 1646.

Distracted Englands Lamentation.
TO lament is a thing seasonable to all that are in misery. And of all
miseries, War is the greatest, for it does most mischief, and has least
mercy. And for that cause David chose rather to fall into the hands of God,
then into the hands of men. But of all War, that we call Civil is the most
rude, merciless and unnatural, (of which I think we are not now to be
instructed) for it armeth the Father against the Son, and Son against the
Father. One Kinsman against another, and one Friend against another. It
brings desolation and confusion to a Kingdom. By it all Order is broken; all
Laws are violated, all Decency is anoulled. In the time of her impious reign,
Liberty gives strength to Error, Coveteousnesse uphouldeth Extortion, and
Ambition nourishes Discord. Vice rides on her Foot-cloth, and Virtue wayteth
at the Stirrup. Whatsoever lists is lawful; what is truth and honesty,
doubtful; and all villainy useful, it is like a Wild Boar in a Vineyard,
that makes havoc of the Grapes and destroys the Vines. Like a great wind
upon the Land that overthrows Towns, Towers and Castles. It is the Be^st
that with his tail sweepeth down the Stars from the Firmament* The Land
Leviathan that swalloweth and devoureth all, as well the g^^at ones as the fry.
It is the Varlet of that Martial Devil that is sworn to betray his own
blood to misery, his own Country to ruin. Of which poor England, who is at
this present under the bloody wings of this fatal mischief, does not a
little, nor without cause complain in her lamentation following.

Have pity on me! have pity on me! at leastwise you that are my Friends,
for the hand of my Lord, has touched me. God has sprung the Mine of his wrath
into me, and wounded me with a most unnatural civil war, which is of all
other the most grievous and destructive. Every day he cutteth me with the
whetted sword of his irefull justice with the rod of his fury; with the iron
rod of his indignation he has whipped me on all sides. On the East, and on
the West. On the North, and on the South. I am full of stripes. He has not lest
a free place in me. O have pluy on me!

By what a steep precipic^ have I fallen down headlong to destruction and
ruin! I that whilom enjoyed sweetes of peace, and blessed plenty with so great
quiet and security. I that was so late admired of the whole World for fair and
opulent Cittys. For buildings of honor and antiquity: For houses of liberal
and hospitable entertainment; For fields as fertile and profitable as
delightful; For woods and forests both beautiful and spacious; For good and
wholesome temper, subject to no malignant influence: For all manner of
provision. My downs were covered ore with sheep, my valleys filled with neat,
my parkes with dear, my ponds with fish; and the fethered game in every
species abounding, and multiplying. Nothing that could be thought necessary
either for pleasure or sustenance, but I could boast of it from the liberal
hand of God and nature.

But now the black curtain of desolation is drawn over me, which was evicted
from every Kingdom that is divided within it self. God has let down the
visitation of his wrath upon me, because I would not know him in time of
plenty. Because in time of peace I would not make my peace with him; therefore
he has removed that Candlestick of his blessing, and has brought in a foe
that has besieged me round. A War, a Civil War, by which I am in all
things impoverisht and brought to beggary. The hooks of War are fastened
into my sides, by which many of my fairest Towns and Edifices have been
pulled down and demolished, without regard either to honor or antiquity. Yea
my very Churches have been cast down to their first bedds, and their steeples
laid level with the earth. Many a good house by violence and unjust
oppressions, are become both inhospitable and inhabitable My fields are filled
with Wars, irefull confusion. The green soar^ is turned into a crimson
goare: All fragrancy and delight converted into (...) spectacle of horror. The
tillage and labor of the painful O^e is trampled under foo^e. My forests lie
at waste: My woods go to decay by the cruel Axe of War, that has pierced
the heart of many a sound oak. I have lost my temper: And my very air now is
infected with malignancy. There is no health nor security in me at all. The
Lamb is not secure in the sold nor the bird in the nest, nor the infant at the
breast of the Mother. My woes are beyond expression. I am cast down below the
bose of misery. I am fallen into the pit of ruin. O have pity on me! have
pity on me! at leastwise you that are my Friends!

But England, whom do thou speak unto? whom do thou call upon for pity?
upon Friends! what Friends? where are they? in the City? in the Country? in
the Court? I must confess all ought to be thy Friends, from the highest Rulers
to the meanest Subject. For thou England have been a dear Mother unto us all.
Our first air we drew from thee, and our first milk. I is a just loyallty
of us all, and a duty which we all owe to love and not our thee, in regard
thou are our dearest Country, and we are all thine by birth right. Thy King.
Thy State. The whole Commonwealth is thine. Why should not all then be thy
Subjects, and thy Friends? why should any degenerate from his loyalty to thee?
or be so cruel as by sword or fire to look and work thy destruction?
Children are condemned that are unnatural to their Parents. None but vipers
destroy their Mother. What name then is due unto such as seek the ruin of
their Country? thou have been our Nurse and Suckler in all our necessities;
and now to return thee so much evil for good, is a hard measure.

We have no reason; we are madd: we know not what we do. Else we would
collect and understand, that all the abuse and wrong we do unto our Country;
all the spoil and havoc we make on her, is a rape and violence committed
upon our selves. We draw our own blood in drawing hers. We cut off the
breast from whence we have our milk. We destroy the hand hat putreth bread
into our mouths. We ripp up and riffel the womb from whence proceeds all
our plenty and livelihood. And not only to our selves is this done, but also
unto our Children that shall com^ after, whose curses will hang upon us in
posterity.

Yet there is nothing now left unattmpted not unperpetrated which the malice of
this cruel and unjust War can reach unto. All Grace, all Virtue and
Goodness whatsoever, we see brought to the battery, and subdued by their
Opp^* Modesty is expulsed by the strength of Impudence: Coveteou^^^^^ ^ath
mastered Liberallity: Pride insulteth over Humllity: Falsho^^ (...) beaten
Truth out of the field: Error makes Religion her quarry. These are the
Conquerours of the times. These are they that have set up Liberty in the Throne
of discipline: By whom all good Laws both divine and humane are violated: All
holy engagements and Covenants of Religion are broken: All obligations of amity
and friendship are made void; and even the nearest bonds of nature cancelled. O
lamentable Times! O execrable manners! It were misery enough to see such
impleties, such hellish wrath und cruelty in the hearts of any Christians
whatsoever. For they ought to be of a Celestial and Divine temper. But much
more in the hearts of Christians and Countrymen in the hearts of Kindred and
Alliance of Friends and Acquaintance. That such hearts should differ; or have
that hardness and stony rancor, as to oppose and injure one another so
inhumanly, fills with amazement and wonder.

What then! shall we never recover reason? shall we still persever in our
frenzies and madness, under the protection of (wilful) ignoranc^, and
misunderstanding one another? after so great a draught is it not time to close
the vein? we have gone out Tigers hitherto; shall we never return men? do
we find so much sweetness in the game, that we cannot forsake the sent? it
is the nature of hounds never to be reclaimed from blood that they are once
flesht in. Are we gone so far a field in heat of blood, so much astray from
humanity, that we can find no passage back?

O unhappy England! what remedy then must thou fly unto? what physic must thou
take to purge away this malignant fever? what antidote is the best to expel
the banefull humors from thy sick heart? nothing but Dens-Gordium: God only
who is the King of hearts: it is he must do it. This is an evil which none but
that King can cure. And therefore since the meetings and Counsels of earthly
Physicians can do no good, nor afford one proposition of comfort, nor minister
any case unto thee: Thou must have recourse to him. Thou must refer the whole
cure to him, who knows thy frame and constitution: and is (too much) acquainted
with thy disease. Prostrate thy self before the Synod of his Divine Wisdom,
and beseech him for his mercy sake to help thee. For he will surely and
infallibly prove thy Friend, so soon ^s thou have taken thy potion of
repentance into the bottom of thy heart, according as he has perscribed. And
not only a Friend to thee, but unto all that come so prepared to ask his help.
Say therefore unto him. Have pity on me, O God, according to thy great mercy!
heal me (...) Lord, for I am sick!

I am indeed: heart sick: grieveously distem^^^^ (...) my head and all my
members. I am sick to death. I have a disease the ^^^ence of which will ruin
me. It is desperate, it rages in all part^ (...) ^^leaguereth my very heart.
My life-bloud is in danger. It bruseth and mortifieth my flesh; even into my
marrow it searcheh: and causes a disturbance in all my bones. It straineth my
sinnewes, and breaks insunder the strongest ligaments of my body. My reeme is
broken, my navill uncloseth, my bowels appear. O all ye that pass by the
way! attend and see if there be any grief like my grief! attend you that
stand aloof! you that are my neighbors; and behold my miseries! behold in
what a dangerous case I am, through mine own depraved and perverse humor!
observe my troubled state! (a good warning peace) see how I lie a bleeding!
what a stux of blood has issued from me; and yet for all this I fear the
plurisie will choke me.

I am faint. Let me bleed no more. I have lost too much blood already: and
that of the purest; of the noblest; and good blood; and innocent blood: Such as
the butcher Cain drew from Abel. Physic more mild and gentle has been
offered me; but I would take none. I would digest none. I have wrested too
much with my self. I have built too much upon the strength of mine own body.
A sick body. A severish body. A very foul body. A body without all symetry,
natural disposition or temper. My veins are on fire; my pulse is out of
order! My temples burn and beat into the plamater of my brain, which makes
me groan and sigh deep, in jealously that I am past cure. And therefore it
is, indeed high time to change my Physician. To repose no more in earthly
Counsels, but with an came heart, and sincere intention, to lift up my hands
and voice to Heaven from whence all help comes, and say, heal me O Lord,
for I am sick!

Lord in this hot fit and bitter conflict, draw the curtain of thy mercy;
and refresh me with the comfortable air of thy holy Spirit! before I utterly
perish, open the Casement of thy Divine Providence and send into my heart the
Dove of Peace! for there is no physic else can do me good: No ballam is
agreeable to my disease as that. Death and miserable confusion is the object of
war: Of which I am made already too sadd a spectacle, but peac^ ^^s health,
and all effects contrary, what war turns to malice, peace ^^^verteth to
love, what war wounds, peace heals, what war ru^^^^^n, peace repaireth,
what war takes, peace restores: If I had peace I should be well: If I had
peace (yet) I should perfectly recover, my head would leave aching, my heart
would receive comfort, I should tak^ ^^st in all my members.

Lord thou have do^^ ^reater cures in Israel! there is nothing impossible with
thee, thou ^^^west all, thou can do all: And therefore, Lord, if thou take
me in (...) I will not misdoubt my cure: If I were dead thou can raise me*
(...) were blind, thou can restore mes unto true and perfect sight, if I were
deaf, thou can renew my hearing, if a Leaper, thou can cleanse me, if I
had Devils in me, thou can cast them out: No heart so hard but thou can
soften, no will so perverse and stubborn but thou can break and master, no
mind so high and puffed up, but thou can humble. All things are confined to
thy power: And there is not any that can resist thy will.

I do confess, Lord, that I am guilty of all: I am dead with sin; I am
blind with error; I am deaf which obstinacy: revive me with thy grace,
enlighten me with thy truth, and reconcile me to thy holy Spirit: I am
grievously defiled with the leprosy of all unrighteousness, but Lord who dare
presume of righteousness before thee, the heavens are not clean in thy sight:
Much less I that am a sinful nation; given to all manner of lewdness and
excesses: I am full of Devils and factious spirits, that have raised this
civil tempest; that have caused all these rumors and combustions in me.
Vouchsafe (O most merciful God) to lay and suppress them with the power of
thy opposite grace and virtues, suppress pride with humility, envy with
patience, wrath with meekness, and malice with charity. Be exquisite in thy
cure as thou art exquisite in all things: Thrust thy tent into my broken and
contrite heart, and search what is amiss, heal that which is wounded, cleanse
that which is foul, refresh and water that which is withered: Nourish that
which is cold, move that which is slow, soften that which is hard, reduce and
bring home that which is wandering.

And grant Lord, that all stubbornes, and worldly respects being laid aside, I
may make a full and perfect resignation of my will to thine. That I may
henceforward cover nothing that is unlawful, nor usurp nothing wrongfully:
But that all my conversation and traffic be in thy business and for thy
glory; And finally that I may be truly penitent and sorrowful for all my
misdeeds, and repent me sore for the innocent blood that I have spilt; for the
families that I have ruined, for the Towns that I have demollisht, for the
houses that I have subverted, for the plenty that I have destroyed and wasted,
and the famine that I have made way for: That so by true sorrow and humiliation
recovering p^^^^ with thee, I may have peace with my self. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

