SYMBOLVM APOSTOLICVM.
I -- Who am sinful in the To save sinners; of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1, 15.
greatest sense
Believe -- In Heart, and place my Confidence
In -- Him, who framed all things by his He spoke and it was done, he commanded
and it stood fast, Psalm. 33. 9.
word
God -- IA H, all potent, all commanding Lord,
The -- Life of all, has He gives to all things life, and breath, and all
things. In him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17, 25, 28.
Motion, Being, Birth,
Father -- Of all so called in Ephesians. 3, 15.
Heaven and Earth:
Almighty -- Giving fashion to each Matter,
Maker -- According to his Rules of Nature, Deus and naturae creavit.

Of -- All unseene, as of that which we name
Heaven -- The Grace of the Created Frame;
And -- Likewise made, as For by him were all things created in heaven and in
earth, visible and invisible, Colos. 1 16.
of all things Beginner,
Earth -- With those various Forms that flourish in her.
And -- For assurance, there my Faith is fixed
In -- Him was Perfect God and perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane
flesh subsisting, Athan Symb.
God and Man, a Person mixed.
Jesus -- Who Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins, Mat. 1. 21.
did salvation to us bring.
Christ -- The God appointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with
power, Acts 10, 38.
Anointed Prophet, Priest, and King,
His -- Fathers This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 17, 5.
self, none able to subdue Him,
Only -- As having not a Second to Him.
Son -- Of the Eternal Father, Light of light, very God of very God, Athan.
Symb.
Light of Light,
Our -- Churches great Protector day and night:
Lord -- Unto us by Nature, Grace, and Glory,
Which -- Showing he was more then transitory,
Was -- Not as other Mortals are indeed
Conceived -- In sin, but of immortal seed,
By -- The The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee. and the power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee, Luke 1, 35.
overshadowing power of God, or rather
The -- Spirit came down, sent from the Eternal Father,
Holy -- To show his Nature free from sin,
Ghost -- And not flesh, nor was, nor er'e had been.
Borne -- When Gal. 4, 4.
the fullness of the time was come
Of -- One Rom 1, 3.
of DAVID'S Line, of Maiden womb,
The -- Wonder of her Sex, when she on Earth
Virgin -- Remained, Vugo fuit partum, post, in, and ante suum.
before, in, after's Birth,
Mary -- Exalted Mari and Martam, signifit exalted.
Maid; then by his Foes
Suffered -- What Malice could on him impose
Under -- The Roman Judge, t'injustice bent,
Pontius Pilat, -- Yet He took water and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person, Mat 27. 24.
pronounced him innocent.
Was -- Flouted, scorned, exposed to all dishonor,
Crucified -- Murdered, slain in barbarous manner:
Dead -- And extended, of all life bereaved,
And -- Was that others might not be deceived:
Buried -- And They went and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone and
setting a watch, Mat. 27, 66.
locked in He made his grave with the rich in his death, Is. 53, 9. Joseph of
Arimathea, an honorable Counselor, went in boldly, and craved the body of
Jesus, and laid him in a Scpulches, Mar. 15, 43, 46.
Honorable Tomb,
He -- Whiles his Corpse was resting in Earths womb;
Descended -- Far Ephesians 3. 9.
below in glorious manner
Into -- That place, where with victorious Banner
Hell -- Saw him triumph, Devils trembled when
The -- Lord Numb 16. 22.
of spirits and flesh appeared: Then
Third day -- To Mat. 16, 21.
show his God head without striving,
He -- As the Lord of Dead, and King of Living,
Rose -- As a Isay. 25. 8.
Conqueror, and then was seen
Again -- On Earth, as if he never had been
From -- Thence by Death removed; and then to show
The -- Truth of all his Enemies overthrow,
Dead -- Men Mat. 27, 52, 53.
appeared, and testified 'twas so.
He -- Having Now on Earth Staid Acts 1, 3.
forty days,
Ascended -- Far He ascended up far above the Heavens, Ephesians. 4. 10.
beyond the Suns bright rays
Into -- The place, where 'bove the Starry Sky
Heaven -- Is the Acts 7, 49.
Throne of Sacred'st Majesty.
And -- There Coequall to the Heb. 12, 9.
Father of Spirits,
Sits -- As Heir, and Glory now inherits
On -- Glories Mat. 19 28.
seat, and being free from sinning,
The -- Place his now; so 'twas before Heb 7. 3.
beginning.
Right Hand -- Has ever been Tux mihi Pa^is erat dextram tetigisse Tyranni.
of peace the sign
Of -- Ours it was, by Him who did conjoyne
God -- And Mankind, and freely 2 Cor. 5, 10, 19.
reconciled
The -- Incensed Party, now by Colos. 1, 20.
blood grown mild.
Father -- By's Son is In whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3 ult
pleased the work being done,
Almighty -- Father by the The Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty. A^han.
Almighty Son:
From -- Which most glorious place, that never has ending,
Thence -- With Dan 7 10.
ten thousand thousand Saints attending
He -- That now sits to plead as 1 John 7, 1.
Advocate
Shall -- On the Ps. 18, 10, and 104 3.
winged Mat 26, 64.
clouds in power and state
Come -- Swiftly Mat. 24, 27.
down clothed in 2 These. 1, 8.
flaming fire,
To -- Give Rev. 22, 12. Mat. 13, 41, etc.
the bad their doom, the good their hire.
Judge -- Just, and Acts 10, 42.
universal He shall be
The -- Unjust to captivate, the just to free:
Quick -- At his then appearing, being 1 Cor. 15, 52, 53.
changed,
And -- Every person then in order Mat. 25, 33, 34, 31.
ranged:
The -- Sentence (20) shall hear pafsed for their faults
Dead -- All Rev. 20, 12. Surgite Mortui and venite ad Judicium.
first summoned from their hallow Vaults.
I -- Furthermore to show I do not err,
Believe -- On Him Christ calls the John 14, 16.
Comforter:
In -- The spirit of Life, and John 14, 17.
Truth that cannot lie,
The -- Blessed Third in Blessed Trinity:
Holy -- And Pure, us Pure and Clean to make
Ghost -- And A Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have, Luke 24. 39.
not Flesh and Bones, which Christ did take.
The -- Limbs of Christ, which ever had a Being,
Holy -- Are called, as with Col 1, 18.
the Head agreeing:
Catholic -- It Is, as without Limitation,
Church -- Of our 1 Timothy 3, 5.
God, the blessed Congregation.
The -- Parts dispersed are here, in Heaven above
Communion -- Proof, made one by Col 2, 2. Ephesians 4. 13. 1 Timothy 1, 14.
Faith and Love:
Of -- Whose sweet unity, this I believe
Saints -- Shall be one in Io. 16, 20. Ps 126. 5, 16.
Joy, though now they grieve.
The -- Chiefest thing that I look after, is
Forgivenes -- For Psalm. 32. 6.
what e're I Have done amiss:
Of -- All for which I may be blamed or shent,
Sins -- Of Though Searlet or Crimson sins, Isay. 1, 18.
all sorts; of this I Am confident.
The Resurrection -- And the full Reviving
Of -- All 2 Cor. 5, 10.
have been on earth since ADAM Living
The -- Soul that may be parted long from this
Body -- Of Mine, shall then both share of bliss:
And -- When my Bodies raised and pardon sealed,
The -- Timelesse joys of Heaven yet 1 Cor. 2, 9.
unreveal'd:
Life -- Without dying, I shall then possess
Everlasting, -- In full grown Happiness.
Amen, is not only a wish or desire of a thing to be so; but also an argument
that the thing is granted. Weem. in Mand. 3.
Amen -- So be it when my Race is run,
Amen -- So verily it shall be done.
Oration Dominica.
O -- All sufficient, which did first Create
Our -- First Grand Parents Pure, Immaculate:
Father -- Of Comfort, God of Consolation,
Which -- Set'st them in a happy Habitation.
Art -- Not thou he which at the first did frame,
In -- Just respect unto thy glorious Name,
Heavens -- Goodly Piece, with Angels that do sing
Hallowed -- And praised be our all-great-good King:
Be -- As thou art, great, good, just, gracious, then
Thy -- Praise shall Echo by all sorts of Men:
Name -- Who dare name, when, where, or whom he will?
Thy -- Name's of power in Heaven, Earth, and Hell.
Kingdom -- Against Kingdom here their forces bend:
Come -- What come will thy Kingdom nere shall end:
Thy -- Gracious word the Quire that is above
Will -- Aye perform in perfect purest Love.
Be -- Pleased then great God that we who have
Done -- For thy Glory, may thy Mercy crave:
In -- Perfect Faith and Love, and find it, when
Earth -- Shall to Earth restored be again:
As -- We are sure all things in Heaven being done,
It Is -- Thy good pleasure and thy will alone:
In -- Earth therefore we will strive, thy word to obey,
Heaven -- Is our pattern to direct the way.
Give -- Freely Lord, who at thy Mercy stand,
Us -- Who implore it at thy gracious hand,
This -- Small Petition for the Body fit,
Day -- After Day having, we will pray for it:
Our -- Food from Body-starving we desire,
Daily -- By Faith in Christ we this require,
Bread -- Which is Mankinds Staff, Lord nere deny us,
And -- Thou shall still be magnified by us.
Forgive -- Especially Lord we entreat
Us -- Who appeal unto thy Mercy-seate,
Our -- Crying Debts, which we do justly call
Trespasses, -- Sins, offenses great and small:
As -- From the bottom of our hearts for ever,
We -- Those that in their Malice do persever,
Forgive -- Most freely, praying thee to bless
Them -- That against us any ways transgress:
That -- In thy rigorous and severe decree,
Trespass -- Or sin may never revenged be.
Against -- Thee only we have sinned Lord,
Us -- Therefore pardon we entreat thee afford.
And -- 'Cause we are in danger of the Devil,
Lead -- Lord thy Flock from wickedness, from evil*
Us -- In especial we entreat thee spare,
Not -- Of us only, but of all take care:
Into -- Old Satan's traps never let us fall,
Temptation -- Sweetest bait he lays for all:
But -- In thy tender Mercy and Compassion
Deliver -- Lord thy Church from foul transgression.
Us -- Have respect unto, who by thy power
From -- Sin and Satan must be freed each hour,
Evil -- Else pursues; from thee then lets not swerve,
For -- All is thine, and all things thee do serve:
Thine -- In respect of glorious Situation
Is -- All this Fabric, all thine by Creation;
The -- Heavens above where God in Glory reigns,
Kingdom -- Of Earth, which for a while remains.
The -- Providence of all is in thy Hand,
Power -- And Protection are at thy Command:
And -- The effusion of all Grace into
The -- Hearts of Christians thou can cause and do:
Glory -- Attends thee, Grace and Glory's thine,
For -- Thus 'twas ordered by thy will divine:
Ever -- 'Twas so before that Man offended,
And -- So't shall be when all by fire is ended:
Ever -- Therefore we will praise thy Name, and say
AmenTo all: Thus let all Christians pray.
To the Old-Protestant-Christian Reader.
When one of the Disciples of our Blessed Savior begged this boon of his
Master for himself, and his fellows; Lord teach us to pray, as John also
taught his Disciples, Luke 11. 2. Christ did not then answer them, as he did
upon another occasion, when they were to be brought before Kings and Governors
for his sake: For then he bids them take no thought, how, or what they shall
speak, because it shall be given them in that hour what they shall speak,
Mat. 10. 19. But now although he were as well able to put words into their
mouths to pray to his Father, as the Holy Ghost was then to answer their
Persecutors: Yet he does not say, Take no thought, how, or what ye shall pray;
for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall pray: Neither does he
add as he does there, v. 20. For it is not ye that pray, but the Spirit of my
Father that prays in you: He neither makes such an Answer, nor adds such a
Reason, but tells them what things they shall pray for, and in what words
present it; this being his Answer to the Petition, when ye pray, say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc. From which Petition of the Disciple, and
answer of the best skilled Master, I have these few things observable.

1. That John the Baptist (as it is very apparent) did prescribe and teach his
Disciples a set Form of Prayer, and did not bid them (as it is now said) pray
by the spirit.

2. From this answer of our Savior it may be gathered, that a set Form of
Prayer is lawful for all Christians, as it was for the Disciples of Christ,
and St John.

3. That this Prayer which Christ taught his Disciples is not to be neglected
of any, but may, and ought to be used and practiced of all, in obedience to
Christ who commands it.

4. That both the Disciples of John, and our Savior praying in that manner as
they did, and were taught by their instructors, did pray by the spirit.

5. That all things necessary for man, either body or soul, this life, or that
which is to come, are summed up in that Prayer, which Christ there prescribed.

6. That Public Prayer is to be preferred before Private, because Christ
taught them to pray in a Body together, not severally asunder, bidding them not
to say My, but Our Father answering the Disciples request, not teach Me, but Us
to pray.

Now, because the Liturgy, or Public Service of the Church is laid aside, and
decried as Popish and Superstitious (with other unseemely expressions) and that
Christ's own Form of Prayer is in particular villified by some irreligious and
scurrilous tongues; some offering to God a worse then Pharisaicall
Thanksgiving, for that they never could say it; others that they have forgotten
it; a third sort publicly glorying, that they have not said it in so many
years past; and in general, that it is neglected and left to a careless
tuition: And that the Apostles Creed is altogether expunged, the New Public
Service either as unnecessary, or imperfect, or fruitless. I have thought good
this versifying way to recall it into peoples minds, especially those who
(stilo Antiquo) have been incorporated into the Body of Christ's Congregation,
and to remember all undertakers, how at the Holy Font they have engaged
themselves before God and the Church, to make provision that they may learn
the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English tongue.

Reader, this which thou see of the Lords Prayer, was so done about 23 or 24
years since, and there are many Coppies of it abroad, the other of the Creed
is newly conceived, and delivered to the Light: I have nothing to Apologize for
my self, but those Sinewy Lines of that Excellent man, Mr. GEORGE HARBERT in
his Church Porch.

Thou whose sweet Youth and Early Hopes inhance
Thy Rate and Price, and mark thee for a treasure;
Hearken unto a Verser, who may chance
Rhyme thee to good, and make a bait of Pleasure.
A Verse may find Him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
So Farewell.

October 22. 1649. Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNHAM.
London, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by John Courtney, in
Salisbury, 1650.


