THE DOCTRINE OF THE PRESBYTERIANS Reduced into Practice.

Whereby it is demonstratively proved, that it can neither convert an Infidel,
amend a profane Person, nor comfort an Afflicted.

That it over-turneth the profitable Preaching of the Word, the use of the
Sacraments, and exercise of Prayers.

LONDON* Printed in the Year, 1647.

THE DOCTRINE of the Presbyterians reduced into Practice.
SEeing the Doctrine of the Gospel tyeth not it is Disciples unto bare
speculation and mere knowledge of the History; but also binds them to the
practice, and edification of their neighbors; every man will say, that the use
thereof consists principally in 3 things, which every Christian, but more
especially each faithful Pastor ought to procuce so far fourth as lies in
him: whereof the first is, 1. The conversion of a stranger to the faith. 2. The
amendment of a bad living Christian. 3. The consolation of the sick, and
otherwise afflicted.


If therefore the Doctrine of the Presbyterian party cannot serve to any of
these 3. ends, nay if it be directly contrary thereunto, no Christian can doubt
but that it is quits different from the Doctrine of the holy Scripture, which
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3.16.

The principal points and Doctrines of whom are contained in these 5. Articles.

1. That God by an absolute decree has elected and chosen to life a very small
number of persons, without the least regard either of their faith or obedience:
and excluded the rest of mankind from all saving grace, destined by the same
decree unto eternal damnation, without any consideration either of the
incredulity or impenitency.

2. That Jesus Christ dyed for no other than only the elect; not having the
least intention of his own, or commandment of his Father, to make a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

3. That by the sin of Adam his whole posterity has lost their free will,
being subject by an inevitable necessity to do, or leave undone that which
every man acts or omitteth, be it good or evil, being thereunto
predestined by the eternal and efficacious decree of God.

4. That God to draw his elect out of the corrupt mass predi^eth a faith in
them, by a power equal to that whereby he created the world, and raises up
the dead. So that they to whom he gives his grace are not able to reject it;
and that the reprobates cannot obtain it, although it be offered them in the
preaching of the Gospel.

5. That they who have once received this grace by faith can never fall totally
or finally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins that they can commit.

Let us now see what profit arises from this Doctrine, and how it serves to
the 3 ends and uses here above proposed.

First then if he that is of that opinion will go about to convert an Infidel,
the Infidel will tell him, that he knows not how to love, nor yet believe
that God to be true and just, which only for his own pleasure has destined
the greatest part of mankind to everlasting torments without the least
consideration of any sin, or at least only for the sin of one man; who
notwithstanding obtained pardon for himself after he had wilfully committed it.
That herein he sees not the least track either of goodness, or wisdom, or
justice to use them so cruelly that are destitute of certain graces and
benefits which this God has never willed to have given them, and which these
miserable wretches could obtain no other way, and to whom by an irrevocable
decree he has imposed a necessity, as well of sinning without having any power
to repeat, as of perishing eternally: which are the words of one of their own
Doctors. That it cannot be that God which in his Word does make himself the
lover of mankind, who would that all men should be saved, and that none should
perish, who swears by himself that he will not the death of a sinner, but
that he repent and live, should keep them from repenting, and being saved.

Yea, he will the more abhor that Doctrine, when it persuades that God uses
double dealing, and has a double will; the one exterior, whereby he inviteth
the sinner unto grace, making as though he were desirous of his salvation; the
other interior, and bidden, which is always accomplished, whereby he Ieadeth
him by inevitable means as well into sin, as to damnation.

The Infidel will say to his convertor, that Homer were sooner to be believed
than he, when he says, that he who speaks contrary to what he thinks ought
to be held as an enemy* and hated as the gates of hell: and that in the
judgment of these men, the most wicked hypocrite and traitor in the world does
most lively represent the Image of that God which he speaks of.

Now if this new Evangelist do tell him, that the passages of Scripture which
say, that God would have all men to be saved, ought to be understood only of
some of every Nation and condition; the Infidel will reply, that then the
Scripture ought with much more reason to say, that God would have all men to be
damned, because that in every Nation and condition there are far more of these
^han of them; and that in all reason the denomination should be taken from the
greatest number.

But then this Catechist will bring another distinction, and say, how that God
indeed wills the conversion and salvation of all men; yet only so as he
approves of those things in themselves, and not that he gives all men the
means necessary to obtain them. Our Catechumenist will be the more astonished,
and demand of him further, how it is possible that God by an absolute and
irrevocable decree should have ordained that those things which he naturally
detesteth and hates, should come to pass; and yet that those things which he
loves and likes, should not. And if it were possible, his Cathecist will make
him turn Manichee, and think that this evil beginning, or evil God that is
the author of all evil, has continued war with that God who loves
righteousness, and hates wickedness; and that an honest man should have just
reason to be angry with him that did interpret his words in that manner, that
the Cathecist does those of holy Scripture, whereby it follows that God is
the author of all wickedness that has been, is, or shall be in the world.

But then again the other will reply, that he confounds the sin with the act;
and that God causes the second, but not the first. Whereas the other
perceiving the mystery, will again tell him, that the greatest Doctors have
written that God has predestined men as well to the means, as to the end:
and that the act is not the cause of damnation, in that it is the act but only
in that it is the sin: and that the miserable men which are under the decree of
reprobation, are no more able to abstain from sin, than to shun their damnation.

The Catechumenist will further add, that if the Gospel according to this
Doctrine be preached unto the most, not to any other end but only for their
greater damnation, that he will no longer hearken to it: seeing it is most
likely that he is of the greatest number, and not of the small; that he
remembers he has read in some Authors, that God directs his Word to them, that
thereby he might make them more deaf; and shows them the light of the Gospel
to blind their eyes; and that therefore they who never heard the Word, are
less miserable, or shall fare better then they who could not therefore
believe, because God would not give them grace sufficient to believe.

Finally, our Catechumenist will tell him, that if the decree of God be so, as
the Catechist proposes, it must needs follow, that they both labor in vain,
seeing that every man before he is come into the world is already enrolled in
one of the two Registers, either life or death; and that it is no more possible
to be blotted out of the one or the other, than it is for God to deny himself.

The Catechist then fearing that this Proselyte will fall from him, does tell
him further, that it is not for us to search into these secrets, that there is
no visible mark whereby to discern the elect from the reprobate; and that the
elect themselves know not the election before their calling, which is deferred
sometimes unto the last hour of their lives, that every man ought to be ready
to answer and obey God when he calls. That there are none but profane and
reprobates who say, that men labor in vain, seeing that they whom God has
elected to salvation are likewise elected to ^aith and good works.

But these things will the more provoke our Catechumenist, for he will say, or
at least think, that it is no matter to be able to distinguish in particular
the elect from the reprobates; and that it suffices to know in general that
every one is necessarily either of the one, or other. And seeing that no man is
able to so any thing before his vocation and conversion which may avail him,
that therefore we should defer all things till then; and seeing that our saving
vocation works with such a force that it is impossible to disobey, it would
be extreme folly to hasten the execution of Gods will by humane industry and
study; yea and that our prayers too were likewise hereto vain, in as much as we
cannot make any thing pleasing to God without faith, which is never to be had
before our calling. That the question is not of the quality of him who so
speaks, whether he be profane, or no; but of the quality of the doctrine
which necessarily makes him to be so.

Let us now see whether this doctrine have more power over a debauched
Christian to bring him to repentance and amendment of life. To him the^fore he
will show the filthiness of his sin, the scandal to his neighbor, the
ingratitude to his Creator and Redeemer, the menaces of the Law, and the
vengeance of God prepared for all Impenitents, etc. Whereupon this man having
more knowledge of the doctrine of the Presbyterians, than a good conscience
will send his censurer to the maxims and principles of them; and will much
muse how the other should be ignorant that every thing which is done by men on
earth, be it good or bad, comes not to pass but by the efficacious decree or
ordinance of God, who does all in all. That the first cause does in such manner
move and direct all the second causes (among which is the will of man) that
they cannot otherwise stir, than as they are stirred. That he is very sorry
that he is given to such and such a vice; but his comfort is, that he knows
that God would have it so by his secret will, that God has predestined him
hereunto, having as much willed and procured the treason of Judas, as the
salvation of St. Paul. That he has no power to retain grace, when he that gave
it will take it away: that the Spirit blows where it lists, inspireth whom
it will, with-draweth when it pleases, and when it pleases returns again.
And if it return with intention of his amendment, it shall be as impossible for
him to withstand or else delay, as it is now to work or hasten it. That it is
not for him to prescribe the time and hour of his conversion, wherein a wicked
man does no more than does a dead man in his resurrection. That God is able to
quicken him, and endue him with his Spirit, though he were already dead four
days, and stinking in the grave as Lazarus: yea if that perhaps shall not be
until the last hour of the day, yet God gives not the grace to cry, Abba,
Father. That he so abhors the Doctrine of those who are styled Independents,
that he dares not use the least endeavor to do well, for fear of obscuring
that grace which works irresistably, and attributing any thing to the will of
man.

Yet he remembers that he had sometimes good motions proceeding doubtless from
the Spirit of God, which has given him the truth, faith that can never fail;
and that for the present he is like unto the trees in Winter, which seem dead
though they are alive, being of the number of the elect. And his sin it self
how enormous so ever works together to his salvation, yea and that he has
already obtained pardon for it. That his Censurer cannot deny it, seeing that
he exhorts him to repentance, which is nothing worth without faith; no more
than faith if it believe not the remission of all sins both done, and to be
done, although he were of the number of the reprobates: a thing which he will
not affirm for fear of being so held indeed. Yet notwithstanding his Censurer
could again nothing by it, who by his exhortation and threatenings could not any
way alter the decree of heaven, but only molest him with the torments of hell,
and to stir up a worm in his conscience to gnaw him to no purpose. If hereupon
the Censurer proceed and tell him, that although the Spirit alone does
immediately produce repentance in the heart of a sinner, yet notwithstanding
that exhortations and threatenings are the means and instruments which it uses
in the work. The other will demand further of him the explication of his saying
therein, observing a manifest contradiction, in that on the one side repentance
is immediately attributed to the holy Ghost; and on the other side, these
Scriptures and threatenings are held as means, and instruments of this work. The
operation being not there immediate where the means are used. That if these
means of exhortation be necessary, or at least if it be ordinarily required in
this operations, how can it be that they who reject it, and resist the
Instrument, do not likewise (nay cannot) resist the principal cause which is
the holy Ghost? He that will not suffer the rasor the necessary instrument of
his cure, does not he therein also reject the Chiru^gion?

The Censurer will say, that the elect reject neither the one nor the other.
The holy Ghost piercing the ear to make it hear, and opening the heart to make
it receive those admonitions which are altogether vain and unprofitable, until
the holy Ghost does so work with them. Thereupon the other will make him to
confess, that the Word preached for the most part is destitute of that
operation of the Holy Ghost, as it appears by the misprixion that the most
part make of it, which cannot be when the efficacy of the Spirit does accompany
it. It follows then, that the whole Ministry is but a fancy or dance, no
more cooperating to man's conversion, than the clay which our Savior applied to
the eyes of the blind did unto his ^ight; or the sole voice calling upon
Lizarus made him to rise out of the grave. He will also demand of him, why it
is (seeing Nature does nothing in vain) that the Author of Nature and of Grace
did appoint the Ministry of the Word; and why those things which the Censures
attributes only to the Spirit are yet notwithstanding in the Scriptures
attributed to the Word preached? And how it is, that thereby we are said to be
begotten, renewed, nourished, edified, purified, etc. Whereas the new Doctrine
of the Presbyterians leaves it in no other function than to serve as an
object, and represent that without, which the Spirit has already wrought
within, as well in the will, as understanding, without any cooperation of the
Word, not only unprofitable without the Spirit, but also dangerous, and
aggravating the damnation of its contemners, although it were impossible to
receive and cherish it, even as it is impossible for them to add the efficacy
of the Spirit which is not in their power.

There now remains no other instance for our Censurer, than to exhort this
profane fellow to pray unto God, that he would be pleased to give the grace to
leave his lewdness, promising that if he pray as he ought to do, he shall be
heard, and receive what he deamandeth*

But hereupon this profane man, being well instructed in the Doctrine of the
Presbyterians, will demand of him, how it is possible to pray as we ought to do
if God gives not grace beforehand; and that also so effectually, that it
should be impossible for him not to pray. And therefore seeing that he fails
so to do, the Censurer must needs say, that God will be no more invoked on by
him than he has given him grace whereby to do it. And that it is no less
easy to perceive that God sent not this Corrector to him with an intention to
better him by his Ministry, when he finds more confusion in the doctrine of
the speaker, than amendment in the hearer; to whom he brings either the
pillow of Epicurus to lull him asleep in his security; else the haltar of
despair, wherewith he may hang himself as Judas.

But above all, this Profaner will find yet one more singular help to the
flattering of his flesh, by the Answer which the Presbyterians do usually make
unto those who ask in what case David would have been had he dyed in his
adultery: Whereunto they say, that it was impossible for David to have dyed
before he repented; because that after this he was to get a son from whom the
Messiah was to descend.

But hereunto our Profaner will reply, that the impossibility of dying before
repentance, according to the Doctrine of the Presbyterians, is founded upon the
general promise made to all the elect; and not upon any particular promise to
David touching the Messiah, whom God had sent into the world by other means,
had he foreseen the impenitency of David, as he foresaw his repentance.

That, if the Presbyterians be not deceived, he is as sure not to dye without
repentance, as was David. So that according to that doctrine, the true means to
avoid death, is to commit, and ever continue in some mortal sin. It being
impossible for him to be killed in adultery, or perish in any other sin, before
having first made his reconciliation with God, who is not angry for ever (to
speak in the language of the Presbyterians) but only with the reprobates.

See then the invention of immortality found out to satisfy the Parace^sians,
and such like fools, who search for this remedy against death in dangerous and
natural causes. Our Presbyterians shows an Antidote in a mortal cause of so
facile and agreeable execution to the facile auditors, that the Poets Ambr^sia,
and Mede's charms are fabulous unto it.

Now then our Corrector will either desise his enterprise in reforming this
man's deboistnesse, or else forsake his own principles, and correct his Doctrine.

But perhaps he will acquit himself far better, in undergoing the office of a
Comforter to one that is afflicted, than he did of playing the Convertor of the
Infidel, or the correcto^ of the profane Christian.

The ground of all comfort and consolation to each afflicted soul has been
eve^ thought and found in the death and passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; whereby having satisfied the justice of God his Father, he obtained
reconciliation for all mankind, actually applyable to all those, who
acknowledging the infiniteness of the benefit do thereupon embrace the author
of it with a true and lively faith. Neither can our Comforter find any other
foundation whereby to consolate and assure his Patient against the terrors of
Gods justice, the condemnation of the Law, and accusation of his own
conscience. But the sick, otherwise afflicted, can never make the true
foundation of Gods Word agree with the false foundation of the Presbyterians,
viz. That Christ dyed not but for a very small number of persons already
elected unto salvation by his heavenly grace; who in his decree did no more
consider the death of his Son, than the faith of the elect.

How shall I truly know, will the Patient then say, that I am rather of the
small number than of the great? seeeing that you my Pastor and Comforter, will
not that the promises of salvation are made universally to all; and those
places of Scripture which seem general according to your opinion, are to be
restrained only to the universa^ity of the elect; and that in all the rest of
the holy Scripture there is no more special promise, nor mention of my self
than of any other, and who besides the holy Scripture have no revelation
whether of Angel or Prophet to assure me thereof.

When our Savior said to his Apostles, O e of you shall etray me, although
this concerned but one of them, yet were they all exceedingly troubled
therewith. So the were there but a very small number of reprobates for whom, as
you say, Christ dyed not, yt should I have no just reason but to fear, and
think that I were one of them much rathe, seeing their number is so great.

Whereupon our Consolate will allege unto him the judgment of carity, which
presumes well of every one, seeing that God does as little reveal the decree
of reprobation, as that of election. But his Patient will not there find the
least assurance; and that for many Reasons.

1. Because this judgment of charity, if a man apply it generally to all, will
necessarily prove false. The Comforter not daring to maintain these
Propositions together, that Christ dyed for all men, and that he dyed but for a
very small number.

2. The judgment of charity has never any place, when he must have the
certitude of faith to believe, or do any thing with a good conscience.

3. The judgment of charity extends it self no farther then to the suppressing
of finister opinions, and suspicions lightly conceived against our neighbors,
whose infirmities it commanden us to conceal, without preaching any falhood to
him.

When I see my one present himself at the Table of our lord, in the judgment
of charity I think hi^ to be prepared as he ought, seeing nothin to the
contrary. But that they who are thus well prepared, do there participate to
their souls health, this they believe with the judement of faith, which medleth
with nothing that is or may be false. So likewise when I see a sick-man as he
is giving up the ghost, calling upon Jesus Christ, I believe in charity that
he dies like a Christian; But that God makes them happy who depart in the
true faith of our Lord and Savior, this I believe with the certitude of faith,
and in such a manner as it is impossible to be deceived. Which yet
notwithstanding both may, and also does happen in the judgment of charity.

In a word, the judgment of charity has no place but in those things only
which are between man and man. But when there is question of the divine promise
that has foundation in divine truth, there is then required a certitude of
faith, wherein there is nothing to be found that is either false or doubtful.

If any man say, that we should presume every one to be of the number of the
elect, until he appear to be the contrary. The Patient will answer, that by
outward appearance we can know nothing either of election or reprobation. And
that therefore it is not sufficient to presume, but that also we must have a
full and perfect assurance that Chrit died for him whom we go about to comfort:
which assurance is not to be found in the Presbyterian doctrine, seeing it
denies that Christ dyed for all men.

The Minister or Comforter will then ask the Patient, if he never felt the
witness of his adoption which the Spirit of God bears to the spirit of the
elect; and if he be assured that he had faith once, he may be certain that he
has it still, notwithstanding the small fruit that it produces.

Whereunto the Patient will well reply, that Calvin himself does much trouble
and obsence this certitude in his Initi^^tions: l. 3. c. 2. ss ^0. The heart of
man (says he) has so many secret corners of vanity, is full of so many hiding
holes of lying, is covered with so guilfull hypocrisy, that it often deceives
himself, persuades him that he has true faith, when he has not.

If the Patient acknowledge that he never felt this testimony in his heart, his
Comforter will answer him in the same manner as he formerly did the Profane,
when he took upon him the office of a Censurer and Corrector, viz. how that all
are not called the same hour.

But if the Patient do then ask him some assurance that he shall be thus
efficaciously called before his death; the Comforter will find none for him.
Only he will tell him, that assuredly Christ dyed for him if so he believe in
him. Wherein he will show himself either a prevaricator of his own side, and an
overthrower of the Presbyterian Doctrine, or else that he is deprived of common
sense.

For if he give the self same consolation to all that are sick, to all that are
afflicted, yea even to those who for the greatest offenses are led to
execution; and if this consolation be founded on the truth, does it not then
follow, that in truth Christ dyed for all, and every one?

And if he so understands it, that this becomes true by the faith, which the
Patient adds to the discourse of the Minister, he has lost his sense in
affirming, That the object of faith, or thing proposed to be believed,
receives it is truth, and depends on the consent and belief of man; who by
this approbation and faith has no more power to make that true which is false
in it self; than to make that false by his incredulity which in it self is
true. The incredulity of man may deprive him of the benefit of this death; yet
cannot it make that Christ suffered not this death, to testify his love unto
all mankind universally, even of all that are bound to believe in him; and yet
no man bound to believe that which is false.

The Apostle says, that God will send the spirit of error upon them that have
not received the love of the truth. And yet according to the Presbyterian
Doctrine, he would have a man first believe that which is false, and then
afterward for having believed this falsehood, he shall be punished with the
spirit of error for believing of a lie.

See then if this be not a labyrinth of prodigious D vinitie, which turns
obedience into punishment. For if these men speak true, and that Christ not
dead for those that believe not on him; how can they deserve to be punished for
not having believed that which is false? and they that have obeyed his
Commandment in believing of his death, how should they suffer the punishment
due unto disobedient and incredulous, which is to believe lying?

In a word, to deny the universalitie of the merit of Christ's death, is
outragiously to dishonor God; as though the author of truth commanded all men
to believe a falsehood.

And the better to discern the giddiness of this spirit, it is to be noted,
how that as on the one side this doctrine does forbid to believe that which the
Scripture does affirm as most true: so on the other side does it command every
one to believe that he is elected unto life, although he be a reprobate in
effect; and that he cannot loose his faith, being once had, for any sin
whatsoever he does commit; which the Scripture does deny as a thing most false
in like terms.

If then that this Doctrine which denies that Christ dyed for all, bereaveth
the afflicted of all consolation; the other point which denies that a man may
fall away from grace and faith, does clean overthrow the Ministry of preaching,
which consists in exhortations by promises and threatenings; which can no
longer be a means to do any good work, only by the immediate operation of the
holy Ghost, as it has been above said.

So neither is there to be found in all the Scripture any one promise of such
perseverance in faith as these men intimate: Seeing that all exhortations,
whereof the Scriptures are full, do directly oppugn this pretended promise.
They admonish the faithful that they take heed they do not fall, of hardening
their hearts, of receiving the grace of God in vain, of falling from their
steadfastness. And yet the imaginary promise of the Presbyterians does declare,
that they cannot fall, that they cannot harden their hearts, that they cannot
have received the grace in vain, and that they cannot fall from their
steadfastness. By which means the admonitions that de^^^nce the danger, and
beget fear, do overthrow the promise which says, there is no fear of danger,
nor cause of fear. If it be not, t^^ Presbyterians will make us believe, that
the faithful who fear a danger that can no more happen, than that God should
lie, are more foolish than certain melancholy persons who fear that the heavens
would fall, which notwithstanding shall one day pass away.

For ^^mme of all, it will come unto that pass, to observe that it were better
to address our admonitions unto God; for him to finish his will in men, to
convert, correct, and comfort them by his omnipotency, which no person is able
to resist. And then it is his fault so many men continue faithless, profane,
and desperate; because it is he that refuses to give or takes away the grace
necessary as well to their conversion, as to their repentance, and perseverance
in the faith.

If any of these Presbyterians were sick of the Palsy, and presented himself
to some Physician; who by the means of an exquisite potion promises him to
leave his bed ere long, and go whither he pleases. The other having recovered
his health, and the use of his arms and legs, would he further bind the
Physician to carry him upon his shoulders from place to place, for the sparing
of his legs, and the nourishing of his sloth? while in the mean time he lies
lazy in his bed, and continues the excess which brought him to his sickness.
And yet notwithstanding these men are not content, that God should furnish them
with necessary and sufficient grace, to preserve and keep them from all
temptations of the world, and the flesh, and to continue in that faith, and
thereby to conserve this grace in watching and praying; but they will also have
God immediately, and irresistably to produce all these things in them.

What remains then but to say, that God himself does believe, does repent, and
persevere in well-doing in man. Even as Servetus said, that the fire does not
burn, that the Sun shines not, bread nourishes not, but only that God does
all these things immediately in his creatures, having given them these
properties.

The preaching of the Word being thus made of none effect by the Presbyterian
doctrine, there will remain no less use and profit in the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, unless it be that the Ministers themselves in
administering thereof do destroy this unhappie doctrine: for to every person to
whom they baptize, they apply the promises of the Covenant of grace, that they
nothing belong unto the reprobates of the world. The Eucharist is given to all,
with assurance that Christ dyed for all those who do receive it; although their
doctrine affirm, that he dyed not for those who receive him unworthily unto
their own condemnation, the number of whom is very great in the reformed Church.

What then remains? Even their prayers themselves, the exercise whereof is
common both to Pastor and the flock; cannot be of any profit either to the one,
or to the other, seeing that all are either elect or reprobate. They for their
part obtain nothing for the means, if that God have written their names in the
book of life from all eternity, without having any more regard to their
prayers, than unto their faith, and that it is impossible for them to be razed
out. And as for these, they are no more able to get themselves registered in by
their prayers, than to undo the immutable and unchangeable decree of God.

So that by this trial of the practice, each one may see what esteem we ought
to have of that opinion, which resists the conversion of Infidels, the
amendment of the scandalous, and consolation of the afflicted. Which makes the
preaching of the Word to be of none effect, and quite overthrows the use of
the Sacraments, and exercise of prayers. And in a word, over-turneth the
foundation of the Ministry, that consists in sound Doctrine, and good
Discipline.

FINIS.

