A DISCOVERY Of some Sins of the MINISTRY, made in a Confession, Published some
years since by diverse Ministers, and now made public again, for its
usefulness, As briefly Comprehending the chief Duties of that Great and
Weighty Work of the Ministry.

Primus felicitatis gradus est non delinquere, secundus, delicta cognoscere,

Cyprian Ep. 55. Discernendi a Plebe and caeteris sumus, doctrina non vest,
conversatione non habitu, mentis Puritate non Cultu,

Cael. ep. 2. ad Episc. Gal. Tom. primo Council. Haec sit Propositi nostri
summa, quod sentimus loqu^mur, quod loquimur sentiamus, concordet sermo cum
vita,

Seneca, Ep. 75. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

Nihil sane turpius, nihil perniciousius, nihil coram ipso Deo abominabilius,
quam in omnium gravissimis Ecclesiae rebus, nempe in docendo Ecebolum aut
Vertumnum agere; arundinis instar levi aura nunc huc nunc illuc impelli ac
vacillare, nescire stare loco, attemperare religionem five nostris, five
aliorum secularibus, caducis, fluxissimis commodis; pro voluntate potentiorum
laxare and restringere omnia, Magdeburgenses in vita Lucae Evangel.

Pulcherrrimus ordo est and saluberrimus, ut onus quod portandum imponis, tu
ports prior, and exte discas qualiter oporteat aliis moderari -- Sermoquidem
vivus and efficax exemplum est operis, sacile faciens suadibile quod dicitur,
dum monstrat factibile quod suadetur, Bern. Epist. 201.

That dreadful charge of Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee
therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearance, and at his Kingdom; preach the Word, be instant in
season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
Doctrine, is able to affright even a Chrysostom, a Calvin, who preached every
day. when I seriously ponder the several effectual enforcements of this
terrible Obtestation, methinks Ministers should do nothing but study, preach
and pray, Rob. Bolton, Assize Sermon, P. 97.

To the Reader.
Reader,
IT concerns thee not to know who were the first Authors of this Confession, if
thou know not already; for I have not published it either to disparage them,
by discovering their Infirmities, or gain them any applause, by fuch a free
ingenuous acknowledgment of them, which would be as absurd as contradictio in
terminis, being intended by themselves for their humiliation, and may serve as
a Directory, not only for such who have little else left them to do, but as the
Friar counseled Luther, abire in cellam and dicere miserere mei Deus; but for
all who are employed in that work, which none ever undertook, but might sadly
reflect upon his own failings in the management of it: For who is sufficient
for these things? as Quintilian says of an Orator, he must be bonus vir and
dicendi peritus; so a Minister must be not only apt to teach, but a good man,
he must take heed both to himself and to his Doctrine, if he would swe both
himself and those that hear him; otherwise he will not know how to deal plainly
and froely with others: For, dicta factis deficientibus erubescunt, Tertul. de
patientia. Or as Aelfric, many hundred years since complained of the English
Clergy, non audent de justitia loqui, qui justitiam nec faciunt nec diligunt,
Usser. de successione, c. 2. s. 35. Or if they preach such things as they do
not themselves practice, how easily do the people put them off, as he that read
Tully, docet officum, non facit officium. He that wins souls is wise, and he
had need maintain in others a repute of his own integrity, though he should not
affect popularity for his own advantage, yet he must have a good report of
those that are without, 1 Timothy 3. 7. Quisquis vitam custodit sibi benefacit,
quisquis autem famam, and in alios misericors est, nobis enim necessaria est
vita nostra, aliis fama nostra, Aug. de bono vid. 22. And if the people look
upon a Minister either as a Diotrephes, that seeks for pre-eminence, or a
Demas, that makes a Trade of the Ministry, for gaining the world, or an
Ecebolus, that builds up the things which he has formerly destroyed, he shall
be as salt that has lost its savor, or as the wood of the Vine that is good
for nothing, of no use, and another shall by his good conversation without the
word, gain more than he shall by his preaching gain without such a
conversation: And it is as vain a thing for a man to continue his Ministry, by
letting go his integrity, as propter vitam vivendi perdere cousus. If any
despise these Confessions, as supposing an unnecessary strictness in Ministers,
I shall account them such as had rather slight their duty, than faithfully
perform it; as a bad Disputant, that finds it a more easy way to neglect his
Adversaries Argument than to anser it, quanto expeditius est dicere fabula and
mendacium est? But such do not persuade men as knowing the terror of the Lord,
or considering the account which they must ere long give before the
Judgment Seat of Christ. Let such read the Epistle of John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, to the Bishop of Winchester, before his works: He had the Bishopric
of Ely or Lincoln offered to him, but he contented himself with that which he
had already, because though he had less Revenues belonging to his Bishopric,
so he had fewer souls, and he should be able to make up his accounts better,
which he expected shortly to be called to, than those who had more souls and
the expense of greater Revenues to answer for. Let me subjoyn hereto a story or
two of like nature, and I have done: There was a good man who having brought up
his Son at the University and being asked why he did not prefer him to a
Benefice (which he had advantage easily to do, being in great favor with such
as lived at the upper end of the world, and if I remember well, one of the
Chaplains in Ordinary to King James) he replied that he had souls enough to
answer for in his own Parish, he would not bring upon himself the guilt of
more, by putting his Son into a Living, before he knew him to be fit for it.
The other is, of Dr. Williams, Late Archbishop of York, who told a Minister
that came to him for Institution not long before his death, that he had passed
through many places of honor and trust both in Church and State, more than any
of his Order in England, but if he were assured, that by his Preaching he had
converted but one soul to God, he should take more spiritual joy and comfort
therein, than in all the Honors and Offices that had been conferred upon him.
Let those that rule over others, so watch for their souls, as those who must
give an account, Heb. 13. 17.

Long tamen graviori and pericuiosiori debito tenentur adstricti, qui pro
multis animabus reddituri sunt rationem. Quid ego infoelix? Quo me vertam, si
tantum thesaurum, si pretiosum depositum istud quod sibi Christus sanguine
proprio pretiosius indicavit, contigerit negligentius custodire? Bern. Sermon. 3.
de advent. Dom.

I shall only add, that if any think somthings in the following Discovery,
having particular respect to the Authors might have been omitted, other things
added, the several Heads enlarged. They are the words of others, which I would
neither add to nor diminish from, I would not put any to much charge, nor abuse
any man's leisure, nor wast perishing Paper; especially intending it for the use
of such as know how to take, or leave, or enlarge any thing, as the matter
requires.

A Discovery after some search, of the sins of the Ministry, because of which,
as we conceive, the Lord is angry, and has almost made his Ministers and
Ordinances contemptible.
Sect. I. In Relation to our Calling to the Ministry.
1. Entering to the Ministry without the knowledge of Gods Sending.

2. Not seeking Confirmation and Seals of our Mission in the Consciences of the
people, or in our own further growth and fitting for the Ministry.

Sect. II. In Relation to Preaching.
1. Going out with little Preparation, trusting in Gifts and Parts, and growing
lazy in preparing to speak to edification.

2. Where Pains are taken for preparation, trusting to it, whereby God is
provoked to blast good matter well ordered and worded.

3. Neglect of Prayer. 1. In studies and preparation, the matter we bring forth
is not seriously recommended to God to be quickened to his people. 2. In our
Prayers for assistance, being set more upon assistance to the Messenger than to
the Message which we carry, not caring what becoms of the Word, if we be with
some measure of assistance and liberty carried on in the Duty. 3. Neglect of
Prayer for the fruit and blessing of the Word which we have preached, that it
may receive the early and latter rain. 4. Neglect of application to God for the
knowledge of his mind in debateable matters.

4. Not meaning and aiming every word in respect to edification, but bringing
forth many things in the Name of the Lord, which are not aimed at profit.

5. Speaking rashly and by guess in the Name of the Lord things that are
plausible, and in many things not bringing from the Lord that which we speak; a
sin pointed at by the Lord, in his disappointing that which so many spoke
confidently of the success of our Army against those which have invaded us.

6. Too much frequent and unnecessary speaking of public Transactions in
Sermons, neglecting to set forth the excellency of Christ, the new Covenant,
etc.

7. Preaching against public sins, neither in such a way nor for such an end
as we ought, for the gaining of souls, and drawing men out of their sin; but
rather because it is our concernment to say something, and have a by-blow and
wipe at them, reproving the evils of the time to please men.

8. Want of Bowels in Preaching, toward them that are in hazard of perishing.

9. We preach not as before God, but as to men; as does appear by our different
pains in preparation to speak to our ordinary Hearers, and to others to whom we
would approve our selves.

10. Too much eying our own credit and applause, and being rickled with it when
we get it, or unsatisfied when it is wanting.

11. Neglect of endeavors to have our own hearts affected with the power,
either in preparation or delivery of the Word which we preach on ordinary or
extraordinary occasions, but for the most part preaching, as if we our selves
were not concerned in the Message which we carry to the People.

Sect. III. In Relation to the Judicatories of the Church and their
Constitutions.
1. Idolizing the authority of Assemblies, so that no difference from their
Conclusions has been accounted tolerable; because of which God has spotted
our Assemblies.

2. Not making conscience of keeping and waiting the Meetings of the Church
Judicatories, but wearying of the expense and attendance, because of which,
diverse things therein treated of, have miscarried.

3. Hastily concluding of Acts, and pressing obedience thereto without
convincing grounds held forth from the Scripture for satisfying the Consciences
of the Lords People.

4. Neglect of making application unto God, for the knowledge of his mind in
debateable things, before they pass into Conclusions.

5. Wearying to hear men fully which present doubts, and to weigh all Arguments
which may be presented for the Negative, before the Affirmative be taken into
consideration.

6. Impatience to wait for a clear and deliberate bringing matters to a
conclusion, with passion hastening to carry things by plurality.

7. Binding the people of God with strait and binding Acts in things
unnecessary.

8. Blind following of leading men in Judicatories without persuasion of the
matter, and oftentimes with hints and doubtings of Conscience smothered.

9. Want of Faithfulness and tenderness both in bringing and holding in persons
in the Ministry, not trying the reality of the work of God in those that enter
into the Ministry.

Sect. IV. In Relation to the exercise of Discipline and drawing forth the
Censures of the Church.
1. Partiality in administration of Censures, with respect of Persons, not
using the like faithfulness and zeal toward the high and low.

2. Not making use of the Ordinances of Discipline for the gaining of Souls,
but turning it into a civil punishment, and in the administration thereof,
either becoming lukewarm, or without a spirit of meekness.

3. Mocking of repentance, by teaching formalities therein to Offenders,
hardening them in their sins, by accepting bare Forms without evidences of
repentance, and loosning when we were persuaded that Christ did not loose,
turning the profession of repentance to a state-Engine to step to employment
and preferment.

4. Want of tenderness in testifying of the conversation and repentance of
Ministers and People, giving Testimonials to Great men, or to shift our
Congregations of Factious Persons.

5. Want of exact carefulness and faithfulness in debarring from the Lords
Table the ignorant and scandalous.

6. Unequal dealing with the poor and rich in admitting to; or debarring and
suspending from the Lords Table.

7. Want of bowels and compassion to the Parties on whom Discipline is
exercised, and an imperious kind of boasting over them.

Sect. V. In Relation to our way of performing Ministerial Duties.
1. Laziness in going about duties, not improving out time and talents to do
all the good we might among the people of God.

2. Want of delight in going about the duties of our Callings, doing them not
for Christ's sake, and love to the Flock, looking on them as burdens.

3. Satisfying our selves with public reproving of public sins, and
neglecting the gaining way of private dealing with the Consciences of sinners.

4. A gross carnal way of handling the matters of Christ.

5. Carrying on some Ordinances, and neglecting others, equally warranted, and
being diligent in no duty but preaching.

6. Not studying to be acquainted with the condition of the people, that we may
apply our selves to the variety of their estates.

7. Turning all Duties and Religion into a forwardness in the cause of God, and
under color of that, neglecting duties, and the life and power of Godliness.

8. Neglect of pains to fit us more for our callings after we have acquired an
habit of preaching, as if we need not grow in fitness for all the duties of our
Callings.

9. Partiality in visiting the sick; if they be poor, we go once, and when sent
for, if rich, and of better rank, ofter, and unsent for, and in examinations
often passing by great folks.

10. Performing the public Duties of preach ing and Prayer, as parts of trial,
and not as duties done to God.

Sect. VI. In Relation to our walk and conversation, personal faults.
1. Worldly-mindedness, caring immoderatly for the things of this life, and
following too eagerly the bettering of stipends.

2. Want of hospitality and charity to the Members of Christ.

3. Want of Sobriety in all things suitable to the times.

4. Sleighting of the Hearing of the Lords Word, hearing the Word from others
only to censure and try their Gifts, and not as Christians that should hear and
make use of it.

5. Envying the gifts and graces of God in others, or discouragement in our
duties, because of our short up-coming to others in whom Gifts and Graces
shine, undervaluing and sleighting the sincerity of Grace in others, because
they be Inferior to our selves in Gifts.

6. Pride showing it self, in not stooping and condescending to the infirmities
of the weak, but disdaining Christ's work in them, because of some infirmities
that we can observe in them.

7. Not enduring admonition or reproof from Ministers or such of the People of
God as observe some things in us that are contrary to tenderness, and give
offense.

8. Loss of Tenderness and diligence after we are Ministers, to which some had
attained before.

9. Being very little in secret Prayer and converse with God, and excusing this
in our selves, with being much taken up in other duties.

10. Neglect of accurate studying the Scriptures.

11. Vain imitation of other men.

12. Neglect of frequent reflecting upon our own state and walk with God.

Sect. VII. In our walk in our Families.
1. Not being Patterns to the Flock in holiness and diligence, but rather ill
examples in lightness in our conversations, and sleighting of Duties, by
superficial performance of duties by starts, not setting apart time for the
deliberate going about them.

2. Reading the Scriptures rashly and inconsiderately, and not as men that
should be acquainted with the mind of God in all his Word.

3. Neglect of the Instruction and Edification of our Families, so that none
more than our own are worse looked to.

4. Little or no time set apart in our Families, to mourn for the guiltiness of
the Land, and the backslidings of the times.

5. Deep Hypocrisy in pressing upon others to do that in their Families which
is utterly slighted by our selves.

Sect. VIII. In our walk amongst the people of our charge.
1. Unfruitfulness, not studying to converse with the people of God for their
Edification.

2. Carnal familiarity with wicked and natural People out of the duties of our
Calling, whereby they are hardened in their sin, finding the Minister like
themselves, however he speaks to them in public.

3. Strangeness and up-keeping of our selves from such as fear the Lord,
whereby they are made to keep back profitable freedom from us.

4. Neglect of spiritual fellowship with the people of God, and not putting
them to pray with us.

5. Unwillingness to entertain spiritual discourse, yea, many times sleighting
and shifting it out when it is cast in by others.

6. Speaking our own words on the Sabbath day, and countenancing the same in
others.

7. Not daring to reprove sin, and appear zealous and tender before the wicked.

Sect. IX. In our Walk in the Company of Ministers, very unprofitable, and often
hurtful one to another, and being an offense to the Lords people.
1. By neglect of Prayer, and every thing that may edify.

2. Shifting off Prayer and other duties when we are called thereto.

3. Ordinary driving away our time in carnal rejoicing and lightness, sporting
and jesting one with another, and censuring, etc.

4. Want of freedom and love, to admonish one another in serious tenderness,
and if any freedom be used, it is in jest, and an upcast which causes an
alienation, when things observed in another, do stick with us, and are kept up,
or told in such a way.

5. Ordinarily we Converse together, as Ministers, and not as Christians,
speaking only of things pertaining to our calling, and of nothing pertaining to
our souls and their condition.

6. Turning all Christian duties into Ministerial duties, we speak them as
things that are without us, and as if they did not concern our selves; in a
word, we are not good Ministers, because we are not good Christians, this is
the root of all the Corruption of our Calling.

FINIS.

