A Discourse or Dialogue between the two now Potent Enemies:



The Lord General Militia, and his illegal opposite Commission of Array.

The first, Pleading the Power and lawfulness of his Authority by the
Parliament for the benefit of the Subject.

The other, Claiming the Prerogative of the King for the Cavaliers.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the
Scottish unicorn and Scottish thistle on the other

October: 7th LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates. 1642.

A DIALOGVE between the Militia and Array.
Militia. THere has been much discourse about you and I, that is, about the
Commission of Array and the Malitia, and you have by the Parliament been
formerly adjudged illegal and unlawful.


Array. Can that be unlawful which is undertaken for the defense of the King?
to whom should the military strength of the Kingdom be subject if not to the
King.


Mil. I allow all this, and my desire as well as yours is, to sacrifice my
blood in maintaining the Kings right, against all such as would have him invade
the privileges of the Subject, and such as seek the dissolution of the
Parliament. In a word, I stand for the King and the Parliament, you only for
the King as he is carried away by the evil counsel of Malignants.


Array. These Malignants indeed have been sufficiently railed upon, and under
that title have been comprised many well affected Subjects; for if every one
led only a loyal subjection, did but afar off appear to incline to the Kings
designs, he was branded with the mark of a malignant spirit, so that many
have by vulgar opinion been undeservedly included under that appellation.


Mil. Though I know Array, that you are a thing created by Regal Authority,
and do endeavor to affront the Militia, I will show you your first beginning
and original, which we spread a blush upon your cheek, or rather conscience,
if you have any grace or Religion, while in a brief Narration I do give you
an account of your own Pedigree, for you are an upstart piece of the military
strength of this Kingdom.


Array. It Is false, I can derive my antiquity from the reigns of many former
Kings, wherein I have done very good service, and such has my valor been,
that I have in many Battles crushed the insolent Commons, and brought a
glorious victory to the Kings Standard.


Mil. You brag on wrong grounds. It is the end of any action that does merit
honor, your confiding in doing service for the King in opposing the
Parliament, is an argument built on false grounds; but you are conformable in
your words to your purposes and beginning: For when the King through the
instigation of the malignant party consisting of Papists, prelaticall Clergy,
Delinquents, and part of the Nobility and Gentry, who serving the Court, had
combined to bury the happiness of this Kingdom in the ruin of this
Parliament, and to cut up the freedom of Parliaments by the root, and to erect
in this Kingdom an arbitrary government, then you the Commission of Array were
presently thought upon, and away you were carried into several Countries by
diverse Noblemen, there by an illegal power to raise an Army for the protection
of Delinquents from the hands of Justice, first under color of a Guard for the
King, you and your Commission of Array overrunning several Counties,
compelling the Trained Bands by force to come in and join with you, or
disarming them and putting their Arms into the hands of lewd and desperate
persons, thereby turned the Arms of the Kingdom against it self, and this
was your intention.


Array. I had no such purpose but was for the safety of the kingdom, and the
honor of the King: For it was always thought fit and requisite that the King
should have the ordering and disposing of the Militia of the kingdom; but when
you were settled and ordered by the Parliament against the Kings desire, and put
into such hands as they would confide in then the Commission of Array issued
out not to disturb the peace of the kingdom, but to defend it as well as you
or any other Militia.


Mil. How comes it then to pass, that when the design which had bin so long
carried on to alter the frame and constitution of this government both in
Church and State, was now come to ripeness, and the conteiners thereof
conceived themselves arrived to that condition of strength, that they should be
able to put it in present execution, they have now made the K. raise a great
army, this was your doings, commission of Array.


Array. I was sent abroad indeed to use the utmost force I could to compel and
summon them in, but more came in voluntarily then by virtue of my commission;
the Gentry and Cavaliers freely engaging themselves in that service, and such a
great confluence of several persons flocking unto the King, that they needed
no compassion, Horse, Arms and Ammunition being daily brought, and besides the
Royal Standard which had a glorious presence in the field, drew more unto it
then the commission of Array.


Mil. If you disdain the matter already, it is likely you knew that your power
was illegal, standing always in defiance of the Parliament, and of the
Militia, but I hope to make you know your error in time. It is fit that
Militia being a faithful subject to the King and Parliament, and standing for
both against those malignants, wherewith the King is now environed, should be
better esteemed than nothing of yesterday. I mean the commission of Array.


Array. It Is false, and I will make, thee know thou malicious Militia, thou
leader on of leatherne Coats and City Roundheads, that you are but a cracking
noise to me, what do boys but waste powder in the streets? and so are you
nothing but an invention to make away powder, carrying a fair show of a
concealed affection to your King and Country, but are led on by the
instigation of weekly pay, and a love you bear to opposition, speak no more,
for Array is accounted with a sword, which as I wear by my side, so I dare man
age for my King and Country.


Mil. I regard not your sword (Array) nor can your threatening language strike
a terror into me, the goodness of my design in defending the King and
Parliament, does give me boldness to appear in the field against you and your
swaggering Troops of Cavaliers, who having engaged themselves against their
Country, would now upon cooler blood be glad with safety to retire. I must
tell you that the name of Array is odious to the people, and therefore your
best refuge is the country, for here in London you would by the common sort be
cut into pieces, for they understand you as a direct enemy to the
Commonwealth; One that would entrench upon the liberty of the subjects, so
that by the authority of your tyrannical power, all whatsoever they possessed
should be subject unto your mercy, and upon any present humor, if you send for
their goods or for money, they must deliver them up, and be glad to be undone,
and that this could stand with Justice was a strange opinion brought up by the
malignant party under whose colors you serve.


Array. You are deceived, my desire is to save the kingdom from ruin, and
preserve the king in a free Monarchy; for the King is resolved that he will not
see Religion, the Basis and foundation of a Commonwealth defaced, and that he
will maintain the rights and liberties of the subject, and the privileges of
Parliament; and he does solely claim this power, as being the Defender of the
faith; and therefore seeing all his actions do reflect on the good of the
Commonwealth, whereunto they ought to be directed, and while the King does
bear this resolution all true subjects are bound to aid His Majesty.


Mil. But if the King may force his Parliament, they may bid farewell to all
Parliaments, and all their Laws will be cut in sunder, with the same sword now
drawn for the destruction of the Parl. therefore let the Militia and Array now
agree, and stand for God, our K. and Parl. I am not far from you under the
command of the E. of Essex, but should be glad of this reconcilement.


Array. If the King were so pleased, I should be glad also of such an agreement.


FINIS.

