royal English blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

A Disputation betwixt the DEVIL And the POPE.

Being a brief Dialogue between Vrbanus, 5. Pope of Rome, and Pluto Prince of
Hell.

Concerning the Estate of five Kingdoms, Spain, England, France, Ireland. and
Scotland

Written by the Author to content his Friend, being Pleasant and delightful to
the READER.

LONDON, Printed, 1642.

The Devil and the Pope. THE Pope whose papal Power all Room controwles
Wanting more wealth (purchaz'd at price of Souls)
Fearing the People in each several Region
Contemn his Mass, and follow true Religion
Grows much distempered; Sickness does weigh down
His holy head, more then his Triple Crown
'Cause a report of late is newly risen
Some of his Tribe in England are in Prison
And many more which did this Land deflower
Are fled and banished by the Almighties Power
Griveing his socerie no more bewitches
By spells he raises Pluto (God of Riches)
Well may the People be in mickle danger
When Rooms great Vicar does begin to conjure
But now the divell's rai'd the Pope requires
New council from the God of quenchlesse fires
It rises like a Friar, with a hood on it
To shreive the Pope, the Devil give him good on it
If their discourse can your attention win
Lend us your ear and hear the Devil begin.

Devil. Hayle to your Holiness what is it offends.
Your King-commanding Power? are your vowed friends
Turned Traitors to your Crown, does France deny
To pay your Annual tribute? strait I Will fly
With Troops of factious Spirits, such as shall
Con^ert the Rebels; or confound them all:
If it be Spain Perplexeth you, I Will strait
With a worse Plague then that in 88.
Vex my ambitious Don torment him more
Then did the Dutch man, on the English shore;
After much war, deep wounds and many knocks
I Will give his Country to the Butter box.

Pope. Great Pluto (Partner in my See of Rome)
It Is not for these my skill calls thee to come
Not many days (before this time) has past
Since by my potent charms I raysd thee last
And bid thee muster spirits (such as are
Powerful in sowing of a civil war)
To send them into Ireland to possess
The Catholics with their own wretchedness
How many years in thraldom they did pant
Under the Scepter of the Protestant,
And that by raising factions they shall see
Their peace again and former Liberty

Devil. This we have done my chiefest Spirit error
The Prince of faction has raised up such terror
In Irish hearts that rather then they will yield
They Will wash with human blood the fertile field
And through the general Kingdom there are none
But cry or else have cause to cry O hone.
Their onset did beginn tragic and black
The English Protestant went first to wrack.
Women they killd, young infants they did smother
As if each man forgot he had a mother.
Brave work for me, for though I prompt them to it
They had almost as good be dambd as do it

Pope. But in these Spoils shall not I a sharer be.

Devil. Oh yes my Lord when you are damnd like me
But whilst this fleshy substance thus controwles
Your Spirit, you can have no share in souls
But when the happy time comes you shall dye
Thou shall be made as great a devil as I

Pope. Thy happy promises do much restore me
For which I Will send as many souls before me
As shall enrich thy Kindome but go on
Upon thy Irish Declaration
I long to hear't.

Devil. You shall, the Irish first
Were Conquerors but now they have the worst
The valliant English now the victors be
And chase the bloody Irish Crom a Cree
From bogg to bogg at every turn they wind them
and fly as if the Devil were behind them
The amazing missery does so besot them
They are afraid S. Patrick has forgot them
The God the English serve does so distract them
Their Beads nor holy water cannot protect them
that now the Proverb ends as it began
it is thought a fart will fright an Irish man

Pope. This is distastefull news but can thou tell
What factious Spirits do in England dwell.

Devil. Few of your Party they are gone as wide
As most report and mad on the other side
There all your Books and Beads are counted toys
Altars and Tapers are pulld down by boys
Discord they say does so possess the Land
It Is thought they will not let the Organs stand
The clean washed Surples which our Priests put on
There is the smock ot'h Whore of Babylon
And I have had report by those have seen them
They break the windows cause the Saints are in them
There Pope you must expect a certain loss
A Tailor must not sit with legs on cross
But strait he is set by the heels, (it is a sign
Of Ceremony only not Divine)
The great grand Bishop there your Popeships cozen
Is in the Tower, there is 13. to the dozen
I wonder by what Spirit they are led
They sent a man to me without a head
The the other day but therein they did well
For were it on it is thought 'twould trouble Hell
Cum Privilegio's out of date, they cry
In every street what new Book will you buy
Come buy a book oath Bishop of Canterbury
And with his missery they make them merry
Miters are banished, and some hope to see
4. Cornered Caps will now be brought to 3.

Pope. Prithee no more this news does quite distract me
And I shall sown unless thy help protect me
There is no hope that Nation is far gone
Whom neither Pope nor Devil can work upon.

Devil. They are distracted? to) brother against Brother,
Friend against Friend one Neighbor against another
But this will not last long; they are happy men
And soon it is thought will settle Peace again

Pope. Why then let us give them over let us save
Free from their Power those Catholics we have
There is no hopes in Scotland, there they be
Confirmed too sure in a fraternity
Therefore at this time leave me.

Pluto. Pope farewell.

Pope. I to my Chamber go.

Pluto. And I to Hell.
Y'haue heard their disputation and may see
How much to us the Pope's an Enemy
The Devil to; it is likely that we shall
Be happy if we seek not our own fall:
The World does know we live in dangerous times
Let every good man then purge his own crimes
For my own part I wish a general Health
To our most gracious King and Commonwealth
If each true Protestant wish thus I hope
They Will shun the Devil as they slight the Pope.

FINIS.

