THE DISCOURSE AND SAD COMPLAINTS BETWIXT The FRENCHMAN and the IRISHMAN:
EVIDENTLY Declaring, that the KING was the only cause of the progress and
continuation of the wars in Ireland, to be brought over into England; And
that the Queen was the only occasion of the Recruits and Moneys which have
been levied, to be transpo^ted over from France.

With a true Narration of the sad success that has followed His Majesty's
Armies and does still keep them company; not only in the West, but in diverse
other pl^ces, and the great possibility wherein the Parliaments Forces are of
putting a speedy period to these long and unnatural Wars.

With a full Account of the s^v^rall remarkable Victories which it has
pleased God of (...) diverse places to confer on the Army of the Parliament.

April (...) L^^^^^, Pri^ted by ^^nard Alsop, 1646.

A Discourse betwixt the Frenchman and an Irishman.
French. STand! and give the word!


Irish. It Is life.


French. Villain thou lie; it is death.


Irish. Then life for life or death for both: Take to thy arms; give me the
lie: I Will drive that lie through thy heart; of what Nation art thou? speak.


French. A Frenchman and Ensign to the Regiment of Colonel Ian^u^ats.


Irish. The same Regiment that plundered all about Lanceston that lived only
upon Rapine and Ruin whose Religion was profaneness, whose life intemperance
and whose end damnation, whose honest recreation was Sodomy and the ravishing
of wives, and maids: It was your common Exercise, to force the women from
their husbands Arms and before their faces to ravish them to death; neither
could you be satisfied in this your villainy, until unto your Lust you added
Murder: Is not this true?


French. Yes, the murder of their husbands, and that was mercy; for what a
grief of heart would it be to them, to remember what was done and with a tame
patience to look on us that did it; have you done?


Irish. The same French you are whose seared consciences will admit of any
impiety, and entertain it with delight and greediness, whose di^course is
altogether oaths and lies; oaths as high as Heaven, and lies as deep as Hell
who after you have sworn a prayer for the King, at the next word with a curse
will damn your selves into Hell and like a Legion of Devils and not a Regiment
of Men, turn all the houses you come to into Stowes, and the Churches into
Stables?


French. Have you done yet?


Irish. The same French you are one of whose Officers being quartered lately at
a Widows house in Torrington had all the Dainties provided for him that the
country could afford; but this bold and unruly Mounsier would not be
satisfied, but so tormented the miserable poor woman that she was altogether
weary of her life and having endeavored to the utmost of her power to content
him in all things she came one day unto him, beseeching him to be more patient
and assuring him that any viands that could be had for money should be prepared
for him: The Frenchman fuming and swearing in great choler did fling away:
she came unto him again with a chi^d in her arms, and with tears in her eyes,
and with much importunity desired to know what his pleasure was promising him
that if it lay within the compass of her ability, and complied either with
reason or with honesty that he should have it. The inhumane Monster commanded
her to ro^st her child, and said that it was only that that would please him
for his supper. The miserable mother amazed at the horror of the injunction did
fall down dead at his foot, and could never again be awakened or recovered unto
life.


French. It Is like enough; it shows how true a Cannibal is war where one
devours another: but say, of what country art thou?


Ir^sh. Ask my sword; see how the Crimson-die dwells on the blade, I am a
natural Irish.


French. Natural: unnatural Irish; the shame of Heaven, the scourge and
plague of Nature: It Was you that first let war and fury loose, where at the foot
of peace they sat on arms, on cruel arms, their hands bound behind them fast
with a thousand brazen chains, and roaring forth with bloody mouths
destruction: 'Twas you who as inhumane as you are blind make no distinction at
all betwixt things sacred and profane; but as if you would fight with Heaven
as well as Man, with most impious hands have broke open the Temples of God and
tore to pieces the Records of his sacred Truth, have flung them in the charnels
and sca^^^red them before the wind who have heard your blasphemies, and carried
the sound thereof into every corner of the world.


Irish. It was a zeal that did become us; for which our Priests have praised
us, and the Pope has sent us many ben^^^^^ (...).


French. It Was you that spared neither Sex nor person, the old, the infants and
the middle aged must all die together.


Irish. An act of Justice on the Heretics.


French. The woman great with child you have ripped up and thrown their
offsprings in the fire before their faces. There is not such another Legend to
be read in Hell, as what you have acted.


Irish. Yours is much like it.


French. It is: And since we are so near of kin in sin, we will agree in
affection; put up your sword, and give me your hand: For Vice in friendship
shall with Vice do^^ dwell. And Devils amongst themselves agree in Hell: What
Spell brought you hither?


Irish. The desire of Honor, and the hope of Gain, that which courts all the
world pleasure: you may add to this the conscience of my Allegiance, and the
ambition which I nourished to stand high and fair at Court in the eye of
Majesty.


French. How can that be and you so strong a Catholic: the King has often
made imprecation upon imprecations, that God to deal with Him and His
Posterity, if He will not maintain the Protestant Religion, how can He
countenance and employ us Catholics, yet swear to his last to defend the
Religion of Geneva.


Irish. Friend you are not so ignorant, but you know that ^^te is no conscience
to be made in keeping oaths with Heretics; especially for the promotion of the
Church of Rome, and how easily pardons are not only granted, but promotions
gained from his Holiness for such who in this nature shall adventure to
advance the Catholic Faith is most apparent; And this has not only bin
practiced by Kings and Prelates, and diverse others of all Degrees, but the Pope
himself has given an Example for it: For the Pope who has taken his oath for
the advancement of the Church of Rome has given a special prohibition to the
Catholics in England not to take the Oath of Allegiance: And yet on the
beginning of the Parliament it being found that this Oath would conduce much to
the good of the Catholics in England the Pope himself dispensed with his
former Orders and with his Bulls that were sent (...) to give (...) right unto
them, And the English Re^^s^ were all permit^^ (...) take the Oath of
Allegiance; which the storm being gone, would again be forbidden to them: so
that Religion of Rome, and the ^ing looks only upon expediency, and depends
more upon policy then conscience. A King (as I have heard) was the Author of
this Verse: Religion is the Righ^ of Kings.
And they know best what good it brings.


At the peace of Sens in France, King H. 3. made an Oath with the Protestants,
and allowed them in some places the free exercise of their Religion; but this
being but a mere Art of State to draw from them his brother Duke of Alenson,
the Oath immediately after was broken, And this was done by the counsel of no
less then three Bishops, the B. of Lions, the B. of Valenciennes, and the B.
of Ambrum, and they received this counsel from the Sea and Bishop of Rome, who
at this time was a favourer to this Prince, and afterward a great Agent in the
murder of him, and an applauder of it. So that we see in these mysteries of
State Affairs, that Popes and Kings do no more regard an Oath then we soldier
do. And this is one reason why we of the Irish Nation have bin induced to side
with his Majesty, and although we are Catholics, to adhere to him who is a
Protestant; For should we have prevailed against the Parliament, it were no
difficult matter to bring the Religion of Rome into England the King being so
much obliged to us for our assistance, and in acknowledgment of it having given
us in Ireland the free exercise of our Religion so that so much favor being
showed to us, who would not fight for such a Kin^, we being induced thereunto
by a Nuntio from Rome, and that whosoever shall lose his life in this service
shall be sure to go to Heaven and be numbered in the Catalogue of the Saints. We
also hear that the Popes Holiness does call the King of England his beloved
Son, and does always give him his Apostolical Benediction. But alas! to the
great grief of our Nation and my self I speak it, the Parliaments Army do
prevail; all our hopes are frustrate; our Saints grown deaf; and our fears
grown strong: we see the Enemy before us, the Sea behind us and on each side
Destruction with outstretched arms ready to receive us the vengeance as well
as the horror of our gu^lt does pursue us; and despair from below does hallow
to us, to descend into that Lake.


French. The same great Argument which embarked you in this bloody and
unfortunate service, did at the first encourage me: The King persuaded you; and
the Queen persuaded us: The King prevailed in Ireland, and the Queen in France;
And her Agents told us that it was a religious and loyal War: religious for
the honor of God, and loyal for the safety of the Crown, I remember our
Priests and Jesuits would preach unto us, that the late war with Scotland was
Bellum Episcopale; but this war against the Parliament was Bellum Papale;
wherein if the Forces of the Parliament should prevail the ruin of the Roman
Religion would ensue; for what likelihood was there, but that those who were so
violent against the seats of Bishops, would be more eager against the Chair of
Rome. Hereupon by the solicitation and importunity of the Queen of England, the
Pulpits in France became as Prostitutes, all complexions and conditions of men
were wrought upon. To the young men, the pleasures of Beauty were commended
which were said to flourish no where more then in this Kingdom. To the
Covetous, treasures of gold. To the Ambitious, hopes of honor and preferment.
Had not so many recruits arrived from France and Ireland, the war had not
continued so long; But tell me what shall become of these Recruits: Instead of
hopes we are now full of despair; for riches we enjoy poverty; for plunder
nakedness; and whatsoever the iron hand of war can inflict we are sure to
partake off: Our health, our strength, our joy is turned into sickness
weakness, sorrow, and confusion of face: Having made such spoil in this, what
other Kingdom will receive us; whither shall we carry the burden of our shame:
is there no hope left?

Is there no remainder of hope depends on the Lord Hoptons Army?


French. None at all! you see the Horse are all disbanded: first our own
Brigade and then afterward the other 8. England is a place too hot for the
Caveleires of the King, therefore they fly into France not so much for succor
as for safety, and to be out of the power of these who are to mighty for them.

In the mean time his Majesty's Forces in the North, West about Worcester are
utterly routed and the Lord Ashly, on whoes courage and Experience his Majesty
depended so much upon is taken prisoner, he was heard to say to the Parliament
soldiers as he sat upon a Drum-head, and was invirouned with them round about:
Gentlemen you may now sit down and fall to play, for you this morning have
done all your work, meaning that he being beaten the King had no Army in the
field. You see our own soldiers with us are ashamed of their own cowardis,
and timorous hearts, and much magnify the civility, the resolution, and the
temper of their Adversaries, and confess them to be an Army invincible, and
not to be fought with.


Irish. But are there no Forces that can come to our assistance from Oxford,
and the Garrisons of the Kings in those parts? Alas! poor ouldiers: whither
shall we go?


French. Not a man. In the last Defeat given to the Lord Astley: there were
taken, The Lord Astley Commander in chief. 3 Colonels, 3 Majors, one
Lieut-Colonell 17 Captains, 16 Lieutenants, The Marshall General, 5 Cornets,
11 Ensigns, 3 quarter masters, The Chyrurgeon, and Sir William Vaughan;
Chaplain, 2000 Arms; All their Ammunition, Bag and Baggage.


Irish. In the mean time the recruits expected from France move not at all,
they are employed upon another Design: the Numbers that are going into France
are many; those that are coming out of France into England are very few.


French. This is not all; for from Newark it is certain, that all things are in
preparation for a sudden storm, and Sir Thomas Fairfax being marched Eastward
(as he will lose no opportunity) I cannot see how Oxford will be able long to
hold out; so that of those many Countries, Cities, Towns, and Garrisons, which
the King was master of not long since, all now are contracted into a short, a
weak, and a most inconsiderable Number: And Scepters devolved from Age to Age
which did promise themselves to know no period; do find all strength is vain
that fights against GOD.


Irish. Since this, Exceter is summoned, and in great hope they are that it is
by this time surrendered: The only strength of the Kings Horse in the field is
beaten, 300 Horse taken, and almost as many prisoners: 3000 of their horse are
commanded Eastward, at the news of which Oxford begins to tremble: Its time to
be gone from thence, And so they say the King is; for the report is, that the
King mistrusting himself in England, is secretly gone into Wales.


FINIS.

