A SERMON Preached on the Fast Day, December 22. 1680.

IN THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF ROCHESTER.

By ROBERT DIXON, D.D Vice-Dean of the said Church.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavel at the Sign of the Peacock
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

A SERMON Preached on the Fast Day, etc.
II CHRON. XX. 12. Neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.


SECTION I.
THE Children of Ammon and Moah, Coherence.
and Mount Seir, whom God would not let the Children of Israel invade, when
they came out of the Land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed
them not; rewarded them so ill for their forbearance, when it was in their
power to have destroyed them, that they came up with a mighty Force against
them to cast them out of their Possession, which the Lord had given them to
inherit. Then Jehoshaphat feared, and took the right course, and set himself to
seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah. And Judah gathered
themselves together, to ask help of the Lord; even out of all the Cities of
Judah, they came to seek the Lord. Then (as Kings and Prophets, and some few
Others in those days had the Spirit of Prayer; In the Gospel times the Spirit
is poured out more plentifully upon all Flesh,) Jehoshaphat stood in the
Congregation of Judah and Jerusalem in the House of the Lord, before the New
Court, and uttered an ingenious Prayer, in which he briefly declared the
Justice of their Cause, and their Confidence in God. Then after him, upon the
Spirit of Jahaziel the Son of Zechariah, a Levite of the Sons of Asaph, came
the Spirit of the Lord in the midst of the Congregation, and encouraged them
not to be afraid, or dismayed of those Ammonites, Moabites, and Idumaeans,
which were so great a Multitude; because the Battle was not theirs, but Gods,
bidding them, stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, and that the Lord
would be with them. Because they believed in the Lord their God and his
Prophets, therefore they should prosper; and accordingly it came to pass, for
their Enemies destroyed one another, and their dead bodies fell to the Earth,
and none escaped, and they took the spoil in great abundance, and they returned
to Jerusalem, to give thanks to the Lord for their great deliverance. This
course our Gracious King and his whole Kingdom have taken against Their
implacable Enemies, both at home and abroad; and we pray, as they did, this day
with one mouth; Behold how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession which thou have given us to inherit. O, our God, will thou not judge
them? for we have no might against this great Company that comes against us;
Neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.

SECT. II.
The Subject is, Last Resolution.

The Points are, 1. Extremity, We know not what to do. 2. Remedy, But our eyes
are upon thee.


Extremity, a helpless Condition, Extremity.
when all outward hopes fail, when Sins are upon us and Enemies upon our back
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; all for mischief and utter ruin.

There are several kinds of Extremities, as of Sins and of Miseries.

1. Personal Extremities of Sins and Miseries, that is, such as we bring upon
our selves, by wilful disobedience Personal. 2. National Extremities of Sins
and Miseries, that is, which a whole People bring upon their Nation, by their
wilful Rebellion, National. 3. Church Extremities of Sins and Miseries, that
is, which they bring upon the whole Church by their wilful disobedience,
Ecclesiastical.
In all these Distractions and Confusions we know not what to do; we are at the
last cast, finding no help from our selves, or any other Creature, Angels or
Men; our Eyes are only upon God.

So we are the Causes of our own Extremities upon our selves, and upon the
whole Nation, and upon the whole Church.

So Others are the Causes of our Personal Extremities.

And Others are the Causes of our National Extremities.

And Others are the Causes of our Ecclesiastical Extremities.

So we are the Causes of Personal Extremities upon Others.

And we are the Causes of National Extremities upon Others.

And We are the Causes of Church Extremities upon Others.

So we do our selves Harm, and we do others Harm, and others do us Harm.

And then we fly to God to do us Good, and others fly to God to do us Good, and
we fly to God to do others Good.

II. Remedy. Remedy.
Faith in God.

Bodily Extremities we must fall into.

Soul Extremities we may avoid.

Deus Providebit, God will secure us from both.

Want of Care brings all these upon us.

Care, remedies all these.

In God's Ark we may be safe, in our Persons, Nation and Church; when, in the
Devil's Ark, all the World is drowned.

There is therefore a Time to unite all Personal Forces. Wit.

There is a Time to unite all National Forces. Arms.

There is a Time to unite all Church Forces. Prayer.

1. Wicked men run headlong into straits, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle,
or an Ox goes to the slaughter; as a Bird hastneth into the Snare, as a Fool
runs to the Correction of the Stocks, not knowing it is for their lives As
the Fish swimmeth, playing, through the Waters of. Jordan into the Dead Sea.
Preying greedily on the pleasant Bait, swallows therewith the deadly Hook.
There is poison of Death in the Pot, before they know it. They go down into
Hell in a moment, before they know where they are. No forecast, no foresight
at all; embrace present things, not regarding futurity. Eat and Drink, and die
to morrow. Dance delicately into the Grave. Sail fairly into Gulphs, Rocks, and
Quicksands.

O Navis, quo te referent in mare novi fluctus, etc. A short life and a
pleasant. Crown themselves with Rosebuds, before they be withered; fill
themselves with costly Wine and Ointments, and let no flower of the Spring pass
by them.

The Prodigal spent his Estate upon Harlots, and came to Swines and Husks. From
Liberty me run into Licentiousness, and fall together by the ears; and of
Freemen become Slaves. Run in Debt; into a Gaol, to die; Rob, and Kill, and
come to the Gallows. Drink drunk, and stagger into their Graves. Stab, Pistol,
Poison one another; suddenly they perish, and come to a fearful end.

2. Righteous men are never forlorn. Troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast
down, but not destroyed. I never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor their Seed
begging their bread; the Lord cares for the Righteous, he is their helper, and
delivers them out of all their Troubles. The Wicked, in their fury lay on
sore strokes upon them; if God be angry but a little, they will be sure to help
forward the affliction all they can, taking more leave than is given them, to
show their Malice, till God burn that Rod in the fire, that would lie longer
upon the Back of the Righteous than it should do. Rejoice not against me, O my
Enemy, for though I fall, yet shall I rise again. The Bush burns, but is not
consumed. The Lord knows how to uphold, and comfort, and deliver. No body
knows the Comforts, and the mighty Assistances that flow from the Divine
Spirit, upon the Spirits of afflicted Servants and Children of God, making
ample satisfaction for all the Sufferings of this life, superadding the
Assurance of everlasting Salvation, into which through many Afflictions we must
enter.

The Righteous suffer justly from God, but wrongfully from the Sons of Men;
they have deserved it from God, but not from Men. They are basely betrayed and
abused; even for Well-doing Christ was numbered among this Transgressors, but he
was innocent and had done nothing amiss. The two Thieves had their deserts. He
was betrayed with a Kiss of his Servant, that did what he listed with the
Purse, and eat of his Masters Bread, and dipped his Morsel in his Dish. Joab took
Abner aside to speak with him quietly, he thinking no harm, and smote him under
the fifth Rib, that he died, not as a Fool died, bound hand and feet, that he
could not help himself; but unawares, as a man falls before a Treacherous
Enemy. Such usage the best of Men find, of whom the World is not worthy. Let us
oppress, say they, the poor Righteous man, and not spare the Widow, nor
reverence the ancient Grayhairs. Let our strength be the Law of our Justice,
for that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth. Let us lay wait for the
Righteous, because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our
doings, he was made to reprove our thoughts. He is grievous unto us, even to
behold, for his life is not like other men, his ways are of another fashion. If
the Just man be the Son of God, he will help him, and deliver him out of the
hand of his Enemies. Let us examine him with despitefulness and torment, that
we may know his Meekness and prove his Patience. But the Souls of the Righteous
are still in the hand of God, whatever becomes of their Bodies, and there shall
no torment touch them. Though they be punished in the sight of God, yet their
hope is full of a glorious and blessed Immortality. And having been a little
chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded; for God proved them, and found them
worthy for himself. They that put their trust in the Lord, shall understand the
Truth, and such as be faithful in Love, shall abide with him; for Grace and
Mercy is to his Saints, and he takes care for his Elect.

These are the Sufferings, and this is the perfecting of the Patience and Faith
of the Saints, even unto the death of the Body, and after death the Patience of
their Souls continues, waiting and crying from under the Altar, Lord, how
long; how long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood
on them that dwell on the Earth? While they lived the eyes of their Faith were
upon God, an Evidence of their deliverance not seen, and the Substance thereof
hoped for. If they fail in the Flesh, they never fail in the Spirit; if they
fail in the false Honors and Riches, they never fail in the true Honors and
Riches. For them to live is Christ, and to die is gain, and whether they live
or die, they are the Lords. Whatever their Beginning be, their End is Peace. A
bed of Thorns is to them a bed of Roses. The Wicked kiss a painted Jezabel,
ravish a Cloud, tantalize Chimera's, desperate, trying all their Wits, using
all means but the true, which is Repentance from dead works to serve the living
God; instead of which they die in their sins, cursing God and blaspheming,
cursing the Stars and the Fates, and what not? so they go to their place. Such
shame have all God's Enemies, and such honor have all his Saints.

SECTION III.
I might here make a Metaphysical Discourse of Spiritual Desertions and
Streights, that they say, Spiritual Desertions.
God puts his People into, and leaves them in for a time and times, hiding his
face, and again looking upon them, casting them down, and lifting them up. Like
Parents, leaving their Children to cry and want, and then satisfying their
wants. I am not certain, that these are the usual ways and methods of God's
dealing with Souls. God's ways are in the Deep, and his paths are in the great
Waters, and his footsteps are not known.

I find it was the way of God's proceeding under the Old Testament, in Legal
dispensations of Judgments and Mercies; but I do not find it is so now. I find
the Spirit is called the Spirit of comfort, and when in seems to depart, fear
not, for it is not departed, as to the comforts of the Body, much more of the
Soul. And that God delights not in grieving the Sons of Men, nor does he
fright-Mortals into Regeneration; for though there be fear in the Flesh, which
is weak, yet there is joy in the Spirit, which is willing, all along, under
various Dispensations and Measures, creating hope above hope, and contrary unto
Hope, which is the Anchor of the Soul.

The Messenger of Satan has been miraculously sent to buffet some great Saints
in the Body here, to try their Faith, that the Soul might be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus.

St. Paul was in a great strait, but it was of Love, between two, that is,
betwixt his own and his Disciples happiness, whether it were best for him to
live or die; he had a desire to both, but did not well know which to choose,
though the one were better for him than the other. To depart and to be with
Christ, was far better for him, but to stay among his Disciples was better for
thein. A great contest and striving of Love, as in another place he says, He
could wish himself accursed for his Brethren, his Companions sake, the Jews,
rather than they should be cast away.

The like Spirit we find in Moses, in a Rapture of Love, wishing to be blotted
out of the Book of Life, rather than the People should perish.

David was brought into a great strait, which to choose (for one he must) of
the three Judgments of Pestilence, Famine, or the Sword; but he chose the last
and least, because it was better to fall into the hands of God, than of men,
for with God there was mercy, but with men there was none.

Job complained in the error of his life, cursing the day of his birth, and
wishing for death.

Elijah in distress prayed, that he might die.

Jonah was angry, even unto death, for a small matter of the shadow of a Gourd,
and because his Prophecy came not to pass.

Thus, for want of Faith in Extremities of Sufferings, many fools in all have
would go down to the Grave to secure themselves there, and many of them died
indeed by their own hands, in a mad mood, and wished themselves alive again
when it was too late.

But none of these was Jehoshaphats case, nor will the letter of the Text bear
it, nor the Spiritual sense. Nor is this the true Case of a Christian, nor will
I hook it into the Text by violent wresting thereof.

Sin may bring into Temporal streights, and does; but Grace and Love casts
out these legal fears. The Spirit of Adoption speaks Liberty, and the Blood of
Christ speaks better things than the Blood of Abel, and the Gospel than the
Law. God bids us to speak comfortably to his People. And Christ says, Let not
your hearts be troubled, and leaves his Peace ever with his Church.

I will not therefore fright poor tender Consciences into despair, I understand
better things. Listen not therefore to the sad complaints and outcries of the
Flesh, in passions and furies against all reason; but give ear to the sweet
melody of the Spirit, in Religious fellowship with God, above all carnal
grievances whatsoever. Say not only in the flesh, We know not what to do; for
if you look no further, you will not know what to do indeed: But say in the
Spirit, Our eyes are upon God, and then you will know what to do indeed; for
the Spirit will teach you what you should do, and lead you into all Truth and
Peace, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

In, and in order to the work of Regeneration, Men cry out to their Companions,
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? as being pricked in their hearts, and being
willing to do any things for God's glory and their own good, desire to know
what they should do that they might be saved; and to God, Lord, what would
thou have me to do? And the Answer is ready from God, Repent and be baptized,
and wait till the times of refreshment shall come from the Lord. Forget those
things that are behind, and look to those things that are before, pressing on
to the mark, and to the Price of the high Calling, which is laid up for us in
Christ Jesus.

There was a time of Legal fears; it is now the time of the Gospel, we are not
to fear after that fashion; but are bidden to rejoice always in the Lord, and
again to rejoice; to mortify all Earthly fears and joys, and to exult because
our Names are written in the Book of life. The Jews had Faith only for Temporal
Deliverances, but Christians have Faith for both. We have not that Spirit of
Bondage to fear, as they did; but we have received the Spirit of Adoption, to
hope, as they did not. Children in Minority, as Women, are fearful; but the
Adult quit themselves like men. When I was a Child, I thought as a Child, spoke
as a Child, I did as a Child; but when I became a man, I put away Childish
things. The Gospel is Tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all People.
Therefore for Christians to be always sighing, and groaning, and crying,
whipping and tearing themselves, going in Pilgrimage barefoot and bare-legd,
lying on boards in Sackcloth and Ashes, I think savours not of a right Spirit.
So to fast this great Day, is not to disfigure their faces, that they may
appear unto men to fast, or to hang down their heads like a Bull-rush for a
day; but to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, to do
Righteousness and love Mercy, and walk humbly with their God.

See God in all these. The last Remedy is best.

Our Eyes are upon God, because God's Eyes are upon us.

God's Care is upon us, because our Trust is upon God.

So men look one upon another, and cannot help one another.

So men look upon God, and he helps them all.

As two Friends look one upon another to pity and help one another, if they
can. And one Friend may be able to help himself and his Friend, and all his
Friends; and the other Friend and Friends are helpless altogether, either of
themselves or their Friends. One Friend may have no need of help, but the other
has. But all have need of help, at one time of other, from each other, and at
all times have need of help from God.

God is able and willing, so are not Men; not all Men, nor at all times.

One Deep calls upon another. The depth of Sin and Misery on our part,
calls upon the depth of Grace and Mercy on God's part.

SECT. IV.
This Doctrine easily falls into use and practice, Application.
as follows at large.

1. Against sinful Hopes, from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; they do us
harm.

2. Against sinful Fears from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; they do us
harm, as of Damnation here or hereafter.

The most Wicked are the most fearful, fearing where no fear is, at every
shadow, at every noise, even to the shaking of a leaf; because there is guilt
within.

The most Righteous are most hopeful, where most despair is for substance, and
Clamours over their heads.

3. But Faith is above Hope, and contrary to Hope; and Faith is above Fear, and
contrary to Fear. And Love advances Hope, and casts out Fear; and Patience
overcomes Fear, keeping Love and Hope.

4. In Sins who should we look unto, but to God alone; for who can forgive
Sins, but God alone?

5. Miseries, who should we look unto, but to God alone; for who can save from
Miseries, but God alone?

6. Humiliation therefore is necessary under Sins, and Humiliation is necessary
under Miseries. And this kind goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting.

SECT. V.
It will be no unreasonable, Prodigies.
nor unseasonable Excursion, I hope, if I decry all sinful Fears or Hopes
arising from Prodigies, which do minister hugely to the Spirit of Bondage in
Gospel Times. To seal men with the Mark of Cain, who feared that every Man that
met him would kill him, and that his Sins were greater than could be forgiven
him. Or with the Mark of a Hypocrite, whose hope shall certainly perish, and
his expectation shall be utterly cut off, as the Spider's Web, before God;
perish, and come to a fearful end.

The old Prophets, by their Learning, Holiness, and Gifts, did create Reverence
to their Persons, and Messages under the Law. And does Heaven now make use of
Monsters, Spectrums, Comets, or other Meteors; as of Blazing-Stars, etc. or of
Unclean Spirits, as his Public Heralds under the Gospel?

Signs Moral.
Signa Moralia, I grant. As the gradual lessening of the glory of the Jewish
Polity and Paedagogy, by the ceasing of Prophets, the absence of Heavenly Fire
unextinguished upon the Altar; the want of the Ark of the Covenant; the
Schechinah, the Vrim and Thummim. The lapsing of Government, from Kings to
Dukes, from Dukes to the Sanedrim, from the Sanedrim to the Roman Yoke. No
Kings were Types of Christ after David and Solomon, except Hezekiah may come in.

The splendor of Moses's Worship waxing dim, might be a sign of the Sun of
Righteouss's arising, in a state of more Spiritual and Inward glory.

The Jews used Signs much, and asked for them often. And except they had Signs
and Wonders, they would not believe.

In the broad Daylight of the Gospel we have no need of these things, nor want
we awakening by Monitors, in Heaven or Earth, into a Sense and Awe of the
Divine Majesty.

We must now believe without a Sign, and derive our Repentance, not from mighty
Earthquakes and Prodigies; but from the ingenuous understanding sense of Sin.

Representation of God Terrible.
Among all Nations, Christian and Heathen, the Sweetness of Divine Goodness,
has been too much sowred with this Leaven, and disgusted by this Gall of
Bitterness. (...), said Herodotus, taxed justly therefore by Plutarch. God is
represented as envious, and dreadful to Mankind: As if his Counsels were taken
up with contriving nothing but Plagues and Thunderbolts, forged in the shop of
Torments, perplexing Mortals from living a quiet life here for the short moment
of time, which they have to live. A Pestilential Air breathed from Hell, eating
out the Vitals of the Soul of Devotion!

The quite contrary is to be believed of God, that he does not willingly grieve
the hearts of the Children of Men. That he delights not in the death of any
Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his Sins, and live. Judgment is his
strange work; Mercy is that in which he most delights, above all his other
Works. Blessed be God.

The more the heart of Man out-grows the Joys and Fears of the World, the less
Prodigies for futurities are esteemed.

Divination by Heathens.
The Gentiles, that lifted not up their minds sufficiently unto Heaven, invented
and practiced most the Arts of Magic and Divination, by Augury, Sorcery,
Magic, Guts of Beasts, etc.

The Jews, that were promised a Heaven on this side thereof, looked after the
Signs of the Times here below.

But the Introduction of a better Hope, has few Intimations of future Events,
(except in the Revelation, which most Learned men do judge to be already
accomplished,) as looking after another World.

The Devil is not of God's Counsel; Christ's coming has put our all the Fires
of his Altars, silenced all his Oracles. Even the Temple, and Ceremonial
Services of God, are all abolished, to bring in a Spiritual Worship every where.

And as for Judgments and Calamities, they are changed into the nature of
Mercies, and are as a launcing of a corrupt Member, to save the rest that are
sound.

A true Son of Wisdom does (...), kiss and embrace all the Issues of Divine
Providence and Goodness; and they are welcome by the Grace of God, and God is
above the Devil.

Ergo, We look not to Prodigies, but to Providence; not downwards upon Earthly
Judgments and Deaths, but upwards, to Heavenly Hopes and Comforts.

We take most care for the Inward Man.

We count our selves secure in God, who has freely given us Christ, and will
with him also freely give us all things.

Freedom of Spirit and Love, secures us from Bondage and Fear.

All Jewish and Paganish Expiations are weak.

Holy Hearts and Lives are the best Sacrifices.

Spiritual Weapons overcome Carnal; and this kind goes not out, but by Prayer
and Fasting.

Agents free, and not free.
As for Prodigies, so long as God is a Free Agent; so long as Natural Causes are
Necessary Agents, not knowing what they do. So long as Men are Free Agents,
knowing what they do: so long as Providence directs and rules Necessary Agents
to produce, or not produce Plagues, Deluges or Droughts, Plenty or Famine,
andc. which are not in their own power, and much less in our power. So long as
Providence orders Free Agents in their own power to do or not to do what is in
their Sphere; Agents free and not free.
So long as Peace and War, Love or hatred, depends upon those Free Agents in
their Counsels and Elections under God, and it is their own fault if they
miscarry otherwise then God would have them, because not rightly chosen
according to the Will of God. So long Comets and Meteors point not directly nor
indirectly at the voluntary Changes and Chances of this Moral and Mortal Life.
Comets are from Natural involuntary Causes, and may produce Natural and
Involuntary Effects of Fires and Waters, Plagues or Famines, etc. as do more
afar off, the Sun Moon and Stars, or may be hindered from producing them, by the
Arbitrary Will and Power of God: So long we will lay no stress upon such things.

Astra regunt homines, sed regit Astra Deus. But for Arbitrary Effects, they
spring from Arbitrary Causes free to be produced or not to be produced,
according as the Wills of Men are pleased or not pleased to determine
themselves one way or other as God has ordered them that they should depend
upon Men's free Will altogether, as God has ordered them that they should
depend, one way or another, such as Coelibates, Marriages, Degrees, Covenants,
Leagues, Gifts, Deprivations, Degradations, Releases, Charges or Discharges,
etc. depending upon the Will of Men as it is empowered under the Will of God.
Besides who can read in Stars or Meteors, such Contingencies under God, depend
only upon man's free Will?

Obj. Josephus reports strange sights in the Air, before Jerusalem was taken.

Sol. The Synagogue was but newly buried, and not yet settled in its Grave. It
was but early days yet, and besides, Comets must happen at one time or other,
and therefore either before or after fatal Contingencies; if before, then they
are vulgarly accounted Causes; if after, What are they then? All Causes must be
before their Effects, and not at the time of the effects nor after them. If
there be Characters of such effects which as yet lie fast asleep in their
Causes, and God knows how long if shall be before they shall be awakned; Who
shall dare to rouse them up before their time? And how angry would such effects
be to be disturbed or hastened to their birth by any but God their Master; How
can it be? I say if there be any such Characters, Of what kind are those
Characters then? Are Comets the Finger of God? Or the Pen in his hands? We are
sure his Will is written in his word, by his Spirit. The writings of the Old
Testament we know, and the writings of the New Testament we know; But what are
these? Thus far we read in great letters, that he that runs may read them.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work,
and every Herb speaks a God; look upon the Sun and praise him that made him,
whose eyes are Ten-thousand times brighter than the Sun in his full clearness.
But in future Contingencies God only knows them, it is not for us to enquire
after them. And what eye of an Astrologer can discern them, more than another
man's, or who brought them a Ladder to climb up so high; and what skill have
they to read them more than any other Man, or to understand when they have read
them what the true meaning of them is, more then any other Man; Who perhaps
has better eyes, and a quicker Judgment then they? They must think well that
we are not Fools altogether, and that they must produce better Principles of
their Art, then they have yet done, before they can convince learned Searching
men of the Truth, of their bold Assertions. What shall we think of that great
and wonderful Change and Revolution of State, after Twenty years Destruction,
(in which time happened that most horrid Parricide of King Charles the First,)
that ever happened in the World, by the Restoration of Charles the Second in
peace and honor? Was this so much as dreamed of by all the privy Counselors
to the Stars? Is not this enough to prove the Divines mad, that could perceive
nothing at all in all the Heavenly Indications of this great matter? And how
many more Instances might be given to the same purposes of secrets kept in the
breast of God, that neither Angels nor Devils, nor Stars not Meteors, had the
least knowledge of them beforehand? Who then should we look unto but to God, in
these and all other causes?

SECT. VI.
The Spanish Armada, Christn'd Invincible, was broke in pieces, notwithstanding
all the Popes blessings.

Consecrated Swords, Banners, Daggers, Pistols, Agnus Dei's, Cruzado's, are
mere Toys and Trifles. They fly to their Saints and Angels, as Heathens did to
their Idol God's; but we seek to the true God. They come unto us with Sword and
Spear, but we come unto them in the Name of the Lord; and he will save us for
his great Name sake. They trust as the Jews did in an Arm of Flesh; but we
trust in God alone. God is our present help in time of trouble, God is the hope
of all the ends of the Earth, and of them that remain in the broad Sea; others
pur their trust in Horses and in Chariots, but we in the Name of the Lord our
God. The Lord's Arm is not shortened, that he cannot save, neither is his
strength abated. We live by Faith, and not by sense. We live above the World,
looking from all help and comfort in God. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in
any Child of Man, for they are utterly deceitful. We have been delivered from
many extremities, but this is the most Universal that ever came upon this
Church and Kingdom. If the Lord had not been on our side, may Israel now say,
if the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us, they
had utterly swallowed us up before now; they were so wrathfully displeased at
us. Never more numerous, powerful and implacable Enemies then now. In perils at
home, in perils abroad, in perils by Land, in perils by Water, in peril amongst
false Brethren. We can never trust them, that profess never to keep faith with
us, but continually ly in wait to deceive by Mental Reservations and
AEquivocations of all sorts that the wit of Man can invent. O let us fall into
the hands of God, for with him there is mercy, but not into the hands of men,
that know no mercy, but their very tender mercies are cruel. O Lord put a Hook
into the noses, and a Bridle into the lips of such men, and curb their
barbarous and monstrous malice, that it may enlarge it self no further.
Discover the depths of Satan, and bring to light the hidden works of darkness
that are contrived secretly in the bosom of Hell it self, against thy holy
Child Jesus, and against the Anointed of the Lord, and this Church and
Kingdom, that they may come forth into the light of the open Sun who is ready
to hide his face from seeing them. We are as the Apple of God's Eye, and as the
Bracelets upon his Right Arm. Tender and dear in the sight of the Lord is the
death of the Saints; Touch not mine Anointed and do my Prophets no harm. If
the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have accepted of our Sacrifices,
neither would he have discovered unto us, all these Mysteries of Iniquities,
nor as at this time have told us such secret Plots of Murders and Assasinations
as these are. Still we cry out Lord save us, or else we perish. And still our
ship lives and bears up against those roaring Surges, and stands off from these
fearful Rocks and Quicksands that wait for her.

Witches, Comets, Polices, Lies of all sorts, even unto death, shall not plague
us into despair. God has raised up the Spirits of the best of the Nation as
one Man to stand up and defend the Truth with might and main. This is the Gift
of God, and its marvelous in our Eyes, and we have cause to thank God for it. A
Gospel Faith, a Gospel Love is a security above all, Let the Earth be removed,
if it will, and the Mountains fall into the midst of the Sea.

Tho the Plowers plow upon our backs and make long furrows, tho we put our
mouths into the very dust, tho we are gone down to bottoms of Mountains, into
the belly of Hell, and the Earth with her bates about us for ever, and the
Weeds of despair are wrapped about our heads, yet will we look once more to
the Holy Temple of the Lord. We will believe above hope, and contrary unto
hope, and the gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against us. For we
know on whom we do believe, and he will never fail us. Did any that trusted in
him ever fail? Tho he hide his face, it is but for a time, tho he be angry, he
will not keep it in everlasting displeasure, he will come, he will not tarry,
with healing in his wings. We shall one day say, doubtless there is a God that
Judges the Earth. Stand still and see the salvation of God. Let the Nations of
the Earth gather themselves together, they shall be broken in pieces. No Weapon
formed against God shall ever prosper. It is in vain to fight against God, it
is in vain to kick against the Pricks. O tarry the Lords leisure, his time is
the best time.

Stay and see what the Lord will do with us, and what he will do for us. When
the Lord in the year 1660 brought again our Captivity out of Babylon, then were
we like unto them that dream. We should utterly have fainted unless we had
believed verily to see the goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the living, the
living the shall praise thee, as we do this day. O let us live, and we shall
praise thee! O taste and see how good the Lord is, all ye that put your trust in
him. He will never leave us nor forsake us.

SECT. VII.
1. We know by woeful experience, that our unthankfulness and unfruitfulness for
former mercies have brought these new extremities upon us. We are at a loss as
to humane Policy and strength, What will all our Rebellion profit us? It will
be bitterness in the latter end. And what shall we do in the end thereof? What
fruit can we have in those things whereof we shall one day be ashamed?

2. We believe Extremities recoverable, Rejoice not against me, O my Enemy, for
tho I fall, yet I shall rise again. God brings to the gate of the Grave, and
brings back again, he kills, and maks alive, he raises up the poor out of the
dust, and sets him among the Princes of the Earth. He raises up light out
of darkness, Order out of Confusion, Plenty out of Want, Health out of
Sickness, Truth out of Error, Peace out of War, Life out of Death; and he only
can do after this fashion. What is it that God cannot do? Is any thing too
hard for the Lord? The Heathens cried to their God's, and cut themselves with
Lances till the blood gushed out, saying, O Baal hear us, but there was no
Answer nor any that regarded. God only is the God that hears Prayers, and
unto him must all Flesh come. And whither should we go but unto him that has
the words of Eternal life?

Whither should Children fly but to their Parents, Servants, but to their
Lords, Sheep, but to their Shepherds, Subjects, but to their Princes, and all
Clients, but to their Patrons, Guardians and Protectors? All lack a Savior in
distress, All cry what shall we do? Whither shall we go? Who will show us any
good? Lord save us, we perish; our eyes are only upon thee, from whom only
comes our Salvation. Whom have we in Heaven but thee, and who is there on
Earth, that we can desire in comparison of thee? The eyes of all things look up
unto thee, and thou give them their meat in due season, thou openest thine
hand wide, and fillest every Creature plentifully with thy blessings; the young
Ravens call upon God, and are fed by him. Does God take care for Revens? How
much more of us, O we of little Faith? Our Fathers hoped in thee, and thou
did deliver them, they put their trust in thee and were not confounded. Fear
not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Let
not your hearts be troubled, the World shall hate you, but it hated me before
it hated you; and if they have done these things to the green Tree, well may
they do them to the dry. The Servant must not be above his Master, it is well
that he be as his Master. In the World ye shall have tribulation, but be of
good cheer I have overcome the World, I have sent you forth as Sheep amongst
Wolves, who shall come to you in Sheeps clothing, and wear a rough Garment to
deceive; therefore be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. It Is hard to
avoid a Hypocrite, a false Brother. Against a professed Enemy we stand in
defiance upon our Guard, and we expect no good but harm from such; but a
Hypocrite kisses and betrays, embraces and cuts your throat. None of these are
to be trusted, especially they that call us Heretical dogs, Dross and Vermin,
Reprobates and Castaways, and out of the Pale of the Church. They are utterly
deceitful upon the Balance, they are lighter than vanity it self, their throat
is an open Sepulcher, they flatter with their lips, but dissemble with their
double heart, their words are softer than butter, smoother than Oil, and
sharper than a two edged Sword, therefore trust them not. What trust can there
be in those men who maintain false Principles and Practices. They are Giants,
the Sons of Anak, their Walls are mounted up to Heaven; They have great might,
and exceeding Malice; but the Lord from Heaven is mightier. He beholds the
tears of the oppressed, how they run down their cheeks every day, and there is
none to comfort them. He sees and smiles, and laughs them to scorn, when they
laugh his Servants to scorn, while they come about them like Bees, and would
eat them as they eat bread, and are confederate against them; they shall be
extinct, as the Fire among the Thorns, suddenly do they perish and come to a
fearful end.

In the mean time great is the patience and comfort of the Saints, their Soul
is among Lions, Briars and Thorns tare them; they fly to the Rocks, and cling
to the ragged Rocks for want of a covering, and no man cares for their Soul;
but God cares for them, and his Grace shall be sufficient for them. The Lord
is on our side, we will not fear what man can do unto us. We call upon the Lord
in our distress, and he hears us, and sets our feet in a large room; The Lord
takes our part with them that help us, therefore shall we see our desire upon
them that hate us. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
man; it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in Princes. All
Nations may compass us round about, but in the Name of the Lord, we shall
destroy them; they may thrust soar at us to make us fall, but the Lord will
uphold us. He is our strength, and our song, and is become our salvation; the
right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. We shall not die, but
live, and declare the works of the Lord, the living they shall praise him, as
we do this day; O let us live that we may praise thee. The Lord has chastned
us sore, but he will not give us over unto death. The Stone which the builder
srefused is become the head stone of the corner. Save now we beseech thee O
Lord, O Lord send us now Prosperity. O give thanks unto the Name of the Lord,
for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

3. God suffers his People to be brought into Extremities and delivers them
looking up unto him with the eye of Faith when all other hopes fail. Instances,

SECT. VIII.
Adam and Eve hid themselves from God for shame after they had fallen and were
driven out of Paradise, and kept out by a flaming Sword, till by Repentance
they recovered and kept the favor of God.

Lot was saved out of the flames of Sodom.

The Three Children were untoucht in the midst of the fiery Furnace.

Susanna rescued from the Unrighteous Judges.

Daniel was safe in the hungry Lions Den.

Jews saved from the destruction plotted by Haman.

Joseph was brought out of the Pit, and from the Prison, and advanced to honor
and greatness.

Prophets hid by fifty in a Cave.

Seven Thousand reserved in Israel, that bowed not their knees unto Baal, and
whose mouths had not kissed him.

Above Forty Conspirators that vowed they would not eat nor drink till they had
killed Paul.

Moses and Aaron saved from the Conspiracy of Corah Dathan and Abiram.

Aaron offered Incense and stood in the Gap between the living and the dead,
and the Plague ceased.

David built an Altar and the Plague stayed.

Sennacheribs Host destroyed by an Angel and Hezekiah saved.

Egypt saved from famine by Joseph's care.

Sudden plenty in Samaria after sudden famine (as if the Windows of Heaven were
opened,) as impossible to be done.

Elijah prayed for Rain and had it.

Manna came down from Heaven.

The Syrians Army smitten with blindness, at the Prayer of the Prophet Elisha.

The Thundering Legion, by Prayers got Rain, when the Romans fainted for thirst.

Jobs latter end was greater than his beginning.

Jeremiah was drawn out of the stinking Dungeon.

The Israelites were saved in the Plagues, and brought out of Egypt, with a
strong hand and a stretched out Arm, and walled on both sides in the Red Sea
while their Enemies sank like Lead in the mighty Waves. They were secured by a
Pillar of Fire by Night, and a Pillar of a Cloud by Day.

The Jews returned from Seventy years Captivity.

Christians secured at Pella, and elsewhere from the Destruction when Jerusalem
was taken.

The Ten Persecutions ceased, and the Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the
Church.

Satan bound for a Thousand Years. Hitherto he must go, and no further.

Manna and Quails rained from Heaven.

Water gushed out of the Rock; and God prepared a Table in the Wilderness.

David was delivered from Cruel Saul, and overcame Goliath with a Staff and a
Sling.

Isaac was snatched from the sharp Knife ready to cut his throat.

Noah. etc. escaped from the Flood.

Elijah was left alone, and preserved from them, that sought his life to take
it away, was fed by Ravens.

Hezekiah was healed of his Plague Sore, and his days lengthned.

The Widow of Sarephath had but a little Cake, and a Cruse of Oil, and two
Sticks, all multiplied, to save her life, and to pay her debts.

Nebuchadnezar from a Beast, became a man again.

The Shunamit's Son was raised to life.

Jonah was delivered out of the Whales belly.

Nineveh to be destroyed at Forty Days end, was saved.

Lazarus after four days raised from the Grave.

Paul was let down in a Basket to save his life, and many times saved beside,
both at Land and Sea, especially from false Brethren.

Christ in his Agony was strengthened in the Garden, as the Angels of God had
ministered unto him in the Wilderness, after the Devils Temptations.

Christ commended his Spirit into the hands of his Father, after he uttered
that bitter cry, My God my God why have thou forsaken me? He trod the Winepress
of God's Wrath alone, and when he looked round about him and saw one to help
him, he wondered that there was none to uphold, therefore his own Arm brought
Salvation to himself and all his People.

The Invincible Navy of Spain in 88. was scattered with the Winds and broken in
pieces, after they had divided the Lions Skin before he was dead.

Twenty years Rebellion and Murder of Charles the First, and the greatest and
best of his Subjects, and Devastation of Church and State was Seconded by such
a miraculous Restoration of all things, as the World hardly ever knew the
like, and Posterity will as hardly believe it, and the Authors of these
mischiefs that survived, are as little sensible of it, though so much for the
Glory of God, and the good of the Kingdoms, and the strengthening of the
Protestant Cause, is for their own safety, if they had hearts to understand it.

The Gunpowder Treason makes honest man's hearts ache to this day to think of it,
and the Devil and the Pope were shamefully foiled on that day, Black to them,
but Glorious to us, and our Posterity for ever.

The last Plot was come to the Birth but wanted strength to bring forth. It is
gone back into the Womb of Hell where it was hatched, and we trust it shall be
condemned to everlasting darkness, and never, O never see the Light.

All these Comforts and Examples and many more were written for our
Instruction, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have
Hope.

Wherefore seeing we are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses,
let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset us, and
let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus,
the Author and finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him
endured the Cross despising the shame, and is set down at the Right hand of the
Throne of God; for consider him that endured such contradiction of Sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your Minds, ye have not yet
resisted unto Blood, striving against sin, and ye have forgotten the
exhortation which speaks unto you as unto Children. My Son despise not thou
the chastizing of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom
the Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. If ye
endure chastn^ng, God deals with you as with Sons, For what Son is he whom
the Father chastneth not? But if ye be without chastisement whereof all are
partakers, then are ye Bastards and not Sons. Furthermore we have bad Fathers
of our Flesh, which corrected us, and we give them reverence, shall we not much
rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits and Life? For they verily
for a few days chastned us after their pleasure, but he for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his Holiness. Now no chastning for the present seems to
be joyous, but grievous: Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable
fruit of Righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up
the Hands which hand down, and the feeble Knees, and make strait paths for your
feet, lest that which is low be turned out of the way, but let it rather be
healed. Think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, which is to try you,
as the same strange thing happened to them. But rejoice in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding Joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ,
happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you; on their
part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. But let none of
you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body
in other men's matters; for if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but let him glorify God, on this behalf; wherefore let them that
suffer according to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him
in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. We know not what to do one way, and
yet we do know what to do another way. For the Divisions of Reuben there are
great thoughts of heart. For the Union and Communion with God, there are
greater thoughts of heart.

1. For our sins, we cannot expiate the guilt of them, Divisions
we cannot explicate our selves from the miseries of them, we shall be left in
the lurch for them, we shall be taken in their snares, be lost, and be at our
wits end. Because our sins are ripe, at the full height. Because our
Consciences do sadly accuse us, and because we are ripe for Judgment coming
upon us like an Armed man that cannot be resisted.

2 For our Miseries, fears of Want, of War, Pain and Confusion, for Distraction
in our understandings, Perplexity in our Wills, Madness in our Passions boiling
over in Despair. Which makes the Wicked Raging, Forlorn, Desperate, Cursing and
Blaspheming, Foaming and Tearing like a Wild Bull in a Net.

3. For our Deliverances from Sin and Miseries a Harbor out of a Raging Ocean,
a Calm in a Storm, an Anchor, a Rest, a Rock, in a dry and weary Land. In a
Tempest every man cries to his several God. In Distress every man takes care
for his Body, and for his Soul, pities himself, should pity others, helps
himself, and should help others, prays for himself, and should for others,
labors for himself, and should for others. Shifts for himself at last.

We know not what to think, speak or do, but look one upon another, and all
upon God.

SECT. IX.
All Experiments, Cordials.
1. If ever there was a time of trial, surely it is now. Behold and see O all ye
that pass by, was there ever any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. For these things I weep, my
eye, my eye pours out tears, because the Comforter that should relieve my
Sorrow is far from me. Can we believe, and will we believe now? Do we dare to
be honest still? If ever Faith be found faithful, it will be now. If we cannot
be happy now, we shall be sure to be happy hereafter. Veniet aliquando dies,
Time will end in Eternity. All tears shall one day be wiped away from our eyes.

We have cause to be taken off from things below, and to fix upon things above.
If there be deliverance, it will come, if none, God's Will be done. Sit down
under the Judgment. If we perish we perish. Ly prostrate at the Footstool of
God's Grace, we cannot everlastingly perish. Faith and a good Conscience will
bring us peace at the last. We know the worst, it is but a Temporal Life We can
loose. Great heart akings, fear not them that can kill the Body, and go no
further, but fear him that is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell fire.
The Lord can find away to deliver us, which we cannot think of, if he have any
heart toward us, or if we have any heart toward him. He will seek to do us
good, if we will seek to do our selves good. We have studied to do our selves
good, and our labor is in vain without God, but our labor shall never be in
vain in the Lord. Woe be unto them by whom the offenses come, it had been better
for them if they had never been born, or that they had been like the untimely
fruit of a Woman which never saw the Sun.

2. Is this a time to contend about Trifles? Parties.
We had more need unite them, and not Scratch and Devour one another, as we do.
We must live and die together, then let us live and die in love together. Seek
to reconcile all Parties, at least bear with them, and love them; then look up
to God, and try if we shall be heard, otherwise, if we make many prayers he
will not hear, know this for certain, the Party that is bloody and false shall
be destroyed. A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. There will be
Parties as long as the World lasts, and those Parties will be of several
Judgments, as long as the World lasts. These may instruct one another whither
they will hear or whither they will forbear, they must not devour one another
therefore, if they do, both parties are guilty, the innocent party may complain
and defend themselves.

Is this a time to hunt after Honors, Riches, Pleasures, till the Flood come
and sweep us all away?

Throne of Grace.
3. The last Refuge is the Throne of God's Grace, never to depart from that is
to be sure of Glory. We know well what to do, for our Eyes are upon God.

Signs of good.
4. There are signs of fair Weather. God remembers that we are but Dust, and
that the Breath is in our Nostrils, and therefore he will not be always
chiding, lest the Spirits of men should fail before him, and the Souls should
die and perish which he has Created.

God propounds the way of Peace.

1. By opening unto us the Danger, and discovering the Contr^vers of it.

2. By raising up the Spirits of men, to that pitch of detestation and utter
abhorrence, of those damnable Doctrines and Practices, as are so universally
destructive to the Church and Commonwealth.

3. By offering ways and means to recover, if we will take them. God has done
his part, but, our business will not be done, except we do our part. What could
God do more for his Vineyard, which he has not done, but still we bring forth
Wild Grapes. God can and will save us, if we will be saved.

4. By giving us a Seed of Rare Champions, Giants for Piety and Learning.

5. If God had no delight in us, Why has he done so much for us already? And
why is he so ready to do for us still? If we will yet repent we shall not
perish.

Preparation for the worst.
6. Prepare for the worst. Hope for the best. If we must die, let us die
together.

In Love in one another Arms.

2. In Faith in the Arms of God.

3. In Justice doing no harm to one another, in Righteousness having a good
Cause and a good Conscience, free from presumptuous sins, and from blood
guiltiness.

The will of the Lord must be done, whither we will or no, it is best for us to
be willing, even against our Will we sin, but God suffers, and we suffer, and
God suffers, we suffer altogether, take heed we do not sin altogether: We are
not alone in sufferings, let us not be altogether in sinnings: God is with us
in sufferings, God is not with us in sinnings. God is with us if we live not
nor die not in sin, this is comfort; but God is far from us, if we live and die
in unrighteousness; this is sorrow. Look to Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, that
they be good now; They that are profane and wicked as they were in times of
safety, are worse now in times of danger. It Is a bad sign, to be bad still.
Will nothing do? Then if your Sons and Daughters commit whoredoms and other
Abominations, let them alone, for why should they be punished any more, they
will revolt more and more; they that are wicked shall be wicked still: But they
that have feared the Lord, and do fear the Lord, and speak often one to
another, a Book of Remembrance is written of those men, and God shall make up
these Jewels carefully: these have done what they can, and can do no more, they
have satisfied themselves, and shall satisfy God through Jesus Christ their
Lord, who has satisfied for them; because they have thought, spoke and done
the bed they can, to the utmost of their power, and taken all the best courses
to avoid sin and misery, and provide for their eternal good; the wisest, and
best, and strongest can do no more. If after all this all their hopes fail for
this life, they have freed their own Souls, they shall be saved in the life to
come.

Means useless.
We have seen by woeful experience all the ways of temporising, and flattery, and
fraud, and policy, and cruelty, and whatsoever else is contrary to Godliness
and a sound Mind comes to nothing. We have tried all means, and beat upon every
bush, and all to no purpose, every thing fails; let us come to that at last,
that will never fail us, Fear God, and keep his Commandments. A Rich man uses
all means, and nothing does him good, all his Physicians are of no value, and
leave him to God. We have contracted sins, and by them brought these miseries
upon our selves that we groan under; and being found out for them, as we never
thought to be, we look one upon another, and say one to another, as Joseph's
Brethren did, We are verily guilty because of our Brothers Blood, and because
of our Fathers Blood, and therefore is this distress come upon us. The Prodigal
came too, when he came to his Husks, and not before. There are two Protestant
Parties that hurt one another, and a third Party that is Popish, stands by and
laughs, and encourages them to worry one another, and when he sees them spent,
he rushes upon them to destroy them. And this is our Case.

7. Make Observations in your Life.

Observations of Mercies.
1. You shall find particular Deliverances to your Persons Estates; great
experiences of Gods Love, in supporting you under your troubles, and saving you
from them; whether they come mediately from the hands of Men, or immediately
from the hands of God, if you mark them, to your great comfort, confirmation,
and assurance for future Mercies, and Thankfulness to God for them.

2. You shall find Public Deliverances to the Church and State, such as have
happened in your days and in the days of old, how the Lord does build up
Jerusalem, and gathers together the outcasts of Israel; how he heals the
broken in heart and binds up their wounds; how he satisfies the longing
Soul, and fills the hungry Soul with goodness: Such as sit in Darkness and in
the shadow of Death, being bound in Affliction and Iron, when they cried unto
the Lord in their Trouble, he saved them out of their Distresses, he brought
them out of Darkness, and the Shadow of Death, and brake their bonds asunder.
He sent his Word and healed them, and delivered them from their Destruction: Oh
that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men; sacrifice the sacrifices of
Thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing. They that go down to the
Sea in Ships, that do business in greats Waters, these see the goodness of the
Lord and his wonders in the Deep. For he commands and raises the stormy
wind, which lifts up the Waves thereof; they mount up to the Heaven, they go
down again to the Depths; their Soul is melted because of trouble, they reel to
and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. Then they
cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their
distresses. He makes the Storm a Calm, so that the Waves thereof are still;
then are they glad, because they be quiet: so he brings them unto their
desire Haven. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and
for his wonderful works to the Children of men. Let them exalt him also in the
Congregation of the People, and praise him in the Assembly of the Elders. He
turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into a dry ground. A
fruitful Land makes he barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
He turns the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
water-springs; and there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a
City for Habitations, and sow the Fields and plant Vineyards, which may yield
Fruits of increase; he blesses them also, so that they are multiplied greatly,
and suffers not their Cattle to decrease; again they are minished, and
brought low, through oppression, affliction on and sorrow. He pours contempt
upon Princes, and causes them to wander in the wilderness where there is no
way: Yet sets he the poor on high from affliction, and makes him Families
like a Flock. The Righteous shall see it, and rejoice, and all iniquity shall
stop her mouth. Whosoever is wise will observe those things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Observation of correspondence with God.
8. Besides these temporal, personal, and public Mercies, I exercise my Soul in
the strict observation of the intercourse and correspondence of Business
betwixt God and my own Soul, which greatly comforts me in all outward Distress.
And I persuade all Christians to do the like, As to observe

Influence of Gods Spirit upon our Spirits.
1. The Influence of God's Spirit upon our Spirits, by the Illumination of our
Minds, and the Invitation of our Wills. When you are serious and solitary, you
will find God knocking at the Door of your Hearts, the motions of his blessed
Spirit, the Light within you, the Voice behind you in your Consciences; this is
the way, walk in it.

Take good heed that you listen to all these good things, God's turning to us.

Refluence of our Spirits upon Gods Spirit.
2. The Refluence of our Spirits upon God's Spirit, by our approbation of the
Mind of God in our Mind, and the Consent of our Will to God's Will, and a
Return of Love for Love, our turning to God. The use and exercise of Graces,
given and received, frequent resort to the Throne of Grace, for Grace
sufficient to help us in the time of all our need. You shall find this
employment beneficial toward a supportation, and qualification of all outward
perplexities, driving the weak heart toward despair. Mark what comes from God
to us inwardly, and what comes from us to God inwardly, for God marks us. We
shall find enough to do to prepare for God's coming into our Souls, and to stir
up the Gifts of God in us, and to use his Graces after he is come into our
Souls. These things will so take up our thoughts and exercise our facult^es,
that we shall be all in hopes and joys, because of our Union and Communion
with God, while the calamities of the World are round about us, that we shall
fear them the less, and bear them the better, and overcome them the sooner.
This I find to be the great Remedy, and Medela Auimae, the Earnest of Heaven
upon Earth, the great Anodine to expel worldly Sorrows. I am safe in the midst
of all Temptations and Dangers of this World, Why? Because I know and feel,
That.

1. God is mine, by his own Act and Deed, not only of Creation, as he is to
all, but of Redemption, as he would be to all if they would take it, and is to
all that do embrace it, to whom he therefore gives power that they should be
called the Sons of God: And then God's Work is done.

2. I am God's by my own Act and Deed, not only by owning my self to be the
Work of his Hands, but covenanting with him to do and suffer his Will in and
upon me, and to trust to him, that he will be my exceeding great Reward. And so
I may call God Father: And then my work is done.

While a Soul is abstracted with mutual Enjoyments, Studies, and Raptures, with
God, no worldly Grievances. can affect such sublime Spirits as they do those
that grovel upon the ground in the concerns chiefly of the Flesh and of the
World. 'Twas said of Archimedes, that his Mind being intent upon Demonstrations
when the City was besieged, and the Enemy broke in upon him, he perceived not
the Danger of his Death, till it seized upon his Contemplations. Death it self
is not feared nor felt so much in the Flesh to a man that is mortified to the
Flesh beforehand from the Corruptions and Lusts thereof; waiting all the days
of our appointed time, till his change do come, looking for, after this earthly
house of his Tabernacle is dissolved, to have a building of God, an house not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, but groaning earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon, with his house which is from Heaven; that being clothed, he shall
not be found naked, not for that he would be unclothed, but clothed upon, so,
that mortality might be swallowed up of life; desiring not in the Flesh, but,
in the Spirit, to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Other thoughts and cares are eating, fretting, and consuming; but these are
healing, comforting, and reviving: caring for God how we may please him, that
cares for us. By these the Soul is upheld from sinking into despair, when the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil are altogether about our ears. Thus we bear up
against the Waves, because our Stern is good, or Keel is sound, and our Pilot
steers a right Course. Do not therefore break my heart with worldly fears, I
have a mind to hope as well as fear, I have crowded my Head already among the
Stars, I may be vexed in my Body, but that also being joined to the Head, will
follow after it by degrees; and Christ, which is my Head, will draw my whole
Body, Soul, and Spirit after him, with whom I am already in Faith in Heavenly
places. My Tribulation works in me patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and I shall never be ashamed: So I encourage all Sufferers.

-- Durate, and rebus vosmet servate secundis.
-- Dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Virg. Upbraid me not, but pity me, for I am resolved, and therefore tempt me
no more, it is enough that I suffer, I murmr not, let me alone.

-- Oro miserere laborum tantorum, miserere animi non digna ferentis. They that
sow in tears, shall reap in joy, and bring their Sheaves with them, after a few
days I shall find the comfort of it.

An humble Soul aims high; God and my Right, but all in Christ. God be merciful
to me a Sinner; for his free Grace in Christ Jesus only: Amen.

If in this Life only we have hope, we are of all men the most miserable. It is
so short and miserable, that in our Extremities we look one upon another, and
know not what to do: What shall we do in Death? That puts an end to all worldly
Extremities, eases the poor Captive in the Dungeon from his Bonds, and the
oppressed from all Tyranny, and is too often wished for in the error of our
Life, but is a beginning of endless Extremities to them that have no hope. We
that could not tell what to do in Life, what shall we do in Death? When the
naked Soul sits trembling upon the pale lip, to be plunged into the bottomless
Abyss of Eternity?

But if in this Life our hope be full of a Glorious and Blessed Immortality, we
know what to do; there is hope in Death: When the Body goes to the Dust, the
Soul returns to God that gave it; to the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and
Jacob; who is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; for they are all
alive in the Spirit with God, and shall live with him in the Body, when the
times of Refreshment shall come from the Lord.

My Son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for Temptation; set
thy Heart aright, and constantly endure, and make not have in time of trouble:
Cleave unto him and depart not away, that thou may be increased in thy last
end. Whatsoever is brought unto thee, take cheerfully, and be patient when thou
art changed to a low estate. For Gold is tried in the Fire, and acceptable men
in the Furnace of Adversity. Believe in him, and he will help thee, order thy
way aright, and trust in him. Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his Mercy, and go
not aside, lest ye fall. Ye that fear the Lord believe him, and your reward
shall not fail. Ye that fear the Lord, hope for good, and for everlasting Joy
and Mercy. Look at the Generations of old, and see, Did ever any trust in the
Lord, and was confounded? Or did any abide in his Fear and was forsaken? Or
whom did he ever despise, that called upon him? For the Lord is full of
Compassion, and Mercy, long suffering, and very pitisul, and forgiveth sins,
and saves in time of Affliction.

Woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the Sinner that goes two ways.
Woe to him that is faint-hearted, for he believes not, therefore shall he not
be deseded. Woe unto you that have lost patience, and what will ye do when the
Lord shall visit you? They that fear the Lord, will not disobey his Word, and
they that love him will keep his ways. They that fear the Lord will seek that
which is well-pleasing unto him, and they that love him shall be filled with
the Law. They that fear the Lord, will prepare their hearts, and humble their
Souls in his Sight, saying we will fall into the hands of the Lord, and not
into the hands of Men; for as his Majesty is, so is his Mercy.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
Mercies, and the God of Comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that
we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God: For as the Sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ; and whither we be
afflicted, it is for our Consolation and Salvation, which is effectual in the
enduring of the same Sufferings; or whither we be comforted, it is for the same
Consolation and Salvation. And our Hope is steadfast, knowing that as we are
partakers of the Sufferings, so shall we be also of the Consolation: For we
were pressed out of measure above strength, so that we despaired even of Life.
But we had the sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God which raised the Dead, who delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver, in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us. You
also helping together by Prayer for us, that for the Gift bestowed upon us, by
the means of many persons thanks may be given by many on our behalf. For our
rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
Godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to youward. We have access
by faith into this grace wherein to we stand, and rejoice in the Hope of the
Glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience, and patience, experience, and experience, hope,
and hope makes not ashamed; because the Love of God is shed abroad in our
Hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. We count it all joy when we
fall into diverse temptations, knowing this, that the trying of our Faith
works patience: But let patience have her perfect work, that we may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

SECT. X
Thus when we have tried all, we shall find God is all in all.

When the Iniquities of our heels compass us round about, and take fast hold
upon us; we do but weary our selves in very vanity, and labor in the very
Fire. In the mean while, when all our bones are out of joint, and we lie upon
the Rack of Extremity, the World stares upon us, and mocks us, and with the
Flesh and the Devil leaves us in the lurch, and therefore we have no reason to
trust them. Still we retain our Inteprity, till we dye; not curse God, nor
speak unadvisedly with our Lips, nor charge God foolishly. Though he kill us,
yet will we put our trust in him. We are content to receive Evil at the hands
of God, as well as Good.

When all Helps fail, God will never fail us nor forsake us. When my Father and
my Mother, forsook me, the Lord took me up. Can a Woman forget her Child? Yes
she may, yet will not I forget thee. The Plague walks in darkness, and the
Pestilence destroys at noon day, yet shall it not come nigh thee. The Lord
shall cover thy Head in the day of Battle. This is mavelous in our eyes. The
Lord gives sight to the Blind, and opens the Prison-Doors to them that are
fast bound in Misery and Iron, even when the Iron enters into their Souls: He
gives Food to the Hungry: He plucketh our Foot out of the Snare, the Snare is
broken, and we are delivered: He quenches all the fiery Darts of the Devil,
and bruiseth Satan under every one of our Feet, and through Christ, we shall be
more than Conquerors. God works Miracles when he pleases. He brings Souls out
of Temptation, and together with the Temptation, gives strength to bear it,
and opens a Door of Hope, that we may escape in due time. Our Extremity is an
opportunity for him to show Mercy. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor
suffer thy Holy Ones to see everlasting Corruption. The patient abiding of the
Meek shall not perish for ever. We do not know what the Lord will do with us,
nor what he will do for us; but this we know, that the Lord will lay no more
upon us, than what he will enable us for to bear, and that his Grace shall be
sufficient for us, and that he remembers that we are but dust, and therefore he
will not always be chiding, lest the Spirits of men fail before him, and the
Souls dye and perish, which he has created; and in his Wrath he remembers
Mercy; and all things shall work together in the end for Gods Glory, and for
our good, and this light Affliction which is but for a moment, shall work for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. He is a Father to the
Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow; he cares for the stranger, and him
that has none to help him. Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every word
which proceeds out of the Mouth of God, does man live. No Sparrow shall fall
to the ground without his Providence, and we cannot make one Hair black or
white.

And now tell me, should you trust in God or Man? Why should we fear always, O
we of little Faith?

Methinks I see an Earned of Gods Favor. So many given us. The Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, of whom the rest of the World is not worthy.
These stand in the Gap, and our dead bones shall live.

It Is time to Unite.

A man would have thought that the Presbyterians of all men, would long ere now
have come in unto us, to the help of the Lord against the Mighty and Malicious
Enemies, that press so sore upon us, to change our Religion, Presbyterians.
and bring in Superstition and Idolatry, and a change of Government both of
Church and State: A man would think in this Juncture of Time, they should have
sought to save themselves and us from common Destruction, now or never; yet
still they will not look upon us, but we will look upon God, and he will save
us without them. Nor will we cry after them, Curse ye Meroz, etc.

Why should they stand so long upon a pitiful Surpliss, or Cross, or Ring, etc.
What care we for these and such things as these, no more than in Reverence to
the Supreme Power which has commanded them; and when the same Power pleases,
may countermand them for Order and Peace sake, as they did before; and we hold
it our Duty to stand ready to perform Obedience to all Decency and Order. Let
them know that we are ready to part with them and with greater things than
those upon Command, if any thing would do and give them satisfaction, if we
might be assured of a Reconciliation at the last. O when will it once be! Will
they play the same Game over again? The Cheat is too much discovered, for to do
it in the same Age, I hope not, God forbid.

They say they hate Popery, and so do we, and that with as perfect a hatred as
they can possibly do, and perhaps much more. And yet they teach their poor
ignorant People to say our Divine Service is Popish, and we are Popishly
affected, and fly from our Devotion as from the Mass or from the Alcoran; or
the Plague its self. The Papists hate our Common Prayer most of all, How then
can it be Popish? Father forg^ve them for some know not what they say, or what
they do, but others know very well what they say and do, but their Gain stands
in the way, together with their Pride and Self-will, What else can it be? We
wait for them, but we depend upon the Lord. We have been ruined once, by some
body, I hope neither they nor the Papist shall do it any more. Amen.

Spiritual Presence of God.
The Spiritual Presence of God is we hope amongst us immediately more than that
mediately in the Ark, or Pillar of Fire, or of a Cloud, or of an Angel, etc.
The Ark removed with the Camp, a sign of God's prevence. Our Ark is Christ, who
has promised to be present with us by his Spirit, unto the end of the World.
Christ is in us, and We in him; there are more with us, then there are or can
be against us. And if God be for us, Who can be against us?

Come then, let us wait upon God, in God's name; there is great reason for it.
It is good to wait upon God; and he that believes will stay the Lord's
leisure, and he that believes will not make have, and he that believes shall
never be ashamed, for the patient expedition of the meek shall not perish for
ever.

We do not prescribe any thing unto God, nor teach him what her should do, but
we prefer our Petitions into the hands of God as a Blank, beseeching him to
write therein, Mercy and Salvation and Deliverance in his own time, and in his
own manner, and as for us, we will lay our hands upon our mouths, and be doing
good. Nevertheless not our wills nor the wills of Angels or men be done, but
God's will be done, who does all things according to the Counsel of his own
Will, and will make every thing to work together, for his own great Glory and
for the good of all them that put their trust in him, and we will hold our
peace. For we are all in his hands as the Clay is in the hand of the Potter's,
and he may do with us what he pleases; but he can, and will do us no wrong. And
the patient expectation of the Meek shall not perish for ever, and through the
tender Compassions of our God, we even we, shall never miscarry. For we know
not otherwise what to do, O Lord, but our eyes look unto thee.

SECT. XI.
Expedients, Lenitives, Anodines, there are in Cases of extremity, as,

1. Thinking: Fill the Mind with the best Thoughts, Thinking.
Desires, Choices, not Shadows but Substantial thing Peace with God, care of
Souls, Eternity, Death Judgment, Heaven and Hell.

2. Relieving in things not seen made evident, Believing
in things hoped for made present and substantial by Faith. Things seen are but
Temporal, Grievous, Vexatious, Unprofitable. Things not seen are Eternal,
Comfortable, Satisfactory, Gainful, forgetting those things which are behind,
and pressing on to those things which are before, ever raising the Soul above
this World to the Word to come. The benefit of troubles is to forget Temporals
what we can and to remember Eternals, and so use this World, as tho we used it
not, looking out for a better state an Inheritance celestial, undefiled, and
not fading away, which were it not for those troubles, we should build
Tabernacles here, and think it best to stay below. In the time of Adversity
consider,

Joseph's Brethren when involved all together, at one time, in one and the same
Calamity, in one place for one and the same Guilt, recollected their memory
easily, and said one to another, we are verily Guilty concerning our Brother,
in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear, and therefore is this distress come upon us; and again Reuben more
closely put it to them. Speak I not unto you saying, Do not sin against the
Child, and ye would not hear? Therefore, Behold also his blood is required.

3. Innocence, Innocence.
To be able to say, Whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom
have I defrauded? I am innocent from the blood of all men. I have endeavored
to keep a good Conscience in all things, void ot offense toward God, and
toward Men. Look about us, look within us, for the sin that sticks so close
unto us, and the iniquity of our heels that compasses us round about, for the
plague of our own heart, for the Accursed thing; see where the shoo wrings us,
see the Conscience be clear, that none of us suffer as an evil doer, and it is
well enough.

4. Union of Spiritual forces in Faith and Prayer. Union.


Leave Controversies, and contend for nothing but for the Faith. Let all enjoy
their opinions in Doctrine so we can but meet in Devotion and public Worship;
we will be content and never persecute one another with the Tongue Fire or Faggot.
Write no more Volums of Polemical Divinity. Beat all our Swords into
Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning Hooks, and learn this kind of War no
more; by dipping our Tongues or Pens in Gall, much less sheathing our Swords
into one another bowels. Use no Canina Eloquentia, no Ecclesiastical Wars, by
my consent. Reformers of all men should best agree, Thieves and Robbers are
peaceable among themselves, and shall true men fall together by the ears? Speak
every one his mind, a God's name, but use no railing accusation, especially
against the Government. What other things, what better things can we do?

5. Patience, Patience.
And let Patience have its perfect working in us.

We are now in the Fiery Furnace of Trial, and we shall come out in God's good
time pure, if we hold out to the end. Nubecula, est citotransibit, Stay a
while, deliverance will come, it will not tarry. God has found out a way for
Eternal Salvation, which Angels or Men could not immagine: and shall not God
find out a way for Temporal Salvation, which Angels or Men cannot think of?

Suppose the worst, that Temporal Salvation, came not to us it will come to our
Posterity, and Eternal Salvation to us both. All the Afflictions of this World,
cannot be worthy of the Glory that shall be revealed hereafter. First, A bitter
Cup to be Drank of a bitter Baptism to be Baptized with, then comes the sitting
at the Right hand and Left hand of God in his H^avenly Kingdom; wherefore
comfort one another with these things, as well as words.

Can you tell me of any better way? Try if you can? I should be glad to know
it. Is there any other God besides our God? God knows none, How is it possible
man should? Is there any other Remedy? There is none. Here is the Fire and the
Altar, and the Wood. all ready, in order to a Sacrifice, but where is the Lamb
for a Burnt Offering? Tho we cannot, yet God can and will provide a Lamb,
though we can find none.

Shall poor Souls, think you, be lost because of Troubles? No they shall be
saved with them, and cannot be saved without them, this is our Portion, Sort
tua contentus abi. (...).

Other Remedies are of no value. They do but increase the pain, they do no good
when all is done. Search and see it you can find any other way, there is none.
This is the way walk in it, Christ himself has trodden it, tho Thorny, it is
safe. This is the Philosophers Stone that turns all into Gold, this is in God's
power to do, in our power to use. Other things of Providence are not in our
power, let them go on, for they must go on, and none can stop them. They may be
born, and they must be born, no other Remedy when all is done that can be done,
only our eyes look up unto thee. Acquaint thy self with God, and be at rest;
retire to God, and be secure, shelter thy self under his wings. Other things
tend to Despair, this to Hope. Study thus to be quiet. This is the way, walk in
it. Hear a voice behind thee, within the round about thee, God is nearer then
when we believed. We shall see by Faith what we cannot see by Sense, we shall
hear by Faith, what we cannot hear by Sense, we shall feel by Faith, what we
cannot feel by Sense, and our hands shall handle of the word of life, only be
valiant and of a good courage. The Lord will do his work, and we shall hold our
peace. Who then is on God's side? Who? Who has believed our Report, and to
whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Shall the Son of Man find Faith on the
Earth? Yes he will find it in the hearts of those that are in Covenant with
him. The Light is within us, keeps us from walking in Darkness. Stay me with
Flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love, ravished transported
with Eternals, do not offer to break my heart with Terrors, for I am ready and
resolved, not only to be bound, but to die for the blessed name of the Lord
Jesus. Make a party to wait on God, and to trust to his mercies. This is a
present help in time of trouble. The Cat in the Fable, had but one shift to
save her life when the Dogs came about her, but 'twas a good one, to take a
Tree; but the Fox had a hundred, but they were all stark naught.

Woeful experience of all unprofitable means, is a means to establish the heart
to a comfortable experience of looking up to God. When we say, Who will show us
any good? And find by experience they cannot show us any good, then we shall
find by experience, that God will show us all good, and that we had fainted,
unless we had believed to see the goodness of God, and that we shall live, and
not dye. I have lifted up mine Eyes to the Hills from whence only comes my
Salvation. You may try all things if you will, but they will do you no good:
But if you hold fast that which is good, that to be sure will do you good. Come
unto me all ye that travel and are heavy laden with the burden of your Sins,
and ye shall find Rest for your Souls. O every man that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters; and he that has no Money, come ye, buy, and eat, yea, come, buy
Wine and Milk, without Money, and without Price, wherefore do ye spend your
Money for that which is not Bread? and your Labor for that which satisfies
not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your
Soul delight it self in Fatness. Incline your Ear and come unto me; hear, and
your Soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even
the sure Mercies of David. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the
Streets; How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners
delight in their scorning, and Fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my Reproof;
behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you; I will make known my Ways unto you.
If thou incline thine Ear unto Wisdom, and apply thine Heart to Understanding;
yea, if thou criest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
Understanding: If thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid
Treasures then shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the
Knowledge of God. Then shall thou understand Righteousness and Judgment, and
Equity, yea, and every good Path. When Wisdom enters into thine Heart, and
Knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soul: Discretion shall preserve thee,
Understanding shall keep thee. To deliver thee from the way of the evil Man,
from the Man that speaks froward things.

Hide your Treasures in Woods, Deserts, Caves, Ponds, Wells, etc. Pack up
Bundles and be bone, fly away as fast as you can; Destruction has swift Wings
to overtake you. Riches profit not in the day of wrath; Thrones have been
tumbled into the Dust, and they that were brought up in Scarlet have embraced
Dunghills. A good Conscience is the truest Riches, will bring you to
everlasting Habitations, where ye may dwell in ease and safety. There is no
rest for the sole of our Feet but in Gods Ark: Look upon one another still, ye
shall peradventure find help one to another in a worldly way, if ye are true
one to another: But look up unto God, and he shall find help in an Heavenly way
one to another. Is there a God or no? If no, despair and dye: If a God, believe
and live.

SECT. XII.
Obj. These are remove Comforts; but my House is on fire, I am undone.

Sol. Undone in outward appearance to the Eye of the World, but safe in inward
appearance to the eye of God, for the World to Come.

I have said all I can, I have no better. If you like this Counsel, take it; if
not, let it alone; but let me not cast Pearls before Swine.

I offer Peace, if you take it, well; if not, it returns to me again. Liberavi
animam meam; I call Heaven and Earth to witness against you: I have saved my
own Soul, your blood be upon your own Heads. I have piped unto you, and ye have
not danced; I have mourned unto you, and ye have not wept: Your destruction is
from your selves, but in God is your help, if you will take it. Do what you
will; I and my House will serve the Lord. Go away with such of your Comforts as
you can yet, make the best of them you can, but behold I show unto you a more
excellent way. You shall perish with all your Provisions; but we that trust in
God, shall be as Mount Sion, which shall never be removed. We may fear as well
as you in this Life, or we may suffer as well as you, or if ye be saved here,
we can but suffer; but we have a better hope than you, your Gold and Silver
shall cancker, and your Garments rot with the Moth.

Solus mihi Consolator Christus in vita and morte. We are Men as well as you;
we have some wit in our Passions as well as you, some courage too as well as
you; and are not idle neither to look out for help, as well as you, and are
resolved to try and lawful means, as well as you; but we will not trust in
them, as you do, we hope we trust in better means than the World has to trust
unto: We have Meat and Drink which you know not of; the carnal man
understands not the things of God, neither can he, because they are
spiritually discerned. When ye have done all you can, without God, you must
come to a Recantation at last. The Righteous man shall stand in great boldness,
Recantation.
before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his
Labors. When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall
be amazed at the strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all that they
looked for; and they repenting and groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say
within themselves, This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a Proverb
of Reproach: We Fools counted his Life madness and his End to be without
Honor. How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the
Saints! Therefore have we erred from the way of Truth, and the Light of
Righteousness has not shined unto us, and the Sun of Righteousness rose not
upon us. We wearied our selves in the way of Wickedness and destruction, yea we
have gone through Deserts, where there lay no way; but as for the Way of the
Lord, we have not known it. What has Pride profited us? Or what good has
Riches with our vaunting brought us? All those things are passed away like a
Shadow, and as a Post that hasted by; and as a Ship that passes over the Waves
of the Water, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found,
neither the Pathway of the Keel in the Waves; or as when a Bird has flown
through the Air, there is no token of her way to be found; or like as when an
Arrow is shot at a Mark, it parts the Air, which immediately comes together
again, so that a man cannot know where it went through. Even so we in like
manner, as soon as we were born began to draw to our End, and had no sign of
Virtue to show, but were consumed in our Wickedness. For the hope of the
ungodly is like Dust which is blown away with the Wind, like a thin Froth, that
is driven away with the Storm; like as the Smoke which is dispersed here and
there with a Tempest, and passes away like the Remembrance of a Guest, that
tarrieth but a Day. But the Righteous live for evermore, their Reward also is
with the Lord, and the Care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they
receive a Glorious Kingdom, and a Beautiful Crown from the Lords Hand, for with
his Right hand shall he cover them, and with his Arm shall he protect them.

Obj. All these are vain Hopes, there is no certainty in them.

Sol. So the Heathens derided the Christians, for relying on a Crucified God,
(...), a Staked Sophister. So did the Jews deride Christ himself, He saved
others, he cannot save himself: If thou be the Christ come down from the Cross,
and we will believe. He trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will have
him. So did the Devil, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down headlong:
Command these Stones to be made Bread, etc. But for all this, Christians glory
in nothing so much as in the Cross of Christ. This is Spes sola Christianorum:
The only Hope of Christians, even the Hope of the Resurrection; that being
crucified with Christ, we shall be glorified with him; Conformity with Christ.
for it behooves us to suffer and be made conformable with Christ, Crucifixa
Membra, sub Crucifixo Capite; Crucified Members correspond with a Crucified
Head. Delicate Membra non decent sub Crucifixo Capite, But Delicate Members no
way agree with a Head crowned with Thorns: Ridemur Debacchamur. We are counted
Fools for Christ's sake; but being reviled, we bless, being persecuted, we
suffer it, being defamed, we entreat; we are made as the Filth of the World,
and are as the offscouring of all things, a Spectacle of Angels and Men. Our
Faith and Patience in all the Persecutions and Tribulations that we endure, are
a manifest token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that we may be counted
worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which we suffer; seeing it is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
that are troubled, Rest. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with
his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire taking Vengeance of them that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; where shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power; when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all them that believe on that Day. God will render to every man according to
his Deeds, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil; of
the Jew first, and also of the Gentile: But glory, honor, and peace to every
man that does good, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; for there is no
respect of persons with God. This is an Account of the Hope that is in us.

Obj. These are but words, and words are but wind.

Sol. Such words as will prove deeds at last; whither you think so, or no, you
will be convinced of them when you see them.

Obj. Let us alone till that day, for we shall never see it.

Sol. What if you do live to see that day of deliverance? And what if you do
not live to see it? It may be because you have not deserved to see it, because
you will not believe it.

Obj. Show us the Father, and it suffices us, to come to our help.

Sol. He that has seen Christ, has seen the Father.

Obj. All things turn about as from the beginning. We are born at all
adventure, and we shall be hereafter, as if we had never been; our Body shall
be turned into Ashes, and our Spirit shall vanish as the soft Air. Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we dye. Our time is a very Shadow that passes away;
and after our End, there is no returning; for it is fast sealed, so that no man
comes again. Come on then, let us enjoy the good things that are present, for
it is our portion and our Lot, etc.

Sol. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; Evil Communications corrupt good
Manners. Awake to Righteousness and sin not, for some have not the Knowledge of
God; I speak this to your shame. Such as perfect Atheists, let them alone. More
Evidences and Demonstrations of Gods Providence here, and his Rewards
hereafter, cannot be given, than have been given: And therefore they that will
not believe upon such grounds and foundations as are laid in Reason and
Religion from the Scriptures and Experiences of Faithful Men, will never
believe.

As for us that do believe, if we be deceived, as we are not, God has deceived
us, as he has not, nor cannot.

Therefore we hope we have taken the surest and safest side for God, in the
ways of Righteousness. Because if we be delivered, it is his Mercy; if we be
not delivered, it is his Justice, yet* we dye in a good Cause, and it is better
to suffer for well doing, than for evil doing. We dye in a good Cause, we dare
venture, our Faith is such, For us to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, but
whether we live or dye, we are the Lords.

The Jews have a great Faith in their Messiah to come, and they dye in it.

The Turks have a great Faith for their Mahomets coming, and they dye in it.

The Millenaries have a great Faith for Christ's Temporal Kingdom, will the
Saints alone for a Thousand years, and they dye in it.

If these men have such hope upon such slender Grounds, shall not we much more,
upon a surer word of Prophecy, that has hitherto come to pass, and has been
fulfilled in every tittle? This is our Comfort, we will not let go our hold,
though Satan has sifted us, as the Wheat is sifted; yet Christ has prayed for
us, that our Faith shall not fail, nor the Gates of Hell prevail against it;
and we will live and dye in this Faith, by the Grace of God.

Obj. The Prophet is a Fool, and the Spiritual man is Mad, much Confidence as
well as Learning has made him Mad. What will this Babbler say? He seems to be
a setter-forth of strange things, and he speaks of a Resurrection.

Sol. We preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a stumbling Block, and to the
Greeks Foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks,
Christ, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God: Because the Foolishness of God
is wiser than Men, and the weakness of God, is stronger than Men; God has
chosen the Foolish things of the World, to confound the things which are
mighty, and base things of the World, and things which are despised, God has
chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are;
that no flesh should glory in his Presence. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes,
to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

Ob. Every Tub shall stand upon its own bottom.

Sol. Provided it have a good Foundation, not else.

Ob. I must answer for my self, take you no care.

Sol. Keep there, but reject not a charitable care, and see that your Cause be
good.

SECT. XIII.
I thank God I have such thoughts as these. David had them in his low
condition, Apology.
when he was as the man that had been long dead, lying in the Grave, and out of
the mind of others, but full of hope in his own mind. God's Rod and his Staff
comforted him, and so it does me, and being thus filled with God's promises, I
find no room for the vain and empty things of this World. And as David's hopes
came to pass at last, so shall mine, and the hopes of all that fear God. I have
studied all I can to find Comfort in Sorrows but I can find none, but in God
and a good Conscience, all the rest is vanity of vanities, and vexation of
Spirit. The Sum of all is fear God, and keep his Commandments, for that is the
whole Duty of Man, and that will bring a man peace at the last.

What did all our Wit and Wealth and Power do us good in Twenty years War? We
ruined our selves at the last. They that fought so long, could never obtain
their ends, all ended in destruction, but God brings all things to pass at
the last. When shall we be settled, and how? Never till we embrace and hold fast
the true Religion. Christians were persecuted, but they conquered still by
suffering. Jews trusted to Egypt for Chariots and for Horses, but all was a
broken Reed. Leave thy Fatherless Children to me, I will preserve them alive,
and let thy Widows trust in me. We shall have the better of it at the last.
When you see it you will believe it, but we believe it, before we see it. Ye
have not so much Faith, it seems, as we have, according to our Faith, so shall
it be unto us. Lord we believe help thou our unbelief. Lord increase our Faith.

What is contended for among us? A Temporal Kingdom, The Good Old Cause, who
shall be greatest, who shall be uppermost? This will not do, but whosoever will
be least among us, he shall be greatest, he shall be uppermost, this will do. I
like the Praying People, as they call themselves, for their Prayer, I should
like them better if they would leave their fighting, I dare not trust them in
their long Prayers to devour Kings Houses, and Priests Houses, and Widows
Houses, and Fatherless Houses, and Strangers Houses. Let them lay down the Arms
of Flesh, and take up the Arms of the Spirit, and we will pray with them, and
if occasion be, fight with them and for them in a good cause when lawfully
called, not against Lawful Powers, but against unlawful Rebels and Invaders.
And for the other Party, were it not for the palpable, intolerable Errors of
Papal Supremacy, Infallibility, Transubstantiation, Truce breaking,
Assassination, etc. In other Truths we would gladly give them the right hand of
fellowship. But what essential Doctrine do we Protestants differ in, if we can
tell? Let there be no strife between us, for God's sake, for we are Brethren.
What my Brother, the Son of my Mother, that sucked the same Paps together, my
Mothers Children were angry with me, and wounded me in my Mothers House. Quo
non penetras livor improbe, quidne scabrae malignitatum clausum? (...). O this
is hard, Who can bear it? What not all the Enoticows, Interims, Confessions,
Comprehensions, Condescentions, Will nothing do? A wide Door is opened for all
Christians to unite against the Common Enemy the Turks that are as Hanibal at
our Gates, but we do not stir a foot to agree among our selves, because of
Pride and Profit, to put by the Plague, and Shame of Christendom. There wants
not a great price in our hand if we had a heart to take it. Now is the time,
now is the day of Salvation or never.

Thus I poor wretch strive to settle and comfort my self and you, all I can,
but all is nothing without God. When the Woman in the time of Famine, cried out
to the King passing by upon the Wall, saying, Help my Lord, O King. He said, if
the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? Out of the Barn-store, Or
out of the Wine Press? So we may cry our hearts out for help from God or man,
except our hearts rely upon God alone, and our Consciences are pure from the
blood of all men.

I Communicate my thoughts to the World, to comfort them under God with such
Comforts, as I have received from God, if they will embrace them, if they find
fault, let them produce better, if they can (if they do I shall not find fault,
but thank them.) Si non, his utere mecum.

I have embosomed my own Soul, my heart is enlarged. I am filled as the Moon at
the full. O si esset fenestratum pectus. It is my love, and goodness not to be
despised from the menarest Swain.

These good thoughts come into my mind, in these distracted times, and surely
the worst of trouble occasion and stir up the best of thoughts, and such ages,
by the good hand of God have produced most excellent of men. I take it for a
great mercy, that there are such rare Saints and Servants of God, that keep
themselves unspotted from the World, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Generation, hating the Garments spotted by the Flesh, abounding so much more in
Grace and Goodness as the World abounds in Sin and Wickedness, of whom the
World is not worthy, nor am I worthy to pour water on their hands, or carry
their Books after them, but desire to sit at their feet to learn and imitate
their great Learning and Piety, whom God preserve. These things comfort me till
deliverance come, and will comfort me, if it were come, because I believe that
the Grace of God is sufficient for us all, though the Thorn be in the Flesh,
and the Messengers of Satan be sent to buffet us. Let the Reader pardon me for
this largeness, in so sad a season, and upon so solemn an occasion of Fasting
and Praying in our greatest extremity. I shall ask his pardon but this once; I
will trouble him no more in this kind. I hope I shall never have the like
occasion, the Storm will blow over. I have told him my mind in this matter, if
he pleases to hear it; if not, I am where I was, and he is where he is, let him
use his discretion. But whether he will pardon me or no, for it is hard to
please, I may pray for him, though he be my deadly Enemy, and that will not
hurt him (tho he would hurt me,) except he refuses to pray for himself.

SECT. XIV.
I conclude with the word of God, and Prayer. Famous are the Examples of Noah,
Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, etc. Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched the
violence of Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in Fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens,
Women received their dead raised to life again, and others were tortured not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection, others had
trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and
Imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn a sunder, were tempted, were
slain with the Sword. They wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented (of whom the World was not worthy,) they
wandered in Deserts and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth. And
these all having obtained a good report received not the Promise. God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

A PRAYER.
O Thou that hear Prayers, unto thee shall all Flesh come. We bow the Knees
of our Hearts, to thee the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the
whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, that thou would be pleased to
grant unto us, according to the Riches of thy Grace, to be strengthened with
might by thy Spirit, in the Inner Man, that Christ may dwell in our Hearts by
Faith, that we, being rooted and grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to
know the Love of God, which passes all knowledge; that we may be filled with
all the Fullness of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and unto him that is
able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or think, according
to the Power that works in us, even unto him be Glory in the Church of Christ
Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End: Amen. For whose sake we pray for
the whole World, especially for those that have remembered thee their God, and
are entered into Covenant with thee, against the World, the Flesh and the Devil,
that they may continue thy faithful Servants unto their Lives end, and that the
Gates of Hell may never be able to prevail against them. And more especially we
pray for that part of thy Church which thou have planted in these Kingdoms of
Great Britain and Ireland, and peculiarly for thy Servant, our most Dear and
Dread Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by thy Grace and amazing Providence, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, and in all Causes,
and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, in these his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions next and immediately under Thee and thy Son Christ Jesus,
Supreme Head and Governor. Give him the precious things of Heaven for the Dew,
and for the Deep that coucheth beneath, and the precious Fruits brought forth
by the Sun, and the precious things put forth by the Moon, and the chief things
of the Ancient Mountains, and the precious things of the lasting Hills, and the
precious things of the Earth, and fullness thereof; and the good Will of him
that dwelt in the Bush come upon the Head of Joseph, and upon the top of the
Head of him that is separated from his Brethren, that he may be unto them a
nursing Father, the Light of Israel, and the Breath of their Nostrils. Endue
his Soul with Princely Virtues, and everlastingly reward him. Grant him a long
life, a happy Reign, a glorious Victory over all his Enemies, and a happy
Succession after him. Let his Enemies be clothed with shame, and let confusion
of Faces for ever fall upon them: Smite through the Loins of those that hate
him, and Plague all those that offer to rise up against him. Let an Excellent
Spirit from the Most High God always rest upon him: Make him Wise and exceeding
Valiant and Courageous, even as an Angel of God, able to go in and out, before
this Mighty, Stubborn, Divided and Discontented People committed to his Charge.
Guard him with Holy Angels, and Loyal Subjects, that the Sons of Violence may
not come near to hurt him; but upon his own Head, and the Heads of his
Posterity, let the Crown flourish, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.
Bless His Royal Consort Queen Catherine, the Illustrious Prince James Duke of
York, and all the Royal Family. Bless the Lords and Others of his Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy-Councel; together with all the True-hearted Nobility,
Gentry and Commons of the Land, that they may be Obedient to thee their God,
Loyal and Faithful to their Prince, truly loving and honest one to another.
Remember this whole Kingdom, and save us from the noisome Pestilence, from the
hurtful Sword, from the devouring Fire, from the overflowing Waters, from
Storms and Tempests, and all fatal Changes and Chances, good Lord deliver us;
that we may lead a healthful and a quiet and a peaceable life before thee in
all Godliness and Honesty, that there may be no more decay, no more leading
into Captivity, nor no more complaining in our Streets. Happy, O happy are the
People that are in such a case, yea, blessed are the People which have the Lord
for their God. O do thou deliver us, and be merciful unto our crying sins for
thy Great Names sake, that though heaviness have endured upon us, for a long
and dark and dismal night, yet Joy may come unto us in the Morning, that we may
see the Salvation of our God in the Land of the living; the living, the living
they shall praise thee, as we do this day, O let us live, that we may praise
thee. Bless all those that wait at the Altars of Religion and Justice, by what
names or titles soever they be dignified or distinguished, the most Reverend
the Archbishops, the right Reverend the Bishops, and all the inferior Clergy,
together with the Reverend Judges and Magistrates of the Land. And that there
may never want a continual supply of able Men, fit to do thee true and faithful
service, both in the Church and State. Bless all Schools and Nurseries of
Religion and Learning, especially the two famous and flourishing Universities
of this Land, Cambridge and Oxford, that from those two Fountains, may be
derived such pure streams as may make glad and refresh the City of our God,
that we may never want a faithful Prophet, nor a Religious Seer, nor a Learned
Guide to go before us, such as may be able to divide the word of God aright,
like workmen that need not to be ashamed, showing both in their Doctrine and in
their lives uncorruptness, gravity and sincerity, and Men of Wisdom and Courage
to execute true Justice and Judgment, that Justice may run down like Water, and
Judgment like a mighty Stream, that the blind may no longer lead the blind,
lest they both fall into the Ditch. Remember the Afflictions of Joseph, for
they are many, Comfort the comfortless, bind up the broken hearted, confirm the
weak hands, and strengthen the feeble knees, uphold all them that stand, and
lift up all such as are down. Remember the Sons of Sorrows, and the Daughters
of Mourning and Lamentation, those that feed upon the Bread of Anguish, and
drink the Water of Bitterness every day, those that are fast bound in Misery
and Iron, into whose very Soul the Iron enters, those that fly to the Clefts of
the Rocks for safety, and cling to the top of the ragged Rocks for want of a
covering, that hide themselves in Caves and Dungeons of the Earth, and wander
about in Deserts and Mountains, Clothed in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
afflicted, destitute and tormented, that cry mightily unto God in the
bitterness of their Souls, and no man hears them nor regards them, of whom
the World is not worthy. Remember those that are forgotten by the Sons of men,
whose wants are never known, and whose complaints are never heard, those that
mourn in secret and have not to comfort them. Behold the Tears of them that are
oppressed, how they run down their Cheeks every day, and there is none to
comfort them. Behold how on the side of those that do oppose them there is
great might and exceeding Malice, but as for thy Servants there is none to
comfort them. Arise O God, defend the Poor, maintain the cause of the helpless,
help all those to fight that suffer wrong, and punish thou the wrong doer. O
Thou that know the wants of all men, and understandest all their complaints,
and art only able to relieve and comfort them. O thou that art rich in mercy
and abundant in tender compassions and loving kindnesses toward the Sons of
Men. Sprinkle thy favors, we beseech thee, upon the several objects of Misery,
that are abroad in the World, according to the several necessities and
extremities which they are in for the Lord's sake. Give unto thy Servants the
Spirit of Faith, and Patience, and Perseverance, and Assistance, and Assurance,
and of the fear of the Lord, and when the great Lord pleases, and how the great
Lord pleases; Open thou the Door of Hope and Comfort unto them, if it be thy
will in this life, that they may see the salvation of the Lord in the Land of
the living, and praise thee in the great Congregation, and declare what thou
have done for their poor Souls. Because they are but Dust, and the Breath is in
their Nostrils, and are but of Yesterday, and to Morrow shall not be,
therefore, be not always chiding, lest the Spirits of Men should fail before
thee, and the Souls should die and perish which thou have Created, Nevertheless
not their Wills, nor our Wills, nor the Wills of Angels or of Men be done, but
thy Will be done, even thine, O Lord our God, who do all things according to
the Course of thine own Will, and wilt make every thing to work together for
thine own great Glory, and for the good of all those that fear thee; and as for
us we will be doing good and wait upon God and hold our peace, for it is good to
wait upon God, and they that wait upon God shall not be ashamed, for the
patient expectation of the meek shall not perish for ever, and through the
tender compassions of our God, we, even we, shall never miscarry. And for the
Public good and welfare of this Church and Kingdom, O Lord discover the depths
of Satan, and bring to light the hidden work of Darkness, that all the
misterious contrivances of wickedness, which are secretly formed in the bosom
of Hell it self, against Thee and thy Holy Child Jesus, and the Anointed of
the Lord, and all the Reformed Protestants here and beyond the Seas, may be
brought forth into the light of the open Sun, that the hopes of Hypocrites may
perish, and the expectation of Deceivers may be cut off, as the Spiders Web
before thee. But that all those that fear thee in the honesty and simplicity of
their Souls, and desire to be obedient in the Land, may be glad in thee and
rejoice in thy Salvation, and may say evermore, the Lord be praised. O put a
Hook into their Nose, and a Bridle into their Lips, and curb their Barbarous
and monstrous malice, that it may enlarge its self no further; tho the Waters
rage and swell and rore and threaten to swallow us up, command them to be quiet
and stop them in their full carere, and say it is enough, so we that be thy
People and the Sheep of thy Pasture shall give thee thanks from day to day, and
will be showing forth thy praise from Generation to Generation. The living, the
living they shall praise thee, as we do this day. O let us live, that we may
praise thee. Remember our Friends our Kindred and all our acquaintance, all
that are near and dear unto us, whomsoever in our hearts we do remember, or
whomsoever we are bound to remember, the Lord God in mercy remember them all
for good, and do them good, abundantly above all that we are ever able to ask
or think. Lord be gracious to our Enemies, and turn thou their hearts, and
deliver us and ours, and all thine, out of all the Snares and Cruelties and
Treacheries of wicked and ungodly Men, and send us Health, Peace and Truth, in
our days and for ever, through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and only Savior,
to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory World
without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately published by the Author, a Book in Folio, entitled the
difference between the OLD and NEW Testament, Concerning Things Commanded to be
done, and Concerning Things promised to be had in them; Demonstrating the High
Dispensation of the GOSPEL above the LAW: In two Volumes. To be sold by Robert
Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1681.


