THE DISPLAYING OF THE LIFE-GUARDS COLORS, OR A true Narrative of the late
actings of his Excellencies Lifeguard, since their Order for Marching up to
London to be Disbanded:

Wherein Are contained his Excellencies Order for their Marching up to London.
Their Remonstrance in referrence to their Solemn Engagement. Their proposals in
order to Disbanding. Their Declaration discovering their Reasons of Seizing
upon and Securing their Standard.

With a vindication of diverse Gentlemen employed by them. And diverse other
things giving Light to each of them.

Now Published to give satisfaction, and to prevent mis-apprehensions
concerning the proceedings of the Gentlemen of the Lifeguard of his Excellency
Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

Magna est veritas and praevalebit

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE DISPLAYING Of the Life-Guards COLORS.
THe Stir-rups, by which many have mounted into the Saddle of Authority and
power, and the stalking horses whereby they have deceived well minded people
have been specious pretenses of their great desires after the public good;
their actings only have discovered them to be feigned pretenders, and men
pretending public good, for their private advantage, which being brought
forth, the panges of their travel cease, unless to confirm themselves as
nails in sure places.

There has been of late a design, (pardon the word) to disband part of the
Army, and that (if you will believe it) for the Kingdoms good; of which
company his Excellencies Lifeguard must have the honor to be Frontiers, for
reasons best known to their lovers. Wherefore an Order issued out from his
Excellency in January last for their marching from their quarters in
Hertford-shire unto London, to be disbanded there. The Copy of which Order here
follows.

A Copy of his Excellencies Order for the Life-Guards coming to London to be
disbanded.
WHereas the Parliament has ordained and appointed the forces under your
command, being my Lifeguard, to be disbanded, and have taken orders that the
said Lifeguard or forces to be disband^^it ^^cept such as have been
entertained since the sixth of August last (who are to be discharged without
money) shall before disbanding have their accounts stated, receive two months
pay in hand, and Dibenturs for the remainder, and those to be registered, and by
several Ordinances secured; those Arreares by good and vi^ble security to be
hereafter paid, or that they shall be agreed with all for their whole arreares
by a gross sum in hand; and have authorited Commissioners to see these
things done.

These are to require you upon notice from their Commissioners entrusted with
that service, you with the said forces under your command do readily comply and
give due obedience in all things requisite for the effectual and speedy
dispatch of that service, and the disbanding the said forces under your
command, according to the said resolutions and directions of Parliament. The
said service being of great concernment to the public and the ease of the
Country. The Parliament and my self expect all due observance heerin: And for
so doing this shall be your Warrant, under my hand and seal at Windsor the 28.
of January 1647.

THOMAS FAIRFAX.

To Captain Cromwell or to Cap. Liev. Ellis, or other Officers in chief present
with my Lifeguard.
In obedience to which Order the Troop marched under the conduct of their
Officers to Barnet near London, and after into the City. Where some of the
Gentlemen calling to mind their solemn engagement with the Army, not to
disband nor divide, nor to suffer themselves to be disbanded nor divided; and
perceiving a necessity of submitting to his Excellency, thought by a
Remonstrance so to free themselves from their engagement that they might with
safety of conscience suffer themselves to be disbanded. Which Remonstrance was
February the 6. presented to his Excellency. The Copy whereof here insues.

An humble Remonstrance to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, from the
Gentlemen of his Excellencies LIFEGUARD.
Most noble General,
WE Gentlemen of your Excellencies Lifeguard formerly with your Excellencies
concurrance (being moved by the unquestionable dictates of reason, and
Parliamentary Declarations, to endeavor this Kingdoms and our own
preservation; against the desperate designs of un-naturall persons, tending to
this Kingdoms and our own destruction) Armies Book Declar. p. 23.26.
have disputed the Commands of Parliament, and entered into a Solemn
Engagement, not to disband nor divide, nor to suffer our selves to be
disbanded, nor divided, till full and equal satisfaction be given to ours and
others just desire, and security sufficiently provided for us, and others
adhereing to us; in regard of actions done in the late War, and things
Agitated in our late endeavors of procuring and promoting our Countries
happiness: in expectation of which satisfaction, and security, we have a long
time traveled with great desire, and have been hitherto frustrated, to our no
small grief, either through weakness, unskilfulnesse, or unfaithfulness of
our Midwives, or the prevalent practices of our Bloud-thirstie enemies.

And now understanding by your Excellencies Order, the resolution both of the
Parliament, and your Excellency to disband us; we are enforced, humbly to
Remonstrate to your Excellency, as follows.

That although we are willing and desirous, for the Countries ease to disband;
and in all Lawful things to be obedient to your Excellencies Command: yet we
cannot give our consent to be disbanded at present, without great dishonor to
your Excellency, and our selves, and unfaithfulness to the Kingdom,
Parliament and Army.

First, Because by consenting to disband, we shall make our selves betrayers
of our Trust, and destroyers of our faith in our Solemn Engagement, whereby
we Engaged not to disband nor divide, nor to suffer our selves to be disbanded
nor divided, till enjoyment of full and equal satisfaction and security, which
as yet is not visible to our ^ight (...) neither are we informed from that
Council, A.B.D. page 26.
which we wi^^ the whole Army Erected, and in whose determination we promited
to acquiese, that there is any such satisfaction or security, and therefore
cannot with safety of conscience voluntarily disband, nor willingly ^u^^er our
selves to be disbanded.

Also because by disbanding, we shall for present discourage the hearts, and
weaken the hands of our dear Fellow Soldiers: and shall (in all probability)
make way for their sudden disbanding by parcells, and so render them (as well
as our selves) incapable of acting for their own and the Kingdoms welfare;
From which evil, we desire to keep our hands clean; least theirs and the
peoples just cries ascend into the ears of the most High against us.

Lastly (to mention no more) our present disbanding will not ease the Country,
(unless for present) but introduce greater burdens, than they have yet borne
(it being the way for present to weaken, and in all probability suddenly to
destroy the Army, the Hedge of their safety) which we desire may not, but fear
will be the effect of it.

We shall not now speak much of the proposed way, and terms of our
disbanding, they being not the end of this Remonstrance: although we conceive
the way dishonorable, we being appointed the first to disband, as if your
Excellencies Lifeguard were most hurtful, or least useful in the whole Army:
and the terms both dishonorable and unreasonable, there being provided at
disbanding for those of us, to whom something is promised, A.B.D. p. 67.
less than those received at disbanding, who deserted the Army; and for others
of us, who were invited by public Declarations, and admitted by special
Orders from your Excellency to ride amongst us, there is nothing provided at
disbanding, because not listed within the Hundred before the Sixth of August;
A.B.D. p. 38.
notwithstanding promises made to them of full and equal satisfaction with
others, and their dangerous adventures, and excessive expenses in joining with
us, to procure the same common end, Liberty and Safety.

Now if your Excellency shall proceed in your resolution to disband us, we
cannot, we shall not re^st; but shall leave this as a witness to the whole
Kingdom of our willingness to appear faithful, and that we are not guilty
of procuring those miseries, that may light on the Country, as consequences of
disbanding.

In conclu^ion, may it please your Excellency to honor us so far, as to take
this paper into your Excellencies serious consideration; and to return an
answer, which we humbly expect. Now the God of wisdom in a^l things direct
your Excellency, that you may still continue a glorious Instrument of much good
to this poor Kingdom, which is the prayer of,

Your Excellencies most humble Servants ready to live and die with your
Excellency, in procuring, and promoting, Common Liberty, and Safety.

After the General had received this Remonstrance and taken it into
consideration, his Excellency returned this answer to M. John Knowles (who was
appointed to present if) That there were two things he observed in it:

First, that the Gentlemen did conceive, that they should by a willing
disbanding break their engagement with the Army.

Secondly, that they thought it dishonorable to be disbanded first. To the
first, his Excellency replied (as M. Knowles related) That he conceived that
the end of their engagement would not be broken by disbanding, seeing
satisfaction and security were provided, and disbanding would be an ease to the
Country.

To which he answered to his Excellency, That the Gentlemen did conceive, that
by a willing disbanding they should destroy the engagement, full satisfaction
and security being not visible to them, and they having received no information
thereof from that Council, which was constituted by the Army to determine what
is, and to declare when there is full satisfaction and security; in whose
determinations and declarations only they were bound to acquiesse. And further
he said, That the end of the Gentlemen's remonstrating was, so to free
themselves from the engagement, That they might without hurt to their
consciences readily disband at the command of his Excellency. Other things he
reported, the mentioning whereof may here well be omitted.

The Gentlemen having by this Remonstrance both freed themselves from their
en^agement, and received more certain knowledge of his Excellencies resolution
to disband them, they began to consider of honest and just terms of
disbanding, which they represented to the General in their proposals, wherein
not being was desired by them but what his Exce^lency in his Order had promised
to them; The truth whereof the Copy here annex^d will manifest and clearly
discover.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax General.
THe humble proposals of your Excellencies Lifeguard. How great our diligence
has been in obedience to your Excellencies commands, our deportment hitherto
and hereafter (we hope) has and shall sufficiently speak. And that we do not
tolerate any unruly spirit amongst us, to the disturbing of the Army or
Kingdom. We shall likewise declare (and though we cannot but judge) that our
present disbanding is a detriment to our honor and other things which we may
justly plead. Yet we do resolve to obey when we shall receive a command
thereunto, not doubting but all those things shall be made good unto us, which
were agreed upon by your excellency with your General Council of War and
the Commissioners of Parliament at Windsor, the denial of which will be an
impediment to our present disbanding, for the removing of which hindrances; We
humbly offer these things following to your Excellencies most serious
consideration.

That we may have our Accounts as well veterane as new audited and Registered by
the Commitee of the Army (or by such as they shall appoint) and visible
security given to us according to the Agreement.

That we may be continued in pay and Quarters assigned us, until our Debenturs
are perfected, and such visible security given.

That we (or such of us as shall desire it) may be compounded with and paid off
in gross, and Trustees appointed for that purpose.

These things we humbly conceive are consonant unto the above mentioned
Agreement, and of great concernment to our selves and the whole Soldiery, how
unspeakable our trouble and prejudice will be to wait for them after we shall be
Disbanded. The dreadful former examples of others, and our present expensive
abode in the City, compels us humbly to present to your Excellencies most
sad contemplation, And we hope it will not resent ill with your Excellency, if
we shall refuse willingly to Disband until they are performed: After which we
shall readily show our obedience, when we shall receive a Command thereunto
from your Excellency.


These just Proposalls humbly presented to his Excellency, procured for them
only a referring (for their satisfaction) to the Committee of Lords and Commons
for the Army, to whom the Gentlemen made their address, and received an answer
which tended b^th to their dish^nour and disadvantage. The Committee telling
them that they were Disbanded long since, and that they must wait upon their
own charges for their Debenturs.

The Gentlemen considering how dishonorable it was to them to be Disbanded
li^e a Cashiered and ill deserving Company, not received so much as thanks for
their Service, and knowing how chargeable it is to wait on Committees, and
believing that if they should submit to this hard usage, others of the
Soldiery to ^e Disbanded (who were less able to bear it) would meet with as
hard (if not harder) dealing at their Disbanding, resolved once more to ma^e
their address to his Excellency, desiring to know of his Excellency what they
should do? Who told them that he wondered they did not disperse themselves. They
further desi^ed to know what they should do with their Colors? His Excellency
told them, they might bring them to him, or dispose of them as they would.

N^w the Gentlemen ill resenting their friends carriages toward them, they
deserving beetter at their hands, were so provoked that diverse of them resolved
to seize on the St^ndard, which accordingly they did, and marched with honest
intentions out of the City unto Knights-bridge, where they stayed till they
received an Order from his Excellency to appear before him and his Council at
White-hal, Febr. 24. where they in obedience to his ^xcellencies Order, waited
to know his Excellencies pleasure with them, and presented to his Excellency
and his Council a Declaration, whereby they Remonstrated their Reason of their
action in seizing upon, and securing their Colors. A Copy whereof here
follows.

The Declaration.
WE the Gentlemen of his Excellencies Lifeguard being brought to L^ndon by an
Order under his Excellencies hand and ^eal for the receiving of these several
Particulars, therein mention^d before disbanding, That two Months Pay be
received, Accounts in general audited and registered, visible Security given,
those that will compound for their Arreares in gross, the Act of Indemnity
confirmed, and all these things ^e^s^^^ed before Disbanding.

We therefor the aforesaid Gentlemen, do declare to the Parliament, General,
Army, and the whole Kingdom, That we have indeed received two Months Pay, and
a Promise that the Debentures of this Army should be perfected, and brought
within the Security above mentioned; but we desire the World to take notice,
that our entertainment until disbanding, the auditing and securing of our old
Accounts, and the exact fulfilling of the general Warrant, are denied; upon
which, for the Generals and our own honor, and the clearing of the just right
of the whole Soldiery, we have been enforced to secure our Standard in our own
hands, with no other intent, sinister end, or desire of standing (which we all
in general protest against) but only that when the Generals honor in
fulfilling his Warrant shall be vindicated, our persons and Arreares secured,
and the Army shall acquit us from all our former Engagements to and with them;
then we say, these things being accomplished, we shall (as men of honor and
honesty) in the open field with our Officers heading of us which will speak a
Disbanding, not a cashiering, either deliver up our Colors to the General, or
otherwise, honorably dispose of them, as becomes Soldiers. Nor can we think
it consistant with our Honors to dissolve privately, and without punctual
order in a City, when we have always stood by our Colors in the field, where
we first received them, and shall again leave them.

We also do believe that the whole World will deem we act but the parts of men
of honor and honesty, if we shall not willingly suffer the just Rights and
honor of our General, our selves, and all the Soldiery to be detained from us
without making it manifest, that we are sensible of so great an injury offered
to them and us, and of the prejudice we shall unavoidably intaile upon all that
shall disband after us.

These things following are the sum of our desires.

That the sum of our Accounts both old and new be audited and secured, those
(that please) compounded with in gross, (that our Pay go on with the Army,
until the day when by punctual order from the General we shall be in the field
disbanded, and at that time each man's Debentur together with his particular
Discharge may he delivered to him, that the generals Order which says, [These
things above mentioned ought to be performed before disbanding] may be cleared,
fulfilled, his reputation vindicated, for putting in that word [before
disbanded] without which the interest of the whole Soldiery will be injured,
theirs and our Expectations frustrated, both they and we enforced to that
tedious and expensive attendance upon Committees which the former sad
Experience of others has made us seek with all possible means to avoid.

We shall not in the least measure aggravate the actings of that Counsel
(hoping that they hereafter may learn to do better) but shall yield a brief
and true Relation of general Passages, to give light to those that desire
satisfaction concerning the Life-guards late Transactings. The Gentlemen being
convened at White Hall (the place where the Counsel sat) three of them, to
wit, M. Clarke, M. ^iggs, M. Thirkill, were one by one called into the Counsel,
where their Accusations were Interrogatories, and their persons for real or
pretended Crimes made Prisoners, two whereof (M. Clarke, M. Thirkill)
under-went a close imprisonment. And all the Gentlemen of the Lifeguard had
till nine a clock at night the Kings Palace for their Prison, they being
denied egresse t^ll that time to go about their necessary occasions. The
fore-mentione^ Declaration was sent into the Counsel by the hands of four
G^^^lemen entrusted for that purpose. The Counsel would scarce vouchsafe to the
L^fe-guard so much honor as to read the presented Paper. The Gentlemen sent
in were coursely handled, and c^used to test^fie under their hands that they
came in the name of the Troop; and so were dismissed (as Prisoners upon
Perroll) with the whole Troop, and ordered to appear on the morrow by nine of
the clock. Who being come together, sent into the Counsel a Vindication of
these Gentlemen who were employed by the greatest part of the Gentlemen and
suspected by the Counsel as Pretended Representatives. The Copy of which
Vindication here follows.

We the Gentlemen of his Excellencies Lifeguard, whose names are here
underwritten, did desire and appoint (and do own it as our own act) M. Clarke,
Captain Bigg* M. Burleigh, M. Lee, M. Bouchir and Maj. Cain, in our Names to
deliver unto his Excellency and the Counsel of War that our Declaration and
those our summary desires which they did accordingly the last night present as
aforementioned. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our hands this
five and twentieth of February, Anno Domini 1647.

We further humbly desire this honorable Counsel of War to take notice, that
in point of takng our Colors into our own custody, or the concealing of them.
We do own as an act which we all approve of, consent to, and hold our selves
equally to be engaged in the owning of that act as the act of the whole Troop.
And expect that their sufferings who are at present confined may not exceed our
own.

This is subscribed by the Gentlemen of his Excel. Lifeguard.

This Vindication was subscribed by many who had no han^ in seasing upon and
securing the Standard, to which Subscription they were induced for the good of
those Gentlemen (Men of desert) who were in great danger for it, if the Council
were in earnest, and acted not merely from policy, to affright the Gentlemen,
and keep in aw the whole Soldiery, that they might not for future dare appear
opposers of their arbitrary Power. The Council having knowledge to what place
the Standard was conveyed, sent (Febr. 25.) a Troop of Horse to the Lamb on
Snow-hill, where they found it and conducted it, to the Generals Quarters in
Queenes-street, where it remains. The Soldiers who were employed in that
Service has professed since their ignorance of that undertaking. After the
Colors were if the Generals possession, the Council or some of them proceeded
to the condemnation of M. Clarke, who was sentenced to be shot to death for a
Crime (so called) exceeding heinous, in the Coun^els aggravating circumstances
of it, were naturally united to it. This night after the Council rose, there
was a great distemper in Colonel Riches R^giment, when they heard of the
Sentence that passed against M. Clarke, who came the same night to White Hall,
(whe^^ the Prisoner was) were permitted to send three in to see the condemned
Gentleman, and had a promise from the Lieutenant Colonel of tha^ Garrison, that
the Prisoner in the morning should be forth-comming, which Soldiers professed
that they were moved to that action from this considerat^^n, that M. Clarke
stood not only for his own and the Life-^uards, but al^^ ^^^^e Rights of the
whole Soldiery: and further they profess^, that th^^^ ^^^ld not suffer one
hair of his head to perish. The Gentlemen of his Excel Lifeguard, after the
Sentence of Death given out met together to consu^^ what was to ^e (...), the
end of their Debate was not to act in, nor encourage ^t^ers to any tumultuous
wa^, but to address themselves by way of Petition to his Excellency, that the
Sent^nce m^^ht be recalled, and the condemned Gentleman with themselves se^^^^^
^a^m^^^ ^e notw^thstandin^ t^eir former actings. According to which
^^te^^^^nati^n d^vers Gentlemen were ^^pointed to draw up a Petition for the
ends af ^^-m^^^^^^ed* The Copy of the Petition drawn up by the Gentlemen
entrusted for that purpose here ensues.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General: The humble Petition of your
Excellencies Lifeguard,
Shows,
THat whereas it has been the late unhappiness of your Petitioners for to do
or seem to countenance the doing of some things which have been ill resented by
your Excel. and your honorable Council of War* as courses tending to mutiny or
receding from your Excellencies command, the thoughts of which we desire to
abhor, and our denial of the desires of many tending thereunto, we hope, will
speak on our behalf, and that M. Will. Clarke having taken some course for
which your Excellency with your honorable Council of War have con^eived him
worthy of death, and accordingly have adjudged him to die, the innocence of
whose intentions we cannot but have high thoughts of, though his behavior or
our own, so far as capable of a bad construction, we shall not desire to
justify, being rather willing to condemn our selves for the Peace of the
Kingdom, than to disturb it, by justifying of our selves.

We therefore humbly pray, that your Excellency will be pleased to take the
dying condition of the said M. William Clarke into your tender consideration,
and that you will be pleased not to take an advantage from his fault to take
away his life, but graciously to pardon the same, or what ever we or any of us
have done so far as its unjust and so offensive, we humbly desire your
Excellency to pass by and sursease any further proceedings, whereby your
Excellencies mercy will not only give a new life to the Gentleman petitioned
for, but also make the lives of your Petitioners much more comfortable, and
oblige them humbly to pray, etc.

Some at the Council being privately made acquainted with this Petition, ^ll
resented it, notwithstanding e^ch line is with moderation and humility
sufficiently adorned; and discouraged them from presenting it, telling them
that it would but increase the fire kindled in the breasts of diverse in the
Council against them. Upon which was a demurre amongst the Gentlemen in
referrence to the Petition; but in the interim a Colonel one of the Counsel
proffered his service to the Gentlemen (although their adversary) to frame a
Petition for them; which accordingly he did; and it was presented to the
General by two Gentlemen without Subscriptions, the Council would not accept
it, unless the Gentlemen would subscribe it, which if denied, the Gentleman
condemned was threatened with an imm^diate Execution of his Sentence. Part of
the Troop were brought up and kept in a chamber, where some were (not from the
dictates of their reason, but) through the greatness of their affection to the
condem^ed Gentleman, enforced to subscrib^ that Peti^ion, whilst others of
them protested against it. This Petition being presented, the subscribing
Gentlemen were called into the Council, and his Excellency pard^ned the
condemned Gentlemen, readmitted the Troop into his favor, and promised them
satisfaction to their just desires.

Now having ended this true Discovery. Had there nothing here p^esented it
self to the view of the world by way of excuse in their low descention by way
of Petition, yet if their former Papers which were aforementioned should be
compared with that Petition (if ever it should present it self unto the view
of the world) it would be accounted but illegitimate: for who can think that
so many Gentlemen of known valor and integrity against their professed Enemies
should ever be brought to so low a condescension by their pretended friends?
but in some cases a pretended friend may do more mischief than an open enemy,
Lupus in vest agnina maxim nocet.

Let this be considered which before was omitted, this Gentleman was condemned
for being pretendedly guilty under two Articles. First, for Mutiny, in taking
the Colors, who was therein but equally concerned with the rest, and so it had
been but partiality to condemn one for all, when all were equally concerned in
the same act. Actor enim and accessarius a^que peccant; itaque candem poenam
mercuntur. Second, Was ^^s disobedience to su^eriour Officers? And what was
that his not answering to Interro^atories, which they were pleased to put to
him? This offense was obedience to the Law, which has Nemo seipsum prodet, for
its Maxim.

Let no Soldier or Commoner from the event of these men's actings be deterred
from endeavoring their Countries freedom, seeing event does not always teach
trut^, and is always a teacher of fools; Verum est, eventum stultorum esse
magistrum.

FINIS.

