A DISCOVERY OF THE ARCH-VVHORE AND HER PARAMOVRS (OR LOVERS) OF WHOM the HOLY
SPIRIT of GOD bears Witness.
Jesus Christ, GOD and Man, having accomplished the work of the Redemption of
Mankind, has sent forth his Messengers into all the world to gather unto
himself a Church or Spouse out of both Jews and Gentiles.

These dispatched Messengers of God, have accordingly taught men with all care
and faithfulness, to renounce all earthly lusts and pleasures, to crucify
their flesh, to forsake all men, how wise soever, even themselves and every
thing else, that is not God himself, and in pure and single hearted Love, to
cleave unto their Head and Bridegroom Jesus Christ, as being betrothed unto
him, and to be only and altogether corrected, ruled, led, and taught in all 1
Cor. 11. 21. 3.
submissive humble obedience, by him and by his Spirit.

But as the Church began already in the Apostles days, besides their
Bridegroom Christ, to honor also his Ministers in his stead, to cleave unto
and follow them, and to call themselves after their names, although the holy
men did highly rebuke them for, and earnestly dissuade them from it, lest they
should be led away, like Eve, by the Serpent 2 Cor. 11.
from the simplicity or plainness of Christ; for as much as they ought to be
Christ's only and no Man's, and that God does catch the crafty in the World,
and confounds them with all their wisdom. So after their Departure is this
Adultery broke forth publicly, and the Ministers themselves have allured the
Spouse of Christ unto themselves with sweet and stately language and show of
their office, and have not addressed them directly only and solely to Christ
their Bridegroom (to wait on his Spirit, for life, power, 2 Pet. 2.
instruction and government) but have offered themselves to provide for the
Souls, the Comfort of Eternal Salvation, in the name and stead of Christ,
thereby to win men with soothing and magnificent words unto themselves,
according as the Adultery of the Churches and their daughters as well among the
Papists, and their party, as among the rest, even to this very present* is but
too manifest.

Whereas it is a known business as well in many other places as in Popery, how
there has been devised a spiritual marriage between the Ministers and their
Parish Churches, which has its beginning in the call and ordination, is
consecrated, consummated and perfected by his saying or singing the first
Mass, and by the imposition of hands; Whence also they are not ashamed openly
to give out themselves for spiritual Fathers, as who like conduits presume to
get spiritual children by their Churches, calling them their Parish Children,
Confession-children.

And although some hundred and two hundred years ago God raised some Ministers,
by whom as by his Instruments he caused his Word to be set forth and published
again, and this Adultery to be made notorious and manifest. Yet nevertheless
the Churches would not desist from their wonted fornication, but being set free
once out of that painful Papisticall brothel-house of despair, they run, like
the Stagge, even mad in a wild and unbridled Libertinisme, beginning anew to
dote on those Ministers and their followers; sought the comfort of salvation at
their hands in stead of Christ's, and setting aside their own Lord-Head and
Bridegroom (who only and solely ought to inhabit, rule and make fruitful
the soul) did cleave unto the servants and Ministers, and called themselves
after their names. And thereby they have plunged themselves into such horrible
Babylonicall division and confusion, that the true knowledge of Christ and of
his holy and precious life, is utterly extinguished, and the true Christianity
turned and changed into a sectarian confusion and most heathenish conversation,
where men go on every one according to the lusts and greedy desires of his
corrupt Adamicall flesh; for their own glory, lust, love and goods, snatching
at, hating, envying, devouring, slandering, condemning and persecuting one
another, and yet for all that still conceiting they have as good a share and
interest in the Merits of Christ as any.

This now is that painted Iesabel, with her glorying and gliftering outside;
that great Babylon, with her so many names of Blasphemies, the Mother of all
Whoredom, with whom the kings of the earth do commit fornication; and being
made drunk with her cup of Abomination do storm and rage so mightily; and she
is carried and supported by the spotted Beast, and the beastly world rule here.

And what are her children, that she brought forth by her Paramours and
spiritual Husbands, but Lions, Bears, ravening Fowls, Woolves, Dogs, Foxes,
Swine, and the like, who every one and all do what they can to persecute the
L^mbe.

For having ever resisted the Spirit of God, Satan the old Dragon has thereby
so rooted and strengthened his kingdom and palace in her and in her children;
that he governs and leads them at his own and absolute pleasure. Hence it
is come to pass that the Bond of Love, according to the unity of the Spirit,
is broken asunder among men, and Christ notwithstanding they boast and glory so
much of him among all Sects is still crucified by the Learned, in his word
according to the spirit and power thereof, and by the Mighty ones, in his
members.

And hence also have all the modern Wars and troubles their sourse* and
beginning, which were hatched and broached by nothing so much, as by the
irritating, prating, urging, streporous and virulent squeaking before the Kings
and Princes of the Earth, of those three Dragon-Frogs, who seek still every one
for himself to be in better and higher grace and favor with the Whore then the
others.

But now it is manifest and apparent every where, how the Horns of this Beast,
wherein this Arch-whore drunk in Saints blood sits, I mean the Forces and
Armies that are abroad in all parts do begin to persecute this great confounded
Whore, devouring her flesh and laying her desolate, as it is put into their
hearts, until the words of God shall be fulfilled upon her.

And God has broken and cut asunder the Bands, and delivers men every one
into the hand of his neighbor, the one to fall by the sword of the other, and
the thrones of kingdoms to come reeling down to the ground.

Happy is he that marketh this, and lays it to heart; that goes out of
Babel, and does not make himself partaker of her sins, and abominable
whoredoms, lest ye receive part also of her plagues.

But the time is at hand that the Lamb of God will grow wrath, and lay down
his enemies for his footstool; resisting and severely avenging such long
practiced Murder, in his Word and Members, and contrarily glorify upon Mount
Sion; the woman that was thrust forth into the wilderness; the true Church
namely, together with her native Members dispersed and scattered as yet, among
all parts and sects, and so distressed by the brood of the Dragon; when as
Babel shall be made the habitation of ghastly fowls. Blessed is he that so
watches and walks as that the shame of his nakedness be not discovered, but
that he may appear in white Robes at the wedding of the Lamb.

Glory only to God. FINIS.

