A discovery of the Jesuits Trumpery, newly packed out of England.
Pack of Popish Trinkets


IF any man shall question what this sack
Contains, I Will tell him; it is a Popish pack,
A Trusse of Trinkets, holy Crosses, beads,
Religious Relics, Ave-Maries, Creedes;
Our Ladies Image, Images of Saints,
That waxen Lamb, that the shaved Priest depaints
By th'name of Agnus Dei, Indulgences,
Pardons, for venial, and for foul offenses:
You Have here Tradition from a subtle pate,
And Copies, teaching to equivocate:
Here Is supererogation, so much merit
Stockt up by one, that many may inherit,
By his good deeds, those everlasting joys,
That few Friars come to, and a thousand Toys.
For him has Coin to buy 'em, here be Coules,
And the sheepes-cloathing, they that weary souls
Do sometimes walk in, for the man that strips
Himself, himself to punish; Here be whips,
And right ones, I can tell you: And to quell,
The pampered body into lust would swell,
(Instead of Hemp or flaxen shirts to wear)
(To scrub the^r itches) here be shirts of hair.
Here Is holy water, Ashes, holy-oyle,
Palm, Holy-Tapers, Spittle, and a coil
With Holy-Salt, and Holy bells, I hope,
Holy-Hemp twisted; so much for the Pope,
With his blind guides: And last (to stuff it full)
Here Is a Nuns Barstard* and a Roaring Bull.
So much for the Pack, now to the Peddler.
BE trudging with your Crosses, in the loss
Of your pretenses; if you love the Cross,
There Is Cross enough, I think, to make you fret
Your Crosses now, have with crosse-carding met.
Your Beads, and numbered Ave-Maries take,
And trudge to Rome, there is Room enough, to make
Some use and practice of them; here you see,
We have no room for such vain things to be.
And as for Images, your selves now go
Like Images made up of Mess-line Dowe;
(For Dow's your C^ke in England, England knows,
The substance from the shadow: such poor shows
Please Fools and madmen: then it is fit we part,
You pray by the Eye, we by the Soul and Heart.
Pack, with your Agnus Dei, (goodly Knacks)
Balm, Holy Water, and pure Virgins wax.
They say it is made of: pretty things indeed)
Prick your fine Lamb, see if your Lamb will bleed
Ours bled for us: That blood, our souls purgation
Without the purge of your imagination:
You know my mind, and whence th'invention ca^e,
Good Wolvs be packing with your waxen Lamb
Indulgences, from your indulgent Father,
Do not extol so much, be thankful rather:
To Englands pity, who (but that his will
Is more to pardon, then to punish (still)
Might quickly send you (wisely think upon it)
To Doctor Stories old three cornered Bonnet.
I marry Sir, Equivocation! fie,
What Fools are they to think we cannot lie,
Without their wit to help us? But to swear,
And break that Oath, yet have the conscience clear.
I, there is the Trick: for so Equivocation
Leads men to hell in a more stately fashion.
This, says a man, goodness enough may do,
To save's own soul, and half his neighbors too,
It Is wondrous strange, yet let no man deride it,
For we have Friars have bin at Heaven and tried it,
But striving thus to set these Bawbles forth,
I lose more time then all the Bundle's worth.
O're-view the Pack at leisure. I forgot
Dags, Daggers, Pistol, poison, powder plot:
I know not well where these are in or no,
I hope they are, and ready packt to go
Back to that spotted bosom did invent them,
And against a pair of spot less bosoms sent them,
Stuffed full with their worst mischief; for that whore
That Kings and Princes humbly must adore:
(That rides upon that many headed Beast,
At Kings and Kingdoms levels, at the least.
Her worke-men too, she will bless, maintain and nurse 'em,
And they that dare not (being sworn to it) curse 'em,
A holy Mother still. Beside these Lurches,
(To show her spite) she will make 'em fire our Churches,
Then is it not time they pack? pack up, away,
Back Devils to your Saints: for some men say,
In many places you have many, One
That helps sore eyes; Another for the Bone
Touched with the Morbe of Naples: one for youth
Troubled with Scabs; one for an akeing tooth:
Nay you have Saints for horses, and for Swine,
For Dogs, for Oxen, for your Goat, and Kine;
For Lambs and Geese; so get you gone, your back,
Prepare, good Peddler, for your Popish pack.
Our land, they know it flows with milk and honey,
Therefore I do suspect there are too many.
Trusting to shifts, by corners and disguizes,
Dare venture still to play their Popish Prizes:
They soon shall know that we have hounds to sent 'em,
Find out their sculking, strip 'm and present 'em,
To The eye of Justice; then they know what follows,
Up Newgate first, then after to the Gallows.
FINIS.
London Printed for Henry Gosson; dwelling on London Bridge.


