JULY, 18. A DIURNALL out of the NORTH: OR, The daily Occurrences of this
Week, with every particular Passage at YORK and BEVERLEY, unto this present
16. of July. 1642.
THis day the King desired to see his Army knit in a Posture, and rode thorough
and about them three or four times very gallantly mounted and Armed, the
entire Body still faced which way soever he rode, or passed by them, and
stooping all their Colors together* made a shoute of an hour long to
Congratulate his Person; the number and men (both Commanders and private
Soldiers) very considerable (however talked on and slighted) especially in their
alacrity and forwardness to obey his Majesty, though the middle sort of the
Country at first seemed to stand in a pause or cogitation what to resolve, but
now, every day more and more come and send in supply of Men, Horses, money, and
provision, the King has won upon them so by his Protestations and
disposition toward the Country.

There was certain Carts of Provision intended out of Lincolnshire to Hull,
interposed others think, rather betrayed willingly by those that had the
Conduct to this side, and the suggestion is not unlikely because the men are
are thankt; and ^is very credible the Common people of that Country, do begin
to deny what they were lately, and break forth into murmures. But the wisdom
of our Parliament having placed such faithful and able men there, who are of
sufficient power and eminency in the Country, discharge their Employment with
a great deal of discretion and safety.

And if their wisdoms do not suddenly contrive some supply for Hull, it may
fall into an unexpected strait, for the Town begins to fall into parties and
combustion amongst themselves, and Sir John finds it a hard task to make his
Commands be obeyed, pray God direct all things for the best.

There is privately come over diverse Comman^^^s for Horse, and some supply of
money, as appeared by a Months pay to the Souldery, but how from whom is not
known, nor do the Soldiers make it their enquiry, suffices that they find it
in their pockets, the Prince, whom the Cavaleers style Captain Stewart,
Commands as brave a Troop as ever came into Field, and some two days before
the remove to Beverley, exercised them a^ the Head himself, and with a
countenance and behavior so full of reservednesse and manhood, that (without
flattery) it much amazed the beholders, and one might read their admiration in
their looks.

The Knights and Gentry of his Troop, presented him at his coming into the
Field, and as he lest his Caroach, by him that had the right hand of the
Troop, with a very goodly white Horse, trapped most richly to the ground with
Velvet all studded with burning waves of Gold, and a rich Tent for that days
purpose, he put on a very curious guilt Armor, and straight way mounted his
gallant Present, with general acclamations through the Field, for though his
Troop compleately consists but of Two Hundred Horse, yet there was to wa^^e
upon him, an infinite number of young Spirits martially habited, and bravely
hors't, and of all sorts at least 40000. who followed him to the Town with
continual shouts.

There had like to have been the next day, (though the occasion fell out that
morn about some terme^ of comparison) a dangerous falling out, between^ one
Colonel Vavasor, (a very goodly Gentleman, and gracious with his Majesty,) and
a Knight of the Princes Troop, but his Majesty had timely notice of it, sent
for them, and made a timely reconcilement, and that which gave another fair
interpretation of his disposition, was concerning some Citizens or Tradesmen,
who it seems compeld by distress of Trade, to leave London to see York, and
having taken a Shop or two, the Townsmen not* only grudged their long being
there, but one Evening sell upon them, threw their wares about the Street, and
beat them saying, Those that drove the King from LONDON, should not drive him
from YORK. This grew to such a strife, that the Lord Major told it to his
Majesty, who was heard to say, The meanest Subject or Citizen was as dear to
him in their true affection, as the greatest, and that no good Subject should
want his protection.

The Archbishop does feast his Majesty very sumptuously, and keeps a little
Court for the commanders and Soldiers, the Earl of Lindsey is to have Ships
to stop all provision for Hull by Sea, and the mouth of Humber will be strongly
guarded, the Earl of Newcastle is very strange in the City, and it was whispered
that Mr. Iermyn, the Lord Digby, the Lord Foredich, and some others were there
privately, but there was no such thing, and those lying papers do but abuse
men, indeed infect them, and reflects upon the Justice of the times but
certain it is, there is a great expectation, from beyond Sea, and strong
working for it.

Upon Tuesday morning by four of the clock, his Majesty received a Packet
from London, and information of the Lord Majors commitment and the cause, and
at Dinner was very merry in his discourse of it to the Lords, and they as free
in delivering their opinions, and however he conceives it be seems to bear a
great mastery and temper over all passages and debatements. Amongst other
discourse it was told him of some Observations upon his Declarations, and the
Book showed him by the Lord Keeper, with a very black Character both of it
and the Author being named, a Lawyer of Grayes-Inne. In the Afternoon the
Lords had a Consultation about him, and a Relation of one C. Babbam, for
writing foolish and seditious Papers, and felling them to the Press to live by
them, and there was a Message ordered from His Majesty to both Houses of
PARLIAMENT for Commitment, if to be found, and punishment.

Sir Francis Wortley and our new made Knight Duncombe, are designed a thousand
Men, eight hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, but whither they are to march
or which way is not yet known, but it is possible toward Mr. Hastings who
sent a private Packet to the King, who makes his party very strong, and is like
to do much damage to Leiceste^shire. And the Lord Strange is as active in his
way and puts Manchester to a muse, but yet they hold him to it.

It is thought* there is a black cloud teeming in Kent, which may fall fatally
if a North wind take it, the Soldiers talk lo^^ly as if the time were come
they were to be made for ever, and the Parliament, had provided all the Plate,
and money solely for them.

That night the King came to Beverly about the shutting up of the day, there
was sent in Fifty great Horses all of a dark Bay, handsomely set out with
ash-colored Ribbins, every man very gentilely accoutred, and armed, they were
presented to His Majesty, but it is not known from whom certainly, but
supposed from the Earl of Newcastle, by the bravery of their accoutrements.

His Majesty next morning went to the great Church, heard Service and a Sermon,
by one of the Arch bishops Chaplains, his text was Heb. 10.24. Let us consider
one another, to provoke unto love and to good works, and held the balance of
his text both equally and excellently, though peradventure the Cavaleers did
not carry much of it home.

Colonel Lunsford came the next day about two of the clock in the Afternoon
to Beverley, had private speech for an hour with the King, and returned by
Post immediately to the Earl of Rivers, who has a Thousand men at command
into the field, and begins great things as is said, and within an hour after
another Post came from the Lord Strange, and returned presently with a Warrant,
Signed for the putting out certain Justices that opposes or are cold to his
Commands.

As the King was Bowling, there was scattered a paper with Verses, very
scandalous against Mr. PYM, and showed the King, who having read them, tore
them in pieces, and with a sad look said, such libellous Rascals has broke
the peace of the Kingdom, and if Justice did but lay hold of them, peoples
minds would be quickly calmed, he that showed them very likely looked for
better thanks.

The Lords here sit as close, as the Houses of Parliament do at London, let
every good heart pray their consultations may meet in the Glory of God and this
Kingdom.

FINIS.
LONDON.

Printed by T. FAWCET, for D. C. July 18. 1642.


