The Disconsolate REFORMADO; OR The sad looked Presbyterian JACK.

Or a true Relation of the sudden CHANGE which has happned in the CITY of
LONDON, since the 30th of July, till the 4th. of August.

Between the Renowned Sr. Thomas Fairefax's ARMY, and Major General MASSEY'S
and Col. POYN'S REFORMADOES.

Aug: 21 London, printed 1647.

Independent JAMY.
Presbyterian JACK.


OH Brother Jamy Independent, whether are you walking so Melancholy? Why Jack
Presbyter, what is the matter with you, you are walking in great have, what a
smoke you are in, from whence come you in such a sweat! Sure there is very hot
businesses abroad; Iamy, I Will tell you though we differ in opinions, yet I love
you, therefore shift for your self, (why what is the matter) I will tell you; I
am now going to Saint Iamses's Fields, (came you not from thence,) you are all
undone: For a new Army is a raising, and I will List my self, I have a Plume
of Feathers already, and a very strong Buffe-Coat well lined with Queries, I
shall make a gallant Reformado; We shall have money, and good Horses, and I
mean to have a touch or two for the good of my Brethren the Presbyterians, (I
pray be plain Brother) Ha, Jamy I am sorry for thee, for in St Iamses, the
new Artillery-Ground, and diverse other places, they are listing themselves
under Major General Massey, Sir William Waller, Cor. Points, and diverse
others that are brave Soldiers, are all Listing themselves by heaps, I hear
say the Army means to do what they please, but our Commanders do intend to
cool their courage, or else they will run for it: Heard you not what a
shouting there was, when they met with a poor fellow of your own stamp, (an
Independent) how they cried out, a tub Preacher, a tub Preacher, down with
him; but the poor fellow at last was horst away) having received many a sore
bastinado (from a gallant Reformado, but brother did he get away without
having any of his bones broken? yea brother, there were some that took pity
of him; and therefore now the tide is turned, have a special care of your
self, and lie close while I go and enquire further what is done, and stir
not out of your lodging (but pray in your tub) till I call for you, and get you
a Pass, to send you to your desired Haven Amsterdam, where you may profess
what you please, and so for this time farewell Brother Jamy.

Jack, and Iamy being parted, Jack jolly makes his repair again into Saint
Iamses's Fields on Saturday the last of July, where he finds many of his old
Comrades still about the old business Lysting themselves, but amongst the rest
of the business, some would not List themselves till the City had set out a
Declaration, (which that evening was done) upon the Sunday following they met
again in the same place, still lysting, some under one Captain, and some
under another, shouting, and crying, some for Massey, some for Waller, and some
for Poyns, and so continued all that day, and at night taking and seizing on
all Horses, no Horse-Coursers stables excepted, where they had any intelligence.

Monday there meeting was in the New Artillery ground, drawing into Companies,
and expecting to receave their moneys, Horses and Arms, but were put off till
the next day. The Common Counsel then sitting very close, and the Committee of
the Militia; Certain of Iamys friends coming with a Petition was much
enterrupted, in so much that in the end, they fell foul one upon the other;
And Poyns like a Gallant Reformado, or a Commander in chief, did there acts of
Chivaldry, killing one poor man, and hurting diverse others. ( Tom. the
Apothecaryes man had better been making of a Glister then looking on) Massey
hearing of the cumbustion, came into the field, and crying out Col. Poyns was
engaged, and with that they came so thick in Companies to Guield-Hall-Gate,
shouting, hollowing; and crying for King, Parliament and City; (poor Iemy lay
then in great fear expecting his Brother Iacks Pass, but none came) In the
mean time, His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax had notice of it, and fearing
that the Kingdom should be imbroyled in a War, (the worthy General) sent
his Letters to the City, with his Declarations to the Kingdom in general,
(all which you may read at large) being unwilling that the City by the
persuasions of some men should be in danger or damnified.

Tuesday, the Common Counsel sat close with other Counsels, and Messages
past too and again from them to Sir Thomas and his Counsel of War; then
leaving off there heat of Lysting, gave them very good words, and promising
fair, doubling all our guards with Trained bands and Auxilliaries.

Wednesday morning about one of the Clock, that worthy Patron of the City Sir
I.W. Knight, went to the Counsel of War to Treaty, on behalf of the City,
and within an hour after he was gone an Alarm was given at Hide-Parke corner,
where the Officers and Soldiers were ready and diligent; But it happened that
about two hours after with hollowing and shouting, they made themselves
Masters of Southwarke: Iamy hearing of that, being over-joyed ran forth to see
his friends with much joy. and coming back found his brother Jack Presbyter
in a discontented manner, walking too and again, whom clapping on the
shoulders, crying, I arrest you; which made Presbyter Jack start, (fearing it
had been Trypes the Sarjeant) but seeing it otherwise took it patiently,
shaking of his head, he asked what news with you brother Jamy? Oh brother
Jack, I have been with part of the Army, it is a gallant Army, but does not
love your Reformadoes; for they say you deserted the Army and endeavored to
make a new War; therefore I would have you take the same council you gave
me, look to your self, for they are men not worse then their words (they are
treating hard) you had best shift for your self, begone, either for France, or
Scotland, and well you escape so. Yet brother Jack if you will stay till
Saturday, you will bless your self at the sight of a gallant Army; they have
much Artillary, but will do no hurt unless you do oppose them, (and that is in
vain Jack) for Friday Sir Thomas concludes of all things at Wistminster, where
he will guard the House with his own men; therefore Jack Presbytary tarry till
Saturday, which is but a very short time, (all your chief Commanders are gone)
and I will be your Protector. So leaving Iamy, and Jack, Iamy rejoicing, and
Jack admiring at the well governed Army of that Renown-Generall marching
through London to Black Heath, whom God I beseech govern and protect, that by
the two Honorable Houses mutable consent, and their strength, we may have a
true setlement of the Church, and a firm peace in the Kingdom.

To the disconsolate Reformado, OR Sad looked PRESBYTER.
I Conceive that tears are fitter for this Theme then words; for I hear since
this unexpected change of your side, you have both scratcht where it does not
itch, and the rather considering how you took upon you, till it pleased God to
turn the tide: It is a true saying, the reason that many men want their
desires, is because their desires want reason, and honesty: You did mainly
bestir your selves on a sudden to flourish, ^^^h like the Pa^tridge, that
carries fair feathers, but (...) flesh* So^e h^^^ not stuck to say, come we
will take their Horses, and their (...) pay, and then let it go on which side
it will. Here Reformado I must tell thee, (if thou art guilty of this) thou
do break^ thy Covenant with God* and man; and must now say to thee (...)
Vlyss^s said to Aliax; Riches, Honors and Policy are precious ^^^els, but
fortune rules the Roast, oftentimes takes all from them that had much, and
gives to them that had little: I have read of a story of Hycurges two Dogs
both of a Damme, the one ran at a Hare, the other at a Poridge-Pot, my
meaning is not to compare the two dogs to Christians, but accept of the
Moral; I conceive the stout hearted Soldier will stand to that which he has
been ever brought up in, when another of the same Train, is good for nothing
but to run after the spoil and ruinning of Cities and Towns. From which
Massacry, (though it have many Enemies) I trust God will ever defend it; Well
Reformado, I am sorry thou have no better employment, but to live by the sword
(and I as am heartily glad thou art disappointed of such an employment) thou
may even now say by thy fortunes, as the Lord Keeper Finch said by his
(BOTSON'T) who thought of a Parliament, so who thought of so peaceable a
change, which change has for the present put thee into a sad and lost
condition; And now Reformado my last advice to thee shall be, to eschew evil
and do good; And that thou may, have more mind on good Books, then of
Bags, more desire of Godliness then of Gold; greater desire to dye well,
then to live wanton^y, or idly: So wishing thee no ill, I bid thee adieu.

Farewell Reformado.
Lastly, My hearty Prayers to God for this whole Kingdom is, That the Lord
would power out upon all sorts of persons in these Kingdoms a spirit of grace
and supplication, that it may repent us of all our iniquities, and that we may
be reconciled to the Lord; that so all the threatens of his wrath may be
removed from amongst us, and he may bless us with the sweet fruits of truth
and peace.



FINIS.

