DIVERSE PAPERS FROM THE ARMY: VIZ.

1. MARSHALL GENERAL SKIPPONS SPEECH To the Army, May the 15th.

2. THE ANSWER OF THE ARMY: Wherein they set down their Grievances.

Whereunto are added other Papers of Concernment.

decoration

LONDON; Printed for Hanna Allen, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley, 1647.

MARSHALL GENERAL SKIPPONS SPEECH At the Convention of Officers at Walden, May
the 15th.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers;
WE are here once more according to appointment, met together to desire you to
give us a clear and faithful account of your communicating the Votes of the
House of Commons to your several Regiments, and those under your Command, and
to desire you to inform us how you have labored to satisfy them in the care
the Honorable House took in those Votes for the Army, and what sincere
industrous and faithful endeavors you have used to make them sensible
thereof, and what distempers you found in your several Regiments, Troops and
Companies, that we may know how you have in these particulars discharged your
duties, as conscientious Christians in the sight of God, and as men faithfully
obedient to the Parliament of England.

I am further to desire you upon a motion made again and again, upon a
mention of my self, in relation of Ireland, to desire you to let me know, how
you find your several Regiments disposed.

The justness, the honorablenesse, and necessity of the service cannot be
unknown to you; I desire you according to the mind of the other Gentlemen
that were sent down with me, not as Commissioners, but as Parliament men, and
members of the Army, that you would in these particulars give us satisfaction,
that it may appear to us, and to the Parliament, and to all the Kingdom^, that
hear of our proceedings, that you have faithfully discharged your duties, as
we desire to do to the Parliament for the service of the whole Kingdom; I
pray that there may be an orderly proceeding in what we have to do; I doubt
not, but in the end of all, we shall find that nothing is aimed at in all
things, but what tends to the real service of the Parliament, and the good of
the whole Kingdom.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP SKIPPON, FIELD MARSHALL GENERAL, LIEVT.
GENERAL CRUMWELL, COMMISSARY GENERAL IRETON, AND COLLONELL FLEETVVOOD.
HAving received at the last Convention by your commands, upon commands and
direction to our several Regiments for the publishing of the Votes of
Parliament, for the satisfaction of the Army in point of arreares and
indemnity; and faithfully to inquire into the distempers of the Army, and
real grounds of their several addresses to the Parliament, and the General:
In which having diligently and accordingly endeavored to answer your
expectations in that you have enjoined us, we have according to the best of
our understandings, and you may please to know, that we find both Officers
and Soldiers quiet and free from any visible distemper, and yet sensible of
diverse pressing grievances, which quietly they have made known unto us, and in
their and our own behalf present unto you.

FIrst, that whereas it pleases the Honorable Houses of Parliament, upon
misinformation falsely suggested unto them, to declare and immediately publish
in print to the Kingdom, that the Petition of the Army, being but only an
intention, did tend to put the Army into a distemper and mutiny, to obstruct
the relief of Ireland, and to put conditions upon the Parliament, and
declaring the Petitioners, if they shall proceed therein, no less then enemies
to the State, and disturbers to the public Peace; which said heavy charge
remaining upon record, as a Mem^randum of Infamy upon us to posterity; we
cannot choose but be deeply sensible thereof, and with amazement wonder how so
humble and innocent address, intended to the General, could beget so strange
an interpretation. The substance of those things that we intended to sue for
therein, being no other then what the Parliament fully promised, and frequently
confirmed unto us by their Declaration.

Secondly, That whereas those persons that have attempted to beget and attempt
and foment divisions between the Parliament and their Army, by their
surrepticious obtaining and misrepresenting our Petitions, and by producing
other scandalous Letters from unknown hands, by them produced; the Authors
whereof are concealed, and not brought forth to make a judicial proof of
those things laid to our charge, which we cannot but look upon as a just cause
of grief, that the suggestors of such untruths seem to be encouraged, and we
who are innocent remain unjustified.

Thirdly, That diverse Officers of the Army, of public and known integrity,
have been (upon what grounds we know not) sent for to the Parliament as
delinquents; Some whereof do at this present attend there, and cannot procure
a trial, having nothing considerable laid to their charge, and more particular
Ensign Nichols, formerly a member of this Army, but now engaged for Ireland;
his pockets searched, and his papers taken from him, contrary to the Law of
this Kingdom, and discipline of war; and since by order from the
Commissioners (without the Generals privity, he being then at the head
Quarter) that were sent to the Army appointed for the relief of Ireland, sent
to London, where he is still kept prisoner at great expenses, and not admitted
to trial: which president may equally extend to any or all in the Army: both
which particulars last mentioned, bearing with them the face of delay and
protraction of justice, we cannot but look upon as a just cause of trouble
unto us.

Fourthly, That whereas we understand that the Parliament has voted a sudden
disbanding of the Army, not having made sufficient provision for the auditing
of our arreares, and stating of our accounts, our own reason, and experience of
others, makes us sensible, how difficult, chargeable, and uncertain the
obtaining thereof will be after our disbanding, and therefore justly makes us
sensible thereof.

Fifthly, That no provision has been made for the payment of our dearly earned
wages by the expense of our blood, and often hazard of our lives, saving a vote
of six weeks upon disbanding, which is so mean a requital of our faithful
service, the Kingdom being now settled in peace, that it will inevitably expose
us (especially the private Soldiers to great extremities) being hardly
sufficient to maintain many of them in their journies to their own homes.

Sixthly, that nothing as yet has been perfected for our future security for
things done as Soldiers, in relation to the war which the exigency thereof
has compelled thereunto, the want whereof we cannot choose but become very
sensible of, when we consider the many, sad examples of bitter and rigorous
prosecutions at Law against Soldiers, for Acts done in order to the promotion
of your service.

Seventhly, That we stand in fear (especially the private Soldiers) of being
impressed or forced to serve as Soldiers out of the Kingdom, many of them
having spent their times freely in the public service of the Kingdom,
forsaking their trades, their only livelihood, to which many desire to return
again for their better future livelihood.

Eighthly, That whereas diverse of us, (especially the private Soldiers) who
were apprentices in London, and other parts of the Kingdom, have voluntarily
engaged themselves in the service, being encouraged thereunto by the
Parliaments Declaration, showing that the time that they should so spend in the
prosecution thereof, should be so effectual in order to their freedom, as if
they had remained with their several respective Masters, notwithstanding
which, many have refused to give some of us freedoms, who may justly claim it
by the Parliaments Declaration for that purpose.

Ninthly, That many Soldiers who have lost their lives, widows who have lost
their husbands, and children their parents in this service, and thereby reduced
to great extremities, even to beggary for want of sufficient provision for
their subsistence, are not sufficiently provided, for a future livelihood.

Tenthly, that whereas diverse persons have both privately and publicly
labored by aspersions, and false calumnies to make us odious to the Kingdom,
thereby seeking to al^enate their affections from us, in order to which they
have published many scandalous Books, such as Mr. Edwards Gangraena, and
diverse others of that nature, and also very lately a report di^u^ged abroad,
that we have petitioned his Majesty inviting him to come to the head of our
Army, and that we would restore him to his Crown, Throne, and Dignity: a
person of eminency having had the confidence to aver at a very great, and
public convention, that he saw a Copy of a Petition, which was delivered to
his Majesty^, and that the Army was no longer a new Model, but had four
thousand Cavilleers, that ^^ coming from the Fountaine-head, perceived that the
King and Cavileeres, had their single and whole dependence upon this Army, and
others privately suggesting the same, by dispersing several Copies of the said
pretended Petition, the several particulars whereof we protest against as most
false, and are confident that it proceeded not from any probable ground, which
may argue such an intention in us, but singly from the malice of our Enemies.

Eleventhly, that notwithstanding the great care of the Committee and
Treasurers of the Army, and the cheerful readiness of most Counties for the
paying of Assessements, as those where we now quarter do affirm,
nevertheless the private Soldiers are necessitated, to take free Quarter for
the present, which is very irksome unto us to be so burdensome to our friends.

Having thus according to your Commands, as fully as we are able, accounted
unto you, what was the true genuine sense of the Army, and not their imaginary
conceits, but their grievances, that inevitably fall upon us, unless the
Parliament take course to prevent them: if the time allowed us by you would
admit, we could more fully demonstrate. We assume the boldness to entreat
you to be deeply sensible of, and represent to the Parliament these
particulars, in such an humble way, and to right us, ^f we shall be
misrepresented to the Parliament by any, and so far as you can cover our
weaknesses, that have or may slip from us, and prevent any scandalls, that the
malice of any men do seek herein to asperse us, when we shall be inquired
into.

Certain Heads of Aggrievances considered of by the Soldiers of Coll: RICHES
Regiment, the consideration whereof is the supplantive cause of our Petitioning.
1 THat we who have adventured our estates, liberties, and lives, yea all that
was near and dear unto us, not only for our own freedom, but for the
privilege of Parliament, and the safety of the Kingdom, should be denied to
step over the very threshold of liberty (to wit) Petitioning; when as our open
Enemies were never debarred of this Privilege.

Secondly, That although the Kingdom has now for some time been quiet, the
Parliament secured, all Quarters free, and somewhat settled; all which has been
procured by the price of our blood. And though great Sums of money has been
brought in by the Compositions of the Common Enemy, the attainment of which,
through the blessing of God, was by our Sword, whose Conquests bears the
scarlet-dye of our valiant fellow Soldiers blood; yet we sti^l remain every
day more deep in Arrears then other, no effectual course being taken for the
payment and accounting of them.

Thirdly, The sad Complaints, and miserable sufferings of many of our fel^ow
Soldiers who now suffer, and the recalling to our serious meditation the
miserable imprisonment, and ignominious death of many who were real and
faithful in this Service; all which they have undergone for acting things
which the exigency of War constrains them to do, the Consideration whereof
makes us sympathize and condoll their sad condition, that we who suffered for
the Parliament, should now be made sufferers by the Parliament, for acting
things that were attendant to their Service, and which aggravates our sorrow,
no means (as we can perceive) is used, for the speedy delivering them of their
distress, nor no provision for ought we hear, to secure either them or us for
the future.

Fourthly, That after our disbanding, we have no security to free us from the
inveterate malice, not of private, but of public Enemies, who greedily would
have sheathed their Swords in our bowels, but are liable to their pleasures;
some of them bearing Office in the Commonwealth, contrary to the Parliaments
Declaration and promise: that insomuch that on every occasion, we who have been
faithful and constant in the Service we have been called unto, and shall be
impressed forth of the Kingdom, never being suffered to enjoy the Privilege we
have purchased with our lives, nor the liberty of a Subject i^ enjoying our
Callings: which confidence of ours is not only imaginary, but will become a
true prophecy, unless the Parliament be pleased to dispossess them of their
power, that so our Enemies may not be our Judges.

Fifthly, That although the whole Kingdom are Testators, that this Army has
served the Parliament with our diligence and fidelity, that by us could be
expressed, or by them expected, yet never had we the least aspersion cast upon
us, for the prosecution of any unjust action, nor never had the infamous badge
of unfaithfulness fixed on our backs for betraying the trust imposed in us,
yet the Parliament upon suggestion and misinformation, without due
examination, were ready to give thanks to the suggestors and mis-informers, as
if they had waited for an advantage against us, to declare us Enemies of the
State, and disturbers of the public peace, the very thought of which we
utterly abominate. And though the very suggestors and mis-informers have been
proved false in their Informations, yet the Parliament has not declared
against them as Enemies of the State, and fomenters of division between the
Parliament and their Army.

Sixthly, That several faithful Officers, Members of this Army, upon
misrepresentation has been sent for from the Army as Delinquents, and are yet
detained for ought we hear, though no just occasion can be brought in against
them; a very ungrateful gratnity for their constant fidelity, and particularly
Ensign Nichols, against all Process of Law imprisoned, as we are informed, by
the Command of some particular Members, who afterward procured a Vote to
ratify and confirm what they had arbitrarily done; and know not how soon it
may be our cause.

Seventhly, That such proportions of Money that have been raised upon the
Ordinance for Sir Thomas Fairfax Army, has not been accordingly paid us,
which has caused us to be burdensome to our friends, beholding to our foes,
and dishonorable to the Employment: all which has been occasioned for want of
supplies of Moneys, to discharge our Quarters; And we fear must yet be further
burdensome, unless moneys come to avoid the same. Yet for all this want of
money, did never obstruct the Service, although our pay was abated, and 6. d.
per diem deducted, which the Parliament promised to restore to us again, when
it should please God to put a period to our divisions, which now we hope are
ended, and expect that promise to be converted to the true performance.

Eighthly, Many of our fellow Soldiers that were Apprentice^ in London, and
other parts of the Kingdom, who came voluntarily into this S^^^ice, in^ited
thereunto by the Parliaments Declaration, which said, That the time they spent
in the prosecution of their Service, should be as really performed, as if they
had really served their Masters. Which Ordinance has been, and still is,
hindered by diverse malignant and ill affected Masters; that insomuch that
unless the Parli^^ent be pleased to put in execution this their Declaration,
and inflict a punishment upon the violaters of it, they will be dishonored,
and their Ordinance not respected; And we who have fought for liberty, ensnared
our selves into a greater slavery.

Ninthly, Many of us, if not the major part, have rode States horses in the
Service; but at the loss or death of the said Horses, we have re-mounted our
selves at our own proper charge: So that we are confident the Parliament will
not be so ignoble and unjust to dismount us. So our confidence is as firmly
grounded, that the forwardness of our Service shall not redound to the
backwardness of our reward: and also those that have been plundered and
imprisoned, the wives and children of those who have been slain in this
Service, may no longer echo forth their lamentations at the Parliament doors,
(which aggrievance saddeth our souls) but may have supplies according to their
necessities. And the Parliaments many Protestations taken not only by
themselves, but also imposed upon most of us; so that until this, together
with all the rest of the true intents of the Protestation, be not only
verbally, but really performed, we cannot engage for any foreign Service:
unless we shall manifestly show our selves a perjured generation.

Lastly, We beseech the Honorable House, not to misapprehend any of the
aforementioned aggrievances, but to be pleased to cloathe the naked truth with
their favorable constructions and approbation, that so the infamous and
reproachful title of the disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom may never be
fyled on our Account, whose safety and tranquillity we prefer before our
own, nor the opprobrions brands of the obstructors of the relief of Ireland be
sealed on our foreheads, whose sad condition we seriously commiserate; and
whose speedy relief we never will obstruct, but earnestly endeavor. But in
the interim we humbly desire, That our humble requests may be heard and
answered, these our grievances seriously considered, and remedies answerable to
the diseases applied: Until such time,

we shall remain such as we always were Humble, faithful, and obedient
Servants to the Honorable House, serious c^ndolers of Irelands distress,
earnest endeavourers of this Kingdoms peace, and perpetual friends and
Servants to our Countres, and true and saithfull lovers of our liberty and
freedoms.

The Requests of Coll: Riches Regiment upon the Votes of Parliament.
1. THat whereas the Parliament says, they have appointed an Ordinance to be
brought in very suddenly for our indemnity.

1. We humbly desire, that the Ordinance may be forthwith resolved, and passed
by the Honorable House of Parliament, that so more weighty affairs may not be
obstructed, and we no longer suspended of our desires.

2. That this Ordinance be so large, that it extend not only to us for acting
things which we were authorized to act by our respective Officers, but also for
acts which the exigency of War has constrained us to act without their
Command; when as our lives and liberties were exposed to the danger of our
merciless Enemies.

Secondly, Whereas the Honorable House says, That an Ordinance is now lying
before them to that purpose.

Although we do not question the verity of the House in this particular, yet we
humbly desire, that as we have acted things in the public view of the Kingdom,
that has involved us into this slavery, that so we may have the public view
of the Vindication, that not only us who have been the actors, but it may be
publicly proclaimed to the whole Kingdom, who have been the sufferers.

Thirdly, That the Honorable House has resolved that a considerable
proportion of our Arrears be paid to us at our disbanding.

We most humbly crave leave to ask the Honorable House two things.

1. What they mean by a proportion of Arrears.

2. What they call a considerable proportion, and how much it is.

Lastly, That whereas they say, they will take care for the payment of the
remainder of Arrears, at such time as it may stand with the necessity of the
Kingdom, and care shall be taken for the auditing of our Accounts, and giving
us debentures.

1. We humbly desire, that direction may be given us for the attainment of the
remainder of Arrears, without the great expense, trouble, loss of time, that
others have undergone in waiting for their Arrears; insomuch that the benefit
has not countervalued their great pains occasioned by their tedious waiting.

2. That we may have good and firm security for the payment of the said moneys
that shall remain in Arrears.

FINIS.

