DIVINE FIREWORKS. OR, Some Sparkles from the Spirit of BURNING in this dead
Letter. HINTING What the Almighty Emanuel is doing in these WIPPING Times. AND
In this HIS day which burns as an OVEN. IN ABHIAM.
Can any good come out of --? Come and see.
crowned lion with flaming sword

THe LION, who a long time sleeped,

Is (by the Consuming Fire) out of his Den fired. Being rouzed,

He roared,

The Beasts of the Forest trembled. This was the Lord knows where the 29th. of
the last mon. An. BLVI and besides spectators and auditors.


Were any of the children frighted?

Have any of them stumbled?

Sure I am the Heathen raged.

Have any of the PEOPLE (also) a vain thing imagined?

The Hell Hounds yelled.

The Dogs with open mouth gaped, and greatly By CRAVOVR witnessed.
barked.

At length

The men of Sodom were (strangely) with blindness smitten.

The Dogs mouths which were so wide open, were (with a pure and heavenly
cunning) stopped:

They also fawned, and their tails wagged, etc.

It Is the earnest of good things to come.

And thus says our Almighty Emanuel,

My ways are unsearchable, and my Judgments past finding out, etc.

O the heights! and depths! and lengths! and breadths! how unsearchable? etc.

The rest is torn out,

Yet it is written

From

My joyous Fiery-fornace, where I am in the Spirit on the LORDS DAY.

Which burns as an Oven,

And where I am joyfully dwelling

With everlasting Burnings.

This first day of the New-Year, BLVI. BLVII.

A. B.

London printed in the beginning of the year, BLVII.

Felt, heard, and understood, manifested and

Revealed at the end of -- An. -- BLVI.

Let none but Angels sing this round,
The end has the beginning found.
And what and if one risen from the dead, etc.

And what and if a fleepy Lion out of his Den fired, etc.

Should tell you the truth? could ye in any wise believe?

Hoc accidit dum vile suit

CHAP. II. The sight, reception, and enjoyment of the TRUE BLV (which far
surpasses the Philosophers Stone, etc. Hinted at.
-- Hoc accidet dum vile fui

For woe is me, I am undone, I have seen the Lord the King.

I am undone. I am a fool.

Suffer fools gladiy; if you may, if you can.

If I am a fool, it is for your sakes.

I am besides my self; and if I am -- it is to God

I am not -- for God has took me.

I am undone, yet gloriously and joyfully undone.

I have seen the Lord. THE King;

Who appeared unto me

On [Innocents Day] the 28 of the last month.

He spoke to me and with me, (as a friend speaks to his friend) of things
unspeakable and unutterable.

By viz 28 Jan. from ten at night til about 3 in the morning.
night (on my bed also) he whom my soul loves, set before mine eye, both
mental and corporal.

BLV

Exceeding glorious, most transparent and most transplendent.

And what I am now about (with fear and trembling, as also with high rejoicing)
I can present to you, no more, no otherwise, then as part of the black, dark
shadow of a man, against a sunshine wall, etc.

At this strange, glorious, and unexpected sight,

The Spirit of Burning (by which the filth of the daughter of Sion is purged)
did so surround me, and took such real possession of me,

That it not only waxed hot within me;

But also (on a sudden) set my body on such a flame; that (at a distance) it
would warm the stander by, as if they were warming their hands at a burning
fire, etc.

Then was I raised to sit up in my bed (in my shirt) smoking like a furnace.

And with glorious holy fear and trembling, I bowed the Knees of my soul; as
also my body

With all awful reverence before the dreadful, (yet to his friends) the
glorious presence of the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob,

With my hands wringing, the Spirit groaning,

And at length saying,

I beseech thee, I beseech thee, I beseech thee

Tell me what is this?

Then HE spoke;

Whose voice once shook the earth; But now not only the earth, but the heavens
also.

Saying,

Fear not, it is I BLVI.

Whereupon the Spirit within me (with exceeding joy) exceedingly groaned; and
with a loud voice, out-sounded

O the BLV! O the BLV! O the BLV!

And the worm, and no man said, what BLV;

Lord

He, as a loving Father, gave me (as it were) a box 'ith' ear, saying,

Do not remember, when thou was it a

Schoolboy, thou heard'st this saying,

TRUE BIV will never stain, will never fail, White is the signal of Innocence.
BLV, of Truth. --

And I that am incomprehensible, without color, invisible,

Yet in (an unfathomable sense) as visible,


And as I may, can and will so say; Heb. 11. 27


I both have, can, will, and do appear in my COULORS, at my pleasure.

The White -- as Innocence, the BLV -- as truth.

TRUE BLVI, True BLVI IAM.

And though I am in heaven, earth, and hell, etc

Yet earth, hell and heaven, yea the heaven of heavens is not able to contain
me, etc.

Now have I in an unspeakable eminent way bowed the heavens, and am come down
upon the earth. And will show my self,

As in my Coulors, -- etc.

Whereupon he drew a sharp two edged flaming sword, etc.

(Another manner of Sword then that he wore on Mount Sina)

Saying,

Bear thou the typical testimony thereof.

And in a dark, low, beggarly shadow, wear BLV, With this Superscription,

TRUE BLVI will never fail,
TRUTH is great, and will prevail.
And (not conferring with flesh and blood) I was obedient to the heavenly
commandment.

Whereupon with an exceeding holy fear and trembling, fiilled brim-ful [also]
of joy and rejoicing,

I bowed down hoth soul and body, before the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

And the Spirit within me sounded forth, O eternal spirit of TRUTH, which will
never fail.

What am I, a worm, and no man? -- -- A Nazarite (By the Lord of Hosts, which
dwells in Mount Sion) made blacker then a cole --

-- Not known in the streets --

Known at home Only.

Fear thou not, I am thine, and I am with thee and a wall of fire round about
thee.

I will also tell thee what I am doing in These whipping Times,

And in this my Day

Which burns as an OVEN.

Hark!

Chap. III. What the Lord is doing these whipping Times? etc.
Hark!

The noise of a whip, on the top of the Mountains,

Whip and burn, whip and burn, whip and burn.

I, THE consuming fire in An. BLVII -- have bowed the heavens, and am come
down, I am am come to baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with Some have felt it
with a witness.
Fire.

My Fan is in my hand, and I will thoroughly purge my Floor, etc.

But,

The chaff I will burn up, with unquenchable Fire.

O chaff, chaff, hear the Word of the Lord.

To the unquenchable fire thou must, it is thy doom.

It Is a whipping Time. The day burns as an Oven.

Wherein (II) all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble. And the
day that comes, and [NOW is] shall BURN them up.

It shall leave them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4. 1. Learn what that
means, Whom it hitteth, it hitteth.

It Is a whipping time.

And he that is TRUTH, and no Lie, has bowed the heavens, and is come down.
(III TO whip the Thieves out of his own Ye are the Temple of the living God, as
God has said, I will dwell in them, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 6. 10.
Temple. And amongst all the rabble that are there, he will whip out that old
thief, that foul and unclean spirit that says, Stand back, I am holier then
thou, etc.

That Thief also shall not escape his Lash, who says, Lo here, or lo there, etc,

These are whipping time; and

The day Burns as an Oven.

And thus says my God,

Who (to my exceeding, exceeding joy) is a consuming Fire, I have bowed the
heavens, and am come down.

(IV) To try every man's work so as by Fire; and this consuming fire shall enter
into the marrow and the bones, and search the heart and the reins:

And shall go on and do its work, as it has begun:

And turn the Inside outward.

To the eternal fame of some; and to the everlasting shame of others.

Let the later expect what is upon them coming with a vengeance.

The day burns like an Oven.

For (V) He has bowed the Heavens -- and is coming down in flaming Fire,

To render vengeance to those that know him not; especially to those who talk
much of him, yet call him, Beelzehub, etc. etc. etc.

These are whipping times.

For [VI) he has bowed the heavens, and is come down to whip

These froward foolish children who call their Father Rogue, if he appear in
any other garb then what they have usually seen him in, etc.

And he will never give over whipping them, till they give over saying to him,
What do thou?

Till they give over Injoyning him his way, etc.

And their daring to be so arrogantly foolish, as

To JUDGE the things THEY know not --

He that has an ear to hear let him hear.

And AL shall feel

It is a whipping time.

For (VII) He has bowed the Heavens, and is come down to whip and burn, whip
and burn. --

None shall escape his lash,

No not his dearly beloved Daughter of Sion.

Among many other things he will soundly scourge her for her haughtiness, and
outstretched-neckedness.

For holding her neck so high.

For her cursed Scorn, Hellish Pride and niceness.

For not remembering her Sister Sodom in the day of her pride, etc.

And the roaring ramping-Lyon, with the sharp two-edged Sword, will run her
through and through.

And with unquenchable fire

Will burn up the bravery of their tinkling Ornaments.

The bracelets, etc. The changeable Suits of apparel, etc.

The Glasses, and fine Linen. The Hoods and the Vails, etc.

And instead of sweet smelling there shall be a stink; and BURNING instead of
Beauty.

And because she turns away her eyes from her own Flesh, yea, and denies her
own Spirit and Life;

Yea, her Father that begot her; and

Her eldest Brother, the Heir of all,

For this her haughtiness, and stretched-neckedness, she shall not only be
whipped, but also the crown of the head of the Daughter of Sion shall be smitten
with a Scab. And

The Lord will discover her SECRET parts.

And this shall be done to the green Tree.

And if this be done to the green Tree,

[VII] What shall be done to the Dry Tree?

At present I will not tell them.

They shall feel with a witness, etc.

And I Will only here insert a Prophecy, which sparkled forth from the Spirit of
Prophecy, before these whipping times were thought on or expected.

The Prophecy.

Since that their ways they do not mend,

I Will find a Whip to scourge them by;

And with my Rod I Will make them bend, and so divide them suddenly.

This is but the beginning of sorrows

And this that is now (in this dead Letter hinted) is but the bare contents of
some of those many things which the consuming fire is about to do these
whipping times; and in this day which BURNS as an Oven; and where in triumphs
and joy I now live.

You shall have it more at large one way or other, one time or other.

The End
Is not yet.
London, Printed for the Author, Jan. 20. An. BLVI BLVII. Written Jan. 1. and
3. An. 56. 57.

True BLVI. will never fail;

TRUTH is great, and will pre^


