JOYFUL NEWS FROM CAPTAIN MARRO IN IRELAND* OR, His second victory over the
Rebels, April 18.

Showing in a most true and exact Relation, the manner of two Glorious Battles
never to be forgotten.

The first by the invincible Courage, of Captiain Marro, April, 18. Also His
Parley, and the Assault and Repulse of Mougarrets Army, April 19.

The second, by the said Captain Marro, and being seconded by Sir Henry
Tichbourn, gave the Rebels a great Overthrow, with the Number of the men that
were slain in each battle.

Also His Majesty's Message to the House of Peers, April the 22. 1642.

Printed for John Wels, 1642.

His Majesty's Message to the House Peers. April. 22. 1642.
HIs Majesty having seen a Printed Paper, entitled, A Question answered how
Laws are to be understood and obedience yielded; (which Paper He sends
together which this Message think, fit to re^ommend the consideration of it to
His House of Peers, that they may use all possible care and diligence for the
finding out the Author, and may give directions to His learned Council, to
proceed against Him and the Publishers of it, in such a way as shall be agreeable
to Law and the course of justice, as Persons who endeavor to stir up Sedition
against his Majesty; And His Majesty doubts not but they will be very sensible
how much their own particular Interest (as well as the Public government of
the Kingdom) is, and must be shaken, if such license shall be permitted to bold
factious spirits to withdraw His Subjects strict obedience from the Laws
established by such Seditious and Treasonable distinctions. And of Doctrines of
this nature, His Majesty's doubts not but that their Lordships will publish
their great dislike, it being grown into frequent Discourse, and vented in
some Pulpits by those desperate turbulent Preachers who are the great Promoters
of the distempers of this time) That human Laws do not bind the Conscience:
which being once believed* the civil Government and peace of the Kingdom will
be quickly dissolved* His Majesty exspects a speech account of their
Lordships exmplary justice upon the Authors and publishers of this Paper.

MORE GLORIOUS, JOYFUL, AND RENOWNED NEWS, FROM IRELAND.
IF there were ever found deadly enemies to true Christian Religion, they are
now found out in Ireland; that Mother of all treachery, and Nurse of Treason,
as may appear by this ensuing Relation following.

Upon the 17. day of this present Month, the Lord Montgarret, and the great
Rebel Mac-Davo, drew their forces together to the number of 14000, intending
to give battle against Captain Marro; by reason he had besieged the strong
Castle of Bellon in the Neweries: they having intelligence, that he was but 900
strong, having with them but only three pieces of Ordnance, he had given three
great assaults against the aforesaid Castle, and mounted his Ordnance in three
several places, being furnished with Cannoncers of great note; Upon the 18.
day of this month he gave the fourth Assault against the said Castle; where
after three hours fight, the Castle yielded, putting all that were therein to
the sword, being in number 300. he then entered the Castle, taking great* store
of good pillage and ammunition, planting his three Pieces on the said Castle,
having intelligence that the Lord Mongarret, and Mack-Davo were intended to
give battle against them, being 7. miles off. Sir Henry Tichbourn having
received a Letter from Captain Marro that he had takeu the Castle, and that the
aforesaid Rebels were resolved to assault him, hasted to him with all speed,
with 1700. men, and being within half a mile of the Castle, caused his Drums to
beat up, Captain Marro hearing the same, sent out Lieutenant Johnson with 200.
to meet them, to know what they were, and approaching near them, Sir Henry sent
to him, to tell him what his intents were, that he was resolved to withdraw
back til he saw the Enemy approach near the Castle; whereupon Lieutenant Johnson
returned back to his Captain, relating to him the policy of Sir Henry, this was
upon the 19. of this month, in the morning; and about two of the clock in the
afternoon, the Rebels marched toward the Castle, besieging it, and having set
their men in four Battalions, began to play against the Castle, Captain Marro
answering them courageously, playing with his Ordnance so thick against them,
that there were slain of the Rebels in the first fiering 300. men, of our side
18. after some cessation they fell to it again, the battle continuing very hot,
being doubtful on both sides, till Sir Henry approached and fell on sending
200. men to give battle against the Enemy on the left slanck, if they had
attempted to pass by on the right slank, of those that were in fight, he sent
secretly by the Hills (where there was a hollow distance) 500. men to charge
them in their Front, which amazed the Enemy much, he himself falling on with
the rest of the Army, Captain Marro still playing against them with most
unheard of courage, who after the space of 13. hours fight, the enemy was
forced to retire, Sir Henry and Captain Marro has also taken 5. other Castles
in the Neweries, and put many of the Rebels to the Sword, the last week, it is
thought they will begin with the great Castle called Newery Castle the next.

Your Loving Brother, John Damon.
From our Quarters in the Neweries, April the 21. 1642.
More exceeding true and joyful News from Ireland.
Loving Brother.
ON the 14. of this month, I received your Letter, being sorry to hear such bad
news from you; and whereas you writ to me, to send you word how passages went
with us here, I thought it convenient, to send you these Occurrences, following.

Upon the 17. of this present month, there was a great and bloody battle in
the Neweries, fought between 3000. men of our side, under the Command of Sir
Henry Tichbourn, Sir Charles Coot, and Captain Marro, against 10000. of the
Rebels, conducted by the great Rebel Mondormo, and after a long and tedious
Battle, they put the Rebels to flight, killed 2000. of them, and wounded the Lord
Mondormo: of our side were slain 400. they are intended to fight a pitched
Battle about the 25. day of this month. We had tidings brought to our Army,
April 12. that Sir Philomy O-Neal has got a great army, intending to give
Battle against us in the Neweries. Captain Marro received a Letter from Colonel
Gore, in the North of Ireland, relating how they had defeated six Regiments of
the rebels forces, but my Lord of Munster has had some loss there.

So I rest your loving Brother J. Gilbert.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Lord Howard of Char,
shall attend upon the King, and present some Reasons unto His Majesty.

John Brown Cler. Parl.



FINIS.

