THE BRIDES Preparation.

By the Lady ELEANOR: DAVIS

For it is the day of the Lords vengeance: and the year of recompense for the
controveosie of Sion: (Isaiah 34.

Printed in the year March 21th 1644.

Of the Signification and Meaning of that Celestial foure-square City:
measured 144 Cubits.
Revelation, 21.
AS most clearly shows: the Year of GOD 1644: With our Lady-Dayes
description. and of the Worlds Creation, and the things therein made in the
Spring: to whose beauty, all the glory of the Jndies Not to be compared, which
quickens and revives every Creature: So unto Nothing again disolv'd, to be at
the same season even seasonable, for the quick and dead their meeting. Even
then the blessed glorious Resurrection, as the great Master Builder, saying, it
is done. J am ALPHA and OMEGA, The beginning and the end; The year finished,
as much to say.

And so when fruit in perfection at the fall then fell Adam: But proceeding
with this HOLY DAY partly why preferrd because this secreet disclosed to one of
that SEX. Besides a day observd of payment, like the doy of judgment every
ones service which rewards even the appointed time then: when the Day and Night
ways equal hours the precious Spring.

Revelation. XXI. And J saw a New heaven, and a New earth, for the first were
passed away.
And I John (Joh: annes) saw the holy City, coming down from Heaven as a
Bride prepared, etc. showed by one of the seven Angels (to wit) Winged time
(the 1700. year) which had the seven Vials full of the seven last plagues,
saying, J will show Thee the bride the Lambs wife; Even this vxorem Agni: The
spring in her variety of Colors, the Earth in all her riches, who begins with;
it: for Times farewell, showed or signified. His last hour glass run out.

But to be brief herein, as every Month of the Year shows, Named severally,
by the Tribes and Apostles Names, written on those Gates and Foundations twelve
in number: where Juda for January and the like, and the Wall answerable thereto
twelve thousand furlongs all bidding time a thousand times farewell: So by the
measure of the Angel, Time so swiftly fleeing a father of many generations,
even the Year aforesaid 1644: is measured by those Cubits 144. With the four
quarters of the Year, three months allotted each: Of such even Length and
Breadth, all foure-square: Three to the East, and three to the West, as it
were, etc. where the equal Day and Night put into the reckoning or balance.
And so every Gate of one pearl, one and thirty days a piece: The most of
these Unions, so going on with this veil of misery ended.

And farther for the very place thus figuring aged time: the Tower of Londons
situation represented, the Cities safety, that great store house even showed
St. John then newly done: unreparable now not worth your beholding to what then
was: turned into a prison, a place of tears and death, together with the
street of this City not unknown of pure Gold like transparet glass: the mint
on both sides lettic'd. With that Crystal Spring proceeding out of the
Throne of God and the Lamb, as Agnus for Anno Dom: and Mensura for Menses, and
Tempus for Templum, etc. And so the tree of life significant also which yields
it monthly fruit for the healing of Nations whose evil incureable without it.
to wit, The last day reveal their only remedy: like that water of life, free
for every one to come and take it, so far from being forbidden or within the
compass of any curse or point of curiosity that it is become a blessing, no
less then one of the commandment to do it. As the second death appointed to
be their portion the fearful and unbeleevers which shall add or deminish from
the words of this book and faithful prophecy showing the Lords second coming.

Seconded thus in the 7. Chap. and Chap. 14. Where concerning the great blow in
such a year all going upon that great number. And I saw four Angels standing
on the four corners of the earth holding the four winds, that the wind should
not blow, till a hundred forty and four sealed, As it were our great Army: For
so no question to be made of what Nation that company. Cap. 7, verse 14. In
Albion Array St. John's reply to that Elder, in plain English makes it known:
Saying SIR, thou know and whence they came, If thou art one of the 24.
Elders since the Conquest your Majesty knows them as much to say whose reign
concluding i^ with his Corownation, thus Mat. 25. Where the Kingdom of Heaven
likend to five wise Virgins and five foolish, no doubt points at the blessed
Virgins feast not to be unprepared then. So make no tarying O my God.

FJNIS.

