A DOGS ELEGY, OR RVPERTS TEARS, For the late Defeat given him at Marstonmoore,
near York, by the Three Renowned Generals; Alexander Earl of Leven, General
of the Scottish Forces, Fardinando Lord Fairefax, and the Earl of Manchester
Generals of the English Forces in the North.

Where his beloved Dog, named BOY, was killed by a Valliant Soldier, who had
skill in Necromancy.

Likewise the strange breed of this Shagg'd Cavalier, whelp'd of a Malignant
Water-witch; With all his Tricks, and Feats.



Sad Cavaliers, Rupert invites you all
That do survive, to his Dogs Funeral.
Close-mourners are the Witch, Pope, and devil,
That much lament yo'r late befallen evil.
Printed at London, for G. B. July 27. 1644.

A Dogg's Elegy, OR RVPERTS Tears.
LAment poor Caevaliers, cry, howl and yelp
For the great loss of your Malignant Whelp,
He Is dead! He Is dead? No more alas can he
Protect you Dammes, or get Victory.
How sad that Son of Blood did look to hear
One tell the death of this shagg'd Cavalier, P. Ruperts sorrow.

He raved, he tore his Perriwigg, and swore,
Against the Roundheads that he would never fight more:
Close couched, as in a field of Beans he lay, His policy.

Cursing and banning all that live-long day;
Thousands of Devils Ram me into Hell,
Or may I live and die an Infidel,
The Day's quite lost, we are all confounded,
And made a prey to every paltry Roundhead;
Just Heaven had so Decreed, as it fell out,
The Cavaliers received a final Rout.
Manchester, Leslie, Fairefax wears the Bay. His Army Routed.

And Crumwell crowned chief Victor of the Day;
While thousands weltring in their blood, did lie
Weary of life, and yet afraid to die.
But for to tell of this Bl^ck Water-witch, His Dogs Progeny.

That puppy'd was of a Malignant Bitch,
Or Hagge, so cunning in her Art, that she
VValk'd under earth (...) in the air (...) fly, The property of Witches.

Sell winds she could, command the Ebb or Tide,
Raise Foggs, give Spells or on the Clouds could ride,
For Magic, Sorcery, Charm or Evil,
She well, might (...) to the Devil.
This Witch one night, late, picking banefull Drugs,
Her Spirit.
Meeting grim Brenno, used to suck her duggs,
In shape of a young stripling Dammy Blade,
For Whoredom, Murder, and for Rapine made,
For all the world, some say, just such another
That used to call Prince Maurice brother:
Thus she Accoasted him, What Form is this
Thou have assumed Brenno? By the Abyss,
My blood rebels more powerful then my Charms,
Till I do lodge thee in my twined arms.
The dog begotten.
No sooner had she spoke, but a black cloud
With duskie curtains did them both enshrowde,
Where was begotten this Malignant Curr,
Who in this Island has made all this stir.
Full thrice three yeears within her cursed womb,
He did remain, ere he to light did come:
The longed for hour is come, most strange to tell,
The Furies straight about their business fell;
Megera midwife was to this strange Fiend,
For whose delivery all the Haggs attend:
Thunder and Earth quakes such a noise did make,
As if Heavens Axletree in sunder brake,
And either Poles, their heads together pash'd,
As all again they had to Chaos dashed:
Then was a noise, as if the Garden Bears,
And all the Dogs together by the Ears,
And those in Bedlam had enlarged been,
And to behold the bayting had come in.
Signs of prodigious births.
About by noon flew the affrighted Owls,
And Dogs in corners set them down to howl,
Bitches and Wolves these fatal signs among,
Brought forth most monstrous, and prodigious young:
And from his height, the earth-refreshing Sun,
Before his hour his golden beams does run
Far under us, in doubt his glorious Eye
Should be polluted with this Progedy.
A trembling fear straight on the people grew,
But for what cause there was not one that knew,
The Destinies, Furyes, Fates, and all hells Crew
Came trembling in, and would this Monster view,
And long it was not ere there came to light.
The most abhorred, and most fearful sight
That ever eye beheld, a birth so strange,
That at the view it made their looks to change:
Women stand off (quoth one) and come not near it, The dogs birth.

The Devil, if he saw it, sure would fear it,
For by it is shape, for ought that I can gather,
The Child is able to affright the Father:
'Twas like a Dog, yet there was none did know
Whether it Devil was, or Dog, or no.
Scarce twice two years past over, His cunning.
but quickly he
Excelled his Mother in her VVitcherie,
And in his black and gloomy Arts so skilled,
That he even Hell in his subjection held;
He could command the Spirits up from below,
And bind them strongly, till they let him know
All the dread secrets that belong them to,
And what those did, with whom they had to do.
This VVizard in his knowledge most profound, His depth of skill*

Sat on a day the depths of things to sound,
For that the World was brought to such a pass,
That it well nere in a confusion was,
For things set right, ran quickly out of frame,
And those awrie, to rare perfection came,
And matters in such sort about were brought,
That States were puzzled almost beyond thought,
Which made him think as he might very well,
There were more Devils then he knew in hell.
Now for to Act his part he does begin,
And tempt's the World to all abhorred sin:
To Rome he first resolves his course to steer, His first trick.

And quickly leaps into the Prelates Chair,
Just 'bout the time some think when as Pope Jone
Was head of the Church, and troubled with the stone,
He cured her Holiness, brought her abed,
And showed the Romish Church her Maiden head:
But finding Rome already prone to Vice,
To Pride, Vainglory, Lust and Avarice,
To Murder, Rape, Idolatry and more
Then he (though Devil) ever knew before,
For Spain he comes, just about Eighty Eight,
And there a Fleet he Rigged for England straight,
The great Armado.
There did he play his Water-prize with Dr^ke,
Who with Earth's thunder, made proud Neptune quake;
He taught this Dog to Duck, to swim, and dive,
Till scarce a Spaniard he had left alive;
But being vexed, missing his aim at Sea,
He vowed on Land revenged he would be,
Queen Elizabeth many times miraculously delivered.
But Heaven which ever did Protect that Queen,
Debarred his malice, and repelled his spleen;
Till Jove fetching her hence, gave her a Crown,
More bright, more glorious, and of more renown,
Who Reigns till Time has date, or Fame has breath,
Queen of true English hearts in life and death.
Aurora's gone: Bright Sol is in his Throne,
Then dry your eyes, and cease for her to mourn:
This Dog now casts about, tries all his skill,
To poison, stab, or some new way to kill
Never yet heard of; The Masterpiece of hell
The Popish Powder Plot.
Is now contrived that wants a Parallel,
The Powder Plot, that would in one half hour,
King, Prince, Peers, Commons, at one blow devower,
But then he failed too, the Eye of Heaven
Descri'd the Plot, and Justice with an even
Impartial hand, by the Decree of Jove,
Set free our Kingdom, and did them remove,
Gave them their just reward, sent them to Hell,
Amongst better Devils then themselves and well.
Our Dog is masterlesse; Could he but frame
Himself to serve the Favorite Buckingham,
The Dog turns Courtier.
This cunning, sly, insinuating Elfe,
By him would work strange wonders for himself,
Then does he Plot, contrive and cast about*
And Hell it self does search, for to find out,
If any way were left, he vowed to (...)
Once more to bring this land to (...).
Duke of Lenox.
Now dies that Noble Scot, who (...)s tell,
'Twas thy Ambition made his carcass swell.
Prince Henry.
Next, Prince Henry -- But here my Muse strikes sail,
A damp glide through (...)
I know not, unless some powerful Spell
Has charmed my head into a watery Well:
"Eyes weep out tears, tears weep out eyes in kindness,
"Since he is dead, how best of all is blindness.
A Match with Spain must now be practiced,
Which soon will strike the nail up to the head:
Oh, now it works, which makes his Holiness, The Popes letter.

Salute his hopeful Son with an Express,
Answered with so much Candor to the Chair,
As if Himself of it did stand in fear.
The Match broak off with Spain, our Noble BOY
Is yet to seek, and must find out a way
By Poison still, how that (O monstrous!) He
More home may strike at Sacred Majesty,
Great Britains KING, and Europs chiefest glory, K. James his death.

Scarce paralleled in any English Story,
Must with White Powder given him in his drink,
Cry out on him that made his Carcass sink.
O for a Bishop now, Come Little Land, Canterbury ushers in popery.

And usher in the Babylonish Baud,
This made him Metropolitan, when he
Did move the Duke to go toth' I Will of Ree, The I Will of Rue voyage.

Poor Rochell Ru'd it, where by more then Chance,
England was made the scorn of conquered France:
But heaven by Felton's hand had so decreed,
He that shed all this blood, himself should bleed.
Now Bishops, Coaps, Caps, Surplices and Crosses,
Must needs Religion-o're these fattall Losses:
GODS Day must be Profaned with Sports profane, The Declaration for Sports on
the Sabbath Day.

Laud, White, and Wren, like Tyrant-Kings must Reign:
Monopolies imposed, and none go free,
But those that loved the Mass, and Popery.
Now Tips of Ears, and burning fiery scarres, Mr. Burton, Mr. Prynne, and Dr.
Bastwick.

Were all sad Symptoms of ensuing VVarres!
That Masse-Book unto Scotland now must trace, Scotlands piety.

Or else a Bloody Sword supplies the place.
Now does that sur-Reverend Piece of Lust, Queen mother.

That Madam Pole cat, that was never just,
Contrive and Plot, and wrack her whoary scull,
Urging her Daughter to make mischief full.
Now Strafford's on the dismal Stage: it is he
Must Act chief part in this red Tragedy:
Traitors, and papists, Whe^ps of the same litter.
Now Harry Jemin, Bristoll, Digby, Cott. --
Must all to work, and see what they can Plot:
Now Bleeding Ireland has by Commission,
Brought the Prot'stants to a sad condition:
Two hundred thousand of them lately slain,
The Protestant Religion to maintain.
It Is time the King now leave his Parliament,
Let Digby wear his Crown, and give consent
To raise an Army Traitors to protect,
And his Great Counsel utterly reject.
The Dogs Master.
Now Prince of Robbers, Duke of Plunderland,
This Dogs great Master, has received command
To kill, burn, steal, Ravish, nay, any thing,
And in the end to make himself a King.
Newcastle next, Capell the Cow stealer,
These and Irish Rebels, his Majesty's best Subjects.
And Hastings alias Rob-Carrier,
Hopton, Hurry, Lunsford, that all do Fight
For the true Gospel, and the Subjects Right.
On Ashton, Leg, and such as these do stand
The Privilege of Parliament and Land!
And the Known Laws, that should good men protect,
Upheld by Rebels, that good men reject,
O durum hoc! -- Mine eyes burst out to think
How blind he is, that can at these things wink.
To tell you all the pranks this Dog has wrought,
That loved his Master, and him Bullets brought,
Would but make laughter, in these times of woe,
Or how this Curr came by his fatal blow,
Look on the Title page, and there behold,
The Emblem will all this to you unfold.
MORRALL.
The World's the VVitch, the Dog, is the Devil,
And men the Actors, that have wrought this evil.
EPILOGUE.
He that cannot get a penny me to buy,
May want a Pound, and a Malignant die.
FINIS.

