THE DANGER OF THE Church of England, FROM A GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF COVENANTERS IN
SCOTLAND. Represented from their Principles in Oaths, and late Acts of
Assemblies; compared with their Practices in these last two Years. Written in
the Year 1690. By a True Son of the Church.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. 1690.

THE DANGER OF THE Church of England. From a General Assembly of COVENANTERS IN
Scotland, etc.
IN this Representation of the danger of the Church of England, from the
Scottish Covenanters, we will make it appear, First, That they are by their
Principles, obliged not only in Scotland to keep up their Covenanted Presbytery
to the Height, but also to endeavor to introduce the same in the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland. Secondly, That they are at this time able to prosecute
those measures, which were then followed for that effect: And, thirdly, that
they are most willing to trace the footsteps of their fathers, if the King
interpose not his Authority for the protection of those Episcopal Ministers
whom the Government has not deprived in that Kingdom; and for a Legal
Toleration, for the Exercise of the Reformed Religion, unto all peaceable
Dissenters.

For the first of these three. In the beginning of 1638. all the three Kingdoms
enjoyed an Episcopal Government, and a Common Prayer, in the Church. In
December 1638. the Scottish Presbyterians took both away in Scotland, without
the King's Authority. and in their having neither Bishop nor Liturgy, they
placed all the Reformation of the Protestant Religion. But they could not be
secured of their being long without them, while the other two Kingdoms enjoyed
them; and therefore when they Covenanted in Aug. 1639. in the very first
Article of the Solemn League, in which they Swear to preserve the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Worship and Government, they likewise
bind themselves by Oath to Reform the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in the
same Points, and to bring the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and
uniformity in both. And what this Reformation of Worship is, and by what
Government it is to be directed, which they vow to preserve among themselves,
and to introduce among us, we cannot be ignorant, if we read the second Article
of their Covenant, where they Swear unto an Extirpation of the Prelacy that is
exercised by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans,
Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers
depending on that Hierarchy. And what is meant in both those first Articles, by
their sincere, real, and constant Endeavors, to reform the Worship and
Government of the English and Irish Churches, according to the Pattern of the
Scottish, is plain from the last Article, wherein they Swear to assist and
defend all those that enter into the League and Covenant, in the maintaining
and pursuing thereof; and that they shall not suffer themselves directly nor
indirectly, by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion, or Terror, to be divided
from their Blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the
Contrary part, or to give themselves to a detestable Indifferency or Neutrality
in the Cause.

To pass from the consideration of the Covenant it self, let us see what
interpretation, in this point, is given upon it, by the Solemn Acts of their
General Assemblies.

That Assembly Convened at Glasgow, in the year 1638. Sess. 24. Decr. 6.
asperseth the Common Prayer of that Kingdom with Popish Errors and Ceremonies,
gross Superstition and Idolatry; scandalizeth their Book of Canons, for
establishing a tyrannical Power in the Bishops; and condemns their Book of
Consecration, for settling Bishops, and Preaching Deacons in the Church,
contrary (as they falsely affirm) to the Word of God. Sess. 17. Decr. 10.
Again, in their Condemnation of the five Articles of Perth, for observing the
Festivals of our Blessed Savior, and his Holy Apostles, for private Baptism,
Communion of the Sick, kneeling at the Scrament, and Confirmation; they inflict
the Censures of the Church not only on those that Observe them; but likewise on
all those that shall dispute for any of these Things.

Sess. 8.19. August.
And a fortnight before the Covenant was authorized in Scotland, in the year
1639. these three Books, and five Articles (but now mentioned) are rejected by
the General Assembly then Convened at Edinburgh, as the Causes of all the Evils
of their Church.

Yea, and when the Earl of Traquair, his Majesty's Commissioner, read and gave
in his Royal Masters Declaration, that his Consent to this their Act, inferred
no obligation to abolish the Episcopacy and the Liturgy in England and Ireland;
and when he required to have this Declaration recorded among the Acts of their
Church, the Moderator (in the Name of his Brethren) refused to grant Warrant
for recording it, Sess. 23. Aug. 30. 1639.
as not agreeable with a good Conscience.

Neither is it strange that the New-sworn Covenanters should thus behave
themselves to that King's Commissioner, whose Declaration (read unto them in
that very Session) concerning his consent to Presbytery in Scotland, expressed
his Royal inclination for Bishops and Liturgies, when the abolishing of both
these in all the three Kingdoms, was so chiefly intended by their Oath, that on
such an Abolishment they Prophesied to themselves that Scotland and England
should become one stick in the Hand of the Lord, Assem. Answer to the Assem. at
Westminster. Aug. 29. 1643.
that it might come to pass that the Lord's Jerusalem in this Island should be
a City of trembling, and a burdensome Stone to all their Enemies round about.

King Charles the I. in his incomparable Book, Chapter 17.
confesses, That so far reason of State did induce him, to approve the
Government of the Church by Bishops, above any other, as he found it impossible
for a Prince to preserve the State in quiet, unless he has such an influence
upon Churchmen, and they such a dependence on him, as may best restrain the
Seditious Exorbitances of Ministers Tongues; who, with the Keys of Heaven, have
so far the Keys of the Peoples Hearts, as they prevail much by their Oratory to
let in or shut out both Peace and Loyalty. This made him repent that he had
consented to the taking away of Episcopacy in Scotland; and for this reason
(among others) he would not condescend to take it away in England and Ireland;
whereupon the Scottish Presbyterians in their Zeal to promote this end of their
League, In the Name of the Lord Jesus, Feb. 13. 1645.
and in the Name of their whole National Church, which they represented, they
made bold to warn his Majesty freely, that the Guilt which cleav'd fast to his
Majesty and his Throne, was such as, if not repented of, could not but involve
himself and his Posterity under the Wrath of the everliving God, for his then
resisting and opposing their Cause, which (in their Opinion) so much concerned
the Glory of God. And if his Majesty should refuse to hearken to their Counsel,
they took God and Men to Witness, that they were blameless of the sad
Consequences. In the mean time, they beseeched his Majesty to take notice that
they were not staggering, or fainting, through the diffidence of the success of
their Cause, and Covenant of the three Kingdoms.

In this hope of success of their Cause, to get Presbytery settled in England
and Ireland according to the Covenant of the three Kingdoms; when the Duke of
Hamilton engaged the Loyal Party in Scotland, for the preservation of that
King, Charles I. they remonstrate against the Duke's Engagement, upon this very
account, (among others of the same Nature, Ult. July 1648.
) That in the Declaration for it, no mention was made concerning his then
Majesty's giving Security by his Solemn Oath, under his Name and Seal, that he
should for Himself, and his Successors, give his Royal Assent for enjoining
Presbyterian Government in both Kingdoms, and that he should never endeavor
any change thereof.

This Remonstrance against Duke Hamilton's Engagement, gave them the Name of
Remonstrators, when but a few among them were called Public Resolutioners,
because of their complying with the public Resolves of the Loyal Party: But
lest it should not be a sufficient fulfillment of the last Article of their
Covenant against Neutrality in this Cause, that they make such a Declaration to
their Brethren at home; Aug. 12. 1641.
they therefore send another (the very next day) to their Brethren here in
England, That when they considered what great expense of Blood and Pains these
Kingdoms had been at for bringing their Work of Reformation to such a length;
and considering his then Majesty's adhering to Episcopacy, they trust that
security would be demanded from his Majesty, for Religion, before he should be
brought to one of his Houses in or near about London, with Honor, Freedom, or
Safety. And but ten days after this Declaration to the Covenanters here in
England, they send a Letter to that King himself in which Letter (by them
called their Humble Supplication,) they tell him, Aug. 12. 1648.
That it had been his Wisdom in all that had befallen him, to read the
righteous Hand of the Lord, writing bitter things against him, as for all his
provocations; so especially for his having resisted their Work. And their Work
which that blessed King resisted, was their settling of Presbytery in England;
for which resistance, they (according to their Covenant) got him put to Death.

Yea, after the Murder of this Royal Martyr, they in their Covenanted Zeal for
Presbytery, here in England, declare to his Son, King Charles the II. that his
adhering to Episcopacy, Aug. 6. 1649.
and the Common Prayer, in the three Kingdoms, was nothing else but to oppose
the Kingdom of the Son of God, and to Refuse that Christ should Reign over him
and his Kingdoms, in his pure Ordinances of Church Government and Worship.

Thus it does appear from the Covenant and Acts of Assemblies, that the
Scottish Covenanters are, by their Principles, obliged to introduce the
Presbytery of Forty Eight into the Kingdoms of England and Ireland.

In the second place, the Scottish Covenanters are able at this time to put in
practice those Methods for introducing their Presbytery among us in England,
which were prosecuted in the late times for that end. Acts and Letters,
recorded in the Registers of the Assemblies of those Days, make this evident,
beyond dispute; which for that purpose we shall at large set down.

And first the Scottish Covenanters may write in their Letter of Thanks to this
King for their own Presbytery, their pressing Remonstrance to have it here
among us; as well as their Forefathers writ it to King Charles I. under this
Title:

St. And. 27. July. 1642.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty: The Hearty Thanksgiving, and Humble
Petition of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland.
OUR Hearts were filled with Joy and Gladness at the hearing of your Majesty's
Letter, which was read once and again in the Face of the Assembly; every Line
almost expressing such Affection to the Reformed The King's expression in his
Letter is this, Where any thing is amiss, we will endeavor a Reformation in a
fair and orderly way; and where Reformation is settled, we resolve, with that
Authority where with God has vested us, to maintain and defend it in Peace and
Liberty.
Religion, and such Royal care of us, as we could require from a Christian
Prince; or requiring so necessary Duties from us, as we are bound to perform as
Minsters of the Gospel, and Christian Subjects; for which, as Solemn thanks
were given by the Moderator of the Assembly, so do we all with one voice, in
all Humility, present unto your Majesty the thankfulness of our Hearts, with
our earnest Prayers unto God, for your Majesty's Prosperity, and the Peace of
your Kingdoms, that your Majesty may be indeed a Nursing Father to all the
Kirks of Cbrist in your Majesty's Dominions, and especially to the Kirk of
Scotland; promising our most hearty Endeavors, by Doctrine and Life, to
advance the Gospel of Christ, and to keep the People in our charge in Unity and
Peace, and in all Loyalty and Obedience to your Majesty, and your Laws. Your
Majesty's Commands to your Commissioner to receive from us our just and
reasonable desires, for what may further serve for the good of Religion here;
the Favors which we have received already; and your Majesty's desire and
delight to do Good, expressed in your Letters; are as many encouragements to us
to take the boldness, in all Humility, to present unto your Majesty, one thing,
which for the present is the chiefest of all our desires, as serving most for
the Glory of Christ, and that is, the Unity in Religion and Uniformity in
Church Government; which we have pressed as a Mien of a firm and durable Union
betwixt the two Kingdoms; and without which, former experiences not only put us
out of hope long to enjoy the Purity of the Gospel with Peace; but have also
rendered the Reasons of our Hope and Confidence, as from other Considerations,
so from your Majesty's late Letter to this Assembly, that you will be pleased
to settle this Blessed Reformation. And therefore we your Majesty's most loving
Subjects, in the Name of whole Kirk of Scotland, represented by us, It Is
strange that any Christians, who pray to an earthly Prince upon the Knees of
their Hearts, will not bow the Knees of their Bodies in their Prayers at the
Sacrament.
upon the Knees of our Hearts, do most humbly and earnestly beg, That your
Majesty in the depth of your Royal Wisdom, and from your affection to the True
Religion, and the Peace of your Kingdoms, may be moved to consider, that the
God of Heaven and Earth is calling for this Reformation at your Hands; and that
as you are his Vicegerent, so you may be his prime Instrument in it. If it
shall please the Lord (which is our desire and hope) that this Blessed Unity in
Religion, and Uniformity in Government shall be brought about, your Majesty's
Conscience, in performing so great a duty, shall be a wellspring of Comfort to
your self, your Memory shall be a sweet savor, and your Name renowned to all
following Generations; and if the unhappy Commotions and Divisions shall end in
this Peace and Unity, then it shall appear in the Providence of God, they were
but the noise of many Waters, and the voice of a great Thunder before the voice
of Harpers, harping with their Harps, which shall fill the whole Island with
Melody and Mirth, and the Name of it shall be, The Lord is there.

This is the exact transcript of that Assembly's Supplication to King Charles
the I. only that for Brevity some Personal things relating to his then Majesty,
and the then Parliaments Declaration are omitted because they do not quadrat
with the times.

In the second place, the Scottish Covenanters keep the same correspondence
with their Brethren here, as was kept in the days of their Forefathers: And
accordingly (as was done in the late times) grant to this effect, and in this
manner:

A Commission for those that repair to the Kingdom of England. Edinb. Aug. 19.
1643.

THE General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, finding it necessary to send
some Godly and Learned of this Kirk to the Kingdom of England, to the effect
underwritten. Therefore gives full Power and Commission to Mr. etc. For in this
Consistory the Mis. John that is Minister, has the precedence to his Grace the
Duke, who is a Ruling Elder, or but a Laick joined in Council.
Ministers, and to D. M. E. or L. Elders, or any three of them, whereof two
shall be Ministers, to repair to the Kingdom of England, and there to deliver
the Declaration sent unto the Parliament of England, and the Letter sent unto
the Assembly of Divines now sitting in that Kingdom. And to propose, consult,
treat and conclude with that Assembly, or any Commissioners deputed by them, or
any Committees or Commissioners deputed by the Houses of Parliament, in all
Matters which may further the Union of this Island, in one Form of
Kirk-Government, one And though the Westminster Confess. avows the K's.
Supremacy, which they do not own, yet they have chosen it in complaisance with
England.
Confession of Faith, one Catechism, and one Directory for the Worship of God,
according to the Instructions which they have received from the Assembly, or
shall receive from time to time hereafter, from the The Commission of the Kirk,
is the great Committee of the General Assembly, which does all affairs when the
Assembly does not sit.
Commissioners of the Assembly deputed for that effect: With power also to
them, to convey to His Majesty the humble answer sent from this Assembly to His
Majesty's Letter, by such occasion as they shall think convenient, and
generally Authorizeth them to do all things which may further the so much
desired Union, and nearest Conjunction of the Churches of Scotland and England,
conform to their Instructions beforementioned.

And if our Presbyterians here in England, should entertain the correspondence
so far, as to Petition in any Letter, the concurrence of their Covenanted
Brethren in Scotland, then, in that case, they probably will return such an
answer, as was returned to our English Presbyterians by the Scottish, in the
year 1642. Dated at St. Andrews, July 22.

Right Reverend and Beloved in the Lord Jesus.
YOur Letters which came unto our Hands so seasonably, was not only acceptable
unto us, but has also encouraged us to renew, both to the Kings Majesty, and
the Houses In their Declaration to the Houses of Parliament, Who knows (say
they) but the Lord has now some controversy with England, which will not be
removed, till first, and before all, the Worship of his Name, and the
Government of his House be settled according to his own Will (meaning to have
neither Bishop nor Common Prayer.)
of Parliament, the desires of the Commissioners of this Kingdom for Unity in
Religion. We cannot be ignorant, but the opposition from Satan and Worldly Men,
in Kirk and Policy, will still be vehement as it has been already, but we are
confident, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that the prayers and endeavors of
the Godly of both Kingdoms, will bring the Work to a wished and blessed issue.
This whole National Kirk is so much concerned in that Reformation and Unity in
Religion in both Kingdoms, that without it we cannot hope, for any long time,
to enjoy our Purity and Peace, which has cost us so dear, and is now our
chiefest Comfort, and greatest Treasure; which one cause (beside the Honor of
God, and the Happiness of the People of God in that Kingdom) more desired of us
than our lives) is more than sufficient to move us to contribute all that is in
our power, for bringing it to pass. And since we have with so great liberty
made our desires and hopes known, both to King and Parliament, it is a duty
incumbent both to you and us, who make mention of the Lord, and are Watchmen
upon the Walls of Jerusalem, never more to keep silence, nor to hold our peace
Day and Night, till the Righteousness of Zion go forth as brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. And if it shall please the Lord to
move the heart of King and Parliament, to hearken unto the motion, for which
end we have resolved to keep a Solemn Fast and Humiliation, in all the Kirks of
this Kingdom (the mean by which we have prevailed in times past) we wish that
the Work may be begun with speed, and prosecuted with diligence, by the joint
Labors of some Divines in both Kingdoms, who may prepare the same for the view
and examination of a more frequent Ecclesiastical meeting of the best affected
to this Reformation there, and of the Commissioners of the General Assembly
here, that in the end, it may have the Approbation of the General Assembly
here, and of all the Kirks there, in the best way that may be, we wish and
hope, at last, in a National Assembly. Our Commissioners at Edinburgh shall in
our Name, receive and return Answers, for promoting so great a Work; which we,
with our Heart, and our Soul, recommend to the blessing of God. We continue,

Your Loving Brethren, and Fellow Laborers.


And although the Oath of Supremacy be inconsistent with Scottish Presbytery,
and has been taken by many in this Kingdom of England, of all degrees and
stations, yet the Scottish Covenanters, for curing that distemper of
Malignancy, may Institute a Fast, of the same nature, and for the same causes,
as made their Predecessors do it in the 6th of August 1642.

Act for remembering in Public Prayers the desires of the Assembly to the King
and Parliament, and induction of a Public Fast.
THE General Assembly being desirous to promote the great Work of Unity in
Religion, and Uniformity in Church Government, in all these three Dominions,
for which the Assembly has humbly supplicated the Kings Majesty, and
remonstrated their desires to the Parliament of England, lest they should be
wanting in any mean that may Advance so Glorious and so Good a Work, do Ordain,
That not only the said Declaration to the Parliament, and Supplication to the
Kings Majesty, shall be accompanied with the earnest Petitions and Prayers of
the whole Brethren, in private and public, for the Lords blessing thereunto,
according to the laudable custom of our Predecessors, who in the year of God
1589, Ordains that the Brethren, in their private and public Prayers,
recommend unto God the estate of the afflicted state of England. But having
just cause of fear, that the iniquities of the Land, which so much abound, may
hinder this so great a Work, do also Ordain a Solemn Fast, to be kept on tht
Second For they can Fast on any day of the Week but on Friday; yea, though it
were Good Friday, in Passion Week, they most then make their Christmas, and
Easter Dinner, in one, to avoid Superstition.
Lords Day of September, for the Causes after specified.

Gross Ignorance, and all sorts of Wickedness amongst the greater part;
Security, mere Formality and Vnfruitfulness among the best, and Unthankfulness
in all.

The Sword raging throughout all Christendom, but most Barbarously in Ireland,
and daily more and more threatened in England.

That God may Graciously bless the Supplication of the Assembly to the Kings
Majesty, and their Proposals to the Parliament of England, for Unity in
Religion, and Uniformity in Church Government, and And some of those means were
the Covenanted Army against K. Chapter I.
all other means which may serve for the promoting of so great a Work, and the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ every where.

That God may powerfully overturn all Wicked Plots and Designs of For in the
Divinity of these Saints, every Bishop is a limb of Antichrist.
Antichrist, and his Followers, and all divisive Proposals against the course
of Reformation.

And since the Scottish Test has produced in the Minds of all their Nobility,
Gentry, and the substantial part of their Commons (out of the Five Western
Shires) mighty aversion to such a Fast, yet the Scottish Covenanters, for
having the more unanimous Concurrence among themselves, to introduce Presbytery
among us again, they may renew their Solemn League, as it was for the same
effect renewed by the Assembly at Edinburgh.

Sess. 6. August 8. 1642. Acts for Subscribing the Covenant.
THE General Assembly considering the good and pious Advice of the
Commissioners of the last Assembly, upon the 22d of September, This is their
Covenant with the Lord, which shall never be forgotten. Genesis Assem. Edenb. Aug.
19. 1643.
post meridiem, recommending to Presbyteries to have Copies of the Covenant, to
be subscribed by every Minister at his Admission; does therefore ratify and
approve the same. And further Ordains, That the Covenant be Reprinted, with the
Ordinance prefixed thereto; and that every Synod, Presbytery and Parish, have
one of them bound in Quarto, with some blank Paper, whereupon every Person may
be obliged to Subscribe: And that the Covenants of the Synod and Presbytery, be
kept by their Moderators Respective; of Universities by their Principals, of
Parishes by their Ministers, with all carefulness: And that particular account
of Obedience to this Act be required hereafter, in all Visitations of Parishes,
Universities, and Presbyteries, in all Trials of Presbyteries, and Synods
Book's.

The General Assembly considering that the Act of Assembly at Edinburgh 1639.
August 30. injoyning all Persons to Subscribe the Covenant, under all
Ecclesiastical Censure, has not been obeyed; therefore ordains all Ministers,
to make intimation of the said Act in their Churches, and thereafter to
proceed, with Censures of the Church, against such as shall refuse to Subscribe
the Covenant. And that exact account be taken of every Ministers diligence
herein, by their Presbyteries and Synods, as they will answer to their General
Assembly.

And if after the renewing of the Covenant, the Men of Honor and Conscience
will yet avoid the taking it, then in that case, the Scottish Covenanters may
(as their Forefathers 1644. did before them) get another Act past.

Against secret Disaffecters of the Covenant.
THE General Assembly understanding that diverse Persons, Judge from this Act,
betwixt the Popish, and the Fanatic Inquisitions.
disaffected to the Solemn League and Covenant, of the three Kingdoms, do
escape their Just Censure, either by their private and unconstant abode, in any
one Congregation, or by secret conveyance of their Malignant Speeches and
Practices, therefore Ordains all Ministers to take special notice, when any
such Person shall come within their Parishes, and so soon as they shall know
the same, that without delay they cause warn them to appear before the
Presbyteries, within which their Parishes lies, or before the Commissioners of
this Assembly, appointed for public affairs, as they shall find most
convenient; which warning, the Assembly declares shall be a sufficient Citation
unto them. And in like manner, that all Ministers and Lay Elders, inform the
said Judicatories Respective against every such disaffected Person, although
without their own Parish, so soon as they shall hear of them. And the Assembly
Ordains the said Commissioners, not only to proceed to Trial and Censure of
such disaffected Persons, but also to take a special account of the diligence
of Ministers, Ruling-elders, and Presbyteries, herein Respective.

After the Covenant is thus renewed, and so rigorously enjoined, matters at
length are ripe for the Uniformity betwixt both Kingdoms in Church Government
and Worship; and therefore, according to the Example given to them 1645, the
Scottish Covenanters may give out their

Solemn and Seasonable Warning to the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Buroughs,
Ministers and Commons of Scotland; as also to their Armies without, and within
the Kingdom.
This Warning was dated 12 Feb. Post meridiem, Sess. 18. and because it takes
up two Sheets and an half, in the Book of the Acts of their General Assemblies,
and is therefore too long to be here inserted verbatim, therefore (in their own
Words) you may take its substance.

AS for our part, our Forces sent unto that Kingdom (meaning England) in
pursuance of the Covenant, have been so In defeating two Armies of K. Chapter the
First, one commanded by the M. of Newcastle, the other by P. Rupert.
mercifully and manifestly assisted and blessed from Heaven, that we have what
to answer the Enemy that reproacheth us concerning that business, and that
which may make Iniquity her self to stop her mouth. But which is more unto us
than all Victories, or whatever Temporal Blessing, the Reformation of the
Religion in Here is plain Language, and home to the purpose.
England, and Uniformity therein betwixt both Kingdoms (a principal end of the
Covenant) is so far advanced, that the English Service Book, with the
Especially Christmas, which they condemned as Superstitious, by their Act of
the very next day after this warning was given, 13 Feb. 1645.
Holy Days, and many other Ceremonies contained in it; together with the
Prelacy, the Fountain of all these, are abolished and taken away. In this we
rejoice, and will rejoice, that the Lord Jesus Christ is no loser, but a
Conqueror; that his Ordinances take place, that his Cause prevails, and the
Work of his Purging and Building the Temple goes forward, and not backward.
But besides the defection of many of this Nation, under our Prelates, from our
first National Covenant (a sin not forgotten by God, if not repented of by Men
as well as forsaken) our later Vows and Covenants have been also foully
violated, by not contributing our uttermost assistance to this Cause, with our
Estates and Lives, and by not endeavoring with all faithfulness, the
discovery, trial, and deserved punishment of all Malignants. The duties of
Humiliation, Repentance, Faith, Amendment, though the principal, yet are not
all which are required at the hands of this Nation. But let all sorts of
people, both high and low, in this Kingdom, call to mind the Solemn Covenants,
and pay their Vows unto the most high; and namely, that Article of our By the
first Covenant they mean that called the National Covenant, and which was
framed in K. James VI. Reign. And by the second Covenant, they mean their
solemn League, which was not contrived for that one Nation, as the first was,
but for all the three United Kingdoms.
first Covenant, which obliges us not to impede nor hinder any such
Resolution, as by common consent shall be found to conduce for the ends of the
Covenant. In our last Covenant, there is another Article which we wish may be
well remembered at this time, namely, That we shall assist and defend all that
enter unto this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and persuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this
Cause; according to which Article, Men's reality and integrity in the Covenant
will be manifest and demonstrable, as well by their Omissions, as by their
Commissions. Whoever he be that will not adventure his Person, or put out those
who are under his power, or pay Contributions for the maintenance of the
Forces, must be taken for a Malignant and Covenant-breaker, and so involved
both in the displeasure of God, and Censures of the Kirk.

After this Solemn warning is given by the Covenanters of Scotland, that it may
have the better effect toward the overthrow of our Episcopacy, and the
abolishing of our Common Prayer in England, they may, after the example of the
Men of Forty Eight, get an

Act for Censuring Ministers for their Silence, and not speaking against the
Corruptions of the Time.
THeir Act of this Title was made in the General Assembly, of the year 1648, at
Edinburgh, 3 Aug. ante merediem, Sess. 26. And it particularly ordains, That
the main currrent of Applications in Sermons may run alone, against the Evils
that prevail at home; and namely, against the defection from the League and
Covenant; against the unlawful engagement in War, And by their Act July 28.
1648. all Decrees even of Parliament are unjust, if established without their
consent, when they concern the common Cant of the Covenant.
and unjust Decrees Established by Law, and against the Plots and Practices of
Malignants. And in the conclusion of this Act, they Ordain, That in case any
Minister for his freedom of Preaching, shall be in the face of the
Congregation, or elsewhere, upbraided, railed at, mocked or threatened, the
Presbytery of the Bounds, shall immediately pursue the Offender; and whoever he
be, charge him to satisfy the Discipline of the Church by public Repentance,
which if they do not, or refuse to do, that then the Presbytery proceed to
Excommunication against him.

And when the Scottish Covenanters have proceeded thus, out of Zeal for
Uniformity of Presbytery in both Kingdoms, in imitation of what was done by
their Predecessors, they can show their Zeal in

A Brotherly Exhortation from the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
to their Brethren in England.
THis Exhortation of their Predecessors was dated August 1649, Sess. ult. And
passing over the Preface thereof, which considers the Troubles which then
oppressed these Kingdoms, as Gods Judgments for the breach of their Covenant, for
Duke Hamilton's Engagement for his Royal Masters Service, and for the Which in
their Declaration 20 Aug. 1647. they call A Liberty of Error, Scandal, Schism,
Heresy, dishonouring God, opposing the Truth, hindering Reformation, and
seducing others.
Liberty of Conscience to Protestant Dissenters: And passing over, that in all
these Troubles, the thing which grieved them most (to speak in their own Words)
was, That there was Interruption in the building of the Lords House in England:
And passing over their Reproof to the Covenant-breakers, and their high
Commendation of those who kept it, the Exhortation to them here in England is
in the last Paragraph verbatim. Thus,

As we shall ever (God willing) be mindful of our Duty to the faithful that
adhere to the Covenant in England, having them always in our Hearts before the
Lord, so we desire to be refreshed with their Sincerity and Boldness in the
Cause of God, according to their places. This is the time of their Trial, and
the hour of Temptation among them; blessed shall they be who shall be found
following the Lamb, and shall not be ashamed of his Testimony. We know in such
dark Hours, many are drawn away with the multitude, when the Lord will again
Purge and make White; and we doubt not but many such are in England, whom the
bold and clear Preaching of Christ may reclaim; much therefore lies upon the
Watchmen at this time, that their Trumpet may give a certain and distinct
sound, warning and exhorting every one, as those that must give account, and
blessed shall those Servants be, who shall be found faithful in their Lords
House, distributing to his Household what is meet for this Season, and can say
they are free from the Blood of all Men, having shown them the whole Counsel of
God, being in nothing terrified of the threats of their Adversaries; and
blessed and happy shall that People be, that walk in the Light, holden forth by
them, and stay upon the Lord in this dark time, harkening to the voice of his
Servants, and walking in the light of his Word, and not in the sparks of their
own, which will end in sorrow. How unexcusable will England be, having so
foully Revolted against so many fair Testimonies, which the Lord Christ has
entered as Protestations to preserve his Right, in these ends of the Earth, long
since given unto him for his possession, and of late confirmed by Solemn
Covenant. Christ's Right to these Kingdoms, is surer than that he should be
pleaded out of it by pretended Liberty of Conscience, and his begun possession
is more precious to him, than to be satisfied with a dishonorable Toleration.
All that yet we have seen, does not weaken our confidence of the Lords
Glorifying the House of his Glory in these Lands, and of his Sons taking unto
him his great power, and reigning in the beauty and power of his Ordinances in
this Island. His Name is wonderful and so also his Works, we ought not
therefore to square them according to our line, but leave them to him who has
the Government laid upon his Shoulder, all whose ways are Judgment, and whose
ruling these Kingdoms had never yet reason to decline. It is good for us to be
steadfast in our Duty, and therein quietly to wait and hope for the Salvation of
God. The word of promise is sure, and has an appointed time, that he that will
come shall come, and will not tarry. There is none has cause to distrust the
Lords Word to his People. It has often to our Experience been tried in the
Fire, and has ever come forth with a more Glorious luster. Let not therefore
these that suffer in England cast away their confidence, they are not the first
who have needed patience after that they had done the Lords Will. But let them
strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, and say to the fearful
in heart, Be strong, fear not, behold your God will come with Vengeance, even
God with a recompense, he will come and save you. Now the Just shall live by
Faith, whereas those that draws back, or becomes lukewarm in the Lords
work, his soul shall abhor them, and he shall spew them out of his mouth. But
we persuade our selves of better things of these our brethren in England; and
prays that the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, may make them perfect in every good work to do his will, working in
them that which is well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever. Amen.

These are the Methods taken by the Fathers, which the Children of the Covenant
may use at this time for introducing (a second time) their Presbytery among us.
They may Petition the King that now is, for Uniformity in Church Government in
all the three Kingdoms. They may send up to our Dissenters in England, some
Commissioned to treat for that effect. They may encourage our Dissenters, with
their Letters, promising assistance in that common concern. They may appoint a
Public Fast to amuse the people of Scotland, with the apprehensions of Piety
in the Work. After that, they may have the Covenant renewed, and disaffecters
of that Oath punishable. Then they may give out their warning to all sorts of
people among them, against Neutrality, in the prosecution of this part of the
Covenant. Then Ministers for silence at this Neutrality may be inflicted with
Censure. And after all, their Brethren in England may be exhorted to Zeal, and
against Toleration. And therefore nothing is wanted to represent the danger of
our Church of England, from the Scottish Covenanters; but to demonstrate in the
conclusion, That as they are obliged by their Principles and Oaths to ruin
her, and as they are able to follow (for that effect) the Methods which their
Predecessors took, so they are willing to do it.

In the third place, That the Scottish Covenanters are willing to ruin this
Church of England (by the same methods) is evident from their practices in
these three last years. For they who from a Zeal for the Covenant, so early
petitioned the King for Presbytery in Scotland, will for the preservation
thereof address to him again, that it may be established in England and
Ireland: They who after Sermons in their public meetings use to send up
prayers to God, that the work which they have begun in Covenanted Scotland may
be perfected in the other two Kingdoms; will not sail to send up Commissioners
hither for that effect. They who last year procured from the Estates of that
Kingdom assembled in Parliament, thanks to the Rabble whom they themselves had
hunted out, against many faithful Ministers; will not fail this year to promise
their assistance to the Dissenters here. They who have already kept a fast in
Scotland for their falling from their first Love (meaning their Love of
Presbytery) will certainly institute another at this time, that the King and
this Kingdom may fall in Love with it too. They who have refused to baptize
children when their Parents refused to abjure the Scottish Test (because that
abjures the Covenant) cannot but renew the solemn League, and persecute those
who disaffect it. And they whose Doctrine has been these two last years that
the Scottish Nation has not (under Bishops) heard the Gospel these 28 years;
will not fail to exhort against all Neutrality of Covenanters, and to censure
thus their Ministers who do not Preach against such Defection. And after all,
they who have already excited the Western Zealots of this Kingdom to affront
the first Peeress of their Nation, for inviting her late Episcopal Pastor to
Preach in her Graces Palace, (when some of their own number had declined to do
it) are certainly averse from all Toleration, even to peaceable Protestant
Dissenters.

FINIS.

