ESSAYS IN DIVINITY; By the late Dr DONE, Dean of S Paul's. BEING Several
DISQUISITIONS, Interwoven with MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS:

Before he entered into Holy Orders.

Now made public by his Son J. D. Dr of the Civil Law.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop
in St Dunstan's Churchyard Fleet Street. 1651.

(...) that in owning these less, yet more lawful issues of this modern
Author, you will prove a greater Mecaenas then those former Writers ever had,
in giving a livelihood to these Ofsprings, that had no provision left them by
their Father.

And to beg this favor, they come (Sir) with the greater confidence, because
being writ when the Author was obliged in Civil business, and had no
engagement in that of the Church, the manner of their birth may seem to have
some analogy with the course you now seem to steer; who being so highly
interessed in the public Affairs of the State, can yet allow so much time to
the exercise of your private Devotions; which, with the help of your active
wisdom, has so settled us, as the tempestuous Northwindes are not like to blast
in the Spring before it come to a full growth, nor the South to over-ripen,
till it arrive at such a perfection as may equal the birth of PALLAS; which
could be produced from nothing but the very brains of JUPITER; who although
she came armed from thence, yet it had not been sufficient to have had a God
for her Father, if she had not had METIS to her Mother. Which shows us, that
the Union is so inseparable between Counsel and Strength, that our Armies
abroad of this Book to your protection, and of my self to your Commands.

Your most humble Servant, JOHN DONE.

To the Reader.
IT is thought fit to let thee know, that these Essays. were printed from an
exact Copy, under the Authors own hand: and, that they were the voluntary
sacrifices of several hours, when he had many debates betwixt God and himself,
whether he were worthy, and competently learned to enter into Holy Orders. They
are now published, both to testify his modest Valuation of himself, and to
show his great abilities; and, they may serve to inform thee in many Holy
Curiosities.

Farewell.
ESSAYS IN DIVINITY.
In the Beginning God created Heaven and Earth. Genesis 1.1.
I Do not therefore sit at the door, and meditate upon the threshold, because I
may not enter further; Apoc. 3.7.
For he which is holy and true, and has the key of David, and opens and no
man shuts, and shuts and no man opens; has said to all the humble in
one person, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it, for
thou have a little strength. Lyra.
And the holy Scriptures, signified in that place, as they have these
properties of a well provided Castle, that they are easily defensible, and
safely defend others. So they have also this, that to strangers they open but a
little wicket, and he that will enter, must stoop and humble himself. To
reverend Divines, who by an ordinary calling are Officers and Commissioners
from God, the great Doors are open. Let me with Lazarus lie at the threshold,
and beg their crumbs. Discite a me, says our blessed Savior, Learn of me, as
Saint Augustine enlarges it well, Mat. 11.
not to do Miracles, nor works exceeding humanity; but, quia mitis sum; learn
to be humble. His humility, to be like us, was a Dejection; but ours, to be
like him, is our chiefest exaltation; and yet none other is required at our
hands. Where this Humility is, Prove. 11.
ibi Sapientia. Therefore it is not such a grovelling, frozen, and stupid
Humility, as should quench the activity of our understanding, or make us
neglect the Search of those Secrets of God, which are accessible. For,
Humility, and Studiousnesse, Tho. 2 a, 2 ae. 161. and 166.
(as it is opposed to curiosity, and transgresses not her bounds) are so near
of kin, that they are both agreed to be limbs and members of one virtue,
Temperance.

These bounds Daniel exceeded not; Dan. 10.11.
and yet he was Vir Desideriorum, and in satisfaction of so high Desires, to
him alone were those visions discovered. And to such desires and endeavors the
Apostle encourages the Corinths, 1 Cor. 12.31.
Aemulamini Charismata meliora, Desire you better gifts, and I will yet show you
a better way. It is then humility to study God, and a strange miraculous one;
for it is an ascending humility, which the Devil, which emulates even Gods
excellency in his goodness, and labors to be as ill, as he is good, has
corrupted in us by a pride, as much against reason; for he has filled us with
a descending pride, to forsake God, for the study and love of things worse then
our selves. This averts us from the Contemplation of God, and his Book. In
whose inwards, and Sanctum Sanctorum, what treasure of saving mysteries do his
Priests see, when we at the threshold see enough to instruct and secure us? for
he has said of his laws, Deuteronomy. 6.9.
Scribes ea in limine; And both the people, and Prince himself, Ezekiel. 46.
were to worship at the threshold.

Before we consider each stone of this threshold, which are 1. The time, In the
beginning: 2. The person, God: 3. The Action, He created: And 4. the Work,
Heaven and Earth;
we will speak of two or three other things, so many words. Of the Whole Book;
Of the Author of those first 5 Books; And of this first book. For earthly
princes look for so many pauses and reverences, in our accesses to their table,
though they be not there.

Of the Bible.
God has two Books of life; that in the Revelation, and else where, Apoc. 3.5.
which is an eternal Register of his Elect; and this Bible. For of this, it is
therefore said, Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, because in them ye hope to have eternal life. And more
plainly, when in the 24. of Ecclesiasticus Wisdom has said in the first
verse, Wisdom shall praise her self, saying, He created me from the beginning,
and I shall never fail, v. 12. I give eternal things to all my Children, and
in me is all grace of life and truth, v. 21. They that eat me shall have the
more hunger, and they that drink me shall thirst the more, v. 24. At last, in
v. 26. All these things are the book of life, and the Covenants of the most
high God, and the law of Moses. And as our orderly love to the understanding
this Book of life, testifies to us that our names are in the other; so is there
another book subordinate to this, which is liber creaturarum. Of the first
book, we may use the words of Esaias, Isa. 29.11.
It is a book that is sealed up, and if it be delivered to one (Scienti
literas) that can read, he shall say, I cannot, for it is sealed. So far
removed from the search of learning, are those eternal Decrees and Rolls of
God, which are never certainly and infallibly produced and exemplified in foro
exteriori, but only insinuated and whispered to our hearts, Ad informandum
conscientiam Judicis, which is the Conscience it self. Of the Second book,
which is the Bible, we may use the next verse; The book shall be given (As
interpreters agree, open) Nescienti literas, to one which cannot read: and he
shall be bid read, and shall say, I cannot read. By which we learn, that as all
mankind is naturally one flock feeding upon one Common, and yet for society and
peace, Propriety, Magistracy, and distinct Functions are reasonably induced;
so, though all our souls have interest in this their common pasture, the book
of life, (for even the ignorant are bid to read;) yet the Church has wifely
hedged us in so far, that all men may know, and cultivate, and manure their
own part, and not adventure upon great reserved mysteries, nor trespass upon
this book, without inward humility, and outward interpretations. For it is not
enough to have objects, and eyes to see, but you must have light too. The first
book is then impossible; The second difficult; But of the third book, the the
book of Creatures, we will say the 18th. verse, The deaf shall hear the word
of this book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity. And so
much is this book available to the other, that Sebund, Ray. Seb. in prolo.
when he had digested this book into a written book, durst pronounce, that it
was an Art, which teaches al things, presupposes no other, is soon learned,
cannot be forgotten, requires no books, needs on witnesses, and in this, is
safer then the Bible it self, that it cannot be falsified by Heretics. And
ventures further after, Tit. 166.
to say, That because his book is made according to the Order of Creatures,
which express fully the will of God, whosoever does according to his book,
fulfils the will of God. Howsoever, he may be too abundant in affirming, that
in libro creaturarum there is enough to teach us all particularities of
Christian Religion, De immanifesto Deo manifestissimo.
(for Trismegistus going far, extends not his proofs to particulars;) yet St
Paul clears it thus far, that there is enough to make us inexcusable, if we
search not further. Romans 2.
And that further step is the knowledge of this Bible, which only, after
Philosophy has evicted and taught us an Unity in the Godhead, shows also a
Trinity. Greg. Hom. 35. in Evang.
As then this life compared to blessed eternity, is but a death, so the books
of Philosophers, which only instruct this life, have but such a proportion to
this book: Which has in it Certainty, for no man assigns to it other beginning
then we do, though all allow not ours: Dignity, for what Author proceeds so
sine test? (and he that requires a witness, believes not the thing, but the
witness;) And a non Notis; (for he which requires reason believes himself,
and his own approbation and allowance of the reason.) And it has Sufficiency;
for it either rejects or judges all Traditions. It exceeds all others in the
object, for it considers the next life; In the way, for it is written by
revelation; yea the first piece of it which ever was written, which is the
Decalogue, by Gods own finger. And as Lyra notes, being perchance too
Allegorical and Typick in this, it has this common with all other books, that
the words signify things; but has this particular, that all the things
signify other things.

There are but two other books, (within our knowledge) by which great Nations
or Troops are governed in matter of Religion; The Alcoran, and Talmud; of
which, the first is esteemed, only where ours is not read. And besides the
common infirmity of all weak, and suspicious, and crasie religions, that it
affords salvation to all good men, in any Religion, yea, Epist. Pii secundi ad
Morisb. Tunam.
to Devils also, with our singular Origin, is so obnoxious, and self-accusing,
that, to confute it, all Christian Churches have ever thought it the readiest
and presentest way to divulge it. And therefore Luther, after it had received
Cribrationem, a sifting by Cusanus, Praefat. ad lect. ad lib. de moribus
Turcarum.
persuades an Edition of the very Text, because he thinks the Roman Church can
no way be shak'd more, then thus to let the world see, how Sister-like those
two Churches are. But that man of infinite undertaking, and industry, and zeal,
and blessings from the Highest, had not seen the Alcoran when he writ this,
though he mention it: Nor Cusanus his book certainly; for else he could not
have said, that the Cardinal had only excerpted and exhibited to the world the
infamous and ridiculous parts of it, and slipped the substantial; for he has
deduced an harmony, and conformity of Christianity out of that book. Melancthon
also counsels this Edition, Praemonit. ad Edit. Alcor.
Vt sciamus quale Poema sit. And Bibliander observes, that it is not only too
late to suppress it now, but that the Church never thought it fit to supresse
it; Apolog. pro Edit. Alcor.
because (says he) there is nothing impious in it, but is formerly
reprehensively registered in the Fathers. As Cusanus has done from the Alcoran,
Galatinus has from the Talmud deduced all Christianity, De arcanis Cathol.
veritatis.
and more. For he has proved all Roman traditions from thence. We grudge them
not those victories: but this flexibility and appliablenesse to a contrary
religion, shows perfectly, how leaden a rule those laws are. Without doubt,
their books would have been received with much more hunger then they are, if
the Emperor Maximilian, by Reuchlyus counsel, had not allowed them free and
open passage. If there were not some compassion belonged to them who are
seduced by them; I should profess, that I never read merrier books then those
two. Ours therefore, begun, not only in the first stone, but in the entire
foundation, by Gods own finger, and pursued by his Spirit, is the only legible
book of life; and is without doubt devolved from those to our times. For God,
who first writ his Law in the Tables of our hearts; and when our corruption had
defaced them, writ it again in Stone-tables; Exodus 31.18.
and when Moses zealous anger had broken them, writ them again in other tables,
Exodus 34.1.
leaves not us worse provided, whom he loves more, both because he ever in his
providence foresaw the Jews defection, and because in a natural fatherly
affection, he is delighted with his Sons purchases. For that interruption which
the course of this book is imagined by great Authors to have had, Irenaeus.
Tertul. Clem. Al. Eusebius. Hiero. etc.
by the perishing in the Captivity, cannot possibly be allowed, if either Gods
promise, or that history be considered; nor, if that were possible, is it the
less the work of God, if Esdras refreshed and recompiled it by the same spirit
which was in the first Author; Nor is it the less ancient, no more then a man
is the less old, for having slept, then walked out a day. Our age therefore
has it; and our Church in our language; for since the Jesuit Sacrobosous, Def.
Conc. Trid. c. 1.
and more late interpreters of the Trent Council, have abandoned. their old
station, and defense of the letter of the Canon, pronouncing the vulgate
Edition to be authentic, (which they heretofore assumed for the controverted
point) and now say, that that Canon does only prefer it before all Latin
Translations; and that not Absoluta, (so to avoid barbarismes) but In ordine ad
fidem and mores; and have given us limits and rules of allowable infirmities in
a Translation, as corruptions not offensive to faith, observing the meaning,
though not the words, If the Hebrew text may bear that reading, and more such:
We might, if we had not better assurances, rely upon their words, that we have
the Scripture, and nearer perfection, then they.

Of Moses.
The Author of these first five books is Moses. In which number, composed of
the first even, and first odd, because Cabalistick learning seems to most
Occupatissima vanitas, I will forbear the observations, both of Picus in his
Hepsaplus, and in the Harmony of Francis George, that transcending Wit, In Genesis
l. 1. c. 8.
whom therefore Pererius charges to have audax nimis, and ad devia and abruta
opinionum praeceps ingenium, though they have many delicacyes of honest and
serviceable curiosity, and harmless recreation and entertainment. For as
Catechisers give us the milk of Religion, and positive Divines solid nutriment,
so when our conscience is sick of scruples, or that the Church is wounded by
schisms, which make solutionem continui, (as Chirurgians speak) though there
be proper use of controverted Divinity for Medicine, yet there be some Cankers,
(as Judaisme.) which cannot be cured without the Cabal; which is (especially
for those diseases,) the Paracelsian Physic of the understanding, Archangelus
Apol. Cabal.
and is not unworthily (if it be only applied where it is so medicinable)
called praeambulum Evangelii. Apoc. 5.9.
[They of the Synagogue of Satan, which call themselves Jews, and are not, but
do lie] as though they were still in the desert, and under the incommodities of
a continual straying and ignorance of their way, (and so they are, and worse;
for then they only murmured against their guide, for not performing Gods
promises, now, they have no promise) are not content with their Pillar of fire,
this Moses, but have condensed to themselves a Pillar of Cloud, Rabbi Moses,
Drus. in Not. ad nomen Tetra.
called the Egyptian, but a Spaniard. [A Mose ad Mosem non surrexit qualis
Moses] they say. This man quarelling with many imperfections, and some
contradictions in our Moses works, and yet concurring with the Jews in their
opinion of his perfectness, if he were understood, accomplished and perfected
their legem Oralem; which they account to be delivered by God to our Moses in
his forty days conversation with him, and after delivered to Esdras, and so
descended to these Ages. His lateness and singularity, makes him not worth thus
many words: We will therefore leave this Moses, and hasten to the dispatch of
the other. Who, because he was principal Secretary to the Holy Ghost, (I
dispute not other dignities, but only priority in time) is very credible,
though he be his own Historiographer. Therefore, though his own books best
show who, and what he was, let us endeavor otherwise to bring those men to
some reverence of his Antiquity, who bring no taste to his Philosophy, nor
faith to his Story. Pererius seems peremtory that no Author is elder. In Ge. c.
1.
I think it moved him, that Henoch's book, mentioned in the Epistle of Jude,
is perished: Epist. Jud.
So is the book of the Battails of the Lord (for any thing we know,) and that
is not spoken of till Number. 21.14. and then as of a future thing. He makes it
reasonable evident, that Linus, Number. 21.14.
Orpheus, and all Greek learning came after, and from him. But if we shall
escape this, that Abraham's book De formationibus is yet alive, by suspecting
and pronouncing it suppositious, (yet Archangelus says, he has it, and has
commented it, Apol. Cabal. Problem.
and Francis George often vouches it;) how shall we deliver our selves from
Zoroasters Oracles? whom Epiphanius places in Nembrots time, Fra. Patricius.
and Eusebius in Abraham's; since his language is Chaldaick, his works
miraculously great, Heurnius de Philoso. Barbaric. l. 2.
(for his Oracles are twenty hundred thousand verses, and his phrase more
express, and clear, and liquid, in the Doctrine of the Trinity, then Moses? For
where says this, as the other, [Toto mundo lucet Trias, cujus Monas est
princeps?] From whence shall we say that Hermes Trismegistus sucked his not
only Divinity, but Christianity? in which no Evangelist, no Father, no Council
is more literal and certain. Of the fall of Angels, Renovation of the world by
fire, eternity of punishments, his Asclepius! is plain. Asclep Dial.
Of Regeneration who says more then [Nemo servari potest ante nogenerationem,
De regenerat. and silentio.
and regenerationis generator est Dei filius, homo unus?] Of imputed Justice,
with what Author would he change this sentence; De fato.
[Justificati sumus in Justitia absente?] Of our corrupt will, and Gods
providence he says, [Anima nostra relicta a Deo, eligit corpoream naturam; at
electio ejus est secundum providentiam Dei.] To say with Goropius, that there
was no such man, because the public pillars and statues in which were engraved
moral Institutions were called Hermae, is improbable, to one who has read
Patricius his answers to him. And if it be true which Buntingus in his
Chronology undisputably assumes, that he was the Patriarch Joseph, as also that
Goropius confounds Zoroaster and Japhet, then Moses was not the first Author.
But Hermes his naming of Italy, Minerva mundi.
and the 12. Constellations in the Zodiaque, are Arguments and impressions of a
later time. To unentangle our selves in this perplexity, is more labor then
profit, or perchance possibility. Therefore, as in violent tempests, when a
ship dares bear no main sail, and to lie still at hull, obeying the uncertain
wind and tide, puts them much out of their way, and altogether out of their
account, it is best to put forth such a small ragg of sail, as may keep the
bark upright, and make her continue near one place, though she proceed not; So
in this question, where we cannot go forward to make Moses the first Author,
for many strong oppositions, and to ly hulling upon the face of the waters, and
think nothing, is a stupid and lazy inconsideration, which (as Saint Austin
says) is the worst of all affections, Romans 1.
our best firmament and arrest will be that reverent, and pious, and reasonable
credulity, that God was Author of the first piece of these books, the
Decalogue: and of such Authors as God preordained to survive all Philosophers,
and all Tyrants, and all Heretics, and be the Canons of faith and manners to
the worlds end, Moses had the primacy. So that the Divine and learned book of
Job, must be content to be disposed to a later rank, (as indeed it has somewhat
a Greek taste) or to accept Moses for Author. For to confess, that it was found
by Moses in Madian, were to derogate from the other prerogative generally
afforded to him. Epist. ad Paul. de lib. Divin.
Here therefore I will temperatly end this inquisition. Hierom tells me true,
[Puerile est, and circulatorum ludo simile, docere quod ignores.] And besides,
Deu. 3 4 6.
when I remember that it was God which hid Moses's body; Jud. 1.5.
And the Devil which labored to reveal it, I use it thus, that there are some
things which the Author of light hides from us, and the prince of darkness
strives to show to us; but with no other light, then his firebrands of
Contention, and curiosity.

Of Genesis.
Picus Earl of Mirandula (happier in no one thing in this life, S^ John More.
then in the the Author which writ it to us) being a man of an incontinent
with, and subject to the concupiscence of inaccessible knowledges and
transcendencies, In fine Heptaph.
pursuing the rules of Cabal, out of the word Bresit, which is the title of
this first Book, by vexing, and transposing, and anagrammatizing the letters,
has expressed and wrung out this Sum of Christian Religion [The Father, in and
through the Son, which is the beginning, end, and rest, created in a perfect
league, the head, fire and foundation (which he calls Heaven, Air and Earth) of
the great man] (which he calls the World.) And he has not only delivered
Moses form any dissonance with other sound Philosophers, but has observed all
other Philosophy in Moses's words; and more, has found all Moses's learning in
every verse of Moses. But since our merciful God has afforded us the whole and
entire book, why should we tear it into rags, or rent the seamless garment?
Since the intention of God, through Moses, in this, was, that it might be to
the Jews a Book of the generation of Adam; Genesis 5.1.
since in it is purposely propounded, That all this Universe, Plants, the
chiefest contemplation of Natural Philosophy and Physic, and no small part
of the Wisdom of Solomon, 1 Reg. 4.33.
[who spoke of plants, from Cedar to Hyssop:] And Beasts, who have often the
honor to be our reproach, accited for examples of virtue and wisdom in the
Scriptures, and some of them seposed for the particular passive service of God
in Sacrifices (which he gave to no man but his Son, and with held from Isaac:)
And Man, who (like his own eye) sees all but himself, in his opinion, but so
dimly, that there are marked an hundred differences in men's Writings concerning
an Antw And Spirits, of whom we understand no more, then a horse of us: and the
receptacles and theaters of all these, Earth, Sea, Air, Heaven, and all things
were once nothing: That Man choosing his own destruction, did what he could to
annihilate himself again, and yet received a promise of a Redeemer: That Gods
mercy may not be distrusted, nor his Justice tempted, since the general:
Deluge, and Josoph's preservation are here related, filling an History of more
then 2300 years, with such examples as might mollify, the Jews in their
wandering. I say, since this was directly and only purposed by Moses; to put
him in a wine press, and squeeze out Philosophy and particular Christianity,
is a degree of that injustice, which all laws forbid, to torture a man, sine
indiciis aut semiprobationibus. Of the time when Moses writ this book, there
are two opinions which have good guides, and good followers. I, because to me
it seems reasonable and clear, that no Divine work preceded the Decalogue, have
before engaged my self to accompany Chemnitius, who is persuaded by Theodoret,
Exam. Conc. Trid.
Bid, and Reason (because here is intimation of a Sabbath, and distinction of
clean and unclean in beasts,) that this book was written after the law; And
leave Pererius, whom Eusebius has won to think this book was written in
Madian, induced only by Moses forty years leisure there; and a likelihood, that
this Story might well conduce to his end, of reclining the Jews from Egypt.

And thus much necessarily, or conveniently, or pardonably, may have been said,
before my Entrance, with out disproportioning the whole work. For even in
Solomon's magnificent Temple, the Porch to the Temple had the proportion of
twenty Cubits to sixty. Our next step is upon the threshold it self, In the
beginning, etc.

PART. 1.
In the Beginning.
IN the Beginning whereof, O only Eternal God, of whose being, beginning, or
lasting, this beginning is no period, nor measure; which art no Circle, for
thou have no ends to close up; which art not within this All, for it cannot
comprehend thee; nor without it, for thou fillest it; nor art it thy self, for
thou made it; which having decreed from all eternity, to do thy great work of
Mercy, our Redemption in the fullness of time, did now create time it self
to conduce to it; and made thy glory and thy mercy equal thus, that though
thy glorious work of Creation were first, thy merciful work of Redemption was
greatest. Let me in thy beloved Servant Augustine's own words, Conf. li. c. 3.
when with an humble boldness he begged the understanding of this passage,
say, Moses writ this, but is gone from me to thee; if he were here, I would hold
him, and beseech him for thy sake, to tell me what he meant. If he spoke
Hebrew, he would frustrate my hope; but if Latin, I should comprehend him. But
from whence should I know that he said true? Or when I knew it, came that
knowledge from him? No, for within me, within me there is a truth, not Hebrew,
nor Greek, nor Latin, nor barbarous; which without organs, without noise of
Syllables, tells me true, and would enable me to say confidently to Moses, Thou
say true. Thus did he whom thou had filled with faith, desire reason and
understanding; as men blessed with great fortunes desire numbers of servants, and
other Complements of honor. But another instrument and engine of thine, Aq. 2.
q. 46. A. 2.
whom thou had so enabled, that nothing was too mineral nor centrick for the
search and reach of his wit, has remembered me; That it is an Article of our
Belief, that the world began. And therefore for this point, we are not under
the insinuations and mollifyings of persuasion, and convenience; nor under the
reach and violence of Argument, or Demonstration, or Necessity; but under the
Spiritual, and peaceable Tyranny, and easy yoke of sudden and present Faith.
Nor does he say this, that we should discharge our selves upon his word, and
slumber in a lazy faith; for no man was ever more endeavourous then he in such
inquisitions; nor he in any, more then in this point. But after he had given
answers to all the Arguments of reasonable and natural men, for a beginning of
this world; to advance Faith duly above Reason, he assigns this with other
mysteries only to her comprehension. For Reason is our Sword, Faith our Target.
With that we prevail against others, with this we defend our selves: And old,
well disciplined Armies punished more severely the loss of this, then that.

This word, In the beginning, is the beginning of this book, which we find
first placed of all the holy books; And also of the Gospel by Saint John, which
we know to be last written of all. But that last beginning was the first; for
the Word was with God, before God created Heaven and. Earth. And Moses his In
the Beginning, has ever been used powerfully, and prosperously, against
Philosophers and Heretics relapsed into an opinion of the worlds eternity. But
Saint John's In the Beginning, has ever had strength against the Author of all
error, the Devil himself, if we may believe the relations of exorcists, who in
their dispossessings, mention strange obediences of the Devil at the naked
enunciation of that word. It is not then all one Beginning; for here God Did,
there he Was. That confesses a limitation of time, this excludes it. Caninius
Conc. To. 1. De Conc. Nic.
The great Philosopher, (whom I call so, rather for his Conversion, then his
Arguments) who was Arius his Advocate at the first Nicene Council, assigned a
beginning between these two beginnings; saying, that after John's eternal
Beginning, and before Moses's timely beginning, Christ had his beginning, being
then created by God for an instrument in his general Creation. But God forbid
that any thing should need to be said against this, now. We therefore
confessing two Beginnings, say, that this first was simul cum tempore, and that
it is truly said of it, Erat quando non erat, and that it instantly vanished;
and that the last Beginning lasts yet, and ever shall: And that our Merciful
God, as he made no Creature so frail and corruptible as the first Beginning,
which being but the first point of time, dyed as soon as it was made, flowing
into the next point; so though he made no creature like the last Beginning,
(for if it had been as it, eternal, it had been no creature;) yet it pleased
him to come so near it, that our soul, though it began with that first
Beginning, shall continue and ever last with the last. We may not dissemble,
nor dare reprove, nor would avoid another ordinary interpretation of this
Beginning, because it has great and agreeing authority, and a consonance with
our faith: which is, that by the beginning here, is meant the Son our Savior;
for that is elsewhere said of him, Rev. 1.8.
I am first and last, which is, and was, and is to come. And hereby they would
establish his coeternity, and consubstantialness, because he can be no
creature, who is present at the first Creation. But because although to us,
whom the Spirit has made faithfully credulous, and filled us with an assurance
of this truth, every conducing, and convenient application governs and commands
our assent, because it does but remember us, not teach us. But to the Jews, who
roundly deny this Exposition, and to the Arians, who accept it, and yet call
Christ a creature, as fore-created for an Assistant in this second Creation;
these detortions have small force, but as Sunbeams striking obliquely, or
arrows diverted with a twig by the way, they lessen their strength, being
turned upon another mark then they were destined to. And therefore by the
Example of our late learned Reformers, I forbear this interpretation; the
rather, because we are utterly disprovided of any history of the Worlds
Creation, except we defend and maintain this Book of Moses to be Historical,
and therefore literally to be interpreted. Which I urge not with that
peremptorinesse, as Bellarmine does, De Purg. l. 1. c. 15.
who answers all the Arguments of Moses's silence in many points maintained by
that Church, with this only, Est liber Historiarum, non Dogmatum. For then it
were unproperly argued by our Savior, If ye believed Moses, ye would believe
me, John 5.
for he writ of me. There is then in Moses, both History and Precept, but
evidently distinguishable without violence. That then this Beginning was, is
matter of faith, and so, infallible. When it was, is matter of reason, and
therefore various and perplexed. In the Epistle of Alexander the Great to his
Mother, remembered by Cyprian and Augustine, there is mention of 8000. years. The
Caldeans have delivered observations of 470000 years. And the Egyptians of
100000. The Chinese vex us at this day, with irreconciliable accounts. And to
be sure, that none shall prevent them, some have called themselves Aborigenes.
The poor remedy of Lunary and other planetary years, the silly and contemptible
escape that some Authors speak of running years, some of years expired and
perfected; or that the account of days and months are neglected, cannot ease
us, nor afford us line enough to fathom this bottom. The last refuge uses to
be, that profane history cannot clear, but Scripture can. Which is the best,
Bib. Sanct. l. 5.
because it is half true; But that the later part is true, or that God
purposed to reveal it in his Book, it seems doubtful, because Sextus Senensis
reckons almost thirty several supputations of the years between the Creation,
and our blessed Saviors birth, all of accepted Authors, grounded upon the
Scriptures; and Pererius confesses, he might have increased the number by 20.
And they who in a devout melancholy delight themselves with this Meditation,
that they can assign the beginning of all Arts which we use for Necessity or
Ornament; and conclude, that men which cannot live without such, were not long
before such inventions, forget both that many Nations want those commodities
yet, and that there are as great things perished and forgoten, as are now
remaining. Truly, the Creation and the last Judgment, are the Diluculum and
Crepusculum, the Morning and the Evening twi-lights of the long day of this
world. Which times, though they be not utterly dark, yet they are but of
uncertain, doubtful, and conjecturall light. Yet not equally; for the break of
the day, because it has a succession of more and more light, is clearer then
the shutting in, which is overtaken with more and more darkness; so is the
birth of the world more discernable then the death, because upon this God has
cast more clouds: yet since the world in her first infancy did not speak to us
at all (by any Authors;) and when she began to speak by Moses, she spoke not
plain, but diversely to diverse understandings; we must return again to our
strong hold, faith, and end with this, That this Beginning was, and before it,
Nothing. It is elder then darkness, which is elder then light; And was before
Confusion, which is elder then Order, by how much the universal Chaos preceded
forms and distinctions. A beginning so near Eternity, that there was no Then,
nor a minite of Time between them. Of which, Eternity could never say, To
morrow, nor speak as of a future thing, because this Beginning was the first
point of time, before which, whatsoever God did, he did it uncessantly and
unintermittingly; which was but the generation of the Son, and procession of
the Spirit, and enjoying one another; Things, which if ever they had ended, had
begun; And those be terms incompatible with Eternity. And therefore Saint
Augustine says religiously and examplarily, Conf. l. 11. cap. 12.
If one ask me what God did before this beginning, I will not answer, as
another did merrily, He made Hell for such busy inquirers: But I will sooner
say, I know not, when I know not, then answer that, by which he shall be
deluded which asked too high a Mystery, and he be praised, which answered a lie.

PART. 2.
NOw we have ended our Consideration of this beginning, we will begin with
that, which was before it, and was Author of it, God himself; and bend our
thoughts first upon himself, then upon his Name, and then upon the particular
Name here used, Elohim.

Of God.
Men which seek God by reason, and natural strength, (though we do not deny
common notions and general impressions of a sovereign power) are like Mariners
which voyaged before the invention of the Compass, which were but Costers, and
unwillingly left the sight of the land. Such are they which would arrive at God
by this world, and contemplate him only in his Creatures, and seeming
Demonstration. Certainly, every Creature shows God, as a glass, but
glimeringly and transitiorily, by the frailty both of the receiver, and
beholder: Our selves have his Image, as Medals, permanently and preciously
delivered. But by these meditations we get no further, then to know what he
does, not what he is. But as by the use of the Compass, men safely dispatch
Ulysses dangerous ten years travel in so many days, and have found out a new
world richer then the old; so does Faith, as soon as our hearts are touched
with it, direct and inform it in that great search of the discovery of Gods
Essence, and the new Jerusalem, which Reason durst not attempt. And though the
faithfullest heart is not ever directly, and constantly upon God, but that it
sometimes descends also to Reason; yet it is thereby so departed from him, but
that it still looks toward him, though not fully to him: as the Compass is
ever Northward, though it decline, and have often variations toward East, and
West. By this faith, as by reason, I know, that God is all that which all men
can say of all Good; I believe he is somewhat which no man can say nor know.
For, si scirem quid Deus esset, Deus essem. For all acquired knowledge is by
degrees, and successive; but God is impartible, and only faith which can
receive it all at once, can comprehend him. Can thou then, O my soul, when
faith has extended and enlarged thee, not as wind does a bladder (which is the
nature of humane learning) but as God has displaid the Curtain of the
firmament, and more spacionsly; for thou comprehendest that, and him which
comprehends it: Can thou be satisfied with such a late knowledge of God, as is
gathered from effects; when even reason, which feeds upon the crumbs and
fragments of appearances and verisimilitudes, requires causes? Can thou rely
and lean upon so infirm a knowledge, as is delivered by negations? Dyon. 2. ca.
Coel. Hierar.
And because a devout speculative man has said, Negationes de Deo sunt verae,
affirmationes autem sunt inconvenientes, will it serve thy turn, to hear, that
God is that which cannot be named, cannot be comprehended, or which is nothing
else? When every negation implies some privation, which cannot be safely enough
admitted in God; and is, besides, so inconsiderable a kind of proof, that in
civil and judicall practice, no man is bound by it, nor bound to prove it. Can
it give thee any satisfaction, to hear God called by concrete names, Good,
Just, Wise; since these words can never be without confessing better, wiser,
and more just? Or if he be called Best, etc. or in such phrase, the highest
degree respects some lower, and mean one: and are those in God? Or is there any
Creature, any Degree of that Best, by which we should call God? Or art thou got
any nearer, by hearing him called Abstractly, Goodness; since that, and such,
are communicable, and daily applied to Princes? Art thou delighted with
Arguments arising from Order, and Subordination of Creatures, which must at
last end in some one, which ends in none? Or from the preservation of all this
Universe, when men which have not had faith, and have opposed reason to reason,
have escaped from all these, without confessing such a God, as thou know; at
least, without seeing thereby, what he is? Have they furthered, or eased thee
any more, who not able to consider whole and infinite God, have made a
particular God, not only of every power of God, but of every benefit? And so
filled the world (which our God alone does better) with so many, that Varro
could account 30000. and of them 300 Jupiters. Out of this proceeded Dea
febris, and Dea fraus, and Tenebris, and Onions, and Garlike. For the
Egyptians, most abundant in Idolatry, were from thence said to have Gods grow
in their gardens. Apol. l. 5.
And Tertullian, noting that Gods became men's Creatures, said, Homo incipit
esse propitius Deo, because Gods were beholden to men for their being. And thus
did a great Greek General, when he pressed the Ilanders for money, tell them,
that he presented two Gods, Vim and Suasionem; and conformably to this they
answered, that they opposed two Gods, Paupertatem and Impossibilitatem. And
this multiplicity of Gods may teach thee, that the resultance of all these
powers is one God, and that no place nor action is hid from him: but it
teaches not, who, nor what he is. And too particular and restrained are all
those descents of God in his word, when he speaks of a body, and of passions,
like ours. And such also is their reverend silence, who have expressed God in
Hieroglyphics, ever determining in some one power of God, without larger
extent. And lastly, can thy great capacity be fulfilled with that knowledge,
which the Roman Church affords of God? which, as though the state of a Monarchy
were too terrible, and refulgent for our sight, has changed the Kingdom of
heaven into an Olygarchy; or at least, given God leisure, and deputed Masters
of his Requests, and Counselors in his great Starr-chamber? Thou shall not
then, O my faithful soul, despise any of these erroneous pictures, thou shall
not destroy, nor demolish their buildings; but thou shall not make them thy
foundation. For thou beleevest more then they pretend to teach, and art assured
of more then thou can utter. For if thou could express all which thou
see of God, there would be something presently beyond that. Not that God
grows, but faith does. For, God himself is so unutterable, that he has a name
which we cannot pronounce.

Of the Name of God.
Names are either to avoid confusion, and distinguish particulars, and so every
day begetting new inventions, and the names often overliving the things,
curious and entangled Wits have vexed themselves to know, whether in the world
there were more things or names;) But such a name, God who is one needs not; Or
else, names are to instruct us, and express natures and essences. This Adam was
able to do. And an enormous pretending Wit of our nation and age undertook to
frame such a language, herein exceeding Adam, that whereas he named every thing
by the most eminent and virtuall property, our man gave names, by the first
naked enuntiation whereof, any understanding should comprehend the essence of
the thing, better then by a definition. And such a name, we who know not Gods
essence cannot give him. So that it is truly said, Aq. 1. q. 13. Ar. 1.
there is no name given by man to God, Ejus essentiam adaequate representans.
And Hermes says humbly and reverently, Dial. As. clep.
Non spero, I cannot hope, that the maker of all Majesty, can be called by any
one name, though compounded of many. I have therefore sometimes suspected, that
there was some degree of pride, and overboldness, in the first naming of God;
the rather, because I mark, that the first which ever pronounced the name,
Genesis 3.1.
God, was the Devil; and presently after the woman; Genesis 4.1.
who in the next chapter proceeded further, and first durst pronounce that
sacred any mystic name of four letters. Genesis 32.29.
For when an Angel did but Ministerially represent God wrestling with Jacob,
he reproves Jacob, for asking his name; Cur quaeris nomen meum? And so also to
Manoah, Why ask thou my Name, quod est mirabile? Jud. 13.18.
And God, to dignify that Angel which he promises to lead his people, says,
Fear him, provoke him not, Exodus 23.20.
etc. For my Name is in him; but he tells them not what it is. But since,
necessity has enforced, and Gods will has revealed some names. For in truth,
we could not say this, God cannot be named, except God could be named. To
handle the Mysteries of these names, is not for the straitness of these leaves,
nor of my stock. But yet I will take from Picus, Proem. in Heptap.
those words which his extreme learning needed not, Ex lege, spicula linquuntur
pauperibus in mess, the richest and learned must leave gleanings behind
them. Omitting therefore Gods attributes, Eternity, Wisdom, and such; and his
Names communicable with Princes, and such; there are two Names proper, and
expressing his Essence: One imposed by us, God; The other taken by God, the
Name of four letters; for the Name, Lam, is derived from the same root. The
Name imposed by us, comes so near the other, that most Nations express it in
four letters; and the Turk almost as Mistically as the Hebrew, in Abgd, almost
in effably: And hence perchance was derived the Pythagorean oath, by the number
of four. And in this also, that though it be given from Gods Works, not from
his Essence, (for that is impossible to us) yet the root signifies all this,
Curare, Ardere, Aq. 1. q. 13. Ar. 8.
and Considerare; and is purposed and intended to signify as much the Essence,
as we can express; and is never afforded absolutely to any but God himself. And
therefore Aquinas, after he had preferred the Name I am, above all, Ar. 11.
both because others were from forms, this from Essence; they signified some
determined and limited property, this whole and entire God; and this best
expressed, that nothing was past, nor future to God; he adds, yet the Name,
God, is more proper then this, and the Name of four letters more then that.

Tetragr. Reuclin. de verbo. Mirifico. l. 1. c. 6. 2 Pet. 1.4.
Of which Name one says, that as there is a secret property by which we are
changed into God, (referring, I think, to that, We are made partakers of the
godly nature) so God has a certain name, to which he has annexed certain
conditions, which being observed, he has bound himself to be present. This is
the Name, which the Jews stubbornly deny ever to have been attributed to the
Messiah in the Scriptures. This is the name, which they say none could utter,
but the priests, and that the knowledge of it perished with the Temple. And this
is the name by which they say our Blessed Savior did all his miracles, having
learned the true use of it, by a Scedule which he found of Solomon's, and that
any other, by that means, might do them.

How this name should be sounded, is now upon the anvile, Jehovah.
and every body is beating and hammering upon it. That it is not Jehova, this
governs me, that the Septuagint never called it so; Nor Christ; nor the
Apostles, where they vouch the old Testament; Nor Origin, nor Hierome, curious
in language. And though negatives have ever their infirmities, and must not be
built on, this may, that our Fathers heard not the first sound of this word
Jehova. For (for any thing appearing,) Galatinus, in their Age, was the first
that offered it. For, that Hierome should name it in the exposition of the
eighth Psalm, De Noie Tetrag.
it is peremptorily averred by Drusius, and admitted by our learned Doctor,
that in the old Editions it was not Jehova. Rainolds de Idol. 2, 2, 18.
But more then any other reason, this does accomplish and perfect the opinion
against that word, that whereas that language has no natural vowels inserted,
but points subjected of the value and sound of our vowels, added by the
Masorits, the Hebrew Critics, after Esdras; and therefore they observe a
necessity of such a natural and infallible concurrence of consonants, that
when such and such consonants meet, such and such vowels must be imagined, and
sounded, by which they have an Art of reading it without points; by those
rules, Genebr. de leg. Orient. siuepunctis.
those vowels cannot serve those Consonants, nor the name Jehova be built of
those four letters, and the vowels of Adonay.

Elohim.

Of the name used in this place, much needs not. But as old age is justly
charged with this sickness, that though it abound, it ever covets, though it
need less then youth did: so has also this decrepit age of the world such a
sickness; for though we have now a clearer understanding of the Scriptures then
former times, (for we inherit the talents and travels of al Expositors, and
have overlived most of the prophecies,) and though the gross thick clouds of
Arianism be dispersed, and so we have few enemies; yet we affect, and strain at
more Arguments for the Trinity, then those times did, which needed them more.
Hereupon has an opinion, that by this name of God, Elohim, because it is
plurally pronounced in this place, and with a singular verb, the Trinity is
insinuated, first of any begun by Peter Lumbard, L. 1. Sent. Did. 2.
been since earnestly pursued by Lyra, Galatin, and very many And because
Calvin, in a brave religious scorn of this extortion, and beggarly wresting of
Scriptures, denies this place, with others usually offered for that point, to
concern it, and his defender Paraeus denies any good Author to approve it,
Hunnius opposes Luther, and some after, Antipar. fo. 9.
but none before, to be of that opinion. But, lest any should think this a
prevarication in me, or a purpose to show the nakedness of the Fathers of our
Church, by opening their disagreeing, though in no fundamental thing, I will
also remember, that great pillars of the Roman Church differ with as much
bitterness, and less reason in this point. For, when Cajetan had said true,
that this place was not so interpretable, but yet upon false grounds, That the
word Elohim had no singular, Eloah. Job. 2. and 36.
which is evidently false, Catharinus in his Animadversions upon Cajetan,
reprehends him bitterly for his truth, and spies not his Error: And though
Tostatus long before said the same, and Lumbard were the first that writ the
contrary, he denies any to have been of Cajetan's opinion. It satisfies me, for
the phrase, that I am taught by collation of many places in the Scriptures,
that it is a mere Idiotism. And for the matter, that our Savior never applied
this place to that purpose: And that I mark, the first place which the Fathers
in the Nicen Council objected against Arius his Philosopher, was, Faciamus
hominem, and this never mentioned. Thus much of him, who has said, I have been
found by them which have not sought me: Isa. 65.
And therefore most assuredly in another place, If thou seek me, thou shall
find me. I have adventured in his Name, upon his Name. Our next consideration
must be his most glorious work which he has yet done in any time, the
Creation.

PART. 3.
MVndum tradidit disputationi eorum, Sirac. 3.11
ut non inveniat homo opus quod operatus est Deus ab initio usque ad finem. So
that God will be glorified both in our searching these Mysteries, because it
testifies our liveliness toward him, and in our not finding them. Lawyers,
more then others, have ever been Tyrants over words, and have made them accept
other significations, then their nature inclined to. Hereby have Casuists drawn
the word Anathema, which is consecrated or separated, and separated or seposed
for Divine use, to signify necessarily accursed, and cut off from the communion
of the Church. Hereby Criminists have commanded Heresy, which is but election,
(and thereupon Paul gloryed to be of the strictest Heresy, a Pharisee; Act.
6.5.
) and the Scepticks were despised, because they were of no Heresy) to
undertake Laert.
a capital and infamous signification. Hereby also the Civilists have
dignified the word Privilege, Acacius de Privil. l. 1. cap. 1.
whose ancientest meaning was, a law to the disadvantage of any private man
(and so Cicero speaks of one banished by privilege, and lays the names, cruel
and capital upon Privilege) and appointed it to express only the favors and
graces of Princes. Schoolmen, which have invented new things, and found out, or
added Suburbs to Hell, will not be exceeded in this boldness upon words. As
therefore in many other, so they have practiced it in this word creare: which
being but of an even nature with facere, or producere, they have laid a
necessity upon it to signify a Making of Nothing; Scot. 2. Sent. Did. 1. q.
5. Pererius.
For so is Creation defined. But in this place neither the Hebrew nor Greek
word afford it; neither is it otherwise then indifferently used in the holy
books. Sometimes of things of a preexistent matter, He created man of Earth,
Sirach. 17.1.
and he created him a helper out of himself. Sometimes of things but then
revealed, They are created now, Isa. 48.7.
and not of old. Sometimes of that, whereof God is neither Creator, nor Maker,
nor Concurrent, as of Evil; faciens Pacem, Isa. 45.5.
and creans malum: And sometimes of that which was neither created nor made by
God, nor any other, as darkness, which is but privation; formans bucem, Isa.
54.7.
and creans tenebras. And the first that I can observe to have taken away the
liberty of this word, and made it to signify, of Nothing, Aq. 1. q. 45 ar. 1.
is our countryman Bid upon this place. For Saint Augustine was as opposite and
diamitrall against it, Aug. contr. advers. leg. and proph.
as it is against truth. For he says, facere est quod omnino non erat; creare
vero est, ex eo quod jam erat educendo constituere. Truly, it is not the power
and victory of reason, that evicts the world to be made of Nothing; for neither
this word creare inforces it, nor is it expressly said so in any Scripture.
When Paul says himself to be Nothing, 1 Cor. 22.11.
it is but a diminution on and Extenuation (not of himself, for he says there,
I am not inferior to the very chief of the Apostles, but) of Mankind. Where it
is said to Man, Your making is of Nothing, it is but a respective, and
comparative undervaluing; Isa. 41.24.
as in a lower descent then that before, All Nations before God are less then
Nothing. Isa. 40.17.
As in another place by a like extreme extending it is said, Deus regnabit in
aeternum and ultra: Ex. 15.18.
Only it is once said, Machab. 2.7.28.
Ex nihilo fecit omnia Deus; but in a book of no straight obligation (if the
matter needed authority) and it is also well translated by us, Of things which
were not. But therefore we may spare Divine Authority, and ease our faith too,
because it is present to our reason. For, Omitting the quarelsome contending of
Sextus Empiricus the Pyrrhonian, (of the Author of which sect Laertius says,
that he handled Philosophy bravely, having invented a way by which a man should
determine nothing of every thing) who with his Ordinary weapon, a two-edged
sword, thinks he cuts off all Arguments against production of Nothing, by this,
Non fit quod jam est, Nec quod non est; Ca. de Ortu and interit.
nam non patitur mutationem quod non est; And omitting those Idolaters of
Nature, the Epicureans, who pretending a mannerly lothness to trouble God,
because Nec been promeritis capitur, Lucret.
nec tangitur ira, indeed out of their pride are loath to be beholden to God,
say, that we are sick of the fear of God, Horace.
Quo morbo mentem concusse? Timore Deorum; And cannot therefore admit creation
of Nothing, because then Nil semine egeret, but far omnes omnia possent, And
subito exorirentur, incerto spacio, Lucret.
with such other dotages. To make our approches nearer, and batter effectually,
let him that will not confess this Nothing, assign something of which the world
was made. If it be of it self, it is God: and it is God, if it be of God; who
is also so simple, that it is impossible to imagine any thing before him of
which he should be compounded, or any workman to do it. Boet. de Consol. 5.
pros. 6.
For to say, as one does, that the world might be eternal, and yet not be God,
because Gods eternity is all at once, and the worlds successive, will not
reconcile it; for yet, some part of the world must be as old as God, and
infinite things are equal, and equals to God are God. The greatest Dignity
which we can give this world, is, that the Idaea of it is eternal, and was
ever in God: And that he knew this world, not only Scientia Intellectus, by
which he knows things which shall never be, and are in his purpose impossible,
though yet possible and contingent to us; but, after failing, become also to
our knowledge impossible, (as it is yet possible that you will read this book
through now, but if you discontinue it (which is in your liberty) it is then
impossible to your knowledge, and was ever so to Gods;) but also Scientia
Visionis, by which he knows only infallible things; and therefore these Idaeas
and eternal impressions in God, may boldly be said to be God; for nothing
understands God of it self, but God; and it is said, Intellectae Jynges a
patre, Zoroast. Oracul. 4.
intelligunt and ipsae: And with Zoroaster (if I misconceive not) Jynx is the
same as Idaea with Plato. The eternity of these Idaeas wrought so much, and
obtained so high an estimation with Scotus, that he thinks them the Essence of
this world, and the Creation was but their Existence; which Reason and Scaliger
reprehend roundly, when they do but ask him, whether the Creation were only of
accidents.

But because all which can be said hereof is cloudy, and therefore apt to be
mis-imagined, and ill interpreted, for, obscurum loquitur quisque suo perieulo,
I will turn to certain and evident things; And tell thee, O man, which art said
to be the Epilogue, and compendium of all this world, and the Hymen and
Matrimonial knot of Eternal and Mortal things, whom one says to be all
Creatures, Picus.
because the Gospel, of which only man is capable, is sent to be preached to
all Creatures; Mar. 16.
And wast made by Gods hands, not his commandment; and have thy head erected to
heaven, and all others to the Center; that yet only thy heart of all others,
points downwards, and only trembles. And, oh ye chief of men, ye Princes of
the Earth, (for to you especially it is said, Terram dedit filiis hominum; for
the sons of God have the least portion thereof; And you are so Princes of the
Earth, as the Devil is Prince of the Air, it is given to you to raise storms
of war and persecution) know ye by how few descents ye are derived from
Nothing? you are the Children of the Lust and Excrements of your parents, they
and theirs the Children of Adam, the child of dirt, the child of Nothing. Yea,
our soul, which we magnify so much, and by which we consider this, is a veryer
upstart then our body, being but of the first head, and immediately made of
Nothing: for how many souls has this world, which were not nothing a hundred
years since? And of whole man compounded of Body and Soul, the best, and most
spiritual and delicate parts, which are Honor and Pleasure, have such a
neighborhood and alliance with Nothing, that they lately were Nothing, and
even now when they are, they are Nothing, or at least shall quickly become
Nothing: which, even at the last great fire, shall not befall the most wretched
worm, nor most abject grain of dust: for that fire shall be a purifier, not
consumer to nothing. For to be Nothing, is so deep a curse, and high degree of
punishment, that Hell and the prisoners there, not only have it not, but cannot
wish so great a loss to themselves, nor such a frustrating of Gods purposes.
Even in Hell, where if our mind could contract and gather together all the old
persecutions of the first Church, where men were tormented with exquisite
deaths, and oftentimes more, by being denied that; And all the inhumanities of
the Inquisition, where repentance increases the torture, (for they die also,
and lose the comfort of perseverance;) And all the miseries which the
mistakings, and furies, and sloth of Princes, and infinity and corrosiveness of
officers, the treachery of women, and bondage of reputation has laid upon
mankind, since it was, and distill the poison and strength of all these, and
throw it upon one soul, it would not equal the torment of so much time as you
sound one syllable. And for the lasting, if you take as many of Plato's years,
as a million of them has minutes, and multiply them by Clavius his number,
which expresses how many sands would fill the hollowness to the first Mover, In
Sacrobos.
you were so far from proceeding toward the end, that you had not described
one minute. In Hell, I say, to escape which, some have prayed to have hills fall
upon them, and many horrors shadowed in the Scriptures and Fathers, none is
ever said to have wished himself Nothing. Indeed, as reposedly, and at home
within himself no man is an Atheist, however he pretend it, and serve the
company with his braveries (as Saint Augustine says of himself, Conf. l. 2.
cap. 3.
that though he knew nothing was blameable but vice, yet he seemed vicious,
lest he should be blameable; and feigned false vices when he had not true, lest
he should be despised for his innocence;) so it is impossible that any man
should wish himself Nothing: for we can desire nothing but that which seems
satisfactory, and better to us at that time; and whatsoever is better, is
something. Does, or can any man wish that, of which, if it were granted, he
should, even by his wishing it, have no sense, nor benefit? To speak truth
freely there was no such Nothing as this before the beginning: for, he that
has refined all the old Definitions, has put this ingredient Creabile, (which
cannot be absolutely nothing) into his Definition of Creation: Piccolomin.
Defin. Creat.
And that Nothing which was, we cannot desire; for man's will is not larger then
Gods power; and since Nothing was not a pre-existent matter, nor mother of this
All, but only a limitation when any thing began to be; how impossible is it to
return to that first point of time, since God (if it imply contradiction)
cannot reduce yesterday? Of this we will say no more; for this Nothing being no
creature, is more incomprehensible then all the rest: but we will proceed to
that which is All, Heaven and Earth.

PART 4.
ONe says in admiration of the spirit and sublimenesse of Abbot Joachim his
Works, Picus.
that he thinks he had read the Book of life. Such an acquaintance as that
should he need, who would worthily expound or comprehend these words, Heaven
and Earth. And Francis George in his Harmony says, That after he had curiously
observed, that the Ark of Noah, and our body had the same proportion and
correspondency in their parts, he was angry, when he found after, that St
Augustine had found out that before. So natural is the disease of Meum and Tuum
to us, that even contemplative men, which have abandoned temporal propriety,
are delighted, and have their Complacentiam, in having their spiritual
Meditations and inventions known to be theirs: for, qui velit ingenio cedere,
rarus erit. But because to such as I, who are but Interlopers, not staple
Merchants, nor of the company, nor within the commission of Expositors of the
Scriptures, if any license be granted by the Spirit to discover and possess
any part, herein, it is conditioned and qualified as the Commissions of
Princes, that we attempt not any part actually possessed before, nor disseise
others; therefore of these words, so abundantly handled, by so many, so
learned, as no place has been more traded to, I will expositorily say nothing,
but only a little refresh, what others have said of them, and then contemplate
their immensity. Al opinions about these words, whether of Men too supple and
slack, and so miscarried with the stream and tide of elder Authority; or too
narrow and slavish, and so coasting ever within the view and protection of
Philosophy; or too singular, and so disdaining all beaten paths, may fall
within one of these expositions. Either in these words Moses delivers roundly
the entire Creation of all, and after does but dilate and declare the Order;
which is usually assigned to Chrysostom and Basil, governed by the words in
Genesis 2.4. In the day that the Lord God made the Earth and the Heavens; and of
these, He that lives for ever made all things together; Sirach. 18.1.
and because the literal interpretation of successive days cannot subsist,
where there are some days mentioned before the Creation of these Planets which
made days. Or else, (which Augustine authorizeth) the Heaven signifies Angels,
and the Earth Materiam primam, out of which all things were produced; which
Averroes has called Id ens quod mediat inter non esse penitus, In 1o Phys. 70.
and esse Actu. And another has afforded it a definition, which Divines have
denied to God: for he says, Est nullum praedicamentum, Arist. 7. Met. Piccolom.
de Defin. Mat. primae
neque Negatio. And therefore that late Italian Distiller and Sublimer of old
definitions has riddled upon it, That it is first and last; immortal and
perishable; formed and formelesse; One, four, and infinite; Good, bad, and
neither; because it is susceptible of all forms, and changeable into all. Or
else Heaven must mean that Coelum Empyraeum (which some have thought to be
increate, and nothing but the refulgence of God) which is exempt from all
alteration even of motion; and the Earth to design the first Matter. And in
this channel came the tide of almost all accepted Expositors, till later ages
somewhat diverted it. For with, and since Lyra, (of whom his Apologist Dornike
says, Dilirat qui cum Lyra non sentit) they agree much, that Heaven and Earth
in this place, is the same which it is now; And that the substantial forms
were presently in it distinctly, but other accidental properties added
successively. And therefore Aquinas having found* danger in these words, 1. q.
65. Ar. 1.
Praecessit informitas materiae ejus formationem, expounds it, Ornatum, not
formam. So that this Heaven and Earth, being themselves and all between them,
is this World; the common house and City of Gods and men, in Cicero's words;
Not. Deor. 2.
and the corporeal and visible image and son of the invisible God, in the
description of the Academicks: which being but one, (for Vniversum est omnia
versa in unum) has been the subject of Gods labor, and providence, and
delight, perchance almost six thousand years; whose uppermost first moving
Orb is too swift for our thoughts to overtake, if it dispatch in every hour
three thousand times the compass of the Earth, Gilbert. de Magn. l. 6. c. 3.
and this exceeds fifteen thousand miles. In whose firmament are scattered more
Eyes (for our use, not their own) then any Ciphers can esteem or express.
For, how weak a stomach to digest knowledge, or how strong and misgovern'd
faith against common sense has he, that is content to rest in their number of
1022 Stars? whose nearer regions are illustrated with the Planets, which work
so effectually upon man, that they have often stopped his further search, and
been themselves by him deified; And whose navell, this Earth, which cannot
stir, for every other place is upwards to it, and is under the water, yet not
surrounded, and is man's prison and palace, yea man himself, (for terra est
quam calco, Conf. 12.
and terra quam porto, says Augustine:) A world, which when God had made, he saw
it was very good; and when it became very bad, because we would not repent, he
did: and more then once; for he repented that he made it, and then that he
destroyed it; becoming for our sakes, who were unnaturally constant (though in
sinning) unnaturally changeable in affection: And when we dis-esteemed his
benefits, and used not this world aright, but rather chose Hell, he, to dignify
his own work, left Heaven it self, to pass a life in this world: Of the glory
of which, and the inhabitants of it, we shall best end in the words of Sirach's
Son, When we have spoken much, Chapter 43.27.
we cannot attain unto them; but the sum of all is, that God is all. But
because, as the same man says, When a man has done his best, Cha. 18.6.
he must begin again; and when he thinks to come to an end, he must go again to
his labor; let us further consider what love we may bear to the world: for, to
love it too much, is to love it too little; as overpraysing is a kind of
libelling. For a man may oppress a favorite or officer with so much
commendation, as the Prince neglected and diminished thereby, may be jealous,
and ruin him. Ambassadors in their first accesses to Princes, use not to
apply themselves, nor divert their eye upon any, until they have made their
first Dispatch, and find themselves next the Prince; and after acknowledge and
respect the beams of his Majesty in the beauties and dignities of the rest. So
should our soul do, between God, and his Creatures; for what is there in this
world immediately and primarily worthy our love, which (by acceptance) is
worthy the love of God? Earth and Heaven are but the footstool of God: But
Earth it self is but the football of wise men. How like a Strumpet deals this
world with the Princes of it? Every one thinks he possesses all, and his
servants have more at her hand then he; and theirs, then they. They think they
compass the Earth, and a Job is not within their reach. Malaguzzi. Theso.
Polit. par. 2. fo. 60.
A busy Wit has taken the pains to survey the possessions of some Princes:
and he tells us, that the Spanish King has in Europe almost three hundred
thousand miles, and in the new world seven millions, besides the borders of
Africa, and all his Islands: And we say, the Sun cannot hide himself from his
Eye, nor shine out of his Dominions. Yet let him measure right, and the Turk
exceeds him, and him the Persian; the Tartar him, and him Prete-Jan. There came
an Edict from the Emperor (says the Gospel) that the whole world should be
taxed: Luke 2.1.
And when the Bishop of Rome is covetous of one treasure, and expensive of
another, he gives and applies to some one the Indulgences Vrbis and Orbis. And
alas, how many greater Kingdoms are there in the world, which know not that
there is such a Bishop or Emperor? Ambition rests not there: The Turk, and
less Princes, have styled themselves King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and
chosen to God. Christian Princes, in no impure times, have taken (nay given to
themselves) Justinian. Proem.
Numen nostrum, and Acacius l. 1. c. 6. Cassa^. Cat. glo. Mud. P. 5. Cons.
24.50.
Divina Oracula, and Sacra Scripta to their Laws. Of them also some speak so
tremblingly, that they say, to dispute their Actions is sacriledg. And their De
nova forma fidelit. c. 1. Extra Jo. 22. ca. cum Intergloss.
Baldus says of him, Est omnia, and super omnia, and facit ut Deus; habet enim
coeleste arbitrium. But more roundly the Canonists of their Bishop, Qui negat
Dominum Deum nostrum Papam, etc. which title the Emperor Constantine also long
before afforded him. Distin. 96. l. Satis. And Martial to Domitian, l. 8.2.
But alas, what are these our fellow-ants, our fellow-durt, our
fellow-nothings, compared to that God whom they make but their pattern? And how
little have any of these, compared to the whole Earth? whose hills, though they
erect their heads beyond the Country of Meteors, and set their foot, in one
land, and cast their shadow into another, are but as warts upon our face: And
her vaults, and caverns, the bed of the winds, and the secret streets and
passages of al rivers, and Hell it self, though they afford it three thousand
great miles, Munster l. 1. c. 16.
are but as so many wrinkles, and pock-holes. A prince is Pilot of a
great*ship, a Kingdom; we of a pinnace, a family, or a less skiff, our selves:
and howsoever we be tossed, we cannot perish; for our haven (if we will) is
even in the midst of the Sea; and where we die, our home meet us. If he be a
lion and live by prey, and wast amongst Cedars and pines, and I a mole, and
scratch out my bed in the ground, happy in this, that I cannot see him: If he
be a butterfly, the son of a Silkworm, and I a Scarab, the seed of dirt; If he
go to execution in a Chariot, and I in a Cart or by foot, where is the glorious
advantage? If I can have (or if I can want) those things which the Son of
Sirach calls principal, water, fire, and iron, C. 39.26.
salt and meal, wheat and honey, milk, and the blood of grapes, oil, and
clothing; If I can prandere Olus, Horace.
and so need not Kings; Or can use Kings, and so need not prandere Olus: In one
word, if I do not frui (which, is, set my delight, and affection only due to
God) but Vti the Creatures of this world, Lombard. l. 1. Did. 1.
this world is mine; and to me belong those words, Subdue the Earth, Genesis 1.28.
and rule over all Creatures; and as God is proprietary, I am usufructuarius of
this Heaven and Earth which God created in the beginning. And here, because
Nemo silens placuit, Auson.
multi brevitate, shall be the end.

O Eternal and Almighty power, which being infinite, have enabled a limited
creature, Faith, to comprehend thee; And being, even to Angels but a passive
Mirror and looking-glass, art to us an Active guest and domestic, ( for thou
have said, I stand at the door and knock, Rev. 3.20.
if any man hear me, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and sup with
him, and he with me, and so thou dwellst in our hearts; And not there only, but
even in our mouths; for though thou be greater, and more removed, yet
humbler and more communicable then the Kings of Egypt, or Roman Emperors,
which disdained their particular distinguishing Names, for Pharaoh and Caesar,
names of confusion; have contracted thine immensity, and shut thy self within
Syllables, and accepted a Name from us; O keep and defend my tongue from
misusing that Name in lightness, passion, or falsehood; and my heart, from
mistaking thy Nature, by an inordinate preferring thy Justice before thy Mercy,
or advancing this before that. And as, though thy self had no beginning thou
gave a beginning to all things in which thou would be served and glorified;
so, though this soul of mine, by which I partake thee, begin not now, yet let
this minute, O God, this happy minute of thy visitation, be the beginning of
her conversion, and shaking away confusion, darkness, and barrenness; and let
her now produce Creatures, thoughts, words, and deeds agreeable to thee. And
let her not produce them, O God, out of any contemplation, or ( I cannot say,
Idaea, but) Chimera of my worthiness, either because I am a man and no worm,
and within the pale of thy Church, and not in the wild forest, and enlightened
with some glimerings of Natural knowledge; but merely out of Nothing: Nothing
prexistent in her self, but by power of thy Divine will and word. By which, as
thou did so make Heaven, as thou did not neglect Earth, and made them
answerable and agreeable to one another, so let my Soul's Creatures have that
temper and Harmony, that they be not by a misdevout consideration of the next
life, stupidly and trecherously negligent of the offices and duties which thou
enjoynest amongst us in this life; nor so anxious in these, that the other
(which is our better business, though this also must be attended) be the less
endeavored. Thou have, O God, denied even to Angels, the ability of arriving
from one Extreme to another, without passing the mean way between. Nor can we
pass from the prison of our Mothers womb, to thy palace, but we must walk (in
that pace whereto thou have enabled us) through the street of this life, and
not sleep at the first corner, nor in the midst. Yet since my soul is sent
immediately from thee, (let me for her return) rely, not principally, but
wholly upon thee and thy word: and for this body, made of preordained matter,
and instruments, let me so use the material means of her sustaining, that I
neither neglect the seeking, nor grudge the missing of the Conveniences of
this life: And that for fame, which is a mean Nature between them, I so esteem
opinion, that I despise not others thoughts of me, since most men are such, as
most men think they be: nor so reverence it, that I make it always the rule of
my Actions. And because in this world my Body was first made, and then my Soul,
but in the next my soul shall be first, and then my body, In my Exterior and
moral conversation let my first and presentest care be to give them
satisfaction with whom I am mingled, because they may be scandalized, but thou,
which see hearts, can not: But for my faith, let my first relation be to
thee, because of that thou art justly jealous, which they cannot be. Grant
these requests, O God, if I have asked fit things fitly, and as many more,
under the same limitations, as are within that prayer which ( As thy Manna,
which was meat for all tastes, and served to the appetite of him which took it,
and was that which every man would) includes all which all can ask, Sap. 16.20
Our Father which art, etc.

EXODUS C. 1. V. 1. Now these are the Names of the Children of Israel which
came into Egypt, etc.
IN this book our entrance is a going out: Of Exodus
for Exodus is Excitus. The Meditation upon Gods works is infinite; and
whatsoever is so, is Circular, and returns into it self, and is every where
beginning and ending, and yet no where either: Which the Jews (the children of
God by his first spouse the Law, as we are by Grace, his second) expressed in
their round Temples; for God himself is so much a Circle, as being every where
without any corner, (that is, never hid from our Inquisition;) yet he is no
where any part of a straight line, (that is, may not be directly and presently
beheld and contemplated) but either we must seek his Image in his works, or his
will in his words; which, whether they be plain or dark, are ever true, and
guide us aright. For, as well the Pillar of Cloud, as that of Fire, did the
Office of directing. Yea, oftentimes, where fewest Expositors contribute their
helps, the Spirit of God alone enlightens us best; for many lights cast many
shadows, and since controverted Divinity became an occupation, Controversies.
the Distortions and violencing of Scriptures, by Christians themselves, have
wounded the Scriptures more, then the old Philosophy or Turcism. So that that
is applyable to us, which Seneca says of Csaears murderers, Plures amici quam
inimici eum interfecerunt. From which indulgence to our own affections, that
should somewhat deterr us, which Pliny says of the same business, Iisdem
pugionibus quibus Caesarem interfecerunt, sibi mortem consciverunt. For we kill
our own souls certainly, when we seek passionately to draw truth into doubt and
disputation.

I do not (I hope) in undertaking the Meditation upon this verse, incur the
fault of them, Shore Texts.
who for ostentation and magnifying their wits, excerpt and tear shapeless and
unsignificant rags of a word or two, from whole sentences, and make them obey
their purpose in discoursing; The Soldiers would not divide our Saviors
garment, though past his use and his propriety. No garment is so near God as
his word: which is so much his, as it is he. His flesh, though dignified with
unexpressible privileges, is not so near God, as his word: for that is
Spiritus Oris. And in the Incarnation, the Act was only of one Person, but the
whole Trinity speaks in every word. They therefore which stub up these several
roots, and mangle them into chips, in making the word of God not such, Literal
Sense.
(for the word of God is not the word of God in any other sense then literal
(and that also is not the literal, which the letter seems to present, for so
to diverse understandings there might be diverse literal senses; but it is
called literal, to distinguish it from the Moral, Allegorical, and the other
senses; and is that which the Holy Ghost does in that place principally
intend:) they, I say, do what they can this way, to make God, whose word it is
pretended to be, no God. They which build, must take the solid stone, not the
rubbish. Of which, though there be none in the word of God, yet often unsincere
translations, to justify our perjudices and foreconceived opinions, and the
underminings and batteries of Heretics, and the curious refinings of the
Allegorical Fathers, which have made the Scriptures, which are strong toils,
to catch and destroy the bore and bear which devast our Lords vineyard, fine
cobwebs to catch flies; And of strong gables, by which we might anchor in all
storms of Disputation and Persecution, the threads of silkworms, curious
vanities and excesses (for do not many among us study even the Scriptures only
for ornament?) these, I say, may so bruise them, and raise so much dust, as may
blind our Eyes, and make us see nothing, by coveting too much. He which first
invented the cutting of Marble, had (says Pliny) importunum ingenium; a wit
that would take no answer nor denial. So have they which break these Sentences,
importuna ingenia, unseasonable and murmuring spirits. When God out of his
abundance affords them whole Sentences, yea Chapters, rather then not have
enough to break to their auditory, they will attempt to feed miraculously great
Congregations with a loaf or two, and a few fishes; that is, with two or three
incoherent words of a Sentence. I remember I have read of a General, who,
having at last carried a town, yet not merely by force, but upon this article,
That in sign of subjection they should admit him to take away one row of stones
round about their wall, chose to take the undermost row, by which the whole
wall ruined. So do they demolish Gods fairest Temple, his Word, which pick out
such stones, and deface the integrity of it, so much, as neither that which
they take, nor that which they leave, is the word of God. In the Temple was
admitted no sound of hammer, nor in the building of this great patriarchal
Catholic Church, of which every one of us is a little chapel, should the word
be otherwise wrested or broken, but taken entirely as it is offered and
presented. But I do not at this time trangress this rule, Of this Text.
both because I made not choice of this unperfect sentence, but prosecute my
first purpose of taking the beginning of every book: and because this verse is
not so unperfect, but that radically and virtually it comprehends all the book;
which being a history of Gods miraculous Mercy to his, is best intimated or
Epitomized in that first part, which is insinuated in this verse, from how
small a number he propagated so great a Nation. Upon this confidence, and
conscience of purposing good, Unvocall preaching.
I proceed in these Sermons; for they are such, in the allowance of him whom
they have styled resolutissimum et Christianissimum Doctorem; Gers. de laud
Scr. consid. 1a.
for he says Scriptor manu praedicat. And that to write books, though one gain
and profit temporally by it, yet if the final respect be the glory of God, is
latriae veneratio, and more honorable to the Church, then the multiplication of
vocal prayers, Imo, quam insolens Missarum inculcatio. Did the Author of that
book, the Preacher, make vocal Sermons? Though these lack thus much of Sermons,
that they have no Auditory, yet as Saint Bernard did almost glory, that Oaks
and Beeches were his Masters, I shall be content that Oaks and Beeches be my
scholars, and witnesses of my solitary Meditations. Therefore, Division.
after I shall have spoken a few words in general of this book, I will proceed
to a nearer consideration of this verse; first, As it begins to present a
Register of their Names, whom God appointed to be the foundation of his many
great works; And then, As it does virtually comprehend those particular
testimonies of Gods love to his people.

In the first, we will look Why God is willing, that those through whom God
prepares his miracles, should be named. Secondly, why they are in diverse places
diversely named. Then, why their number is expressed; And why that also
diversely, in diverse places. And lastly, whether there be no Mystery in their
Number, Seventy.

In the second part, wherein out of this verse radically will arise to our
consideration, all his favors to his chosen, expressed in this book, we shall
have occasion to contemplate Gods Mercy, and that, In bringing them into Egypt,
In propagating them there, In delivering them from thence, and in nourishing
them in the wilderness. Secondly his Power, Expressed in his many Miracles:
Thirdly his Justice, in their pressures in Egypt, and the wilderness: And
lastly his Judgments, in affording them a law for their direction.

Exodus.
When this Book became a particular book, that is, Of Moses five Books
when Moses his book was divided into five parts, I cannot trace. Not only the
first Christian Counsels, which established or declared the Canon of
Scripture, and all the earlyest Expositors thereof, whether Christians or Jews,
but the Septuagint, almost 300. years before Christ, acknowledge this
partition. Yet, that Moses left it a continued work, or at least not thus
distributed, it seems evident, both because the Hebrew names of these books are
not significant, but are only the first words of the book, (as we use to cite
the Imperial and the Canon laws) And because by Conradus Pellicanus I am
taught, Comment. in Pentat.
that Moses, according to the 52. Hebdomades, distinguished the Pentateuch into
so many sections, of which this is the 13. And Josephus Simlerus notes, that
the first letter here, which ordinarily has no use, but grace, has in this
place the force of a conjunction. And so Lyra, and many others acknowledge, that
this is but a continuing of the former History Besides the reasons which moved
those times to make this a singular Book, I may add this, That God, when he had
in that part of Moses book which we call Genesis, expressed fully, that by
creating from Nothing, before Nature was, he needed not her to begin his
glorious work; so in this he declares especially, that he has not so assumed
Nature into a Collegueship with himself, that he cannot leave her out, or go
besides her, and neglect her, or go directly against her when it pleases him.
And therefore this book is, more then any other, a Register of his Miracles. Of
which book this is notable, it consisting of the most particular ceremonial
parts, wherein the Jews yet persist, and we faithfully see already
accomplished, and therefore likelyest to minister matter of quarrel and
difference between us, of all other books in the Bible, is best agreed upon;
and fewer differences between ours and their Copies then in any other book: so
equally careful have al parties been to preserve the Records of his Miracles
intemerate.

PART. 1.
I Come now to the first Part: Names.
In which, the first Consideration is, Why God would have them named? These are
the Names, Antiq. l. 2. c. 4.
etc. Josephus delivering the same History, says, that he would not have
ascribed the Names, because they are of an hard and unpleasant sound, but that
some had defamed the Nation, as Egyptians; and denied them to be Mesopotamians.
It has therefore one good use, to distinguish them from profane Nations: But
the chiefest is, That they are inserted into this Book for an everlasting
honor both to God and them. Amongst men, all Depositaries of our Memories, all
means which we have trusted with the preserving of our Names, putrify and
perish. Of the infinite numbers of the Medals of the Emperors, some one haypy
Antiquary, with much pain, travel, cost, and most faith, believes he has
recovered some one rusty piece, which deformity makes reverend to him, and yet
is indeed the fresh work of an Impostor.

The very places of the Obelises, and Pyramides are forgotten, and the purpose
why they were erected. Books themselves are subject to the mercy of the
Magistrate: and as though the ignorant had not been enemy enough for them, the
Learned unnaturally and treacherously contribute to their destruction, by
rasure and mis-interpretation. Caligula would abolish Homer, Virgil, and all
the Lawyers Works, and eternize himself and his time in Medals: The Senate,
after his death, melted all them: Of their brass his Wife Messalina made the
Statue of her beloved Player; and where is that? But Names honored with a
place in this book, cannot perish, because the Book cannot. Next to the glory
of having his name entered into the Book of Life, this is the second, to have
been matriculatted in this Register, for an example or instrument of good.
Lazarus his name is enrolled, but the wicked rich man's omitted. How often in
the Scriptures is the word Name, for honor, fame, virtue? How often does God
accurse with abolishing the Name? Thou shall destroy their Name, Deuteronomy. 7.24.
And, I will destroy their Name de sub coelo, Deuteronomy. 9.14. And, Non seminabitur de
Nomine tuo, Nah. 1.14. With which curse also the civil Ephesian Law punished
the burner of the Temple, that none should name him. And in the same phrase
does God express his blessings to Abraham, Genesis 12.2. and often elsewhere, I
will make thy Name great. Which, without God, those vain attempters of the
Tower of Babel endeavored: for it is said, Genesis 11.4. They did it, to get
themselves a Name. Whether Nomen be Novimen, or Notamen, it is still to make
one known: and God, which cannot be known by his own Name, may nearlyest by the
names and prosperity of his. And therefore, for his own sake, he is careful to
have his servants named. He calls his own sheep by name; And, Joh. 10.
Scribe Nomen Diei hujus, says he to Ezekiel, c. 24.2. Of all Nations, the Jews
have most chastely preserved that Ceremony of abstaining from ethnic Names.
Ethnic Names.
At this time, when by their pressures they need most to descend to that common
degree of flattery, to take the names of the Princes by whose leave they live,
they do not degenerate into it, when almost all Christendom has straied into
that scandalous fashion, of returning to heathen Names, as though they were
ashamed of their Examples. And almost in all their Names, the Jews have either
testified some event past, or prophesied or prayed for some good to come:
Significant. Names.
In no language are Names so significant. So that if one consider diligently
the senes of the Names registered here, he will not so soon say, That the Names
are in the History, as that the History is in the Names. For, Levi is coupled
to God, which notes Gods calling. Simeon, hearing and obedient, where their
willingness is intimated. Juda is confessing and praising, which results of the
rest. Zebulon is a dwelling, because they are established in God: in whom,
because they have both a Civil policy, and a Military, Dan is a Judgment, and
Gad, a Garrison. In which, that they may be exercised in continual occasions of
meriting, Naphthali is a wrestling. And to crown all, Asher is complete
blessedness. The other Names have their peculiar force, which will not come
into this room: but I entered the rather into this Meditation and opinion,
because I find the Scriptures often to allude to the Name, and sometimes express
it, as 1 Samuel 25.25. As his name is, so is he, Nabal, a fool. And in Exodus
15.23. Therefore the name of the place was called bitter. And the Romans also
had so much respect to the ominousness of good Names, that when in Musters
every Soldier was to be called by Name, Cic. l. 1. de Divinat.
they were diligent to begin with one of a good and promising Name, which
Festus reckons to be Valerius, Salvius, Statorius, and such. And I have read in
some of the Criminalists, that to have an ill Name, in this sense, not malae
famae, was Judicium ad torturam. Hom. 8. in Genesis
Origin exaggerating pathetically the gradations of Abraham's sorrow at the
immolation of his son, after he has expostulated with God why he would
remember him of the Name son, and why of Beloved son, rests most upon the last,
that he would call him by his Name Isaac, which signifies joy, in a
commandment of so much bitterness. It may be then some occasion of naming them
in this place, that as these men were instruments of this work of God, so their
names did sub-obscurely foresignifie it. For Reason, the common soul to all
laws, forbids that either great punishments should be inflicted otherwise then
Nominatim; Non nisi nominatim liberi exheredandi: Briss. form. so. 604.
Or that great benefits should be in any other sort conferred. For conformably
to this case, which now we consider, of delivering persons from bondage, the
law is, Lex Fus. Can.
Servis non nisi Nominatim libertas danda est. Of this Honor to his servants,
to be remembered by Name, God has been so diligent, that sometimes himself has
imposed the Name before the birth, Changed Names.
and sometimes changed it to a higher signification, when he purposed to exalt
the person. It is noted, Fr. George pro fo. 17.
that to Abram's Name he added a letter, whose number made the whole Name
equal to the words, Creavit Hominem. So that the multiplying of his seed, was
a work not inferior to the Creation. And from Sarai's Name he took a letter,
which expressed the number ten, and reposed one, which made but five; so that
she contributed that five which man wanted before, to show a mutual indigence
and Supplement. How much Schismatic disputation has proceeded from the change
of Simon's Name into Peter? Mat. 15.
What a Majestic change had James and John into the Sons of Thunder? Mar. 13.
yet God not only forbore ever such vast Names, as Pharaoh gave Joseph, Ge.
41.41.
which is not only Expounder of secrets, Addition to Names.
but Savior of the world: which also the Roman Emperors assumed in many Coyns,
( AEternitas Caesaris, And Caesar salus, And Servator, And Restaurator Orbis;)
but (to my remembrance, and observation) he never added other Name, as a
pronomen, or cognomen, or such: To show (I think) that man brought not part of
his Dignity, and God added; but that God, when he will change a man, begins,
and works, and perfects all himself. For though corrupt custom has authorized
it now, And, Robortellus de Nominibus.
Gaudent pronomine molles auriculae; yet the Romans themselves, from whom we
have this burden of many Names, till they were mingled with the Sabius, used
but one Name. Politianus Miscel. c. 31
And before that Custom got to be noble, their slaves, only when they were
manumitted, were forced to accept three names. In this Excess of Names the
Christians have exceeded their patterns: for to omit the vain and empty fullness
in Paracelsus Name, which of the Ancients equals that grave, wise Author,
which writes himself, Pulmannus Anicius Manlius Torquatus Severinus Boethius?
But God has barely and nakedly, but permanently engraved these Names. Which
shall never be subject to that obscurity, which Ausonius imputes to one who was
Master to an Emperor, and rewarded with a Consulship, but overswaid with his
Colleague, that men were fain to inquire, Quibus Consulib. gesserit consulatum.
But wheresoever these Names shall be mentioned, the Miraculous History shall be
called to memory; And wheresoever the History is remembered, their Names shall
be refreshd.

Diversity in Names.
Our next consideration is, Why they are diversely named? and not always alike,
in Genesis 46. and here, and in Deuteronomy, and the other places where they are
spoken of? And this belongs not only to this case, but to many others in the
Holy Bible. Josua and Jesus is all one. So is Chonia, and Jechonias. And how
multinominous is the father in law of Moses? And the name Nebrycadrozor is
observed to be written seven several ways in the Prophets. To change the
Name, in the party himself is, by many laws, Dolus; and when a Notary does it,
he is falsarius; faults penal and infamous. And therefore laws have provided,
that in instruments of contract, and in public Registers, all the Names,
Sur-names and additions shall be inserted; and they forbid Abbreviations; and
they appoint a more conspicuous and more permanent Character to express them.
So necessary is a certainty and constancy in the Names. Some late interpreters
of the law, Acacius de privil. Juris.
teach, that false Latin in Grammar, in Edicts or Rescripts from the Imperial
Chamber, or any other secular Prince or Court, does not annihilate or vitiate
the whole writing, because all they may be well enough presumed not to
understand Latin; But the Bulls of the Popes, and decrees in the Court of Rome
are defeated and annulled by such a corruption, because their sufficiency in
that point being presumed, it shall be justly thought subreptitious, what ever
issues faulty and defective in that kind. So, though Error and variety in
Names, may be pardonable in profane Histories, especially such as translate
from Authors of other language, yet the wisdom and constancy of that one
Author of al these books, the Holy Ghost, is likely to defend and establish all
his instruments, chosen for building this frame of Scriptures, from any
uncertain waverng and vacillation.

The Cabalists therefore, which are the Anatomists of words, and have a
Theological Alchimy to draw sovereign tinctures and spirits from plain and
gross literal matter, observe in every variety some great mystic
signification; but so it is almost in every Hebrew name and word. Lyra, who is
not so refined, yet very Judaick too, thinks, that as with the Latin, Cholaus,
Choletus, Cholinus, and Nicolaus is one Name; so it is in the variation of
names in the Scriptures. But oftentimes, neither the sound, nor letter, nor
signification, nor beginning nor ending, nor root, nor branch, have any
affinity: as himself (though corruptly) says, that Esau; Seir, and Edom are
one name. Genesis 36.
It may be some laziness to answer every thing thus, It is so, because God
would have it so; yet he which goes further, and asks, Why Gods will was so,
inquires for something above God. For, find me something that enclines God, and
I will worship that. since therefore this variety of Names falls out in no
place, where the certainty of the person or History is thereby offuscate, I
incline to think, that another useful document arises from this admitting of
variety; which seems to me to be this, Difference in things not essential.
that God in his eternal and ever-present omniscience, foreseeing that his
universal, Christian, Catholic Church, imaged, and conceived, and begotten by
him in his eternal decree, born and brought to light when he travailed and
labored in those bitter agonies and throes of his passion, nourced ever more
dilicately and preciously then any natural children, (for they are fed with
their Mothers blood in their womb, but we with the blood of our most Blessed
Savior all our lives,) foreseeing, I say, that this his dearly beloved
Spouse, and Sister, and Daughter, the Church, should in her latter Age suffer
many convulsions, distractions, rents, schisms, and wounds, by the severe and
unrectified Zeal of many, who should impose necessity upon indifferent things,
and oblige all the World to one precise form of exterior worship, and
Ecclesiastic policy; averring that every degree, and minute and scruple of
all circumstances which may be admitted in either belief or practice, is
certainly, constantly, expressly, and obligatorily exhibited in the Scriptures;
and that Grace, and Salvation is in this unity and no where else; his Wisdom
was mercifully pleased, that those particular Churches, devout parts of the
Universal, which, in our Age, keeping still the foundation and corner stone
Christ Jesus, should piously abandon the spacious and specious
super-edifications which the Church of Rome had built thereupon, should from
this variety of Names in the Bible it self, be provided of an argument, That
an unity and consonance in things not essential, is not so necessarily
requisite as is imagined. Certainly, when the Gentiles were assumed into the
Church, they entered into the same fundamental faith and religion with the
Jews, as Musculus truly notes; and this conjunction in the root and
foundation, fulfilled that which was said, Fiet unum Ovile, Joh. 10.16
and unus Pastor, One fold, and one shepherd. For, by that before, you may see
that all Christ's sheep are not always in one fold, Other sheep have I also,
which are not of this fold. So, all his sheep are of one fold, that is, under
one Shepherd, Christ; yet not of one fold, that is, not in one place, nor form.
For, that which was strayed and alone, was his sheep; much more any flock which
hearken together to his voice, his Word, and feed together upon his Sacraments.
Therefore that Church from which we are by Gods Mercy escaped, because upon the
foundation, which we yet embrace together, Redemption in Christ, they had built
so many stories high, as the foundation was, though not destroyed, yet hid and
obscured; And their Additions were of so dangerous a construction, and
appearance, and misapplyableness, that to tender consciences they seemed
Idolatrous, and are certainly scandalous and very slippery, and declinable into
Idolatry, though the Church be not in circumstantiall and deduced points, at
unity with us, nor it self; (for, with what tragic rage do the Sectaries of
Thomas and Scotus prosecute their differences? and how impetuously does Molinas
and his Disciples at this day, impugn the common doctrine of grace and
freewill? And though these points be not immediately fundamental points of
faith, yet radically they are, and as near the root as most of those things
wherein we and they differ;) yet though we branch out East and West, that
Church concurs with us in the root, and sucks her vegetation from one and the
same ground, Christ Jesus; who, as it is in the Canticle, lies between the
breasts of his Church, Cant. 1.12
and gives suck on both sides. And of that Church which is departed from us,
disunited by an opinion of a necessity that all should be united in one form,
and that theirs is it, since they keep their right foot fast upon the Rock
Christ, I dare not pronounce that she is not our Sister; but rather as in the
same Song of Solomon's, Cant. 8.9.
We have a little sister, and she has no breasts: if she be a wall, we will
build upon her a silver palace. If therefore she be a wall, That is, Because
she is a wall; for so Lyra expounds those words, as on her part, she shall be
safer from ruin, if she apply her self to receive a silver palace of Order,
and that Hierarchy which is most convenient and proportional to that ground
and state wherein God has planted her; and she may not transplant her self: So
shall we best conserve the integrity of our own body, of which she is a member,
if we laboriously build upon her, and not tempestuously and ruinously demolish
and annull her; but rather cherish and foment her vital and wholesome parts,
then either cut, or suffer them to rot or moulder off. As natural, so politic
bodies have Cutem, and Cuticulam. The little thin skin which covers al our
body, may be broken without pain or danger, and may reunite it self, because
it consists not of the chief and principiant parts. But if in the skin it self,
there be any solution or division, which is seldom without drawing of blood,
no art nor good disposition of Nature, can ever bring the parts together again,
and restore the same substance, though it seem to the ey to have sodder'd it
self. It will ever seem so much as a deforming Scar, but is in truth a breach.
Outward Worship is this Cuticula: and integrity of faith the skin it self. And
if the first be touched with any thing too corrosive, it will quickly pierce
the other; and so Schism, which is a departure from obedience, will quickly
become Heresy, which is a wilful deflexion from the way of faith? Which is
not yet, so long as the main skin is inviolate: for so long that Church which
despises another Church, is it self no other then that of which the Psalm
speaks, Ecclesia Malignantium. Thus much was to my understanding naturally
occasioned and presented by this variety of Names in the Scriptures: For, if
Esau, Edom, and Seir were but one man; Jethro and Revel, etc. but one man,
which have no consonance with one another, and might thereby discredit and
enervate any History but this, which is the fountain of truth; so Synagogue and
Church is the same thing, and of the Church, Roman and Reformed, and all other
distinctions of place, Discipline, or Person, but one Church, journying to one
Jerusalem, and directed by one guide, Christ Jesus; In which, though this
Unity of things not fundamental, be not absolutely necessary, yet it were so
comely and proportional with the foundation it self, if it were at Unity in
these things also, that though in my poor opinion, the form of Gods worship,
established in the Church of England be more convenient, and advantageous then
of any other Kingdom, both to provoke and kindle devotion, and also to fix it,
that it stray not into infinite expansions and Subdivisions; (into the former
of which, Churches utterly despoyl'd of Ceremonies, seem to me to have fallen;
and the Roman Church, by presenting innumerable objects, into the later.) And
though to all my thanksgivings to God, I ever humbly acknowledge, as one of his
greatest Mercies to me, that he gave me my Pasture in this Park, and my milk
from the breasts of this Church, yet out of a fervent, and (I hope) not
inordinate affection, even to such an Unity, I do zealously wish, that the
whole catholic Church, were reduced to such Unity and agreement, in the form
and profession Established, in any one of these Churches (though ours were
principally to be wished) which have not by any additions destroyed the
foundation and possibility of salvation in Christ Jesus; That then the Church,
discharged of disputations, and misapprehensions, and this defensive war,
might contemplate Christ clearly and uniformely. For now he appears to her, as
in Cant. 2.9. He stands behind a wall, looking forth of the window, showing
himself through the grate. But then, when all had one appetite, and one food,
one nostrill and one purfume, the Church had obtained that which she then
asked, Arise o North, Cant. 4.10.
and come o South, and blow on my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.
For then, that savor of life unto life might allure and draw those to us, whom
our dissentions, more then their own stubborness withold from us.

Of Number.
As God Registers the Names of his Elect, and of his Instruments, so does he
the Number, He counts the Number of the stars, and calls them by their
Names, says the Psalmist; Ps. 147.4.
which many Expositors interpret of the Elect. Of which Saint John expresses a
very great Number, Rev. 7.6.
when he says, I heard the number of them which were sealed 144000. But after
in the ninth verse, A Multitude in white before the Lamb, which none could
Number. In that place of Genesis, Ge^. 14.14 Pererius.
when Abram took 318. to rescue Lot (which Number has been, not unusefully
observed to accord with the Number of the Fathers in the first Necene Council,
where Christianity was rescued from Arius) the Septuagint have Numeravit, and
Saint Ambrose says, the Hebrew word signifies Elegit; as though it were so
connaturall in God, to number and to Elect, that one word might express both.
And because Christ knew how rigorous an account God took of those whom he had
made Governors of his, Joh. 17.12.
in his prayer, that they might be after preserved, he says, I have kept them,
and none of them are lost, except, etc. How often does God iterate this way
also of expressing his love to Abraham, that he will multiply his posterity? If
a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed be numbered, Genesis
13.16. And lest he should have seemed to have performed that promise when he
had only multiplied their Number, and yet left them to be trod under foot by
the Egyptians, because that comparison of Dust might import and insinuate so
much; he chooses after another of infinite Number and Dignity together; Tell the
Stars, if thou be able to number them: So shall thy seed be, Genesis 15.5. David,
to let them see what a blessing their increase in number was, bids them
remember what they were, Ps. 105.12.
Cum essent Numero brevi. And Jeremy, as though they did not else concur with
God in his purpose to restore them to greatness, when they were in Babylon,
says to them, Jer. 26.6.
Nolite esse pauci Numero. Upon this love of God to see his people prosper,
says Rabbi Solomon, Vt homo habens peculium: or, As a man which has a Stock
of cattle which he loves, reckons them every day; so does God his people.
Hence is it, that so many times God commands his people to be numbered.
Insomuch, that that which we call the Fourth book of Moses, Prologo.
in which Saint Jerome says are contained totius Arithmeticae Mysteria, has
the denomination from Numbering. In the first entrance whereof, God commands
his to be numbrd, and to be numbered by Name: And the number in that place, when
the old and young, Fr. George Prob. 376.
and women are added to it, one very curious, following those rules by which
the Hebrews have learned the number of the Angels in heaven, has found to
accord precisely with that number of Angels intimated in Dan. 7. This Order, of
being first Named, and then Numbered; or first Numbered, and then Named,
Antichrist perverts by Anticipation, and doing both at once; for his Name is a
Number. The Devil, who counterfeits God, put a desire into David to number his
people; who was then only in his right Arithmetic, when he prayed to find the
number of his days. Psalm. 39.5. 1 Chr. 21.1.
But when Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number his
people, he entered a work of such glory and ostentation, that Joab was nine
months and twenty days in doing that service. 2 Samuel 24.8.
But God would number also; and because David would not attend his leisure, he
changed his fashion, and brought upon them that number, which he after
threatens again in Isaiah, Isa. 65.11.
Numerabo vos in gladio.

Of this Number.
For the Number registered in this History, As God had well provided for their
Honor, by entering their Names in this everlasting record: so (I think) he
provided for his own Honor, of which he is ever jealous, in expressing the
Number; that all posterity might be awakened to a reverent acknowledgment of
his greatness and goodness, by seeing, from what a small Number, in how short a
time, how numerous a people, through how great pressures, and straits, were by
him propagated and established. For, since he is content to receive his Honor
from us, (for although all cause of Honor be eternally inherent in himself,
yet that Act proceeds from us, and of that Honor, which is in Honorante, he
could have none, til he had made Creatures to exhibit it;) his great work of
Creation, which admits no arrest for our Reason, nor gradations for our
discourse, but must be at once swallowed and devoured by faith, without
mastication, or digestion, is not so apt to work upon us, for the provoking of
our Acts of Honor, as those other miracles are, which are somewhat more
submitted to reason, and exercise and entertain our disputation, and spiritual
curiosity by the way, and yet at last go as far beyond reason, as the other; as
all miracles do equally. Of that kind this is; because a mighty People is
miraculously made, not of Nothing, (upon which, Consideration can take no hold)
but of a disproportionall, and incompetent littleness. And in these, where the
smallness of the root, or seed, is a degree of the miracle, the Spirit of God
uses to be precise in recording it. And therefore, in the greatest of that
kind, which is the fulfilling and replenishing the world, after that great
exinanition by the general deluge, though Moses say twice or thrice, that
Noah, and his sons, and his and their wives went into the Ark, and came out;
yet, because the Miracle of propagating consists in the Number, Almighty God is
pleased, by his ordinary way of expounding his word, (which is, to explicate
and assure one place by another) to teach us, that this Number was but eight:
for St. Peter says, In the Ark but few, that is, 1 Pet. 3.
but Eight were saved. In like manner, I mean with like preciseness, after the
Miracle in Mat. 14. was precisely recorded, how many loafes, how many fishes,
how many Eaters, how many baskets of fragments; In the next chapter, another
Miracle of the same kind, being to be registered, though it be less then the
other, (for their is more meat, fewer eaters, and fewer fragments) yet God
seems careful in the particular Numbers. This therefore I take to be some
reason of inserting this Number; which being somewhat discordantly, and
differently set down, as the collation of places manifests, and the Spirit of
God doing nothing falsely, inordinatly, negligently, dangerously, or
perplexedly, to an humble and deligent understanding; we will in the next
Section consider the Variety in this Number.

Variety in the Number.
Numbering is so proper and peculiar to man, who only can number, that some
philosophical Inquisitors have argued doubtfully, whether if man were not,
there were any Number. And error in Numbering is De substantialibus, as lawyers
say, and sometimes annuls, ever vitiates any Instrument, so much, as it may not
be corrected. Nothing therefore seems so much to endanger the Scriptures, and
to submit and render them obnoxious to censure and calumniation, as the
appearance of Error in Chronology, or other limbs and members of Arithmetic:
for, August. in Enchirid.
since Error is an approbation of false for true, or uncertain for certain, the
Author has erred (and then the Author is not God) if any Number be falsely
delivered; And we err, if we arrest our selves as upon certain truth (as we do
upon all the Scriptures,) when there is sufficient suspicion of Error,
(abstracting the reverence of the Author,) and a certain confession and
undeniableness of uncertainty. And as a man delated juriddically, or by fame,
or by private information of any Crime, must, when Canonical purgation is
required at his hands, not only swear his own innocence himself, but produce
others of his neighborhood and friendship, to swear that they think he swears
true; and if they concurred not with him, this would have the nature of a
half-proof, and justify a further proceeding to his condemnation: so when any
profane History rises up against any place of Scripture, accusing it to Humane
Reason, and understanding, (for though in our supreme Court in such cases, for
the last Appeal be Faith, yet Reason is her Delegate) it is not enough that one
place justify it self to say true, but all other places produced as handling
the same matter, must be of the same opinion, and of one harmony. I have
therefore wondered that Althemerus, pretending to reconcile all apparent
discordances in the Scriptures, has utterly pretermitted all variety in
Numbering: Of Examples whereof, the comparing of the Historical books, would
have afforded him great plenty, and worthy of his travel. The general reasons
why God admits some such diversities in his book, prevail also for this place
which is now under our consideration; which are, first, To make men sharp and
industrious in the inquisition of truth, he withdrawes it from present
apprehension, and obviousness. For naturally great wits affect the reading of
obscure books, wrestle and sweat in the explication of prophesies, digg and
thresh out the words of unlegible hands, resuscitate and bring to life again
the mangled, and lame fragmentary images and characters in Marbles and Medals,
because they have a joy and complacency in the victory and achievement
thereof. Another reason is, That as his elect children are submitted by him to
the malice and calumny of the Reprobate, and are not only ragefully tempested
with storms of persecution, but contemptuously and scornfully (which is
oftentimes the greater affliction) insimulated of folly and silliness, are in
his knowledge, and often so declared in this world to abound in the treasure of
riches and wisdom: So he is pleased that his word should endure and undergo
the opinion of contradiction, or other infirmiries, in the eyes of Pride (the
Author of Heresy and Schism) that after all such dissections, and ^ribrations,
and examinings of Heteticall adventures upon it, it might return from the
furnace more refined, and gain luster and clearness by this vexation. But the
most important and useful reason is, that we might ever have occasion to
accustom our selves, to that best way of expounding Scriptures, by comparing
one place with another. All the doubts about this place determine in two.
First, why the Number is in so many places said to be Seventy, as Genesis 46.27.
and in this place of Exodus, and in Deuteronomy. 10.22. And yet Genesis 46.26. the Number
is said to be but 66. And in all the process of time from Moses's to Stephen's
martyrdom, recorded Act. 7. there could be no other doubt but this one, to
them which understood Hebrew, and were not misgoverned by the translation of
the Septuagint. And this first doubt is no sooner offered, then answered; for
in the 46. of Genesis the 26 verse speaks of 66, and considers not Joseph and his
two sons, which were already in Egypt, in which the 27. verse does, and adding
Jacob himself, perfects the Number 70. of which it speaks. So that here is no
dissonance in the Number, but only the Spirit of God has used his liberty, in
the phrase, reckoning some born in Egypt among the souls which came into
Egypt. The other Doubt, which has more traveled the Expositors, is, why
Stephen, referring to Moses, Act. 7.
should say, they were 75. The occasion of this mistaking (for so I think it
was) was given by false Copies of the Septuagint's translation, then in most
use. For the Hebrew text was long before so far out of ordinary use, that we
see our Savior himself, in his allegations, follows the Septuagint. And in my
mind, so much reverence is due to that translation, that it were hard to think,
that they at first added five to Moses Number. For, that which is said for that
opinion (though by Saint Hierome) which is, that they comprehend some nephews
of Joseph, has no warrant; and all the rest of the brethren were likely to
have nephews at that time also. And against this opinion it prevails much with
me, that, by Saint Hieromes testimony, that translation in his time, in the
other place, Deuteronomy. 10.22. had but 70, conform to Moses: And any reason which
might have induced them to add 5 in Genesis, had been as strong for
Deuteronomy. Junius, scarce exceeded by any, L. 1. Par. 92.
in learning, sharpness, and faith, thinks that Stephen neither applied his
speech to that account of those that were issued from Jacob's loins, which were
indeed but 66, nor to the addition of the three in Egypt, which, with Jacob
himself accomplished the number of 70; but that, insisting precisely upon Moses
syllables, he related so many as were expressed by name by Moses in that
Chapter, to have been of Jacob's Family; which were Jacob's four wives, and the
two sons of Judah, which make up 75. But with that modesty wherein he asks
leave to depart from the Fathers, I must depart from him: for Joseph could not
cause these two sons of Judah to be brought into Egypt, (as appears in the Text
he did, for all the number there intended,) since they were dead in Canaan
before, as is evident, Genes. 46. Others therefore have thought, that Saint
Luke reported not the words out of Stephen's mouth, but by view of Moses his
text, and that but in the Translation; because being but a Proselite, he had no
perfection, nor was accustomed to the Hebrew. And others, that indulgently he
descended to that text which was most familiar, and so most credible to them.
For, though this be either an apparent Error in the Septuagint at first, (which
is hard to allow, if we believe half of that which uses to be said, in proof;
that the Holy Ghost assisted them) Or a corruption insinuated after, (as it is
easy, when Numbers are expressed by numerant letters,) yet that translation,
so corrupted, had so much weight, that all then followed it; and it maintained
that authority so long, that even in Lyra's time the Latin obeyed it. For he
reads in this place of Exodus, 75. though he there confess the Hebrew has but
70. This in my understanding may safelyer be admitted, then to decline so far
as Master Calvin does, who thinks it possible that Saint Luke reposed the true
Number 70; but some other exscriber, ignorant of Hebrew, and obedient to the
Septuagint, reformed it deformly since his writing; for this seems to me to
open dangerously a way to the infringing, or infirming many places of
Scripture. The Number being then certainly 70, since by the hardness and
insolence of the Phrase, there seems some violence and force, to raise the
Number to 75. (for it may seem hard, that Joseph, which sent for these 70,
should be called one of the 70 which came; And that his two Sons already in
Egypt, should be two of them which came into Egypt; And that Jacob should be
one of these 70 which issued out of Jacobs loins;) in a few words we will
consider, Of the Number 70.
whether any Mystery reside in that chosen Number; the rather because very many
remarkable things, and passages in History, seem to me to have been limited in
that Number, which therefore seems more Periodick then any other.

But because any over curious and Mysterious consideration of this Number 70.
though it be composed of the two greatest Numbers (for Ten cannot be exceeded,
but that to express any further Number you must take a part of it again; and
Seven is ever used to express infinite,) be too Cabalistick and Pythagorick for
a vulgar Christian, (which I offer not for a phrase of Diminution or Distrust,
that such are unprovided of sufficient defenses for themselves, or are ignorant
of any thing required in such as they, for salvation; But that there is needed
also a Meta-theology, and super-divinity, above that which serves our
particular consciences, in them, who must fight against Philosophers and Jews)
because I am one, and in a low degree, of the first and vulgar rank, and write
but to my equals, I will forbear it, as mis-interpretable; since to
some-palates it may taste of Ostentation; but to some, of distraction from
better contemplations, and of superstition to others: yet, we may, as well with
reverence to the things, as respect to the Number, rest a little upon those
works of God, or his Servants, which this Number, at least, reduces to our
memory.

First therefore, Those Fathers of the world, 70. Patriarchs.
to whom God affords a room by name in the 10th. of Genesis from whom are derived
all Nations, all extinguished and forgotten, all now eminent and in actions,
and all yet undiscovered, and unbeing; They to whose Sons he has given the
earth, utterly wasted before, and has reserved rooms in Heaven, from whence
their betters are dejected, are reckoned there to be 70. After, when the
children of Israel's murmuring kindled Moses zeal to expostulate with God, 70.
Elders.
thus, Have I conceived all this people, or have I begotten them, that I should
bear this? I am not able to bear all this alone; therefore, if thou deal thus
with me, if I have found favor in thy sight, I pray thee kill me, that I
behold not my misery. When by this importunity Moses had extorted from God
another form of policy, the Number amongst which God would divide Moses's
labor, and Moses's spirit, was 70. The barbarous cruelty of Adonibezek, 70.
Kings slain. Judge. 6.1.
confessed by himself, was then accomplished, and ripe for God's vengeance,
when he had executed it upon 70. Kings. Moses, 70. years our life.
though his words, Genesis 6. Man's days shall be 120. years, are by many, and may
well be expounded to be the ordinary term of man's life after the flood, (though
ordinarily they are said to design the years from that speech to the flood.)
And though at that time when he writ the 89th. Psalm, (for he writ the
Pentateuch first, and that after his going out of Egypt) he was more then 80
years old) yet in that Psalm, he pitches the limits of man's life 70 years. In
70. David died.
Though David were not Author of that Psalm, he was an Example of it; for,
though in a Kingdom which had but newly taken that form, and was now translated
to David's Family, and vexed with the discontentments of Readiness friends, and
his own son's ambitions, a longer life, and longer reign might seem to many to
have been requisite, yet he ended his years in 70. David was thirty when he
began to reign, 2 Samuel 5.4
and he reigned forty; 70000. of the plague.
After he had seen the anger of God, punishing his confidence in the number of
his men, 2 Samuel 24.31.
by diminishing them, limit and determine it self in 70 thousand. And in that
great Captivity of Babylon, 70. years in Babylon.
in which (as many think) the word of God himself, the Text of Scriptures
perished, that great and pregnant Mother, and Daughter of Mysteries, (for how
many Prophesies were fulfilled and accomplished in that, and how many conceived
but then, which are not yet brought to light?) the chosen people of God, were
trodden down 70. years. To which foreign sojourning, for many concurrences,
and main circumstances, many have assimilated and compared the Roman Churches
straying into France, 70. in Avignon.
and being empounded in Avignon 70. years; And so long also lasted the
Inundation of the Goths in Italy. 70. the Goths in Italy.
In that dejection and bondage in Babylon, God afforded to Daniel that vision
and voice, 70. Hebdomad.
then which nothing is more mysterious, nothing more important for our
assurance, nothing more advantageable against the Jews, which is the seventy
Hebdomades. Then, 70. Disciples.
those Disciples, supplyers and fellow-workers with the Apostles, equal to
them in very many things (and, men dispute, whether not in all) whom our most
Blessed Savior instituted, Luke 10.1.
were also of this Number, 70. And so having refreshed to your memory, upon
this occasion of the Number 70. these stories out of the Bible, we will end
with this observation, that when God moved Ptolomeus to a desire of having the
Bible translated, Septuagint.
he accited from Jerusalem 72, for that glorious and mystic work; And these,
though they were 72, either for affection to conform themselves to a number so
notorious, or for some true mystery in it, or for what else, God knows; have
ever retained the name of Septuagint.

And so having delivered what by Gods grace I received, of this book in
general, and of the reason of registring the names, and why there is therein
some variety. Why also they are summed and numbered up; and why variously; And
lastly, noted those special places, which the Number 70. presented; I will now
pass to that which I destined for a second Part, because it is radically and
contractedly in that first verse, but diffused and expansively through the
whole book; The Mercy, Power, Justice, and Judgment of God: of which, if
nothing can be said new, nothing can be said too often.

PART. 2.
THough God be absolutely simple, Composition in Gods actions.
yet since for our saks in his Scriptures he often submits himself to
comparisons and similitudes, we may (offencelesly (since there is nothing but
himself, so large as the world) thus compare him to the world: That his
eternal Prescience is the Celestial world, which admits no alteration, no
generation of new purposes, nor corruption of old; and those four, Mercy,
Power, Justice, Judgment, are the Elementary world, of which all below is
composed, and the Elemented world are his particular extrinsick actions: In
which, though they be so complexioned, that all are mingled equally, yet in
every one of them, every one of these four concur. For, in every work of God
there is mercy and justice, Aq. qu. 21. ar. 4.
so, as they presuppose one another. And as in his created Elements, so in
these there is a condensing and a rarifying, by which they become and grow into
one another. For often that action which was principally intended for a work of
Justice against one Malefactor, extends it self to an universal Mercy, by the
Example. And the children of God know how to resolve and make liquid all his
Actions. They can spy out and extract Balmes, and Oils from his Vinegers; and
supple, and cure with his corrosives. Be he what he will, they will make him
Merciful, if Mercy be then wholsomest for them. For so that brave Macabee
interpreted Gods daily afflicting them; The Lord does not long wait for us, as
for other nations, whom he punishes when they come to the fullness of their
sins; but he never withdraws his Mercy from us. And in like manner out of his
Mercies they can distill Justice, when presumption upon Mercy needs such a
corrective. For so says Saint Ambrose, De Paradiso. De poenit. did. 1. Serpens.
Cain indignus judicatus est, qui puniretur in peccato; because he was not so
much spared, as reserved to a greater condemnation. And upon like reason, the
Imperial laws forbid a servant in an Inn to be accused of incontinency,
because (in those times) custom had made them all such, and therefore unworthy
of the laws cognizance. Yet of all these four Elements Mercy is the uppermost
and most Embracing. Of Mercy.
Miserationes ejus super omnia opera ejus. And, Psalm. 144.
Quanta Magnitudo, as great as his greatness (which is infinite) is his Mercy.
And as great as his power, Eccl. 2.17.
which is omnipotent: for it is therefore said, Misereris omnium, Sap. 11.
quia omnia potes. Before there was any subject of his mercy, he was merciful;
for Creation it self is one of the greatest of his Mercies. And it is
Misericordia Domini, Three. 9.
quia non sumus consumpti; so that our preservation is also from mercy. And
therefore will the Lord wait that he may have mercy upon you; Isa. 30.18.
and, miserans miserabitur, in the next verse. God is the Lord of Hosts, and
this world a warfare. And as the Imperial Armies had three Signa Militaria to
be given them, Veget. l. 3. cap. 5.
so has Gods mercy afforded us. They had Signa Vocalia, the express word of
the Commander, which office the word of God does to us; And Semivocalia, which
were the sound of trumpets and other instruments, and such to us are traditions
and Sermons, partaking of God and man: And they had Signa muta, which were the
Colors and Ensigns, and such to us are the Creatures and works of God. His
Mercy is infinite in Extent: for it is in all places; yea, where there is no
place: And it is infinite in Duration; For as it never begun, (for the Ideating
of this world, which was from everlasting, was a work of mercy) and as the
interruptions which by acts of Justice it seems to suffer here, discontinue it
not, (for though God say, For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee;
Isa. 54.8.
yet he adds there, yet with everlasting Mercy have I had compassion on thee;)
so also is it reasonable to think, that it shall never have end. And because in
heaven there can be no distinct and particular act of Mercy from God, because
there shall be no demerit in us, nor possibility of it, after judgment;
Therefore, and from the Psalm, Non continebit in ira sua misericordias suas,
some (but too licenciously) have concluded a determination and ending of the
pains of the damned; and others learned and pious, and accused by no body for
this opinion, evict from hence, certain intervalla, and relaxations in the
torments of Hell, Lomb. l. 4. Did. 46. ex August.
after the general Judgment, as all confess a diminishing of the pains there,
and that the punishment is citra condignum, by the benefit of the passion of
our Blessed Savior. That which is Mercy in God, in us is Compassion. And in
us, it has two steps. To rest upon the first, which is but a sadness, and
sorrow for another misery, is but a dull, lazy, and barren compassion.
Therefore it is elegantly expressed in the Psalm, Psalm. 111.
Jucundus homo, qui miseretur, and commodat; for that is the second and highest
step in Compassion, Alacrity, and Cheerfulness to help. And as God, delighting
most in mercy, has proposed to himself most ways for the exercise thereof,
so has he provided man of most occasions of that virtue. Every man contributes
to it, by being Agent, or Patient. Certainly, we were all miserable, if none
were; for we wanted the exercise of the profitablest virtue. For though a Judge
may be just, though none transgress; and we might be merciful, though none
wanted, by keeping ever a disposion to be such, if need were; yet what can we
hope would serve to awake us then, which snort now under the cries of the
wretched, the testimony of our own consciences, the liberal promises of reward
from God, and his loud threatenings for such omissions? Amongst the Rules of
State, it is taught and practiced for one, That they which advance and do good,
must do it immediately from themselves, that all the Obligation may be toward
them: But when they will destroy or do hurt, they must do it instrumentally by
others, to remove and alienate the envy. Accordingly, when Princes communicate
to any Jura Regalia, by that they are authorized to apprehend, accuse, pursue,
condemn, execute, and dispoil, but not to pardon. God does otherwise; for, for
our first sin, himself has inflicted death, and labor upon us. And, as it
were to take from us all occasion of evil, he does all the evil of which his
nature is capable, which is but Malum poenae. But of the treasures of his
mercy, he has made us the Stewards, by dispensing to one another. For first,
he has redeemed man by man, and then he has made Hominem homini Deum. And
proportional to this treasure, he has made our necessities and miseries
infinite. So much, that an Egyptian King forbad Hegesias the Philosopher to
speak publicly of humane misery, Val. Max. l. 8. c. 9.
least every one should kill himself. All consists of givers and receivers: and
to contract it closer, every man is both those; and therefore made so, because
one provokes the other: for, Homo indigus, Prove. 19.
misericors est. And it is therefore that Aquinas says, 2a. 2ae. q. 30. ar. 2.
that old men, and wise men, are aptest to this virtue, because they best
foresee a possibility of needing others compassion. And if thou had nothing
to give, or knew no want in any other, thou have work enough within doors;
Miserere animae tuae. But toward our selves, Eccles. 30.
or persons almost our selves, there is not properly mercy, but grief; Aqu.
ibid.
therefore we must go to seek guests. And to such a cheerful giver, God gives
himself; Paulinus: Homil. de Gazophilactio. l. 4. c. 5.
Et quid non possidet, qui ipsum possi^^^ possidentem? says a contemplative
wise man. And for such a giver to work upon. God makes others needy; Fecit
mileros, at agnosceret misericordes, says the same man, in the same book. In
the first constitution of the Roman Empire, by the general corruption of all
men, which is to give more to them which abound, they easily foresaw, that men
would soon decline and stray into a chargeable and sumptuous worship of their
Gods; And therefore they resisted it with this law, Deos frugi colunto. This
moderated their sacrifices, but yet withheld them not from the superfluous
adorning the Temples and Images of their Gods. But in our reformed Christian
Religion, which is the thriftiest and cheapest that ever was instituted, (for
our Sacrifices grow within us, and are our own creatures, prayer and praise;
and since our Bessed Savior has given himself for us, we are now as men which
had paid a great fine, and were bound to no other rent, then acknowledgements
and services) now that we have removed the expensive dignising of images, and
relics, what other exercise is there left for our charity, then those nearer
images both of God, and of our selves, the poor? Be merciful then, as your
Father in heaven is merciful. And how is he? homines and jument a salvabis,
Deus, Psalm. 35. and by jumenta are understood men not yet reduced to the
knowledge of God. Give then thy counsel to the ignorant, thy prayers to the
negligent, but most thy strength to the oppressed and dejected in heart; for
surely, oppression makes a wise man mad, Eccl. 7.9. how tempestuously will it
then work upon a weaker? let no greatness retard thee from giving, as though
thou were above want. Alas, our greatness is Hydroptick, not solid: we are not
firm, but puffed, and swollen; we are the lighter, and the lesser for such
greatness. Alcibiades bragged how he could walk in his own ground; all this was
his, Aelian. l. 3. c. 28.
and no man a foot within him; and Socrates gave him a little map of the world,
and bid him show him his territory there; and there an Ant would have overstrid
it. Let no smalnesse retard thee: if thou be not a Cedar to help toward a
palace, if thou be not Amber, Bezoar, nor liquid gold, to restore Princes;
yet thou art a shrub to shelter a lamb, or to feed a bird; or thou art a
plantane, to ease a child's smart; or a grass to cure a sick dog. Love an asker
better then a giver: which was good Agapetus counsel to Justinian: Yea rather,
prevent the asking; and do not so much join and concur with misery, as to
suffer it to grow to that strength, that it shall make thy brother ask, and put
him to the danger of a denial. Avoid in giving, that which the Canonists
express by Cyminibilis, which is a trifling giver. And give not (as Seneca
calls them) panes lapidosos; which are benefits hardly drawn, which have only
the shape, not the nourishment of benefits: But give as thou would receive.
For thou give not, but restorest, yea thou performest another duty too, thou
lendest. Thou do not waste, but lay up; and thou gainest in losing. For to
this giving most properly squares Plato's definition of liberality, that it is,
studium lucrandi ut decet. I need not much fear that any man is too much
inflamed to a wastfull charity by this; yet it is an affection capable of sin.
And therefore, as waggoners in steep descents, tie the teame behind, not to
draw it up, but to stop sudden precipitations downward, so, only to prevent
such slipery downfals, I say, That as the Holy Ghost forbids, Eccl. 7.18. Be
not just orvermuch, so one may be charitable overmuch. His aptnes to give, may
occasion another sloth, and he may breed the worms which shall eat him; and
produce the lean kine, which shall devour the fat. And so, as Paulinus says,
Ad Severum.
In charitatem de charitate peccat. And in another place, De Monachata.
Multa charitas pene delirum, and pietas stultum fecit. For, God would not,
says Saint Ambrose, that we should pour out, De Officiis.
but distribute our wealth. So that for precise Moderation herein precept will
not serve; but that prayer of that most devout Abbot Antony, (of whom Saint
Augustine says, De Doctrina Christiana.
that without knowledge of letters, he rehearsed, and expounded all the
Scriptures) Deus det nobis gratiam Discretionis. For, the same B. Dorothaeus
which says wisely, God requires not that you should fly, but that you should
not fall, Doctrine. 14
says also devoutly, Doctrine. 1.
That they which do what they are commanded of Christ, pay their tribut justly,
but they which perform his counsels, bring him presents. But in this we may
insist no longer: we shall best know what we should do, by considering what
God has done, and how he expressed his mercies toward his Israelites.

His Mercy in bringing them to Egypt.
He brought them into the Land of Egypt. For though in the Scriptures, when God
would excite his children, he uses to remember them that he is that God which
brought them out of the Land of Egypt; yet, that he brought them into that
Land, was more simply, absolutely, and entirely a work of Mercy. For, in the
other he exercised his Justice upon Pharaoh; and his Power in Miracles. And
Miracles must not be drawn into consequence; No man may argue to himself, God
has miraculously preserved me, therefore he will do so still. Miracles are to
our apprehension incoherent and independent things with the rest of Nature.
They seem none of the links of that great chain of providence, and connection
of causes. Therefore he which hears them, believes them but so far as he
believes the reporter; and he which sees them, suspects his sense in the
apprehending, and his judgment in the inquisition and pursuit of the causes;
or goes more roundly to work, and imputes it all to the Devil. But this work
of bringing them into Egypt, was only a work of a familiar and fatherly
Providence: and, though it were greater then the other (for in coming from
Egypt they were but redeemed from serving, here from perishing) yet there is
nothing in the History, which a mere natural man would grudg to believe. From
what kind of Destruction did he then deliver them? Famine.
From famine; One of those three afflictions, which God in a diligent and
exquisite revenge presented to David's choice. And one of those two, in
comparison whereof, David chose a pestilence of uncertain lasting and
intenseness. An affliction so great, as God chooses that comparison to express
his greatest affliction of all, which is a famine of his word. Amos.
An affliction which defeats all Magistracy; for in it one may lawfully steal.
All propriety; for in it all things return to their primative community. All
natural affection; for in it fathers may sell their children, by humane laws;
and divine books have Examples where they have eaten them. An affliction,
Sueton. Calig. 26.
which Caligula, to exceed his predecessors and his own Examples, studied out,
when to imitate the greatest power of all, praeclusis horreis, indixit populo
famem. An affliction with which our law revenges her self when a delinquent
which had offended her before, does after in contempt of her stand mute at the
bar. It is a Rack, without either Engine or Executioner; a devouring poison,
and yet by substraction; and a way to make a man kill himself by doing nothing.
Such are all extreme famines, and such was this. For it was no particular curse
upon one country; for famine was in all the Land, Genesis 41.54. ver. 57.
says the text. And all Countries came to Egypt to buy corn. It was no natural
disease or infirmity in the earth or air: but as the Psalmist expresses it,
Ps. 105.16
God had called a famine upon the land, and utterly brake the staff of bread.
Egypt her self, which uses to brag, Paneg. Plin. in Iracund.
Nihil se imbribus coeloque debere, and whose inundations are fertilities, felt
the barreness, though by Joseph's providence it felt not the penury. In this
affliction, in this distress, the sons of Jacob must go into a strange land,
where they had no friend whom they knew, but (to speak humanely) an enemy whom
they knew not. And yet God, as though their malice against their brother
Joseph, and as though this curse upon the whole land had been ordained by him
for their advantage, (for so it may seem by those words of Joseph, You sent me
not hither, Genesis 45.8
but God; and in the Psalm, Psalm. 105.
God sent a man before them) appears to Jacob, persuades the journey, assures
him and his safe going, great propagation, and safe return.

His Mercy in propagating them in Egypt.
Propagation is the truest Image and nearest representation of eternity. For
eternity it self, that is, the Deity it self seems to have been ever delighted
with it: for the producing of the three Persons in the Trinity, Propagation of
God.
which is a continuing and undeterminable work, is a propagation of the Deity.
And next to this contemplation, that God, which is full, and perfect, and All,
should admit a propagation, it may deserve a second place to consider, that
that which is merely and utterly Nothing, Of Sin.
which is Sin, (for it is but privation) has had the greatest propagation that
can be. And between these two extreme Miracles, A propagation in that which is
already All, and a propagation in that which is always. Nothing, we may wonder
at a propagation in that which is but one half; which is, those Religious
Orders, Of religious Orders.
and devout professions, which multiply without Mothers. Of which (not to speak
of late times, when that profession was become a disease and contagion, and so
no wonder though they infected, and possessed, and devoured whole teritories;
but in their primitive institution and practice, how infinite was the
propagation? we cannot discredit those stories (for being dis-interessed in our
late-sprung Controversies they could not speak prejudicially) which reckon
5000. in some one Monastery; and 500 Monasteries under one Abbot. These who had
no wives, had infinite spiritual children; and having nothing in the world,
had a great part of it. Within one mile of Alexandria, there were 500
Monasteries pene contigua. So that, it is truly said of them, they had Oppida
extra Mundum. And when the only tribe of the Benedictins was in full height,
Azor. l. 12
it had not many less then 40000 Monasteries. And not only the Christian
Church, the easiness of whose yoke might invite them to these counsails, but
the Jews under an insupportable law, would ever super-errogate in this kind.
Of whose one sect, the Esseni, L. 5. c. 17.
Pliny says, per multa seculorum millia, gens aeterna, in qua nemo nascitur;
and he gives no other mother to such an increase then this, Tam foecunda illis
aliorum vitae poenitentia. Of these men, (if they will accept that name,)
(except such of them as being all born to sail in the same ship as we, and to
suffer with us, have so sublimed their wits with a contempt of ours, that they
steal from us in a Calenture; or so stupefied themselves, that they forsake
their partnership in our labors and dangers, in a lazy Scurvie,) I dare not
conceive any hard opinion: For though we be all Gods tenants in this world, and
freeholders for life, and are so bound amongst other duties, to keep the world
in reparation, and leave it as well as we found it, (for, ut gignamus geniti)
yet since we have here two employments, one to conserve this world, another to
increase Gods Kingdom, none is to be accused, that every one does not all, so
all do all. For as, though every particular man by his diet and temperance,
should preserve his own body, and so observe it by his own experience of it,
that he might ordinarily be his own Physician; yet it is fit, that some sepose
all their time for that study, and be able to instruct and reform others; So,
though every one should watch his own steps, and serve God in his vocation; yet
there should be some, whose Vocation it should be to serve God; as all should
do it, so some should do nothing else. But, because, our esse must be
considered before our been esse, and to our esse properly conduce all things
which belong to our preservation here, (for, the first words that ever God said
to man, were, Genesis 1.28
Bring forth, and multiply, and fill the earth, which was propagation; And then
presently, subdue it, and rule, which is Dominion. And then, Every thing which
has life, shall be to you for meat; which is not only sustenance, but lawful
abundance and delicacy.) Therefore to advance propagation, laws have been
diligent and curious. Some have forbidden a man to divide himself to diverse
women, because, though God in his secret ends have sometimes permitted it to the
Patriarchs, and though (being able to make contraries serve to one end) he
threatens in another place, that ten women shall follow one man; yet ordinarily
this liberality of a man's self, frustrates propagation, and is in it self a
confession, that he seeks not children. Maximiniano, and Constantino.
And therefore the Panegyric justly extols that Emperor, who married young;
Novum jam, tum miraculum, juvenis uxorius. And some laws in the Greek States
enforced men to marry: and the Roman law pretended to have the same ends, but
with more sweetness, by giving privileges to the married: but ever increasing
them with their number of children, of which to have had none, threw a man back
again into penalty; for of the estate of such, a tenth part was confiscate; for
to have children, is so much of the essence of the lawfulness of that act,
that Saint Augustine says, Si prolem ex condition vitant, De bono Conjugali.
non est matrimonium; for that is a condition destroying the nature of
matrimony; of which, and of the fruits thereof, how indulgent the Romans were,
this one law declares; That to Minors they allowed so many years more then they
had, as they had children.

Of this propagation.
Of this propagation, which is our present contemplation, many think devoutly,
that the smalnesse of the first number, and the shortness of the time, are the
remarkable and essential parts. To advance their devotion, I will remember
them, that the number of 430. years diverse times spoken of, is from Abraham's
coming to Canaan; Exodus 12.41.
for the time of this propagation in Egypt, was but 215. years. And the number
of men, which is 600000. is only of fighting men, Numb. 1.
which cannot well be thought a fist part of all the souls. The whole number
Josephus, proportioning 10. to a paschal lamb, as the Rabbis do, brings to be
3700000. yet to me these seem no great parts of Gods exceeding Mercy in this
History; for from so many, in such a space, God, without miracle, by affording
twins, and preserving alive, might ordinarily have derived more men then ever
were at once upon the whole earth. But whether his decree have appointed a
certain number which mankind shall not exceed, (as it seems to be a reasonable
conjecture of the whole, because in the most famous parts it is found to have
held; Rome, and Venice, and like States never exceeding that number to which
they have very soon arrived:) Or that the whole earth is able to nourish no
more, without doubt it is evident, that the world had very long since as many
souls as ever it had, or may be presumed to have ever hereafter. And it is a
very probable conjecture, that the reason, why, since wolves produce oftener,
and more then sheep, and more sheep are killed then wolves, yet more sheep
remain, is, because they are cherished by all industry. For only there men
increase, where there is means for their sustentation. That therefore which God
did mercifully in this, was, that he propagated them to such numbers under such
oppressions and destructions: for the Egyptians cruelly caused them to serve,
Exodus 1.
and made them weary of their lives by sore labor, with all manner of bondage:
yea, their devotion was scornfully mis-interpreted, Because you are idle, you
say, let us go offer to our Lord. Exodus 12.
And yet, the more they vexed them, the more they grew; Ps. 105.24
and he made them stronger then their oppressors; And this, though that
desperate law of destroying all their male children, had been executed among
them.

His Mercy in bringing them from Egypt.
Now follows his bringing them from Egypt: And though that were properly a work
of Justice, because it was the performance of God's promise, yet that promise
was rooted in Mercy: And though he brought them out In Manu forti, as it is
very often repeated, and by effect of miracles, and so showed his power, (for
it is written, Psa. 106.7
he saved them for his Names sake, that he might make his power to be known.
And in another place, Exo. 14.4
I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host) yet respecting the
time when he did it, (to which his promise had not limited him) and for whom he
did it, we can contemplate nothing but Mercy. For in the same place, it is
said, Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, neither remembered the
multitude of thy Mercies: so that, diversely beheld, the same Act might seem all
Power, and all Mercy. And at this time we consider, not that those plagues
afflicted Egypt, but the land of Goshen felt none; and we hear not now the
cries and lamentations for the death of the firstborn, but we remember, that
not a dog opened his mouth against the children of Israel. Exodus 11.
He delivered them then from such an oppressor, as would neither let them go,
nor live there. From one who increased their labors, and diminished their
numbers. From one who would neither allow them to be Naturals, nor Aliens. So
ambiguous and perplexed, and wayward is humane policy, when she exceeds her
limits, and her subject. But God, though his mercy be abundantly enough for all
the world, (for since he swet, and bled Physic enough for all, it were more
easy for him, to apply it to all, if that conduced to his ends,) yet because
his children were ever froward, and grudged any part to others in this their
Delivery, pours out all his sea of Mercy upon them, and withdraws all from the
Egyptians. Therefore he is said to have hardened Pharaoh's heart. Which because
it is so often repeated (at least nine times) was done certainly all those ways
by which God can be said to harden us. Induration.
Either Ad captum humanum, when God descends to our phrase of speech, and
serves our way of apprehending; Or permissively, when God, as it were looks
another way, Corn. Cell. 5.3.
and agrees with that counsel of the Physician, It is a discreet man's part to
let him alone, which cannot be cured; Or substractively, when he withdrawes
that spiritual food, which, because it is ordained for children, must not be
cast to dogs; Or Occasionally, when he presents grace proportioned to a good
end, in its own nature and quality, which yet he knows the taker will corrupt
and envenom it, (for so, a Magistrate may occasion evil, though neither he
may, nor God can cause any;) Or else Ordinately and instrumentally, when God, by
this Evil, works a greater good; which yet was not Evil where it first grew,
in the Paradise of Gods purpose and decree (for so no simple is Evil) but
becomes such, when it comes to our handling, and mingling* and applying. Yea,
that very Act which God punished in Pharaoh, which was the oppression,
proceeded from God. For the Psalmist says, He hardened their heart to hate his
people, Ps. 105.25
and to deal craftily with his servants. Percrius Ex. 1.
That so by this Violence and this Deceit, they might have a double title to
proffess themselves of the Egyptians treasure. And accordingly for all their
pressures, he brought them away sound; and rich, for all their deceit: Ps.
105.37
He brought them forth with silver and gold, and there was none feeble in their
tribes. Yea it is added, Egypt was glad at their departing; which God
intimated, when he said, Exo. 11.1
when he lets you go, he shall at once chase you hence. Only to paraphrase
the History of this Delivery, without amplifying, were furniture and food
enough for a meditation of the best perseverence, and appetite, and digestion;
yea, the least word in the History would serve a long rumination. If this be in
the bark, what is in the tree? If in the superficial grass, the letter; what
treasure is there in the hearty and inward Mine, the Mistick and retired sense?
Dig a little deeper, O my poor lazy soul, and thou shall see that thou, and all
mankind are delivered from an Egypt; and more miraculously then these. For,
Almightiness is so natural to God, that nothing done by his power, is very
properly miracles, which is above all Nature. But God delivered us, by that
which is most contrary to him; by being impotent; by being sin; by being Dead.
That great Pharaoh, whose Egypt all the world is by usurpation, (for Pharaoh is
but exemptus, Acacius de privilegiis.
and privilegiatus; and that Name, (I hope not the Nature) is strai'd into our
word Baro) whom God has made Prince of the air, and Prince of Darkness; that
is, of all light and aerie illusions, and of all sad and earnest wickedness, of
Vanity, and of sin; had made us fetch our own straw, that is, painfully seek
out light and blasing Vanities; and then burn his brick, which is, the clay of
our own bodies with concupiscences and ambitions, to build up with our selves
his Kingdom; He made us travel more for hell, then would have purchased
Heaven; He enfeebled us from begetting or conceiving Male children, which are
our good thoughts, and those few which we had, he strangled in the birth: And
then, came thou, O Christ, thine own Moses, and deliveredst us; not by doing,
but suffering; not by killing, but dying. Go one step lower, that is higher,
and nearer to God, O my soul, in this Meditation, and thou shall see, that even
in this moment, when he affords thee these thoughts, he delivers thee from an
Egypt of dullness and stupiditie. As often as he moves thee to pray to be
delivered from the Egypt of sin, he delivers thee. And as often as thou
promisest him not to return thither, he delivers thee. Thou have delivered me,
O God, from the Egypt of confidence and presumption, by interrupting my
fortunes, and intercepting my hopes; And from the Egypt of despair by
contemplation of thine abundant treasures, and my portion therein; from the
Egypt of lust, by confining my affections; and from the monstrous and
unnatural Egypt of painful and wearisome idleness, by the necessities of
domestic and familiar cares and duties. Yet as an Eagle, though she enjoy her
wing and beak, is wholly prisoner, if she be held by but one talon; so are we,
though we could be delivered of all habit of sin, in bondage still, if Vanity
hold us but by a silken thread. But, O God, as mine inward corruptions have made
me mine own Pharaoh, and mine own Egypt; so thou, by the inhabitation of thy
Spirit, and application of thy merit, have made me mine own Christ; and
contenting thy self with being my Medicine, allowest me to be my Physician.
Lastly, descend, O my Soul, to the very Center, which is the very Pole, (for in
infinite things, incapable of distinction of parts, Highest and lowest are all
one) and consider to what a land of promise, and heavenly Jerusalem God will
at last bring thee, from the Egypt of this world, and the most Egyptiacal part,
this flesh. God is so abundantly true, that he ever performs his words more
then once. And therefore, as he has fulfilled that promise, Out of Egypt have
I called my Son; Mat. 2.15.
So will he also perform it in every one of his elect; and as when Herod dyed,
his Angel appeared to Joseph in Egypt in a dream, to call him thence; So when
our persecutor, our flesh shall die, and the slumber of death shall overtake us
in this our Egypt, His Angels, sent from Heaven, or his Angels newly created in
us, (which are good desires of that dissolution,) or his Ministerial Angels in
his militant Church, shall call and invite us from this Egypt to that Canaan.
Between which (as the Israelites did) we must pass a desert; a disunion and
divorce of our body and soul, and a solitude of the grave. In which, the
faithful and discreet prayers of them which stay behind, may much advantage and
benefit us, and themselves, if thereby God may be moved to hasten that judgment
which shall set open Heavens greater gates, at which our Bodies may enter, and
to consummate and accomplish our salvation.

His Mercy in their Preservation.
The next place is, to consider his Mercy in their preservation in the Desert.
For God has made nothing which needs him not, or which would not instantly
return again to nothing without his special conservation: Angels and our Souls
are not delivered from this dependancy upon him. As therefore Conservation is
as great a work of Power as Creation; so the particuliar ways of Gods
preserving those special people in the Wilderness, are as great works of Mercy,
as the Delivery from Egypt. And though this book of Exodus embrace not all
those, yet here are some instances of every kind; as well of preservation from
extrinsick violences of War, as intrinsic of Famine; and mixed, of infirmities
and diseases. And because Gods purpose had destined them to an offensive War at
last, let us mark by what degrees he instructed and noursed them to it. They
had been ever frozen in slavery, without use of Arms, or taste of Honor, or
Glory, or Victory. And because they were therefore likely to forsake themselves,
and dishonor him, God (faith the History) carried them not by the way of the
Philistims Country, Exodus 13.17.
though that were nearer, lest they should repent when they see War, and turn
again into Egypt. But presently after, when he had contracted himself to them,
and affirmed and affianced his presence by the Sacrament of the Pillar, he was
then content that they should see an Army pursuing them; which was not so much
terrible to them as they were Enemies, as that that they were their Masters.
For then they exclaimed to Moses, Exodus 14.11.
Have thou brought us to die in the wilderness, because there were no graves in
Egypt? Did not we say, let us be in rest, that we may serve the Egyptians? So
soon did a dejection make them call their former bondage, rest; and sink down
to meet and invite death, when the Lord of life upheld them. And at this time,
God used not their swords at all, yet gave them a full victory. But when this
had warmed them, as soon as the Amalekites made toward them, they feared not,
murmured not, retired not; nay, they expected not: but says Moses, to Joshuah,
Choose us men, and go, Exodus 17.9
fight with Amalek. Which victory, lest they should attribute to themselves,
and so grow too forward in exposing themselves, and tempting God; the lifting
up, or falling down of Moses's hands in prayer, that day, swayed and governed
the battle. Which therefore God was especially careful that the soldier
should know; for so he commanded Moses, Write that for a remembrance in the
book, Exodus 17.14.
and rehearse it to Joshuah. To their other wars this book extends not: but is
full of examples of his other mercies toward them, though they murmured; yea,
by the words it may well seem, they were done because they murmured: In the
Morning ye shall see the glory of God, (says Moses to them) for, Exodus 16.7
he has heard your grudging against him. And again, At evening shall the Lord
give you flesh; Ver. 8.
for the Lord has heard your murmuring. They murmured for water, Exodus 15.24.
saying, What shall we drink? and then God presented water; but lest they
should attribute all that to the nature of the place, those waters were too
bitter to be drunk. Then God would sweeten them; yet not by Miracle; but to
incline them to a reverence of Moses, he informed him, what would do it
naturally; as it appears in another place, where the Art of physic is
extolled: Was not the water made sweet with wood, Eccl. 38.5.
that men might know the virtue thereof? And yet, the next time that they
murmured for water, he gave it them miraculously from the rock; to show, that
though Moses was enabled to all natural works, yet he withdrew not his
miraculous presence from them. And then, when they murmured desperately for
meat, Oh that we had dyed in the Land of Egypt, Exo. 16.2.
when we sat by fleshpots, etc. the Lord, as though nothing in use, or in
nature, had been precious enough for them, rained down such fowls, as no
Naturalist since can tell what they were: and such a grain, as though it abide
the interpretation of panis fortium, and panis Angelorum, yet, says a curious
observer of those subtilties, the name signifies, Fra. Geor. problem. fol. 45.
Quid est hoc? which is easily gathered from the very Text, When they saw it,
they said to one another, Exodus 16.15.
it is Man; for they wist not what it was. In which, Probl. 351
the same Problamist observes this wonder, that every man took a like
proportion, and all were alike satisfied, though all could not be of alike
appetite and digestion. And a greater wonder, and by a better Author is
observed in it, That it was meat for all tastes, Sap. 16.20
and served to the appetite of him which took it, and was that which every man
would. Yet this heavenly food they injured with a weariness of it; and worse,
with their comparisons; for they cried, We remember the flesh we are in Egypt
for naught, Number. 11.5.
the cucumers, pepons, leeks, onions, and garlic. As though they had been
less worth, or they had paid more for it. If then they could chide him into
mercy, and make him merciful not only to their sin, but for their sin, where
or when may we doubt of his mercy? Of which, we will here end the
consideration; not without an humble acknowledgment, that it is not his least
mercy, that we have been thus long possessed with the meditation thereof: for
thus long we have been in the Harbor, but we launch into a main and unknown
Sea, when we come to consider his Power.

Of all the ways in which God has expressed himself toward us, we have made
no word which does less signify what we mean, then Power: for Power, which is
but an ability to do, ever relates to some future thing: and God is ever a
present, simple, and pure Act. But we think we have done much, and gone far,
when we have made up the word Omnipotence, which is both ways improper; for it
is much too short, because Omnipotence supposes and confesses a matter and
subject to work upon, and yet God was the same, when there was nothing. And
then it over-reaches, and goes down-wards beyond God: for God has not, or is
not such an Omnipotence, as can do all things; for though squeamish and
tenderer men think it more mannerly to say, This thing cannot be done, then,
God cannot do this thing; yet it is all one: And if that be an Omnipotence,
which is limited with the nature of the worker, or with the congruity of the
subject, other things may incroach upon the word Omnipotent; that is, they can
do all things which are not against their nature, or the nature of the matter
upon which they work. Beza therefore might well enough say, That God could not
make a body without place; And Prateolus might truly enough infer upon that,
Verbo Bezanitae.
that the Bezanites (as he calls them) deny omnipotence in God; for both are
true. And therefore I doubt not, but it has some mystery, that the word
Omnipotence is not found in all the Bible; nor Omnipotent in the New Testament.
And where it is in the Old, it would rather be interpreted All-sufficient, then
Almighty; between which there is much difference. God is so All-sufficient, that
he is sufficient for all, and sufficient to all: He is enough, and we are in
him able enough to take and apply. We fetch part of our wealth, which is our
faith, expressly from his Treasury: And for our good works, we bring the metal
to his Mint, (or that Mint comes to us) and there the Character of Baptism,
and the impression of his grace, makes them current, and somewhat worth, even
toward him. God is all-efficient: that is, has created the beginning,
ordained the way, foreseen the end of every thing; and nothing else is any
kind of cause thereof. Yet, since this word efficient, is now grown to signify
infallibility in God, it reaches not home to that which we mean of God; since
man is efficient cause of his own destruction. God is also all-conficient: that
is, concurs with the nature of every thing; for indeed the nature of every
thing is that which he works in it. And as he redeemed not man as he was God,
(though the Mercy, and Purpose, and Acceptance were only of God) but as God
and man; so in our repentances and reconciliations, though the first grace
proceed only from God, yet we concur so, as there is an union of two
Hypostases, Grace, and Nature. Which, (as the incarnation of our Blessed
Savior himself was) is conceived in us of the Holy Ghost, without father; but
fed and produced by us; that is, by our will first enabled and illumined. For
neither God nor man determine man's will; for that must either imply a
necessiting thereof from God, or else Pelagianisme) but they condetermine it.
And thus God is truly all-conficient, that is, concurrent in all; and yet we
may not dare to say, that he has any part in sin. So God is also
all-perficient: that is, all, and all parts of every work are his entirely: and
lest any might seem to escape him, and be attributed to Nature or to Art, all
things were in him at once, before he made Nature, or she Art. All things which
we do to day were done by us in him, before we were made. And now, (when they
are produced in time, as they were foreseen in eternity,) his exciting grace
provokes every partiticular good work, and his assisting grace perfects it. And
yet we may not say, but that God begins many things which we frustrate; and
calls when we come not. So that, as yet our understanding has found no word,
which is well proportioned to that which we mean by power of God; much less of
that refined and subtle part thereof, which we chiefly consider in this place,
which is the absolute and transcendent power of Miracles, with which this
History abounds. For whatsoever God did for his Israelits, beside Miracles, was
but an extension of his Mercy, and belongs to that Paragraph which we have
ended before.

Nature is the Common law by which God governs us, and Miracle is his
Prerogative. For Miracles are but so many Non-obstantes upon Nature. And
Miracle is not like prerogative in any thing more then in this, that no body
can tell what it is. For first, Creation and such as that, are not Miracles,
because they are not (to speak in that language) Nata fieri per alium modum.
And so, only that is Miracle, which might be done naturally, and is not so
done. And then, lest we allow the Devil a power to do Miracles, we must say,
that Miracle is contra totam Naturam, against the whole order and disposition
of Nature. For as in Cities, a father governs his family by a certain Order,
which yet the Magistrate of the City may change for the Cities good, and a
higher Officer may change the Cities Order; but none, all, except the King: so,
I can change some natural things (as I can make a stone fly upward) a
Physician more, and the Devil more then he; but only God can change all. And
after that is out of necessity established, that Miracle is against the whole
Order of Nature, I see not how there is left in God a power of Miracles. For,
the Miracles which are produced to day, were determined and inserted into the
body of the whole History of Nature (though they seem to us to be but
interlineary and Marginall) at the beginning, and are as infallible and
certain, as the most Ordinary and customary things. Which is evicted and
approved by that which Lactantius says, and particularly proves, De vera Sap.
c. 15.
that all Christ's Miracles were long before prophesied. So that truly nothing
can be done against the Order of Nature. For, Saint Augustine says truly, Cont.
Faustum l. 26. c. 3.
That is Natural to each thing, which God does, from whom proceeds all
Fashion, Number and Order of Nature: for that God, whose Decree is the Nature
of every thing, should do against his own Decree, if he should do against
Nature. As therefore if we understood all created Nature, nothing would be
Mirum to us; so if we knew Gods purpose, nothing would be Miraculum. For
certainly, those Miracles which Moses did, after God had once revealed to
Moses, that he would do them, were not Miracles to him, no more then the works
of the Conjurers, which ex Ratione Rei, were as true as his. But the expressing
of his power at this time was, that in the sight of such understanders and
workmasters, as the Magi were, he would do more without any Instrument
conducing to those ends, then they could do by their best instrument, the
Devil; and so draw from them that confession, Digitus Dei hic est: for else
who could have distinguished between his and their works, or denied the name of
Miracle to theirs? for they (not to depart at this time from vulgar Philosophy;
not that I bind your faith to it, but that if we abandon this, it is not easy
and ready to constitute another so defensible) by their power of local Motion,
and Application of Active and passive things, could oppose matter to heat, and
so produce frogs truly; yea, when such things are brought together by such a
workman, he can by them produce greater effects then nature could. As an Axe
and timber being in the hand of a Statuary, he can make an Image; which they
two, or a less skillful Agent could not do. But God wrought not so: But, as
Arnobius says, he did them, Sine vi carminum, Adversus Gent. l. 1.
sine herbarum aut graminum succis, sine ulla observatione sollicita: De vera
sap. c. 15.
but verbo, and jussione, as Lactantius notes. By which means Arnobius
pronounces, none of the Philosophers could cure an Itch; Adv. gent. l. 2.
Nemo Philosophorum potuit unquam scabiem, una interdictione sanare. Another
expressing of his power, was in this, that when he would, he intercepted their
power; which was, when they attempted to make Cyniphs. For that is a kind of
treason, and clipping God's coin, to say, that they were hindered by natural
causes, for, if those Cyniphs werelice, (as many Translations call them) and if
sweat be the matter of them, and the Devil could not ordinarily provide store
of that, yet I say, their credit stood not upon the story, but the fact: And
then the Devil knew natural means, to warm and distill multitudes of men into
sweats: And last, if they were such vermin, yet they are agreed to be of that
kind which infest dogs; and they never sweat. And if by Cyniph be expressed
some fly, not made till then, and then of putrefaction (for it were too much
to allow creatures of a new Species,) certainly, the Devil can produce all
such. Either then the creature being merely new, the Devil understood not of
what it was composed; Or God changed the form of Dust into another form, which
the Devil could never do; or else, God manacled his hand in the easiest thing,
to confound him the more; for after this, it appears not that the Magi
attempted to do any more Miracles. To discountenance then their deceits, and
withal to afflict the Land of Egypt, was the principal purpose of God in
these Miracles: not to declare himself, or beget faith; for he does not always
bind miracles to faith, nor faith to miracles. He will sometimes be believed
without them; and sometimes spend them upon unbelievers; lest men should think
their faith gave strength to his power. For though it be said, Mark 6.5.
Christ could do no great works in his own country, for their unbelief: yet
he did some there; which Saint Hierom says, Ema. Sacra, in hunc locum.
was done, lest they should be excusable, having seen no Miracle: And he did
not many, least, as Theophylact says, he should after many Miracles resisted,
have been forced in justice to a severer punnishment of them. But because the
danger of believing false miracles is extremely great, and the essential
differences of false and true, very few, and very obscure, (for what humane
understanding can discern, whether they be wrought immediately, or by second
causes; And then for the end to which they are addressed, what sect of
Christians, or what sect departed from all Christians, will refuse to stand to
that law? If there arise a Prophet, and he give a wonder, Deuteronomy. 13.1.
and the wonder come to pass, saying, let us go after other Gods, that Prophet
shall be slain.) I incline to think, that God for the most part, works his
miracles rather to show his Power, then Mercy, and to terrify enemies, rather
then comfort his children. For miracles lessen the merit of faith. And our
Blessed Savior said to the Pharisees, An evil anoadulterous generation
seeks a sign, And John Baptist, Mat. 12.38 Joh. 10.
in whom there seems to have been most use of Miracles, did none. And though in
this delivery from Egypt, for Pharaoh's hardness, God abounded in Miracles, yet
in their delivery from Babylon, (of which in respect of this, the Prophet says,
The day shall come, Her^. 16.
says the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord lives, that brought
his sons out of the land of Egypt; But the Lord lives, that brought his sons
out of the land of the North) God proceeded without Miracles. And though in
propagation of Christian Religion in the new discoveries, the Jesuits have
recorded infinite Miracles, yet the best amongst them ingenuously deny it; Jo.
Acosta. de procur. Jud. sal. l. 2. c. 9.
And one gives this for a reason, why Miracles are not afforded by God now, as
well as in the primitive Church, since the occasion seems to be the same, That
then ignorant men were sent to preach Christianity amongst men armed and
instructed against it, with all kinds of learnings and philosophies; but now
learned men are sent to the ignorant; and are superior to them in Reason and
in Civility, and in Authority; and besides, present them a Religion less
incredible then their own. I speak not thus, to cherish their opinion, who
think God does no Miracle now: that were to shorten his power, or to understand
his counsels; but to resist theirs, who make Miracles ordinary. For, besides
that it contradicts and destroys the Nature of Miracle, to be frequent, God at
first possessed his Church, (Fortiter) by conquest of Miracles; but he governs it
now, (suaviter) like an indulgent King, by a law which he has let us know. God
forbid I should discredit or diminish the great works that he has done at the
tombs of his Martyrs, or at the pious and devout commemoration of the sanctity
and compassion of his most Blessed Mother. But to set her up a Bank almost in
every good Town, and make her keep a shop of Miracles greater then her Sons,
Miracula B. Virg. ab Anno 1581 ad 1605. fo. 150.
(for is it not so, to raise a child, which was born dead, and had been buried
seventeen days, to so small end?) (for it died again as soon as it was carried
from her sight) is fearful and dangerous to admit. God forbid, I should deny
or obscure the power and practice of our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, in
casting out Devils in the primitive Church: but that the Roman Church should
make an Occupation of it, and bind Apprentices to it (for such are those little
boys whom they make Exorcists) and then make them free when they receive
greater Orders, and yet forbid them to set up, or utter their ware but where
they appoint, is scarce agreeable to the first Examples, I dare not say,
Institution; for I see not that this Order had any. Why we do not so, the
reason is, because non fuit sic ab initio: And no hardness of heart is enough
to justify a toleration of these devout deceits and holy lies, as they are
often called amongst themselves. The Power of God, which we cannot name, needs
not our help. And this very History (in expounding of which Pererius inculcates
so often, Non multiplicanda miracula) which seems the principallest record of
Gods Miracles, though literally it seem to be directed to his enemies, by often
expressing his power; yet to his children it insinuates an Admonition, to
beware of Miracles, since it tells them how great things the Devil did: And that
his giving over in no great thing, but the least of all, shows, That that was
not a cancelling of his Patent, which he had in his Creation, but only a
Supersedeas not to execute it at that time. For, (excepting the staying of the
Sun, and carrying it back (if it be clear that the body of the Sun was carried
back, and not the shadow only) and a very few more) it appears enough, that the
Devil has done oftener greater Miracles, then the children of God: For God
delights not so much in the exercise of his Power, as of his Mercy and Justice,
which partakes of both the other: For Mercy is his Paradise and garden, in
which he descends to walk and converse with man: Power his Army and Arsenel, by
which he protects and overthrows: Justice his Exchequer, where he preserves his
own Dignity, and exacts our Forfeitures.

Even at first God intimated how unwillingly he is drawn to execute Justice
upon transgressors; for he first exercised all the rest: Mercy, in purposing
our Creation; Power, in doing it; and Judgment, in giving us a Law: Of which
the written part was in a volume and character so familiar and inward to us
(for it was written in our hearts, and by Nature) as needed no Expositor: And
that part which was vocal, and delivered by Edict and Proclamation, was so
short, so perspicuous, and so easy (for it was but prohibitory, and exacted
nothing from Man) as it is one of the greatest strangenesses in the Story, that
they could so soon forget the Text thereof, and not espy the Serpents additions
and falsifications. And then at last God interposed his Justice; yet not so
much for Justice sake, as to get opportunity of new Mercy, in promising a
Redeemer; of new Power, in raising again bodies made mortal by that sin; and
of new Judgments, in delivering, upon more communications, a more particular
law, apparelled with Ceremonies, the cement and mortar of all exterior, and
often the inflamer of interior Religion. So that almost all Gods Justice is but
Mercy: as all our Mercy is but Justice; for we are all mutual debtors to one
another; but he to none. Yea, both his Nature, and his will are so conditioned,
as he cannot do Justice so much as man can. For, for his will, though he
neither will nor can do any thing against Justice, he does many things beside
it. Nothing unjustly, but many things not justly: for he rewards beyond our
Merits, and our sins are beyond his punishments. And then, we have exercise as
well of Commutative Justice as Distributive; God only of the later, since he
can receive nothing from us. And indeed, Distributive Justice in God, is
nothing but Mercy. So that there is but one limb of Justice left to God, which
is Punishment; And of that, all the degrees on this side final condemnation,
are acts of Mercy. So that the Vulture, by which some of the Ancients figured
Justice, was a just symbol of this Justice; Pierius li. 18.
for as that bird prays only upon Carcasses, and upon nothing which lives; so
this Justice apprehends none but such as are dead and putrified in sin and
impenitence.

To proceed then: All ordinary significations of Justice will conveniently be
reduced to these two, Innocence, which in the Scriptures is every where called
Righteousness: or else Satisfaction for transgressions, which, though Christ
have paid aforehand for us all, and so we are rather pardoned then put to
satisfaction; yet we are bound at Gods tribunal to plead our pardon, and to
pay the fees of contrition and penance. For, since our justificaon now
consists not in a pacification of God, (for then nothing but that which is
infinite could have any proportion) but in the application of the merits of
Christ to us, our contrition (which is a compassion with Christ, and so an
incorporating of our selves into his merit) has aliqualem proportionem to Gods
Justice; and the passion of Christ had not aequalem, but that Gods acceptance
(which also dignifies our contrition, though not to that height) advanced it to
that worthiness. To enquire further the way and manner by which God makes a
few do acceptable works; or, how out of a corrupt lump he selects and purifies
a few, is but a stumbling block and a tentation: Who asks a charitable man that
gives him an alms, where he got it, or why he gave it? will any favorite, whom
his Prince only for his appliableness to him, or some half-vertue, or his own
glory, burdens with Honors and Fortunes every day, and destines to future
Offices and Dignities, dispute or expostulate with his Prince, why he rather
chose not another, how he will restore his Coffers; how he will quench his
peoples murmurings, by whom this liberality is fed; or his Nobility, with whom
he equals new men; and will not rather repose himself gratefully in the
wisdom, greatness and bounty of his Master? Will a languishing desperate
patient, that has scarce time enough to swallow the potion, examine the
Physician, how he procured those ingredients, how that soil nourished them,
which humor they affect in the body, whether they work by excess of quality, or
specifically; whether he have prepared them by correcting, or else by
withdrawing their Malignity; and for such unnecessary scruples neglect his
health? Alas, our time is little enough for prayer, and praise, and society;
which is, for our mutual duties. Moral Divinity becomes us all; but Natural
Divinity, and Metaphysick Divinity, almost all may spare. Almost all the
ruptures in the Christian Church have been occasioned by such bold disputations
De Modo. One example is too much. That our Blessed Saviors body is in the
Sacrament, all say; The Roman Church appoints it to be there by
Transubstantiation. The needless multiplying of Miracles for that opinion has
moved the French and Helvetick reformed Churches to find the word
Sacramentally; which, because it puts the body there, and yet no nearer then
Heaven to Earth, seems a riddle to the Saxon and such Churches; whose modesty
(though not clearness) seems greatest in this Point; since believing the real
being of it there, they abstain generally (though some bold adventurers amongst
them also do exorbitate) from pronouncing De Modo. The like tempests has the
inquisition De Modo, raised in the article of Descent into Hell, even in our
Church; and of the conveyance of Gods grace (which was the occasion of this
digression) in the Roman at this day. But to decline this sad contemplation,
and to further our selves in the Meditation of Gods justice declared, in this
History, let me observe to you, that God in his Scriptures has Registered
especially three symbols or Sacraments, of use in this matter. One in Genesis,
of pure and mere Justice, Cha. 3.22.
vindicative, and permanent; which is, The Cherubim and fiery sword placed in
Paradise, to keep out, not only Adam, but his Posterity. The second in Exodus,
of pure and only Mercy, Chapter 25.17
which is the model and fabric of the Mercy seat, under the shadow of two
Cherubims wings. The third, partaking of both Mercy and Justice, and a
Memorial and seal of both, is the Rainebow after the Deluge. Genesis 9.14.
The first of these, which is of mere Justice, is so figurative, and so
mystic, and so unfit for Example or consequence, and so disputable whether it
lasted long, or ever were literally, that it seems God had no purpose to
deliver any evident testimony of so severe and mere Justice. But that of mere
Mercy, he made so familiar, that only devising the form himself, he committed
the making of it to man: and so affiancing and binding his Mercy to man's work,
did, as it were, put his Mercy into our hands. Yet that also is long since
translated from us: and there remains only the middle one, more convenient, and
proportional, and useful. For, as it betokens his Justice in the precedent
deluge, or his Merey in assuring us from any future; so is it made of natural
and well known causes, (and thereby familiar to us) and yet became a Sacrament
by Gods special institution then. Hom. 28. in Genesis
And, though it should be true which Chrysostom says, That it was a new
miracle then, and never appeared before; De Noe and Area, cap. 27
yea, though that could be true which Ambrose, somewhat against the text, and
directly against the other Expositors, says, That the Bow mentioned there was
not a Rainbow, but that A bow in the clouds, signifies only, The power of God
in persecution, and thereupon he observes, that God says, A Bow, but says not
Arrows, to inflict terror, not wounds; Every way, I say, it does the office of
remembering Gods Justice and Mercy together. And accordingly, in this large and
particular History of Gods Justice and Persecution, both toward his children,
and his enemies, if we consider their laborious waste and maceratings of their
bodies by hot and intemperate labor; All their contempts, and scorns, and
aviling, and annihilating in the eye of the Egyptians; All their Orbity, and
enfeebling their race by the Edict of destroying their male children; All their
deviations and strayings forty years, in a passage of a few days; and all
their penuries and battles in that journey; And then for the Egyptians, if we
look upon all their afflictions, first of plagues hateful to their senses,
then noisome to their fruits, then to their cattle, then to their bodies, then
to their posterity, then to their lives, excepting only the drowning of the
Egyptians in the sea, and the killing of the Israelites by their own hands in
their guiltiness of Idolatry with the Calfe, it will scarce be found that any
of the afflictions proceeded from mere Justice, but were rather as Physic, and
had only a medicinal bitterness in them. It remains, for determination of
this Meditation, that we speak a little of Gods Judgments.

And at this time, (as by infinite places in the Scriptures we are directed) we
call Gods Judgments, all those laws and directions by which he has informed
the Judgments of his children, and by which he governes his Judgments with or
against them. For otherwise this word Judgment has also three profane, and
three Divine acceptations. Of the first sort, the first serves contemplations
only, and so, Judgment is the last act of our understanding, and a conclusive
resolution: which both in private studies, and at Counsel tables, many want,
though endued with excellent abilities of objecting, disputing, infirming, yea
destroying others allegations; yet are not able to establish or propose any
other from themselves. These men, whether you consult them in Religion, or
State, or Law, only when they are joined with others, have good use, because
they bring doubts into disceptation; else, they are, at least unprofitable: and
are but as Simplicists, which know the venom and peccant quality of every
herb, but cannot fit them to Medicin; or such a Lapidary, which can soon spy
the flaw, but not mend it with setting. Judgment in the Second acceptance
serves for practice, and is almost synonimous with Discretion; when we consider
not so much the thing which we then do, as the whole frame and machine of the
business, as it is complexioned and circumstanced with time, and place, and
behoders: and so, make a thing, which was at most but indifferent, good. The
third way, Judgment serves not only present practice, but enlightens, and
almost governs posterity; and these are Decrees and Sentences, and Judgments in
Courts. The phrase of Divinity also accepts Judgment three ways; for sometimes
it is severe and mere Justice, as, [Judgment must begin at the house of God,] 1
Pet. 4.7.
And many such. And Judgment in this sense, is deep and unsearchable. For,
though Solomon pronounce, Eccl. 7.17.
[There is a just man that perishes in his justice, and there is a wicked man
that continues long in his malice;] yet he enquires for no reason of it: Psa.
36.6.
For, [Gods righteousness is like the mountains] eminent and inviting our
contemplation toward Heaven; but, [his Judgments are like a great deep,]
terrible and bottomless, and declining us toward the center of horror and
desperation. These judgments we cannot measure nor fathom; yet, for all that,
we must more then believe them to be just; for the Apostle says, We know the
Judgment of God is according to truth. Romans 2.2.
But yet oftentimes Judgment signifies not mere Justice, but as it is
attempred and sweetened with Mercy. For, by the phrase of the Psalmist, [
Judicabit populum in Justitia, Psa. 72.2.
and pauperes in Judicio] and many such, Reuch. de Art Cabul. l. 1.
the Cabalists (as one which understood them well, observes) have concluded,
that the word Judgment applied to God, has every where a mixed and participant
nature, and intimates both Justice and Mercy. And thirdly, the Talmudists have
straightened the word, and restrained Judgment to signify only the Judicial part
of the law: and say, the Holy Ghost so directed them, in Deuteronomy. [These are the
commandments, and the Ceremonies, and the Judgments, which the Lord commanded.]
And they proceed further; for, Deu. 4.13.
Because Gods Covenant and his ten Commandments are said simply to be given
them, and without any limitation of time or place, they confess, they are bound
to them ever, and every where; but, because his Ordinances and his law, (which
in the Original is, Ceremonies and Judgments) are thus delivered, Ver. 5.
[You shall keep them in the Land which you go to possesse] they therefore now
cut off Ceremonies and Judgments, from the body of the law, Galatinus, l. 11.
c. 3.
and in their dispersion bind not themselves to them, but where they may with
convenience enough. But here we take the word Judgment entirely, to signify
all the law: for, so the Psalmists speaks, Ps. 147.19
[He shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; he
has not dealt so with every Nation, nor have they known his Judgements]. For
here Judgments are as much as all the rest. And God himself in that last piece
of his which he commanded Moses to record, Deuteronomy. 32.4
that Heavenly Song which only himself composed, (for though every other
poetic part of Scripture, be also Gods word, and so made by him, yet all the
rest were Ministerially and instrumentally delivered by the Prophets, only
inflamed by him; but this which himself calls a Song, was made immediately by
himself, and Moses was commanded to deliver it to the Children; God choosing
this way and conveyance of a Song, as fittest to justify his future severities
against his children, because he knew that they would ever be repeating this
Song, (as the Delicacy, and Elegancy thereof, both for Divinity and Poetry,
would invite any to that) and so he should draw from their own mouths a
confession of his benenefits, and of their ingratitude;) in this Song, I say,
himself best expresses the value of this word thus, [All my ways are
Judgment.]

The greatness of this benefit or blessing of giving them a law, was not that
salvation was due to the fulfilling of it; nor were they bound to a perfect
fulfilling of it upon damnation; for, Salvation was ever from a faith in the
promise of the Messiah; and accordingly the Apostle reasons strongly, [The
promise of Christ to Abraham was 430 years before the law, Gal. 3.17.
and therefore this cannot disannull that] and yet this to Abraham was but an
iteration of the promise formerly given, and iterated often. But one benefit of
the Law was, that it did in some measure restore them toward the first light
of Nature: For, if man had kept that, he had neeeded no outward law; for then
he was to himself a law, having all law in his heart; as God promises for one
of the greatest blessings under the Gospel, when the Law of Nature is more
clearly restored: Jer. 13.31.
[I will make a new Covenant, and put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts:] So that we are brought nearer home, and set in a fairer
way then the Jews; though their and our Law differ not as diverse in species;
Tho. 12 ae. q. 51.5.
but as a perfect and grown thing from an unperfect and growing: for to that
first Law all Laws aspire. As we may observe in the Jews, who, after the Law of
Nature was clouded and darkened in man by sin, framed to themselves many
directive laws, before the promulgation of this Law in the Desert. Bretram. De
politica Judaica. c. 2.
For we may easily trace out, besides Circumcision, (which was commanded)
Sabboths, Sacrifices of diverse sorts, Expiatory and Eucharisticall, Vows,
Excommunication, Burial and Marriage, before the written Law. But these had
but half the nature of Law; they did direct, but not correct; they did but
counsel, not command: and they were not particular enough to do that office
fully; for they showed not all. To. 3.20.
Therefore Saint Paul says of Moses's Law, and the sufficiency of it, To. 4.15.
By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. And in another place, Where no Law is,
there is no transgression: And again, When the Commandment came, sin revived;
that is, Romans 7.9.
it revived to his understanding and conscience: For, that sin was before any
written commandment, himself cleers it; Unto the time of the Law was sin in
the world; To. 3.15.
but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Not that God imputes it not; (for
there is always enough within us for him to try us by; and his written Laws are
but Declaratory of the former;) but we impute it not to our selves, by
confession and repentance. This therefore is the benefit of the Law, that (as
Calvin upon this place says) Arguit, objurgat, and vellicando nos
expergefacit. Lev. 24.10
We read in Leviticus, That a Blasphemer was stoned, and after his execution a
law was made against Blasphemers: If it had been made before, perchance he had
not perished. Oftentimes laws, though they be ambiguous, yea impossible, avert
men from doing many things, which may, in their fear, be drawn within the
compass of that Law. Not to go far for Examples; without doubt, our Law which
makes Multiplication Felony, keeps many from doing things which may be so
called, for any thing they know, though perchance no body know what
Multiplication is. And our Law, which makes it Felony to feed a Sprit, holds
many from that melancholic and mischievous belief of making such an express
Covenant with the Devil, though every body know it is impossible to feed a
spirit. Another benefit of the law, (taking the law at large, for all the
Scriptures, as the Apostle does, [ Tell me, Galat. 4
you that are under the law, have you not read in the law, etc.] and then cites
a place out of Genesis, before the law was given; And as Saint John says, Joh.
15.25
[It is written in the law] and then cites the 35 Psalm) is, that it has
prepared us to Christ, by manifold and evident prophesies. Which use the
Apostle makes of it thus, [ Before faith came (that is to say, Gal. 3.24
the fulfilling of faith, for faith was ever) we were kept under the law, and
shut up unto the faith which should after be revealed: wherefore the law was
our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ.] Lastly, the law benefits us thus, that
it wrastles with that other law which St. Paul found himself not only subject
to, but slave to, Romans 7.13
[I am Captive to the law of sin.] And, [I serve in my flesh the law of sin.]
These then were the advantages of the law; And had it any disadvantages? It is
true, the laws were many; for, as the frame of our body has 248 bones, Fra.
Geor. To. 2. prob. 8.
so the body of the law had so many affirmative precepts; and of the same
number consisted Abraham's name, to whose seed the Messiah, to whose knowledge
all the law conduced, was promised. It has also 365 negative precepts; and so
many sinews and ligatures has our body, and so many days the year. But, not
to pursue these curiosities, besides that, multiplicity of laws, (because
thereby little is left to the discretion of the Judge) is not so burdenous as it
is thought, except it be in a captious, and entangling, and needy State; or
under a Prince too indulgent to his own Prerogative: All this great number of
laws are observed by one, Galatinus. l. 11. c. 4.
who ( Capnio says) was breathed upon by the Holy Ghost, to have been reduced
by David to 11, by Esaias to 6, by Micheas to 3, and by Abacuc to one. The
Lawgiver himself reduced them in the Decalogue to ten, and therefore the
Cabalists mark mysteriously, Fra. Geor. ibid.
that in the Decalogue there are just so many letters, as there are precepts in
the whole law. Yet certainly the number and intricacy and perplexity of these
laws, (for their later Rabins, which make the Orall law their rule, Buxdorfius
Synag. Jud. c. 4. fo. 44.
insist upon many both contradictions and imperfections in the letter of this
law,) was extremely burdenous to the punctual observers thereof. Yet, to say
peremptorily that it could not be observed, seems to me, hasty. Though Calvin,
Marlorate in hunc locum.
citing Saint Hierome, [Si quis dixerit, impossible esse servare legem,
Anathema sit] say wisely and truly, that Hierom must not prevail so much as he
which says, Why tempt you God, to lay a yoke upon the Disciples necks, Act
15.10.
which neither our Fathers nor we are able to bear? Yet that place in Deuteronomy.
30.8. has as much Authority as this [Do all the Commandments which I command
thee this day;] therefore they might be done. And in another verse it is said
of all the Commandments, laws and Ordinances together, [This Commandment is
not hid from thee, nor far off; It is not in heaven, that thou should say,
who shall go up, and bring it down; nor beyond sea, that thou should say, who
shall go beyond sea and fetch it: but it is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart.] For, though the Prophet in Gods person say, Eze. 20.25
Dedi eis praecepta non bona; it was but in comparison of the laws of the
Gospel: As our Savior calls his Apostles evil comparatively; Mat. 7.11
[Yee which are evil, can give good things.] For simply, Homil. ad Romans 13. in
ver. 25. cap. 7. ad Romans
the law was good; And, as Chrysostom says, so easy, that they were easier
things which were commanded by the written law, then by the law of Nature: As,
to my understanding, in the point of concupisence it is evident; which in the
first law of Nature, and now in the Gospel, is prohibited, but was not so in
the letter of the written law. Ibid.
So much therefore as was required of them, (for so Calvin says) that is, to
make the law a bridle, and a direction to them, was possible to them: and he
concludes this point, and I with him, That even the regenerate do but half that
themselves, the grace of God perfecting the rest.

FINIS.
PRAYERS.
O Eternal God, as thou did admit thy faithful servant Abraham, to make the
granting of one petition an encouragement and rise to another, and gave him
leave to gather upon thee from fifty to ten; so I beseech thee, that since by
thy grace, I have thus long meditated upon thee, and spoken of thee, I may now
speak to thee. As thou have enlightened and enlarged me to contemplate thy
greatness, so, O God, descend thou and stoop down to see my infirmities and the
Egypt in which I live; and (If thy good pleasure be such) hasten mine Exodus
and deliverance, for I desire to be, disolved, and be with thee. O Lord, I most
humbly acknowledge and confess thine infinite Mercy, that when thou had almost
broke the staff of bread, and called a famine of thy word almost upon all the
world, then thou broughtest me into this Egypt, where thou had appointed thy
stewards to husband thy blessings, and to feed thy stock. Here also, O God,
thou have multiplied thy children in me, by begetting and cherishing in me
reverent devotions, and pious affections toward thee, but that mine own
corruption, mine own Pharaoh has ever smothered and strangled them. And thou
have put me in my way toward thy land of promise, thy Heavenly Canaan, by
removing me from the Egypt of frequented and populous, glorious places, to a
more solitary and desert retiredness, where I may more safely feed upon both
thy Mannaes, thy self in thy Sacrament, and that other, which is true Angels
food, contemplation of thee. O Lord, I most humbly acknowledge and confess, that
I feel in me so many strong effects of thy Power, as only for the Ordinariness
and frequency thereof, they are not Miracles. For hourly thou rectifiest my
lameness, hourly thou restorest my sight, and hourly not only deliverest me
from the Egypt, but raisest me from the death of sin. My sin, O God, has not
only caused thy descent hither, and passion here; but by it I am become that
hell into which thou descendedst after thy Passion; yea, after thy
glorification: for hourly thou in thy Spirit descendest into my heart, to
overthrow there Legions of spirits of Disobedience, and Incredulity, and
Murmuring. O Lord, I most humbly acknowledge and confess, that by thy Mercy I
have a sense of thy Justice; for not only those afflictions with which it
pleases thee to exercise me, awaken me to consider how terrible thy severe
justice is; but even the rest and security which thou affordest me, puts me
often into fear, that thou reservest and sparest me for a greater measure of
punishment. O Lord, I most humbly acknowledge and confess, that I have
understood sin, by understanding thy laws and judgments; but have done against
thy known and revealed will. Thou have set up many candlesticks, and kindled
many lamps in me; but I have either blown them out, or carried them to guide
me in by and forbidden ways. Thou have given me a desire of knowledge, and some
means to it, and some possession of it; and I have armed my self with thy
weapons against thee: Yet, O God, have mercy upon me, for thine own sake have
mercy upon me. Let not sin and me be able to exceed thee, nor to defraud thee,
nor to frustrate thy purposes: But let me, in despite of Me, be of so much use
to thy glory, that by thy mercy to my sin, other sinners may see how much sin
thou can pardon. Thus show mercy to many in one: And show thy power and
al-mightinesse upon thy self, by casting manacles upon thine own hands, and
calling back those Thunderbolts which thou had thrown against me. Show thy
Justice upon the common Seducer and Devourer of us all: and show to us so much
of thy Judgments, as may instruct, not condemn us. Hear us, O God, hear us, for
this contrition which thou have put into us, who come to thee with that
watchword, by which thy Son has assured us of access. Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

O Eternal God, who art not only first and last, but in whom, first and last is
all one, who art not only all Mercy, and all Justice, but in whom Mercy and
Justice is all one; who in the height of thy Justice, would not spare thine
own, and only most innocent Son; and yet in the depth of thy mercy, would
not have the wretched'st liver come to destruction; Behold us, O God, here
gathered together in thy fear, according to thine ordinance, and in confidence
of thy promise, that when two or three are gathered together in thy name, thou will be in the midst of them, and grant them their petitions. We confess, O
God, that we are not worthy so much as to confess; less to be heard, least of
all to be pardoned our manifold sins and transgressions against thee. We have
betrayed thy Temples to profaneness, our bodies to sensuality, thy fortresses to
thine enemy, our souls to Satan. We have armed him with thy munition to fight
against thee, by surrendering our eyes, and ears, all our senses, all our
faculties to be exercised and wrought upon, and tyrannized by him. Vanities and
disguises have covered us, and thereby we are naked; licenciousness has
inflamed us, and thereby we are frozen; voluptuousness has fed us, and thereby
we are sterved, the fancies and traditions of men have taught and instructed
us, and thereby we are ignorant. These distempers, thou only, O God, who art
true, and perfect harmony, can tune, and rectify, and set in order again.
Do so then, O most Merciful Father, for thy most innocent Sons sake: and
since he has spread his arms upon the cross, to receive the whole world, O
Lord, shut out none of us (who are now fallen before the throne of thy Majesty
and thy Mercy) from the benefit of his merits; but with as many of us, as begin
their conversion and newness of life, this minute, this minute, O God, begin
thou thy account with them, and put all that is past out of thy remembrance.
Accept our humble thanks for all thy Mercies; and, continue and enlarge them
upon the whole Church, etc.

O Most glorious and most gracious God, into whose presence our own consciences
make us afraid to come, and from whose presence we cannot hide our selves, hide
us in the wounds of thy Son, our Savior Christ Jesus; And though our sins be
as red as scarlet, give them there another redness, which may be acceptable in
thy sight. We renounce, O Lord, all our confidence in this world; for this
world passes away, and the lusts thereof: We renounce all our confidence in
our own merits for we have done nothing in respect of that which we might have
done; neither could we ever have done any such thing, but that still we must
have remained unprofitable servants to thee; we renounce all confidence, even
in our own confessions, and accusations of our self; for our sins are above
number, if we would reckon them; above weight and measure, if we would weigh
and measure them; and past finding out, if we would seek them in those dark
corners, in which we have multiplied them against thee: yea we renounce all
confidence even in our repentances; for we have found by many lamentable
experiences, that we never perform our promises to thee, never perfect our
purposes in our selves, but relapse again and again into those sins which again
and again we have repented. We have no confidence in this world, but in him who
has taken possession of the next world for us, by sitting down at thy right
hand. We have no confidence in our merits, but in him, whose merits thou have
been pleased to accept for us, and to apply to us, we have: no confidence in
our own confessions and repentances, but in that blessed Spirit, who is the
Author of them, and loves to perfect his own works and build upon his own
foundations, we have: Accept them therefore, O Lord, for their sakes whose they
are; our poor endeavors, for thy glorious Sons sake, who gives them their
root, and so they are his; our poor beginnings of sanctification, for thy
blessed Spirits sake, who gives them their growth, and so they are his: and for
thy Sons sake, in whom only our prayers are acceptable to thee: and for thy
Spirits sake which is now in us, and must be so whenever we do pray
acceptably to thee; accept our humble prayers for, etc.

O Eternal and most merciful God, against whom, as we know and acknowledge that
we have multiplied contemptuous and rebellious sins, so we know and acknowledge
too, that it were a more sinful contempt and rebellion, then all those, to
doubt of thy mercy for them; have mercy upon us: In the merits and mediation of
thy Son, our Savior Christ Jesus, be merciful unto us. Suffer not, O Lord, so
great a waste, as the effusion of his blood, without any return to thee; suffer
not the expense of so rich a treasure, as the spending of his life, without any
purchase to thee; but as thou did empty and evacuate his glory here upon
earth, glorify us with that glory which his humiliation purchased for us in the
kingdom of Heaven. And as thou did empty that Kingdom of thine, in a great
part, by the banishment of those Angels, whose pride threw them into
everlasting ruin, be pleased to repair that Kingdom, which their fall did so
far depopulate, by assuming us into their places, and making us rich with their
confiscations. And to that purpose; O Lord, make us capable of that succession
to thine Angels there; begin in us here in this life an angelical purity, an
angelical chastity, an angelical integrity to thy service, an Angelical
acknowledgment that we always stand in thy presence, and should direct al our
actions to thy glory. Rebuke us not, O Lord, in thine anger, that we have not
done so till now; but enable us now to begin that great work; and imprint in us
an assurance that thou receivest us now graciously, as reconciled, though
enemies; and fatherly, as children, though prodigals; and powerfully, as the
God of our salvation, though our own consciences testify against us. Continue
and enlarge thy blessings upon the whole Church, etc.

FINIS.

