DOOMES-DAY: OR, The great Day of the Lords Judgment, proved by Scripture; and
two other Prophecies, the one pointing at the year 1640. the other at this
present year 1647. to be even now near at hand.

WITH The gathering together of the Jews in great Bodies under Josias Catzius
(in Illyria, Bithinia, and Cappadocia) for the conquering of the Holy Land.

2 Peter 3.10, 11. The day of the Lord will come as thief in the night, in
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the element shall
melt with fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up.

Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness.

(The Prophecy of Enoch the seventh from Adam.) Behold the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints.

April 8th. LONDON, Printed for W. Ley. 1647.

Doomsday: or, the great day of the Lords Judgment, proved by Scripture to be
even now near at hand.
SEtting aside all opinions of the Ethnicks who (some of them) affirm, that as
the world had no beginning, so it shall never have end, that there are more
worlds then one, that the face of things shall only be changed, and not a
final dissolution; we will inform our selves out of the Word of God, and
from two other Prophecies, never before imparted, and find out so far forth as
we may whether or no the destruction of the world, and the second coming of
Christ, be not even now to be expected.

It were needless to go about to prove, that most part of the Prophecies of the
ancient Prophets are already fulfilled.

Christ the Son of God, is come in the flesh, and has performed the work of
our redemption: the Gospel has been preached to all Nations, yea to those
Nations that (when our Lord lived on earth) were not so much as heard of, nor
known to be under heaven, who have been converted from Paganism to
Christianity, and are at this day zealous for the truth; the Jews who betrayed
the Lord of life, and crucified their redeemer, whose blood, according to their
rash desires, has been upon the heads of them and their children, and have
(according as he prophesied) been scattered among all Nations: the remnant of
those many hundred thousands the Sword of God, and Vespasian had spared, the
abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, viz. the head of a
swine in derision of the Jewish Religion set up over the gate of that Temple
where God himself was once pleased to dwell, and which may certainly assure
us, that the day of doom is even now at hand, according to the Prophecies of
the Prophets; that before that day there shall be a restoration of Israel,
even those people the Jews, according to certain and credible information,
are at this time Under Josias Catzim, and according to Letters from beyond the
Seas, they are numerous, and show themselves in great bodies in Illyria,
Bethinia and Cappadocia.
assembling themselves together into one body from out of all countries,
wherinto they have been driven with a resolution to regaine the holy land once
more out of the hand of Ottaman: But here me thinks I hear some men say, but
yet is not come the downfall of the Whore of Babylon, who has made all
Nations drunk with the wine of her fornication; That man of Sin, the Pope, who
sits in the Temple of God, and is worshipped as God, has not yet tasted of
the fierceness of Gods wrath. I answer, That the fall of that Antichrist is
even now at this present, he sits tottering on his seat, he has a long time
pursued the Israelites, viz. the faithful servants of Jesus Christ, but now
his Chariot wheels are taken off England, Scotland, and Wales, which some three
hundred years ago was wholly in subjection to the papal Throne, and wandered
groping in an Egyptian darkness of Popery and Superstition, are now illuminated
with the glorious light of the Gospel, and enjoy the pure and undoubted Word
of God, sufficient for the salvation of their souls; the house of Austria have
burst in sunder their yoke, and cast off the bondage of Antichrist, the Danes
and Hollanders, sometime superstitious Papists, are at this present sincere
Protestants. France even now also looking two ways, and desirous to renounce
the Popes power, with diverse other Kingdoms Principalities, Provinces and
Dukedomes, formerly yielding obedience to the Sea of Rome, now the haters of
his usurped power: Rev. 18.20.
rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has
avenged you on her Chap. 19. Verse. 1.
for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
Whore* which did corrupt the carth with her fornication, but some may object,
and say, why yet the great and mighty King of Spain with others, stand firm
to his holiness? I answer, and so may do (even till The meaning of that place
Rev. 18.17, 8.
Christ coming to judgment) she shall sit as a Queen and say, I am no widow;
she shall say, though these Nations and those Kingdoms are departed from me,
and are the servants of the living God, yet I am no widow, the King of Spain
etc. is my husband, and still maintains my abominations: But mark what the
Holy Ghost: says, Chap. 18. Verse. 8.
therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine,
and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, and least any should doubt her so
sudden subversion, the words ensuing tell them, without doubt it shall be so,
for strong is the Lord who judges her: This brings a Prophecy into my mind,
which I once saw in the study of a great Scholar, and no mean Antiquary who
deceased some few years since, which I copied out, and having this opportune
occasion, will present it to public view.

When Chawcers Prophecy shall be
Found true by folk of Britanie,
When Englands walls, and Scotlands shall
Have pure religion amongst them all,
Then lo the Pope shall tumble down,
And F. shall wear his triple crown.
Now the Prophecy of Geofrey Chawcer, who flourished in the days of King
Richard the second, ran thus.

When faith fails in Priests Sawes,
And Lord hests are taken for Laws,
Then shall the Isle of Brittanie
Be brought into great misery.
Now let us compare and examine these two Prophecies: The first says, when
Chawcers Prophecy shall be fulfilled, when troubled and miseries shall come
upon great Britain, occasioned through the wickedness of the Pastors, who
(themselves erring from the way) cause the people to walk astray with them; for
so he certainly meant when he said, When faith fails in Priests Sawes.

The fulfilling of the Prophecy we all know before our present distractions:
Was not the most part of the Clergy of this Kingdom given over to vice, and
Epicurisme? when arbitrary power shall be endeavored to be set up, and the
Subjects of the Kingdom brought into bondage: for so he no doubt meant when he
said, When Lords hest are taken for Laws.

Do we not know, that before the breaking forth of our present distractions,
the power of the King was divulged to be over the people both body and goods,
that a few persons in favor with his Majesty, imposed upon the Subjects of
this Kingdom the great loan of Ship Money; and that the Earl of Strafford
proposed, that the tyrannical power of the Kings of France might warrantably
be exercised by the Kings of England; therefore when things should be thus
carried, he prophesied:

His Prophecy began to be effected in the year 1640. and was fulfilled in
the year 1644.
Then shall the Isle of Brittanie
Be brought into great misery.
And have not our eyes seen the same fulfilled? What greater misery can come to
a nation, then to be at variance among themselves, mutually to sheath their
swords in each others bowels, to batter down Cities ore one another heads,
to have their Sovereign in arms against them, and in a word, to have all the
calamities of war at once heavy upon them; and this has this poor Kingdom of
England, till of late, undergone; therefore the fulfilling of Chawcers
Prophecy none but a mad man will deny.

But now for the other Prophecy, it comes more near unto us, even to this
present year 1647. for are not the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Wales entered into a solemn League and Covenant, to set up one and the same
Religion in the three Kingdoms? then (if granted) now is the long looked for
year come, that Antichrist shall fall, and then the day of Doom shall happen,
But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in
heaven, Mat. 13.32. that is, no man can positively affirm, that such a day in
such a month, and at such an hour. The Prophet Daniel gives us the time when
it shall be, saying, Dan. 12.1. And there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a nation, to that time: and is not that time now. Is
not the whole world involved in watres, was there ever such a time of trouble
as there is now, since there was a Nation upon the earth? And that these
troubles foretell the near approach of the day of judgment, the very next
Verse informs us: And many of them what sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some so overlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting c^^^^^p^.
Again, for our Saviors Prophecy, Mark 23. confirming the Prophecy of the
Prophet Joel, Iod 3.15. That the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon turned
into blood, it is the opinion of the Ancients, and of ^he best of our mode^^
Divines, that the darkness of the Sun, not ^^^^^tion of the Moon is not to be
expected, but rather the mystical sense thereof, the Sun being taken for the
glorious light of the Gospel, the Moon to presigure the Church. But now what
is meant when he says, And F. shall wear his triple crown?

I am not able to determine, whether (as is most likely) that some Prince, the
first letter of whose name begins in F. shall pluck the Pope out of his
Throne, let the learned judge, whose knowing minds are able to dive into such
deep mysteries: it suffices me to be informed, that the ruin of Antienrist is
near, even at the door, and that the day begins to draw nigh that God will
visit them that dwell upon the earth, when God will make of them what they be
that have hurt unjustly with their unrighteousness, and that the righteous man
shall stand with great boldness before the faces of them that have afflicted
him, who when they see it, shall be amazed with terrible fear, and wonder at
the strangeness of his salvation; and they repenting and groaning for anguish
of spirit within themselves, shall say, this is he whom we had sometime in
derision, and a proverb of reproach, we fools accounted his life madness,
but now he is numbered among the children of God, and has his lot with the
Saints.

There is a report spread abroad, and the common talk about London, and so
consequently over England, that such a day in such a week the day of Doom
shall happen: others will have it, that on that day Christ shall come again on
earth, and there personally reign with his Elect a thousand years; and
opinion monstrous, and to be abhorred as much as their opinion who contend,
that the devils shall at length be released from their torments. We are
sufficiently informed in the Scriptures, and next to them from others, that the
day of Doom is even now at hand, and that the second coming of Christ is each
day and hour to be expected; what remains then, but that we prepare our
selves to meet the Bridegroom, with the loins of our minds girded, and oil in
our lamps, that when our Lord comes, he may say, well done good and faithful
servants, enter ye into your masters joy.

FINIS.

