The Downe-fall of Dagon, or the taking down of Cheap Side Cross this second
of May, 1643. wherein is contained these principalls following, viz.

depiction of the Cheapside Cross

Printed for Thomas Wilson. 1643. May.3.

The Downe-fall of Dagon, or the taking down of Cheap Side Cross, etc.
IT is an e^sier task to reckon up all the species and several kinds of
nature, than to describe all the Sects, Divisions, and opinions in Religion
that is now in and about this Kingdom and City of London; so that whereas
there is but one Truth and one way guiding thereunto; the people of our Land
cannot agree about this one way: but Error and Scisme being multiplied
manifold they, can all find out those ways to a hai^e; so that the times
remain still as corrupt in manners as ever any age heretofore ever did, I will
leave all particular vices which are too common and frequent amongst us in
these our days, and come to the su^ject in hand namely, the complaint of
Cheape-side Cross, which it makes in his own defense before it suffers its
d^cay or ruin^, hea^ing that it must be pulled down. And now to see the misery
of a high fortune, I that was so stout and glorious, and did not look^ for a
fall, am now become the hateful Idol of the City: I cannot speak much being
of Stone, but I will give you a brief expression of my antiquity; King Edward
was the first that built me, and many more Crosses in several Town at the
death of good Queen Elenor, and in Anno 1441. I was repaired in beautiful
manner, then six thousand pound was given to my new erecting, and have been
so often guelded at many times that I am sorry to think that all my glory
should now be laid in the dust, but I am not the greatest that have fallen; but
now it is no time for me to babble out my griefs, Time with all his hours and
years shall lament me and my violent undoing.

But give me leave in my anger to express my mind. It Is some body was my
enemy, and I cannot tell who it was; but I can guess well, down I must; and go
even flat the Earth, and then I am sure they will not remember me, I was
glorious in many Kings reigns and esteemed well in Queen Elizabeth's days,
beautified at King James his coming into England, and again at King Charles
^is coming to the Crown. And I am now accounted for a Papist, all my
antiquity is lost from time to time, which if I should m^ntion would w^ary you
wi^h the relation. I am esteemed and held not fit to have my abidi^g in the
City, I am called by the name of the City Idol, the Brownists spit at me and
throw stones at me as they come along the street, the Famalists hide their
eyes with their fingers, the Annabaptists wish me to be knocked in pieces, as I
am like to be this day, the sisters of the Fraternity will not come near me, but
go about by Watling street, and come in again by Soaper-lane to buy their
p^ovisions of the Market-folkes. Oh these and the like occasions have grieved
and tormented my whole Fabric, I guess the cause, that I am now to be
ruin^ted and quite pulld down. It is the Cross that stands upon my head which
is a moate in their eyes. Nay, they do not only say that I am an Idol, but
that I am a supporter of Idols, because diverse Images are placed about me, but
I feel my self now sick, nay sick at heart, and I groan under the burden of
my own fabric, for I hear and am certainly told that I am to be pulled down
and defaced this morning. Oh I feel the pangs of death come upon me, I shall
never see the end of the merry month of May, my breath is at a period, my life
is gone, for I feel my self dying downwards, my head being the first part that
does loose the sense, my tongue rattles in my throat, and just as the Cross
had so said, he presently dyed; whereupon his Executors hearing of it, came in;
and would have him embalmed; and they first struck off his head, and so by
degrees descended to other parts of the body, and left him like a Sceleton or
an Anatomy of his body or corpse by ten or eleven a clock at noone, with that
his Executors looking about, found his Will which he had got, being written in
this manner.

Iespar Cross his last Will.
IN primis, I desire to be taken down in a decent round manner, and that no
spoil be made of my fabric; for some parts of me worth money.

Item, I pray my Executors to be civil, and that they have a care that no hurt
be done at my demolishing.

Item, The Gold which I am gilded withal I appoint to be ^^^ed and taken off
by those persons which will give most money for me.

Item, I give to the Red-coate Soldiers all the Lead which is about me to make
bullets if occasion be; if not I give it to the company of Plummers to make
Cesternes and Pumps with, or else jacke weiAhts.

Item, I give my Iron-worke to those people which make good Swords at Hou^st^w,
for I am all Sp^nish Iron, and Steel to the back.

Item, I give my Body and Stones to those Masons and Workmen that cannot tell
how to frame the like again, to keep by them for a pattern; for in time there
will be more Crosses in London then ever there was yet, etc.

Item, I give my ground whereon I stood to be a free Marketplace, hoping that
no more people will go round as they have used to do about me; but will be
content to speak well of me hereafter, because I suffer so roundly and so
patiently for my errors:

Vera copia tesamenta Iasperi Crosseribus,



Cheap side Cross his Epitaph.
I Look for no praise when I am dead,
For going the right way I never did tread,
I was as hard as an Aldermans door,
That Is shut, and stony hearted to the poor.
I never gave Alms, nor did any thing
Was good* nor e're said, God save the King:
I stood like a stock that was made of wood,
And yet the people would not say, I was good:
And if I tell them plain they are like to me,
Like stone to all goodness, but now Reader see
Me in the dust, for Crosses must not stand
There is too much Crosse-tricks within the Land;
And having so done never any good,
I leave my praise for to be understood;
For many women after this my loss.
Will remember me and still will be cross.
Cross tricks, Cross ways, and Cross vanities,
Believe the Cross speaks truth, for here he lies.
This Cross in Cheape-side was first erected as I have said by Edward the
first, in commemoration of his Queen whose name was Ell^nor; Secondly it was
then builded for an Ornament to the City, being placed in the chiefest place or
street of the laid City, and therefore was thought and held at that time for a
glorious Fabric, and would continue there for antiquity sake, rather then to
give an occasion of offense to any; It has now stood near upon 400. or five
hundred years, still repaired and beautified, but never suffered martyrdom
till now; it has been twelve several times adorned and decored in all ages;
and was ever held a graceful Fabric to London, till of late years; until
indeed many superstitious and foolish people have publicly adored it and
worshipped it as they have gone by it; which offense is the maine cause of its
pulling down and defacing.

The reason why Cheap Side Cross was pulled down.
BEcause it is in its own structure a monument of Idolat^y, and may better
suite well with an Idolatrous place, as Rome and such like places, than for
this civil City, wherein so much preaching and teaching of Gods word is used;
Again, that many people by nature desire a visible God, rather then an
invisible God; Also that it occasions many from coming to look for Christ in
an invisible way, so long as they can fee him visible. Besides, diverse ignorant
people who have been misled and mi^informed in the Protestant Rligion, have by
such like Images been seduced and made believe that praying to several Saints,
desiring them and instigating them, that they would solicit and speak to our
Savior in their behalf, that our Savior would make intercession to his
father for the mittigation, and for the forgiveness of their sins; This
opinion of theirs is very vain, idle and rediculous; and a great sin committed
against God himself; robbing and taking away his honor due unto him; and
giving it creatures; as to the Saints and Angels, in worshipping pictures
crucifixes, and such like traditions and inventions of men; So this Cross has
been a great means to cause superstition and idolatry from time to time in
worshipping and adoring it, as many people have done as they pass by it; for
diverse people both men and women has been seeen by several honest, ancient,
and good Inhabitants dwelling near the place, that sundry sorts of people have
by three a clock in the morning come barefoot to the Cross, and have kneeled
down, and said something to themselves, crossed their forehead and their
breast, and so risen and making obeisance, went away, which punishment was
enjoined upon them as a penance for some sins they had committed: Likewise that
hundreds of people have been publicly seen and in the midst of the day, b^nd
their bodies to it, and put off their hats, and cross themselves: Not only as
they have gone on foot by it, but diverse that have rid on horseback* and in
Coaches have put out their heads and pulled off their hats and d^ne reverence
to it; this has bin done for these many years together, and it has bin
offensive to many good Christians to behold such such Idolatrous worship given
to a Cross, and to images, and pictures, in so much that it has bin often
complained on by diverse godly Ministers. not only in their public Sermons,
but also in their printed books; showing the unlawfulness of it, and how it
has from time to time increased and encouraged people to Popery: therefore
seeing no redress or helpe^ ^^r the suppression of it; the Common Counsel of
London did Petition to the honorable Houses of Parliament for relese in this
case, which was soon granted, and had a warrant to take it down, by all the
fair means they could devise, calling to their aid the Trained bands of the
City for their defense, because no uproare might arise thereby, and that no
blood might be spilt; because diverse people had given out they would rather
lose their lives then it should down* down it must, and it is so ordered to be
taken down that the materials may be made useful other way, and that they
should be sold for a valuable consideration; the materials being most lead,
iron, and stone; some report diverse of the Crowns and Scepters are silver;
besides the rich gold that it is gilded with which as it is reported, may be
filed and taken off, and yield a good value; so that diverse which have offered
some 400. l. some 500. l. but they that bid must offer 1000. l. for it; and so
this Tuesday it is a taking down with a great deal of judgment and discretion,
and four Companies of the Trane Bands of the City to guard and defend those
that are about the work, and to keep others from domineering, and so I leave
it to be made level with the ground this second day of May 1643. And pray
good Reader take notice by the Almanacke* for the sign falls just at this time
to b^e in the feet, to show that the Cross must be laid equal with the
ground for our feet to tr^ad on, and what day it was demolished; that is on the
day when Crosses were first invented and set up, and so I leave the rest to
your consideration.

FINIS.

