A DECLARATION Delivered into the House of Lords, by Mr: Abraham Dowcet, on
Monday the 3 of July, 1648. Against Major Edward Rolph whom he charges to have
lain in wait three hours to have pistold the King.

With his speech at the Bar in the House of Peers; And the Lords Order for
Trial of Major Rolph.

And several ORDERS of the House of Commons for apprehending Delinquents.

depiction of King Charles I on his throne

London Printed for A. H. n^er Pye-corner, July 4th 1648.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE the English royal blazon surmounted by a crown and
flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn
and thistle on the other
Die Lunae 3 July, 1648.
MR: Abraham Dowcet, being brought by the Keeper of Peter-House, where he is a
prisoner, was by Order of the House of Peers, called to the Lords Bar, to
give in evidence against Major Edward Rolph, concerning the business wherein
Mr. Richard Osburne accuses him to have had a design to have taken away the
Kings life.

Mr: Dowcet being at the Bar, The Right Honorable the Lord Hundsdon (by
Order of the House of Lords,) asked him what he could say concerning any thing
that he knew of a Design by Major Rolph to take away the life of the King:

Mr. Abraham Dowcets Speech before the Lords in Parliament assembled, the 3 of
July 1648.
My Lords,
I Humbly desire your Lordships favorable construction toward me, in that I
cannot deliver my self in good language, being that I am not an En^l^sh m^n;
And therefore I do desire your Honourr: that you will be pleased to give me
leave to deliver in writing, what I shall testify upon Oath, in this business
propounded to me by your Honors.

The Lords Ordered that according as was desired by Mr. Abraham Dowcet, he
should deliver in the case in paper, under his handwriting, upon Oath.

A Declaration delivered into the House of Lords against Major Edward Rolph,
July 3. 1648. Under the handwriting of Mr. Abraham Dowcet, concerning the
design against the King.
My Lords,
I Am ready to make Oath that Mr. Richard Osburn, told me, the Kings person was
in danger, and that the said Major Rolph, had a design for conveying his
Majesty's person to some place of secrecy, where only three should go with
him, and where they might dispose of his Majesty's person as they should think
fit, Which informations from Mr. Osburn, and the assurance I had of his
Majesty's inten^ions forthwith to come to his Parliament, was the cause of my
engagement in this business.

I am ready likewise to depose, that the said Rolph came to m^e, when I was a
prisoner in the Castle, and in a jearing manner asked me why the King came not
down according to his appointment* And then in great indignation and fury said
he waited three hours under the new Plat ^orm, with a good pistol ready
charged, to have received him if he had come,

Your Lordships humble servant, Abraham Dowcet.
Westminster the 3 of July, 1648.
Mr. Abraham Dowcet, delivered this upon Oath, to be all truth, before their
Lordships.

Major Rolphs Letter to the Lords.
My Lords,
KNowing my self (I speaking in the presence of that God who searches all
hearts) to be so perfectly clear and innocent of that foul and horrid crime
charged upon me, that I abhor the very thoughts of it: Earnestly desiring an
opportunity of appearing for vindication of my innocence, or what ever else
mal^ce in wicked men can lay against me; resting fully assured that whatsoever
award I shall find at the hands of men, I shall enjoy the happiness of an
upright and peaceable conscience with the same God, in whose presence I stand.

Edward Rolph.

Die Lunae 3 of July. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That it be referred to the Kings learned
Council to bring in an impeachment of High Treason, against Major Edward Rolph.

BY virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, These are to require you, your
Deputy or Deputies forthwith to make repair to the abodes or dwelings of Mr:
Richard Banks, and Mris: Mary Hanmer, and them there, or where they may be
found to apprehend and bring to the House of Commons as Delinquents to answer
their contempt and breach of the privilege of Parliament, in breaking open or
causing to be broken open the chamber doors of Mr. Robert Charlton a Member of
the said House, taking away his goods, and forceably conveying away the body of
Francis Charlton his Ward, and his Servants, even sitting the House, and Mr.
Charlton then attending in the House the public service of the Kingdom.
These are further to require (if need be) all Mayors Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, Constables and all other His Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects (in
breaking open doors locks or any place or places (to be aiding to the
Sergeants Deputies in the execution of this warrant, And for so doing, this
shall be your Warrant.

William Lenthall Speaker.

To Edward Birkhead Esquire; Sergeant at Arms attending on this House, his Deputy
and Deputies.
I do nominate and appoint Marmaduke Sanders Edm. Cooper and Richard Action my
lawful Deputies for the execution of this Warrant

Ed. Birkehead Sergeant at Arms.



ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Richard Bancks a
Mercer or Silke-man at the inner Temple-gate, and Mris. Mary Hanmer widow, and
all other person or persons in whose custody the body of Francis Charlton, an
Infant, now is, do forthwith make restitution of the body of the said Francis
Charlton, to Mr. Robert Charlton a Member of this house, and Guardian to the
said child, he having been forceably taken out of his custody, whilst he was
sitting in the House of Commons upon the public service of the Kingdom, And
that the Sergeant at Arms attending on this House do forthwith make search
after the said Francis Charlton, and seize and apprehend him wheresoever he
shall be found, and bring him, and restore him to Mr. Robert Charlton.

Henry Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom Com.

To Edward Birkhead Esquire; Sergeant at Arms attending on the House of Commons,
his Deputy or Deputies.
Die Lunae, etc.
Resolved etc. Francis Charlton out of the Chamber of Mr. Robert Charlton (a
Member of this House) and breaking open his Chamber whilst he was attending the
service of the public, is a breach of privilege; And it is Ordered, That Will
Taunton, Joseph Rogers and Andrew Bateley act^rs in the said Business be co^
to the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, and that they remain in custody
until the body of Mr. Francis Charlton (...) delivered unto Mr. Robert
Charlton or this House take further Order.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

