THE REASONS Why the Lrd. Marquess of Dorchester printed his Letter The 25th.
of February, 1659. Dated the 13th. of the same Month.
Together with my ANSWER to a printed Paper, called, A true and perfect Copy of
the Lord ROOS his ANSWER to the Marquess of DORCHESTERS LETTER, Written the
25th. of February, 1659.
ON the 12th. of February last, about five in the afternoon, I received the
Lord Roos his Paper, mentioned in my printed Letter, and immediately thereupon
I writ that Answer, and sent it away Post the next day: And though, both before
and after, I was frequently informed, what reports he gave out in the Country,
yet I held them only worth my scorn, and at that time had not the least
intention of making any thing public; my Letter being writ ad hominem, and not
for the Press. But when I saw for three days together (before I thought of
printing it) those scandalous Papers, that were scattered up and down, Posted,
and Cried by the Common Crier all London over: And this done (besides the
injuries most uncivilly offered unto my Daughter, when She had not put him one
penny in debt) to confirm by so notorious an Act his idle boasting, that I was
afraid to meet him; I was compelled so to vindicate my self, being deprived of
all other means; for then I well knew he durst not Fight. The Posted Papers I
need not recite, because they are so common; For the Jewels and Plate therein
mentioned, the first were all her own, except one Necklace of Pearl, and some
trivial Diamonds: The Plate was no more than she used in her Bedchamber, and
under the value of Threescore pounds: Before she secured these, she was often
threatened they should be all taken from her, and not so much left her as a Ring
or Spoon: And since, I entreated Persons of Honor to acquaint his Mother (which
they did accordingly) that I would make good both what her Son, and my self
gave her, and at their own Rates; But all would not serve, Spleen and Folly
prevailed against Honor and Reason. And now upon the whole matter, whether,
and how far I am justifiable in publishing that Letter, I willingly submit to
the judgment of any indifferent person. And thus I come to the Lord Roos his
Answer to the Lord Marquess of Dorchester's Letter, etc.

This Whelp has for this Month been licked over and over, and is yet without
form, a rude and indigested lump; If you had used the like quickness in your
Reply, as I did in my Answer to your Letter, and therein required an account of
me with my Sword in my hand, and in stead of Eleven days I allowed you, you
had given me but Two, nor so much neither, but in respect of the distance of
our dwellings; If in that short time you had not heard from me, with full
satisfaction to your demand, you might then upon some grounds have divulged
this and more; but now after a Months space, when you durst not do like a Man,
to answer like a Child, clear from the purpose, and most apparent scope of my
Letter, which was to provoke you to Fight, and not to Rail; This I say would
have stigmatized you with an indeleble mark, if you were capable of more
Infamy, then is now upon you. FOR YOU ARE STILL A COWARD, AND DARE NOT FIGHT.
This Expression I must use often, as Cato did his Puto Carthaginem esse
delendam: You know the Saying, Cloth an Ape in Tissue, and it but adds
deformity to the Beast; and, the more a Coward seeks to conceal, the more he
discovers his Fears: Of the truth of this you are a shameful Example. What a
noise, and blustering do you make, to appear Somebody, as if with Homer's
Ulysses you had got the Winds into your empty Bottles? but all in vain; for
it is with you like a Jade in the Mire, Your laboring to get out, but plunges
you the deeper in. FOR YOU ARE STILL A COWARD, AND DARE NOT FIGHT. You say, I
was amongst my Gally-pots and Clyster-pipes, when I gave my Choler so violent a
Purge: If so, I was prescribing a Clyster for you to take before our Meeting,
else I should sooner have had you in my Nose, than in my Sight. You go on; I
had better have been drunk, and set in the Stocks for it, when I sent the Post
with a Whole Packet of Chartels to you. I mention this ingenious Piece of
Eloquence, for no other end then to show what Wit there lies in the Froth of
Ale. You proceed, That If I understand any thing in my own Trade, I could not
but know, that the Hectique of my own Brain, is more desperate then the Tertian
Fits of yours, which are easily cured with a little Sleep. Is it possible for
any man to be so stupid, as to publish himself in print a Common Drunkard? This
is the plain English of your Tertian Fits, which if you had called Quotidian,
you would easily have been believed; though indeed they have out-lasted any
Quartan. You talk of Tutors and Schoolmasters; I have been long since out of
their hands; but it is high time you were under their correction; and had I
known you, as well before I sent to you in a way of Honor, as I do now, I would
for once have played the Schoolmaster my self, and have brought, in stead of a
Sword, a good Rod, the only fit Weapon to encounter such an Adversary; FOR YOU
ARE STILL A COWARD, AND DARE NOT FIGHT. You add; That now I begin to vapor,
and tell you I have fought before; and that you have heard I have, with my
Wife, and Poet; but if I came off with no more honor then when I was beaten by
my Lord Grandison, I had better have kept that to my self. What you mean by my
Poet, I cannot imagine; but you may conceive it is not impossible for me to beat
a Woman, since I declared such a proneness to Cudgel you. The business between
my Lord Grandison and my self, is so fully known to the world, and his Second
(an Eyewitness of what passed) yet alive, that there is no need for me to
speak a word therein; only this, as a Hector (a name amongst others you are
pleased to bestow upon me) I tell you, He that will Fight, though he have never
so much the worse, loses no reputation: And I protest, I had rather meet with a
man of Honor and Courage, though he did beat me (as you word it) then now to
Fight and Beat you: But there is no great danger of that, FOR YOU ARE STILL A
COWARD AND DARE NOT FIGHT. Next, you scrible about my cutting up Calves, and
Dogs; and if by threatening to cram my Sword down your Throat, I do not mean my
Pills, you are safe. Indeed, Experiments in Anatomy have much conduced to the
bettering man's knowledge; and I make no doubt, had I the dissecting of you in
stead of a Calfe, I should find the place, where Cowardice is seated. This
would be an acceptable Discovery to our College of Physicians. As concerning
my Pills, those you would most fear to take, must be prepared with Steel, for I
know between Steel, and you, there is a great Antipathy. And whereas you say,
There is no half quarter of a man but would venture to give me battle; Alas
poor Wretch! you do not understand what Dirt you throw in your own face; for
your not daring to meet me, proves ex ore tuo, that you are less then half a
quarter of a man; and surely here is both good Grammar, and Logic to boot. And
now you tell me, I am most unsufferable in my unconscionable engrossing of all
Trades, That I am a Doctor of Civil Law, a Barrister of the Common, a Bencher
of Greys-Inn, a Professor of Physic, a Fellow of the College, a
Mathematician, Caldean, a School-man, and a piece of a Gramarian (as my last
work shows, were it construed) a Philosopher, Poet, Translator, Antisocordist,
Solicitor, Broker, and Usurer; a Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, and a
Hector: And there is no dealing with me without a Brigade, if I have a Second
for every capacity. What ridiculous stuff is here? Risum teneatis Amici? yet I
think a less number would scarce secure your Fears, and, even then, you durst
not appear in the Head of them; FOR STILL YOU ARE A COWARD, AND DARE NOT FIGHT.
You say, for eating the Bread out of the Hectors mouths, you hope some of them
will make me give them Compounding dinners, as well as I did to the rest of my
Fraternities. I think you escape fairly, if for abusing them, you can be
admitted to Compound for Dinners and Suppers too. You pithily write, That I
measure another man's valor by comparing it with my own. I understand in what
sense you would be taken, and laugh at it: But yet it is true, I ever did, and
shall think, of all Gentlemen as I do of my self, till I find them such as you
are: And now for the future, I shall measure all Cowards by your Scale. I will
omit (for brevity) the rest of your Billinsgate nonsense (indeed your whole
Letter is ejusdem farinae) and give you this friendly admonition, That you be
more careful and circumspect hereafter, and not charge a fault upon another,
when at the same instant you commit a greater in the same kind; I mean, your
accusing me of Railing, when you your self transcend therein. I have but a word
or two more, and I have done with you: You say, That I might have had the
honor I desired to have fallen by your Sword. I see the Proverb does not hold
true in you, that Bad Memories have good Wits: I did not desire absolutely to
fall by your Sword, but under the condition mentioned in my printed Letter: And
as for the honor you vainly put upon falling by it; I think there is not any,
but will believe me without swearing; if I could have thought upon a more
ignominious thing, I had named it. And now Sir, If your back be not
sufficiently laden, go on, and I will lay more and more weight upon you, till
you fall under the burden; AND STILL YOU ARE A COWARD, AND DARE NOT FIGHT.

DORCHESTER.

[Printed the 20th. of March, 1659. the day after the Printing the Lord Roos
his Answer, etc. above mentioned, the Date whereof by him purposely omitted.]


