Strange and VVonderfull PROPHESIES BY The Lady ELEANOR AUDELEY; who is yet
alive, and lodges in WHITE HALL.

Which She Prophesied sixteen years ago, and had them Printed in Holland,
and there presented the said Prophesies to the Prince Elector; For which she
was imprisoned seven years here in England, by the late King and his Majesty's
Council: First, she was put into the Gate House then into Bedlam, and
afterward into the Tower of LONDON.

With Notes upon the said Prophesies, how far they are fulfilled, and what
part remains yet unfulfilled, concerning the late King; and Kingly Government,
and the Armies and people of ENGLAND. And particularly White Hall, and other
wonderful Predictions.



Imprimatur

Theodore Jennings
August 27. 1649.
London Printed for Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens head Tavern,
1649.

Strange and VVonderfull PROPHESIES BY The Lady Eleanor Audeley, who is yet
alive, and lodges in White Hall.
TO Those that believe this prophecy.
Sion most beloved I sing
So the frequently called the Bishops and Courtiers of England.
of Babylon a Song,
Concerns you more full well I wot
then ye do think upon.
The late King Charles whom in all her books she called Belshazzer; because the
wall of the Banqueting house at White-Hal, where he feasted, should be terrible
to him, as a writing on the wall was to Belshazzer, which proved true, for
there he was beheaded.
Belshazzer, lo, behold the King
feasting his thousand Lords;
Phoebus and Mars praised on each string,
every day records.
The Temple Vessels of Gods House,
boldly in drunk about:
His Here she prophesied of his pawning and selling of his plate.
own (it is like) were made away,
bids holy things bring out;
The pulling down of pictures and Organs in Churches.
Praising of Gold and Brass, the gods,
of Iron, Wood and Stone,
All did rise against him but the Court faction.
See, hear, nor know, but now alas,
praised in Court alone.
A Here she prophesied of the Kings death, which fell out true For the
heads-man took the hatchet in his hand wherewith he was be-headed, on the wall of
the Banqueting House, after the King had drank a glass of wine, at one blow
or line of blood, in presence of his then Equals, for he dyed as Charles
Stuart. After he had been scarce an hour upon the Scaffold, he fell down on
his knees, and so laid his neck on the block, with a pale ghastly countenance,
without any opposition.
hand appears, lo in his sight,
as he did drink the wine,
Upon the wall against the light
it wrote about a line
In presence of his numerous Peers,
not set an hour full,
In loins nor knees had he no might,
changed as a ghastly skull.
Who might it read, alas, the thing,
Belshazzer Here she speaks of the High Court of Justice, where the King
pleaded hard, and so did the 3 Lords, but they were sentenced for their
Treasons, etc. and put to death, according to judgment denounced by the Lord
President in Scarlet.
loud did shout;
Calls for Magicians all with speed.
came in, as wise went out.
Caldeans and Southsayers sage,
the meaning whosoever can
Of Mean Mean third Realms Peer
in Scarlet Robe the man.
His The King did eat no Supper the night before he dyed.
majesty forgets to Sup,
Nobles astonished all;
Musicians may their pipes put up,
stood gazing on the Wall.
The He drank a glass of wine a little before he came to execution.
pleasant Wine at length as sharp,
too late till thought upon
Division His head was divided from his body.
of another strain
unfolds the fingers long.
When Here she names the Banqueting House, the very place where he should be
executed, and that before the host or Army. And this did befall him, for being
led by his Queen.
to the Banqueting house so wide,
Where host of Lords did ring,
So wisely came the grateful Queen,
said, Ever live, O King.
Needs This she write to persuade the King to believe her prophecy.
trouble, O King, thy thoughts no more,
forthwith shall it be read;
Daniel there is who heretofore
like doubts did open spread.
Could al interpretating Show
which profound man scon brought,
On whom confer the King needs would
his The King delivered His George to the Bishop of London for P. Charles, but
the Parliament considering his raising forces against them would not let him
have it.
orders high unsought.
Needless preferments yours reserve,
Sir, keep your gifts in store,
High offices let others gain,
there is given too much before.
Yet unto thee shall here make known,
resolve this Oracle true,
Sure as in Here she set down the very place and manner of his execution,
which was true, for at the Banqueting House the King had his head cut off at
one fatal blow.
thy Banqueting house,
where all that come may view:
The Vessels of my God are brought,
the palm salutes thee know
Herewith; for these profaned by thee
threatens the fatal blow.
O King, even thou, the most high God
unto thy His Grandfather was put to death in Scotland, which she did usually
call Caldean Land.
Grandsire bold,
Caldean land, a Nation fell
gave them to have and hold.
The Royal Scepter and the Crown
advanced whom he would have,
And whom he would he pulled down,
could put to death and save:
Till walking at the twelve months end,
subject full Tides do fall;
Excellent Here she prophesied that Monarchy should cease in England, and
White hal which was the Kings Court be turned into an hold for Soldiers.
Majesty how gone,
Court exchanged for the Stall.
Thy She here prophesied that he should as surely be put to death, as his
Grandfather was, though not in the same manner.
Grandsire on, as came to pass;
at all yet minded not,
As if a feigned Story, but
his miserable Lot.
Expelled was for the words escaped,
memory can speak well,
Hardened in pride, unheard of such,
the wild Ass with did dwell:
Sent to the Ox, its owner knows,
Here she prophesied of the fouls which flew over the King when he was at
execution, to show his folly, that he would not know his time, but bring
himself to that miserable end.
undreamt of this his doom:
Fowls their appointed time observe,
wots not the night from noon.
Whose Here she prophesied that his Entrals should be taken out, and his body
be imbalmed, which was true.
heart made equal with the Beast,
driven out with those that Bray;
The Diadem as well fits thee,
Ass, go, as much to say.
She speaks this of his spiritual estate, that God in mercy has saved his
soul.
Until returned came to himself,
knew him that rules on high,
Over the sons of men appoints
what office they supply.
During the time of the Kings imprisonment, there were Guards upon him night
and day.
During which space, this Assyrian,
what watch kept night and day,
Thus metamorphys'd, over him,
lest make himself away.
This fell out true, for he was much lamented, by those of his own party
especially.
Fields, woods as well ring out, as men
for woe, and Echoes call
Mercy this savage King upon,
in holy Temples all.
Bewailed, dejected soul, thus fallen,
fed now grazing full low,
whilst they bedew the ground with tears
It was grown to a common Proverb that the King knew not his friends from his
foes, al being abas'd, and none daring to stir or move for him.
discerns not friend from foe.
Earth that of late made seem to dawn
with songs of Triumph high,
Flees each wight abas'd as much,
among the Herd does lie.
By Speaking of her own family.
Starlight for device who gave,
as graven on his Shield,
An Eagle mounted on the Crest,
a Heart in silver field.
Extold again his God as high,
blessed him all his days:
She here blames those that would not believe her.
Others reputes them as nothing,
alone proclaims his praise.
Whose seven Here she prophesied of the very time seven times seven that is
49th year of his age, the King was be-headed.
times it served forth,
in vain for rest to crave;
Whom Devils Legions do possess,
a Monarch turned a Slave.
Deposed thus, thou knew well,
Belshazzer, Prince Charles.
O his Son,
And renewed so, This fell out true for presently after the Kings death, the
House of Commons Voted England a deliverance from Monarchy.
deliverance is
voyced by every one.
A day a An Act was published in all parts against kingly Government,
notwithstanding the many favorites thereof, And Lords that the King used to
call Cosens.
Trumpet made to sound
for Generations all;
And with a Feast solemnized,
that no time might recall:
The memory of such an act,
yet as it had not been,
Thy Favorites who are more this day,
or matched to thy Kin.
Then they This is not yet fulfilled, but it seems to point out that the Kings
Statues, and Arms shall be broken and pulled down from all public places, as
he in his Reign had promoted Idolatry liberty on the Lords day, and other
notorious sins against God,
adoring. Wood and Stone,
Statues forsake Divine;
Meditate carved Statutes on
in Faction do combine,
With Enemies of God most high,
to thrust him from his Thron,
And thus have lifted up thy self.
so facile and so prone.
Against the Lord of Heaven thy King,
not humbling of thy heart,
But stiffened have with pride thy neck
unto thy future smart.
Behold, polluting holy things
with Sabbath so Divine,
Idolartry and Revells in
that day and night made thine,
But he in whose hand rests thy life,
even breath, thy ways, and al,
Thou have not glorified him
sent this wrote on the wall.
God numbered thy Kingdom has
ended; the Hand points here,
In Balance he has weighed thee too,
the set hour drawing near.
How light soever by thee set,
thou as thy weightlesse Gold,
His Image wanting, found much more
lighter then can be told.
This is in part fulfilled by the Kings lands and goods new upon sale.
Parted, divided thine Estate,
given to the Medes is,
At Hand, the Hand bids it adieu,
She pophecies here that there shall be no more Kings in England.
finished thy Majesty's.
Anagr.
Reveal O Daniel. Eleanor Audeley
FINIS.



