FOR VVHITSONTYDS LAST FEAST: THE PRESENT, 1645.

ACTS the first: The same JESUS shall come, in like manner as ye have seen
him go, etc. Printed in the Year 1645.

THE LA: ELEA: HER CREED OR Confession.
VErily as We all Believe in GOD, the sole Creator of all Things that were made
in the beginning: So according to His promise made also; Concerning the VVomans
SEED, ( of which the Serpent, forfiture or on pain of his head forewarned to
beware:) do believe in our Lord JESUS he the very GOD: alone Redeemer of the
World, born of the VIRGIN, which Concerved by the Holy Ghost, our only
Sanctifier.

Who after he had finished, on the sixth day the work of Our Redemption, and
rested the seventh, rose again; And was by the space of six weeks seen,
whose last Commandment was to wait for his Fathers promise, of the Holy
Ghosts coming in whom We also believe.

Wherefore of belief not slow: in those Things written by the Prophets and
Apostles, do for mine own part Confess, how incredible soever it seems to
Others, I farther believe the second Coming of the holy Ghost, imediately
before the day of Judgment according to that spoken by the Prophet JOEL,
saying: GOD says, afterward it shall come to pass, I will power out my Spirit
upon all flesh, before the great and terrible Day of the LORD: Namely, on the
Gentiles, their Sons and Daughters likewise: And I will show Wonders in the
Heaven^ ( beside a New Star, not long since signs never known) more frequent
and the Earth Blood, and Fire, and pillars of Smoke, etc. W^sse such warr^
(...) Christian world.

Of which last days, give ^^^E leave to say^ Grace and Gifts of LEARNING, how
Rich soever They esteem themselves The Gentiles nevertheless of (...)
Comfort more need had Never, how much soever pres^ upon their Holiness:
Supposing like the Jews a Savior for them unnecessary, which held themselves
so just: And so because. Christian (...) cleansed; likewise no more need(...)
^ding: Thus all co^ded under unbeleif, and fearful blindness, unmindfull (...)
agreeable to the present division, and as both agreeing in one, styled by the
Prophet Daniel, a time and times and the deviding of time, whose Commission to
continue so long: And then he whosoever shall oppose it never so great: as here
he styled the God of the earth no less these two as freely to proclaim open
war so often as they please, to smite the Earth or Land with Pestilence and
such Judgments, for which Vials of wrath directed to the present Century, so
much suffices: and how they were rewarded, their Sackcloth changed into a
glorious cloud, and their Foes so much tormented with their testimony, how at
the same time such an Earthquak the City fal^ing upon them, except a Remnant
which upon Repentance escaped.

And all these but speaking one thing in several Languages (to wit) the
Resurrections loud voice, and that of the Ascension: as ascendite huc added to
those Prophetical sirie tongues of their or fire proceeding out of their
mouths, if any will harm them suffices for the ensuing feast also, when fully
come or finished wherefore with the 24. Elders that great Coudcell or States
sitting upon their seats for ever with one consent and voice: Let great
Brittame say. We give thee thrice humble thanks O eternal Trenity, which
art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power
and have reigned.

And I believe lastly, though a Mystery none of lest: Like the grace of God
bestowed upon the Gentiles, held as impossible a point with the Apostles: That
after the last Period expired, there (...) a Release out of HELL, Redemption for
all the DAMNED, Although granted that sentence Jrevocable, Go ye Cursed, etc.

And the unpardonable sin, not in this world nor that to come forgiven: And
the fire unextinguished, yet proves their sufferings not of like nature and
condition: Notwithstanding in danger, (were God extreme) of endless torment:
Therefore if Salt which preserves be good, the fire also necessary like those
better to enter maimed into Heaven then otherwise go into fire unquenchable
which goes not out, to our days without doubt directed ( Mark the 9. where so
often repeated th^se words concluded, have peace in your selves.

And therefore before that Parable where mentioned the gulf or fixed space, no
other then a prefixed space of time. ( Luke 15.) That Elders expostulating
reproves like unnaturallnesse in others without compassion of those undergoing
the second death in the ^^st Son instanced the second Brother as those words,
saying: It was meet, etc. For this thy Brother was dead, and is alive again,
was lost, and is found.

Approving of that Principle of every thing in the end, goes to its proper
place from whence it came to return.

And moreover again for the Bottomless pit opend (Revela.) Hells Epitomie and
their King over them. where they not having the Seal of God in their foreheads
(some name given as it were) These not killed seeking death fleeing from them:
shuning so many months imprisonment: As prisons never so filled as in these
days: Shall not need to add what year of God sealed with, etc. where such
innumerable Hors-men discribed to the life.

And thus having cansel'd Purgatories numberless passes and pardons that take
upon them to deliver others, and cannot out of such utter spiritual Darkness
free themselves derived from: Thou shall not come forth thence until paid the
utmost mite. And he without commisseration of his fellow servant served with
the like MEASVRE.

Take to your comfort those arms displayed, as said to the one, this day Thou
shall be with ME, etc. So inferrs another day for the Other: And therefore, as
the Lord lives that sha'l raise us from the dust of death so the Lord lives
(let us say) that brings up out of the Jaws of HELL back to Paradise.

FJNJS.

