FOR The blessed Feast OF EASTER.

Writs, By the La. ELEANOR.

Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be glad:

Let the Field be joyful, and all that is therein, before the Lord, for he
comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the People with his truth.

Printed in the year, 1646.

TO THE ISLES OF Great BRITAIN these; From PATMOS I WILL:
BEcause the time short, as here showed, in the NAME OF GOD, Amen: shall name
the Child, Namely the blessed LAMB extold so, and magnified in the Apocalypse:
Even the week of EASTER, (as much to say) when the general RESVRECTION time:
And this is the interpretation thereof; of which aforesaid Feast covered under
NO few figures, Metaphors and the like; Thus,

Given with such a special charge, to keep the things written therein; verse
3 (to wit) contains. Jnfalible forerunners and signs, when the End of time
at hand for the Churches Preparation to stand on their gaurd, lest surprised
unawares.

And as here Times and Seasons mystery proclaimed with Times treble voices:
grace and peace from him which JS, and which WAS; and which JS to COME: And
from the seven spirits before (or in sight of) the THRONE, so shows withal His
day of coming a GREATER then his proclaimed BY great BRIITAIN, whose feast
solemnized about the Resurrections feast, March 27.: Those first and last
Princes, or Kings; Of which last time the Prophet Daniel Thus in his last; And
at that time shall Michael stand up the great Prince etc. who seals it with
these, Dan. 12. And many that sleep in the dust, shall awak, etc. including
those observed Feasts aforeshewed, for an express token of the general
Resurrection in their Reign, and at that very time and season.

Touching which turning again to the Revelation

And with the Sign of the LAMB, proceeding lation, bearing the same date,
verse. 5. And from Jesus CHRIST the faitfull Witness, the first begotten of the
dead, PRINCE of the KINGS of the Earth: That loved US, and washed US from our
sins in his own blood, concluded With these, and has made us Kings and
Priests, etc. To HIM be glory and dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.

Behold HE comes, etc. Saying, J am ALPHA and OMEGA: Even so upon the LORDS
day showed unto that happy man: The Disciple whom he Lord above the rest
entrusted, The likeness of the dreadful day of JVDGMENT standing in the
midst of Watch-lights, saying; fear NOT, J am the first and the last King; J
have the Keys of HELL and DEATH: Write the things which Thou have seen, etc.
And he that has an Ear let him hear the Spirit of Prophecy, and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, to Supp with him who holds the seven
Stars in his Hand, The evening of TIMES Ensign.

briefly beyond hope, that pre veiled to open the seven Sealed Book of Times
Mystery; after his much weeping, because no man was found worthy to read, or
look? thereon: No not the Prophet Daniel, who more then once was bidden go thy
way, (Dan. 12.) for the words are referred for the end of time.

Thou shall rest, etc.

Even so, Glory, Honor, and Peace, be ascribed to the Lamb, (Easter our Rest)
before whose face (Rev. 6.) Kings of the Earth, Mighty men, Great men, Rich
men, and chief Captains, then taking their flight, as who able to stand in
such a Storm of confusion, then comes the great day of the wrath of the Lamb.

Revel. Chap. 7. As here the year of Grace 1644. follows, when. accomplished
(Or Sealed) those pernicious Winds till then not let loose.

And, the Seals being sealed or oppened, thus proceeds.

And after these things, I saw four Angels standing at the four corners of
the Earth, holding the four Winds, that the wind should not blow: Saying hurt
not the Earth, nor the Sea, till We have sealed the Servants of God in the
Foreheads. And I heard the number of them that were Sealed, and there Was sealed
a hundred and forty etc. twelve times twelve, serving both for the months and
year, and the equal hours divided between day and and night, when those
unrestrained winds.

And as he heard the number of the one: Thenafter that (or the following year)
which no man could number, so he saw of all Nations standing before the Throne,
and before the Lamb, saying salvation to our God that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb, the year of our salvation (to wit in the month of March)
renown through the world beginning about Easter. And as by sitting on the
throne expresses the Rest or Sabbath day when it began also, observed by
Christians so loug, likewise every one by those Palms in their hands Ensigns
of Victory and Peace, even proclaiming the Joyful year 1645. this victorious
time of such thanksgivings, wherein Babylon is blown up, and thus the last
year, and the New Model signified hand in hand who have washed their Robes in
the blood of the Lamb, and made them so fair.

Wherefore there needs no further question to be made of that Albion Army, who
they are that serve him day and night, since not unknown the condition of
soldiers, companions of restles time, of whose service hard to indge between
the state of prisoners, where desired, death flees away, and such liberty as
they enjoy, which to be preferred or desired, (as the Prophets Esaias 49) shows
or binds them together here. That thou may say to the prisoners go forth,
and them that sit in darkness, show your selves. They shall hunger no more,
neither shall the heat of the Sun smite them: The Lamb is their leader, as much
as to say Easter shall bid them welcome to the Lords table, and thus from their
eyes tears wiped away by the Lamb in the midst of the throne, when peace and
the day of judgment together going.

Revel. Chap 14.
AND following the Lamb whether he goes, and his Albion Troops in their Virgin
springaray, his fathers name having in their foreheads, such a year of God, of
the interpretation whereof as follows. And lo a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and
with him a hundred forty and four etc. where again the foresaid year of our
redemption, witness these words.

These are redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God and the
Lamb, And these whereas singing a new song before the Throne, which song no man
could learn but such a certain number a hundred forty four which were redeemed
from the earth, no other then some watch word given (as it were) showing When
such a New time come to pass of Reformation, That then our Redemption draws
near; As hereby showed the hour come of his judgment, This for another sign
Babylons fall, first her Numerous Jdols cast down its fallen, its fallen; The time
expressed in that overflowing Wine press of hers, a thousand six hundred bearing
date.

Wherefore no marvel though Syon tun^s up her Harps, so long out of tune, for
such a blessed day where the Cup or Chalice of his indignation, not in a corner
or in private administered, but powered out in the Presence of the holy Angels,
and in the Presence of the Lamb: Even NO more of their real PRESENCE and the
like, to wit, who have no Rest day nor Night, with sulphorous Smokes
suffocated, in their own kind rewarded for the blessed Sabbath days,
violation, That solemn rest prophand.

Even so again on the other side write, Blessed are the dead which dye in the
Lord henceforth, that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow
them. Showing also for them with such Valor and Courrage that have followed
the Cause, these their everlasting Epitaph.

And so much for the NEW Time, and for Babylons judgment, the day of
judgments forerunner, Her grapes being cried full ripe, the hour unexpected
Come, the Wine Press trodden without the City up to the Horse-bridles, the
horses too drink their fill of blood without measure, the sixteen hundred
years being fulfilled, serving for the measured compass of this Island, 1600
miles also, Those furlongs. And this the contents of the Apocalypse 14. Chap.
where Like the fruitless tree after the fourth year cut down, sufferd to
stand no longer.

And proceeding on, Revela. Chap. 19.
FOr the great days Preparation, as here: a greater priveledge then those
Writs of Parliament to be called hither, to partake of The Lambs marriage
Supper; A blessing to be desired much more Then the beauty of Lillyes, to
bear HER Company, granted she should be arrayed in fine Lynnon, clean and
white: As clear by such voices and Acclamation: Of which marriage Writs to be
published; briefly as follows: Requiring rather a quire of paper, Then
circumscribed within the Narrow limmits of a sheet or two.

For such a meeting so long waited for: Represented (as it were) by the ghests
invited Now to the Lords table the Easter-weeke: when as that Deciple about to
fall down and worship, Charged; See thou do it NOT: not the first caveat entered
to to flee Jdolatry.

But going on with the Season and Time, a thing of such Consequence, as here
the Virgins day in Lent, after which, when Marriage licenses so frequent,
accompanied with the victorious Bridgrom, clothed in his Easter robes: a
Vesture dipped in blood, proclaimed King of kings, and Lord of lords, that in
righteousness makes war: his Coronation feast then, as crowned with so many
Crowns, followed with his Saints, mounted or white Horses every one; a greater
show then St. Georges his coming at hand, or any other.

whose Name called the Word of GOD, that unknown Name in another language (as
it were) written, Not unlike those words: Rex: Parliament: Peers etc. ver.
Where showed lastly the fowls feasted on flesh, the Storke and Crane etc. Not
ignorant of their time of coming, in the Spring time; as the Horse (Chap. 14.)
swimming in blood up to the neck, which know their owner; called unto the
supper of the great God, to assemble and muster themselves to eat the flesh of
Kings, the flesh of Captains, the flesh of mighty men, even Licenced by the
Lamb, all the fowls to be filled: All but so many tokens, or Ensigns
displayed proclaiming when the hour of his Judgment, Come.

Revela. Chap. 21.
ANd as called to witness here, a Reformation set forth before the End; a new
Model, a new Heaven and a new Earth, new Jerusalem prepared as a Bride to
meet her Husband, where no more pain, tears, and the like, but like the
Peacable Spring; when painful Winter past, to such infirmities subject, as
that heavenly voice making known; Behold I make all things new, former things
are past away, saying, it is done: J am Alpha and Omega; seals it with that
unsearchable Name, the quintessence of Mystery and Mercy.


