A Dangerous and BLOODY PLOT DISCOVERED Whereby should have been murdered and
most barbourously Massacred fourscore of the House of Commons, diverse of the
chief Actors being revealed.

ALSO A terrible fight between LONDON and Saint Albones, betwixt a party of the
Royalists and a party of the Parliaments forces.

WITH A great and bloody fight at Sea, wherein was taken 1 ship 10 piece of
O^dnance, all their Arms and great store of Ammunition besides much rich
Merchandise.

LIKEWISE A great overthrow given to the Scots, and the last intelligence from
Newport touching the successful proceedings between the Kings Majesty and the
Commissioners of Parliament.

London Printed for Richard Wilcocks 1648 8ber3d

A terrible Battle between London and St, Albons, fought betwixt a party of
the Royalists, and a party of the Parliaments forces upon Saturday last,
THis day being the 28. of Sep. 1648. A Member of the House gave notice, that
himself and another Gentleman, having occasion to pass forth of the City about
some extraordinary business, were affronted by 3. Gentlemen, (who very well
knew the said Member, calling him by his name) two of them drew their Swords,
and fell on him, the third had a Dagger to stob him, but by great providence
gave them a Repulse. T^ere was also information given that Col. Rainsborough
was likewise set upon by 3, of the Kings party between London and St. Alba^s,
he having a Captain in his company, the Cavaliers seeing their gallantry and
resolution, put spurs to their horse, and rode for it and being extraordinary
well mounted over rid them.

A great Plot discovered, Wherein should have been Murdered, and most
villanously Massacred fourscore of the House of Commons, diverse of the Chief
Actors being discovered.
UPon Saturday last, Information was given to the Committee of Darby house and
the Speaker, that there were diverse of the Kings party who had c^mbined to
massacree fourscore of the Members of the Honorable House of Commons, who as
they said opposed the Treaty in the House, and gave a note of 4. of their names
A Captain of the Army was likewise killed in London, and a Major the last week.

A Petition was presented to the house in the name of many Thousands of the
County of Ox^n, showing their approbation of the large Petition in the name of
many Thousands of the City of London, Westminster, and parts adjacent, and the
great danger the Kingdom is in at this Time, desiring that those that have ever
adhered to them and ventured their lives and fortunes in this great cause may
not perish suddenly, while the destroyers cry peace, peace, but seek after
blood, And that they would return to their first principles and not fail from
the good work of God, that Gods wrath may be appeased, the enemies of him and
his people subdued, their friends reconciled, which will be like life from
death to this poor dying Nation, and so by this means a wel-grounded peace
established.

From St. Albons September. 29. thus.
There has little of concernment happened here since the last Post, his
Excellency takes all the care he can to the Country that undergoes the great
but then of Free quarter; complaints coming in daily concerning the same and
that which adds to affliction is, That the Soldiers is not paid, whereby to
enable them to discharge their quarters, some Regiments having not had one
penny pay these 18. weeks past, and none having had above one month pay in a^l
that time, except the 2. Regiments which were in Kent, and the Soldiers begin
to be much discontented, that the fault should be imputed unto the^ for not
satisfying for what they have in provisions when as they have been so ill paid,
it is v^ry much feared if some speedy course be not taken herein, neither the
Country nor the Soldier will with patience long undergo the same. His
Excellency had letters out of Scotland (where Lieut. Genesis Crumwell is with the
Army) informing of the good correspondencie betwixt the Earl of Argiles Army
and ours, and that Monro was possessed of Sterling bridge, hoping thereby to
increase his Army its conceived it will rather lessen their number. There past
some Scots prisoners this way going to be shipped for beyond the Seas, most of
them curse Duke Hamilton, and wish that the Deele may flea his hide, some of
them who escapt when they came to beg made as if they were dumb, making signs
for bread, least their language should discover them.

2. Letters came this day to the General from good hands, that there was a
Design that 2. Caviliers should sto^ him during his residence at St. Albans,
another from France came this week to his Excellency to the same purpose, and
the party is in England and upon his journey from France that first discovered
it.

The Lord Admiral with his fleet consisting of about 20 ships has now alarmed
the revol^ed ships and is laboring to reduce them the particulars are as
follows. viz.

His Lordship called a Council of war upon receite of the Ordinance for giving
indemnity to the revolted ships, And it was resolved to send them a summons and
offer indemnity to them accordingly.

And coming within 4 leagues of them, a Summons was sent to them, offering
them if they would surrender themselves and their vessels they should have
Indemnity and favor if not, to expect none.

But the Prince sent answer of a positive denial to come in, or do any thing
in order to that Summons, sleighting the indemnity offered. And declared
resoluton and those with him for the restoration of the King his Father to his
former Rights.

My Lord having received this answer, sent a reply to the Prince, to let His
Highness know the dangerous courses he is in, and those with him, and what a
hopeful way the Kingdom of England, is now in to be settled, and all
differences composed, and very good invitation to his highness, and those with
him to hearken to an agreement with the Parliament of England.

The Hollanders declare themselves Newters, and that they will not meddle at
all neither on the one side nor on the other, between the King and Parl. of
England.

And they have a fleet of ships put in between our ships and the Princes, that
so no hostile act may be done on either side.

But the Officers, and Seamen have differences among them, with the Prince,
and that very great; only at present upon a little money paid to them, they are
so unruly altogether, since the Prince came, as they were before, and yet I do
not hear that Prince Charles is aboard them. It is thought his Highness will not
go aboard for fear they should have some design to carry him away.

Intelligence came just now that the Warwick Frigot has had a fight with one
of the Irish ships, and taken her with 10 pieces of Ordnance, 5 barrels of
Gunpowder, and good store of Merchandise, diverse hundreds of Hids, and many
Thousand Weight of Tallow. And there is also a little Vessel taken that was
(by the Lord Iermins order) going with relief to his Islands, and all the
Ammunition therein taken.

SIR,
BEing at present arrived into Chester water, having been to the Northward, and
came on yesterday our of the Bay of Carrickfergus, where upon Saturday was a
sennite, Col. Mouke did surprise the Town and Castle of Corrickfergus, and the
same day did surprixe Belfast: I have brought over with me the General Major
Monro Prisoner unto your Honors; Upon Thursday last when I received him
aboard, Col. Monk did march away toward Colrane, I pray God give him good
success, he is in great want of men and money; here is one Captain Browf come
over in charge with the General Major, to whom I refer you to further
relation at his coming to you.

Thus with my humble service presented unto you, I take leave and remain, Yours.

T. B.

SIR,
FRom this Island for the present I can write little of News, only his Majesty
and the Commissioners goes on very hopefully, and his Majesty is willing, and
ready to come to an agreement upon reasonable Conditions, so that there is
great hopes of a speedy alteration and happy union between both parties.

Newport September. 29. Yours to his power H. L.

FINIS.

