My Lord Nevvarks SPEECH To the Trained-bands of Nottingham-shire at Newark,
13. July* 1642.

Concerning His MAJESTY'S Commission of Array.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin. 1642.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp
Gentlemen, and my good Conntrey-men all,
THese Noble Gentlemen and my self have called you together by virtue of His
Majesty's Commission of Array directed to us, I shall acquaint you with the
grounds and reasons of it, which are these, the defense of His most sacred
Person, of your Liberties, Laws, Religion, and the just privileges of both
Houses of Parliament. These are the ends of this Commission, and of all His
Majesty's actions and endeavors, they tend hither as to their proper Center and
place of rest; I know herein you easily believe me, the least doubt cannot
remain with them that have so often had his Royal word, his solemn and
frequent protestations to this purpose, and the Word of a King is sacred as His
Person, what then are His solemn Protestations?

I hope this is the farthest journey you shall take, and that your Country
shall be the only Sphere wherein you are to move, I am sure His Majesty
heartily desires it should be so; But if there be urgent and necessarily
occasions that you must go further, I will accompany you, and not any shall be
exposed to that hazard I will not be my self; your trouble shall be mine,
your danger mine, all fortunes I will participate with you, and my care of
every one of you shall be equal to that I shall have of my self I should have
been glad to have found any where, such zeal and readiness to serve the King;
but rejoice much more to find them here, amongst you my Countrymen, in this
place, the place of my birth, and my affections; It should argue some
diffidence I had of you to persuade you to persuade you to obedience and
loyalty to your Prince, and indeed I should lose time in so doing, when I
already see your hearts full of them, and well may they be so to him that is so
careful and tender of the good of you, So gracious a Prince, as unexampled in
virtues as in Royalty; besides I should but lay open my own folly in thinking
any Arguments could be more prevalent and of greater efficacy with you then
those I have already named, your religion, the safety and preservation of your
Prince, of your Laws, and Liberties, and of all that is dear and near unto
you, to these I may add, the faithful keeping of those religious Oaths and
Protestations you have taken; with whom these would not be powerful I am sure
nothing under Heaven could, no not Heaven it self.

I have acquainted the KING, and fully, with your forwardness to serve him,
and told him that this Country has been only remoter from His Person, but
as near to him in heart as Yorkshire, and that in our dutiful affections to
Him we will not be second to any subjects He has. I have no more to trouble
you with, you may all now depart every one to his own home, where I pray God
you may happily live, and enjoy the benefit of those good Laws the care of
former times has transferred to you, and the goodness of His Majesty has
bestowed, and is still ready to bestow more upon you.

FINIS.

