THE DOUBTFUL ALMANAC. OR, A very suspicious presage of great Calamities yet
to ensue.
By G. WITHER.
WHere the Head is not obeyed, it is in vain to seek remedies: that State must
needs fall in pieces, where out of point of Conscience the sovereign powers are
maligned, for no other thing more then for pressing Conformity to wholesome
commands: It is held a bad sign of reconciliation, when after the long feude
between two enimous parties there arises a third, a perfect neuter equally
distant from both, still favoring the weakest, till at length it self becomes
the strongest; difference is sooner comprimed between two then three: the third
standing as a partition wall of purpose that the other should not join. It is
observed by Josephus, the great Cronographer of the Jews, that in Jerusalem
(when the time of its long before denounced destruction by our Savior drew
near) there were three Leaders of that civil and lamentable dissension amongst
them: the City being divided into the jurisdiction of the Temple, the high and
the low Town; it is recorded by the same Josephus, that the Governor of the
Temple, and Captain of the Chief Town had often times come to an agreement, had
it not been for him of the Base Town; in like manner that the Chieftains of
both the upper and lower Towns had easily come to reason, had not the Captain
of the Temple ever opposed: for such is the nature of Civil distraction where
three are interest in it, there will ever impede the corresponding of the other
two; lest they souldred into one should charge him, vi unita: therefore keeping
them enemies, he is sure of subsisting, if not of gaining; but once made friend
he is certain to be reduced, if not ruined. To set the staff at our own door,
and to come a little nearer home: At the first rising of the thrice unhappy
dissension in England for a long season, there was no talk but of two parties
standing upon the punctilioes of their own Rights, that of Kings, challenging
the full extent of his Prerogative, the other of the Parliament, maintaining the
Petition of Right, and Privilege of Parliament; And although these had some
sharp encounters, yet were not good men out of all hope of reconciling them; as
witness the great hopes (yea almost assurances) that to judicious men did
appear of it twice at Oxford, and far more clearly for a good many days at
Vxbridge; but when once the Independent party burst out, and sung no note but a
Base; when they came not only to presence, but to precedencie, yea
presidencie: Deus (...) incr^^uil malum! to what a height swelled the tide of
our miseries: Quo cruore madebant omnita! what blood has been spilt? how is
peace not only deferred, but, is some are jealous, even delaid: so that we may
but truly say with Philosophers, Omnis Ecclysis fit interpositione tertii: The
matter is but marred (if not quite destroyed) by the intervening of a third.
Whether this party has not tried le sec et le vert (as the Frenchman says)
what lies in them both in Countries, Towns, and City. Coetera silentin
praeterienda, I dare go no higher, to keep the wheel off this factious Civil
broyls still afoot, let those enquire it who by their daily undoing have most
reason to resent it.

The next malum omen which offers it self as Avis sinistra, an unluckie bird
auguring the continuation, if not an increase of our miseries, is, that Sects
and Schisms, Absolon like, sit at the entrance of the gate, courting,
enticing, alluring, and fawning upon all passengers to the intent to win them
to her, and to wear her livery. And because I have touched upon Absolou, let us
see if his proceedings in the at chievement of his wicked designed purpose,
from the beginning to the end of it, does not, per omnia quadrare, up and down
the same; with the course of Heretics and Schismatics in these days; let us
then scan his actions, and take his carriage apeeces: Absolon not so foul
within, but as fair without; proper of personage, beautiful of visage, quaint
of language, affable in carriage, pitiful and compassionate toward Suitors in
his usage: he sits at the entrance of the Kings gate, every man may have
access to him. If some (...) daunted with the presence of his gallant feature,
glittering apparel, or consideration of his high dignity, as being not only
King David's Son, but Heir apparent to the Crown, why Absolon will call him to
him, ask him his matter, and that he may have him the readier, he offers him
his hand to kiss, the better to encourage him, he would hear his cause out,
and whatsoever it were in its own nature the Plaintiff ever departed from
Absolon possessed with the justness of it, and that it might have passed on his
side, had not King David and his Officers of Justice been in fault through
their negligence, if not worse: Thy cause is good, says he, passing good
questionless, but there is none deputed by the King to bear thee. By the King,
oh what a blow does Absolon give his Father here! he insinuates the King to be
wholly careless of the welfare of his Subjects, although Prince was never more
tender; he endeavors to make the world believe, that he cared not which end
went forward with them: but were Absolon in solio had he to do as he should
(leastwise as he would) matters should not be so carried: Quia sibi vult
Absolon? what means Absolon by all this? Surely to withdraw the heart of the
common people from his Father, and to fasten them upon himself; knowing full
well, that if he could be master of their affections, he should soon have both
their hands and purses; that being the lodestone that drew the rest: Absolon
was reasonable well assured of that; what is behind? A fit place, and that
somewhat remote from Court is to be thought on, where he may have some time and
opportunity to draw to a head, for near David that could not so well be done,
he having too many sage and trusty Worthies about him, that would soon crush
his cockatrice in the shell; Absolon has a clue for this, a way to bring't to
pass, the better to effect it undescride, he varnisheth with Religion; in all
humble wise he acquaints his Father with a Vow he had made of such a sacrifice,
that he would offer unto God in case he should see his Fathers face in peace
(after his banishment for his unnatural murder of his brother Ammon) he
earnestly sollicites leave for the accomplishment of this sacrifice in Hebron,
King David, (well meaning David) as gladly condescends to the motion as it was
him craved (a Prince a great while since David's days did himself the greatest
injury when he intended to his people the greatest boon) joyful that his Son
of a murderer was become a sacrificer: dismisseth him to his sacrifice, not
only with a consent, but a blessing: The Lord God accept thy sacrifice:
Absolon has his aim both to King and people, forthwith he mounts his Chariot,
and with a train but of fifty Laques, and two hundred chosen men out of
Jerusalem he speeds unto Hebron: there indeed he sacrifices, yet sends to
Giloh to Achitophel while he offered; nay the same Scripture observes, 2 Samuel
15.12. That during his sacrificing the conspiracy grew strong.

It is recorded of one of the most politic Kings that ever reigned in France,
Lewis the 11.
that he ever held his most serious and important consultations and ever
expedited his weightiest affairs in a Monastery; when the world thought that
the good King went so often thither for no other reason but his Souls health,
viz. to make his Confession, receive Absolution, hear Mass, receive the
Sacrament, and the like, (which the simple vulgar thought the only business
of repairing unto Religious Houses) King Lewis was contriving how to undermine
the Constable of France, who put him in fear of joining either with the King of
England Edward the fourth, or Charles Duke of Burgundy, both them his
professed Enemies. Lewis in his Monastery spent his Canonical hours, in
projecting some way to cast a bone between his two confederate Enemies, to set
them at odds one against the other, the better to draw one of them, viz. Edward
of England into League and Amity with him, which he effected both to the utter
confusion of the Conte St. Paul the Constable; and to the small profit of the
Duke of Burgundy: these, and the like, were the Beads that he said daily over
during his abode in his Monastery. Oh nothing is so favorable for the covert
of black designs as some exercise of Religion: be sure that be strongly
pretended when ye mainly intend this; and all is well. To act devotion whilst
one plots villainy, frees the design not only from suspicion, but procures a
good opinion to it: men have been, are, and ever will be taken with fair
outsides: they not being able (for the most part) to see clear through this
glasser (Sed haec per transennam) by the by this. Let us return to our matter.
And having seen Absolon act his first part, let us see how ste behaves himself
in the second: why now knowing his own strength, having well considered the
concourse of people to him, viewed their number, observed their quality, he
takes off the mask, shows himself to the world in his own shape, causes it to
be proclaimed throughout the Land by sound of Trumpet, that Absolon was King in
Hebron.

David perceives too late, that Absolons sacrifice was no peace offering upon
the receipt of the news, and true intelligence of the strength of the rebellion;
he is fain to fly for it, leaving Jerusalem to a new Master, who is not long
before he takes possession of it; all men flocking to him, and worshipping a
rising Son, except Sadok, and Abiathar, Gods chief Priest in ordinary, and
some other, those stuck to David: although little reason in humane judgment
for it, yet to David they adhere: these were orthodox Seers, call in to Gods
vineyard, Gods way, these men would not countenance rebellion with their
presence, they will hide for it rather; they knew that although it were an ill
weed, and grew apace, yet it is not of long continuance, but is at length cut
down, these two Priests of God with their Sons will not applaud it, though
triumphing. But not to digress from our Story.

Absolon makes a glorious entrance into Jerusalem, there takes possession of
the Palace royal; nay to make known to the world in what vile esteem he held
his Father, and fearing lest men should not take notice enough of it, he
defiles his Fathers Concubines in the open view of Jerusalem: and that all men
might know that he had as good a will to despoil his Father of his life, as of
his honor; he marches into the Field with a puissant Army, and give him but a
pitched battle both for King, and David; where had not God miraculously stood
to him, Absolon of a traitorous, perfidious Rebel, had become a rightful
King. I have done with the example, and should come unto the Parallel: were it
not that one thing I observe in the Catastrophe of this memorable Story, will
not let me slip over it before I have touched it: Absolon is routed, yea I may
justly speak it, hanged up for his unnatural and undutifull rebellion, by God
himself; his chiefest ornament serving for his halter: yet David by his
deserved destruction was not only ensur'd of his life, but restored to his
Crown and pristine dignity: one would think that David ( Si quis mortalium
alius, if any man living) had no cause to be sorry for his riddance out of the
way, and was he not? so it should seem by that most heavy, dolorous, and
pathetick dittie that he breathed forth at the tidings of his fall: O Absolon,
my son, my son, would to God I had dyed for thee, O Absolon my son, my son.
Absolon that formerly murdered one of his brothers (and that at a feast in his
own house) Absolon that had endeavored, all in him, to steal the heart of his
people from him, by slandering his Government, and promising mountains if he
could but once get to the helm; (a wile much practiced amongst us within these
few years.) Absolon that had in the clear day light openly defied his Fathers
(...); Ab^^^^^ that had no^ only privately conspired to take off his Crown,
but openly sought his life in a bloody battle. Absolon, who built his
imaginary greatness upon no other foundation then the ruin of his Father: yet
the death of this Absolon does David take so ill, that his victory is no
victory with him, because he is not alive: nay he preferres his own life to his
own: Would God I had dyed for thee, O Absolon my son, my son. Beside David
could not choose but apprehend digitum Dei, Gods signal justice upon his Son
for his notorious rebellion, and his mavelous mercy toward him in his
preservation. Cui igitur in lacrymas effunditur David; What means David to take
on in this manner? whereas to all men's thinking he had matter of exceeding
great joy, triumph, and thanksgiving. Naturam expellas furca licet tamen usque
recurret: It is an old saying, Murder will out; and it is a true saying,
Nature will not be hid. David looked upon the person of Abshlon, Oculo affectus,
and Oculo sensus, with the eye of the body, and eye of natural affection. Upon
his converlation he only looked with the eye of understanding, and that of
grace; we are more moved for the loss of that wherewith the bodily sense and
natural affection are delighted, then we rejoice for the removal out of the
way that, whereby Gods Law is slighted, and humane society violated.

Again, David although a man after Gods own heart, yet David had the seeds of
corrupt nature in him still; it is Proprium quarto modo to nature, Quod Deus
vult, nolles to antipodize God, to walk with our heels against his head. A
third cause of David's so lamenting the death of his son Absolon, although so
ill deserving at his hand, was questionless this: David did well conceive (as
being a Prophet) the horriblenesse of Absolons offense, it being unnatural
rebellion, which God detesteth as witchcraft, which witchcraft is an absolute
deserting of God, and cleaving to the devil his professed enemy: David therefore
weighing the crime, as also the manner of his sons punishment for it, how that
he was taken away in his sin, having no time given him to repent him of it,
might justly fear the loss of soul as well as body, which to David could not
but be the subject of incredible grief. Now let us compare the parallel of Sects
and heresies in their accustomed proceedings with this example of Absolon: do
not the Sectaries first show the Sirens face? can any make more outward show of
piety, purity, sanctity of life then they? Do any talk more of God, of truth,
of standing for the Gospel of Christ? Do they not possess all men with the
goodness of his matter, of his state in grace, of his undoubted share in
heaven in case he side with them? Do they not humble themselves to the kissing
not only the hands, but the feet of those they desire to win for their
proselytes? while they are in their minority, pretend they to desire ought
else save to enjoy the freedom of their consciences in the profession of the
truth of Christ? Term they not themselves the poor despised flock? Stand they
not only in the gates, but in the streets, corners, alleys of Towns and
Cities, of purpose to woe and allure silly folk unto them? Make they not men
believe, that if (with Absolon) they were made Judges in the Land, and had the
absolute power of controulling, that all things should be in far better
condition? Do they not persuade that where they rule, God rules, and no where
else? Do they not seem to sorrow chiefly for our sorrow, in that none is
appointed either to relieve or right us? Have they not often professed, that
they could be content to be made anathema from Christ (presupposing more
interest in him, then perhaps Christ himself well knows of) so that we were but
grafted in to him after the manner that they are? Have they not
subsceptitiously stole away the heart of the people from the supreme and
undoubtedly lawful Magistrate; Vellicande, detractando, insumulando, by
calumniating, slandering, falsely reproaching to his government? And now that
they are grown to a considerable (may I not rather say) a formidable party;
after they had obtained liberty to go a sacrificing (what if a man should say a
whoring, were it any hurt think you?) after their own inventions: and that I
may take up that saying with a great deal more just reason for Christ, then
ever the Scribes and Pharisees did against him, Behold how the whole world
rimneth after them: Now, I say, that they are grown to this height, how do they
look upon us now? marry now as rises their good, so rises their blood; the
visard is off now: they must say now, Et flectere si nequeum superos Acherante
movebunt; all shall topsi turvie before any shall mar them: they have no part
in David, (they) nor portion in the son of Jesse: Every man of their new Israel
to his tent: they know full well that if a lawful King and lawful Government
be once established, a joyful calm must needs ensue, and put an end to these
our so long continued tempests: this name of peace is a very m^rs in ^ll: to
them: they fear right well, that the establishing of that will be their
downfall; the Dagon of their not orious purposes must needs fall before Gods
Ark of peace, they will none of it therefore: it strikes at the root licentious
Anarchies keep him out, cry they, while he is out; they that have now the
managing of the Kingdom should do well never to trust (him) more, or to suffer
him to have any thing more to do in it: and these men have stopped the tide (with
their powerful although pernicious influence) of our (not long since)
streaming joys, if not quite turned it: does it not hence appear, that Schism
is up and down Absolonnisme, both in Prologue and Play. Indeed I must needs
confess, that in th'epilogue there may be some difference, for we read that
Absolon for his detestable rebellion against his own Father, and his King, was
hanged up by the hair of his head; but the hair of these men is somewhat of
the shortest for that purpose; so that of necessity use must be made of
another thing. But seeing that these wise men still bear such a stroke, and can
hinder the current of our long hoped for quiet, without being checked or chid
for it, nay which with confidence in the fact, it presages to me that God has
still a controversy with us; that God who is the God of peace, and styles none
of his servants (whatsoever graces they have been otherwise endowed with) the
children of God, save only the peacemakers; I fear, I say, that this God of
peace does not yet hold us worthy of so great, and so an inestimable benefit as
is that of peace: but that by reason of our grievous sins (a catalogue whereof
follows) His anger is not turned away from us, but that his arm it stretched
out still. Isa. 9.

FINIS.

