The doleful Lamentation of Cheap Side Cross: Or old England sick of the
Staggers.

The dissenting, and disagreeing in matters of opinion, together with the
sundry sorts of Sects now raving and reigning being the maine causes of the
disturbance and hinderance of the Commonwealth.

depiction of Cheapside Cross

London, Printed for F. C. and T. B. 1641.

The doleful lamentation Of Cheap Side Cross. OR Old England sick of the
Staggers.
IT is a general and common complaint, that trading, employment, and commerce
in the Commonwealth is so astonished and dead, that all Callings and
Vocations, are feign to make a cessation from their usual ways and endeavors,
which they attribute to the present doubtfulnesse and disturbance of the Times,
which were never so full of faction, destraction, and contradiction, as at this
present, men being only full of windy opinion, so that the world is grown
into a new confused Chaos, or a Babell of balling, and foolish disputing.
First, the Papist he thinks there can be no salvation out of his Mother
Church: and an old woman she mistakes her Mothers Church, for her mothers
Church: then the poor Papists they cry up merits, because they had a dole of
pudding at such a rich man's funeral: then your fine fellows, together with
Dancers, Musicitians, Organists, and the like, they like well of Ceremonies and
complementing with God: and some Countrie-men like well of Popery, because
Ignorance is the mother of Devotion: thus as every one abounds in his own
sense, or in the sense of profit, so they will defend their owners in the
blind popish Religion. Against this blind sort of ignorant people steps out a
Hydra, or multitude of proud and precise Sects, who are all knowledge, and all
eyes, loving nothing but their own silly fancies, accounting all things else
profanation and superstition, they are full of new wine, and a new spirit, new
revellations, new forms of prayer; they think the old ones are worn
threadbare, and they are not tedious enough, nor full of tautologies of the
Name of the Lord. This Sect can endure no cross but that on silver, and for
Cheap Side Cross it is the abomination of the City, and Surplesses are Smocks
of the whore of Rome; and every thing, tho never so laudable, and decent, and
necessary, if contrary to their opinion, is by them accounted profane. They
like none but sanctified and shuttle headed Weavers, long-winded Box-makers,
and thorow-stitching Cobblers, thumping Felt-makers, jerkin Coach-men, and
round-headed Button makers, which spoil Bibles, while they thumb over the
leaves with their greasy fingers, and sit by the fireside scumming their
porridge-pot, while their zeal seethes over in applications and
interpretations of Scriptures, delivered to their as ignorant wives and
handmaids, with the name and title of dear brethren, and especially beloved
sisters. But the world does sufficiently know their Characters, and
Description, and is sensible enough of the trouble and discord which they
breed. But beside these, there are diverse foolish Sects and Schismatics,
whereof many partake, and are favorers thereof. Nay, most men in matte s of
opinion are divided one against another. One will do no good works because the
Papists do them: another thinks good works are good, but will do none,
because they are chargeable: a third makes faith a matter of Discourse, but
shows none in his pious life an^ conversation; for quantum habet in arca
tantum h^bet and fidei, He has so much faith as coin he has in his Chest: A
fourth will needs make himself wise in Gods eternal Counsels, and all his
friends shall be of the Elect, but his foes, and those he bares any grudge
unto, be accounts them Reprobates. Some again will talk themselves out of
breath, in Scripture phrases, and coxen the world with an hypocritical
sanctity. Another loves fasting well but his flesh better: and therefore he
thinks feasting is very good and lawful, especially when our Laws commands
fasting. Another imagines prayers a great help to Heaven, though they be never
so brief and compendious, but then another spirit would know how far it is
to heaven, that he might frame a long Babel-like prayer, made up with hums and
hawes, that might reach up thither.

Six of the purer, but of the weaker Sect,
One day had conference to this effect,
To change the old and ancient name of preaching
And first, the first would have it called teaching.
A second, that same vulgar name dispising,
Said she would have it called Catechizing:
A third, though not so learned, yet as wise,
Thought it more fit to call it Exercise.
The fourth, a most magnificent Corrector,
Said she approved it best to call it Lector.
Nay, quoth the fifth, our brethren, as I hear
Do call it Speaking i^ Northampton shire.
Tush, quoth the sixth, then Standing were more fit,
For Preachers seldom in the Pulpit sit,
Then Standing let it be, cried all the rest,
With one consent applauding standing best.
It is easier to reckon up all the Species and kinds of nature, than to
describe all the Sects, Divisions, and opinions in Religion, that is now in
London; so that whereas there is but one truth, and one way l^ading thereunto,
they cannot agree about this one way, but error and vice being multiplied
manifold, they can all find out those ways to a hair; so that the times
remain still as corrupt in manners as ever they did: for pride has made them
not only ambitious to excesses of apparel, but every woman getting a red
Petticote over their shoulders will mount into the chair of Divinity: what
makes Artificers to be Preachers, by presuming on the assistance of the Spirit,
is it not the Spirit of pride? what makes them so ready to censure another
transgressions, is it not the pride of their profession? surely all their
factions are but the destractions and madness of their pride, that delights to
rave in Pulpits, and to have the liberty of talking blasphemous nonsense,
saying, O good Lord, little do thou know, how these sinful, proud, and
leacherous Bishops, if they had not been suppressed, would have dealt with thy
poor flock, such as we are, filly and harmless men and women: but dear
brethren and sisters, whatsoever we do let it be with zeal.



But where is this pious life, and Religion so much talked of? Look into the
world, and there is a general confusion or mixture of sin. Here you shall
find Drunkenness eagerly disputing in an Alehouse, sitting upon the Bench,
and condemning whom he pleases, and what Religion he does disaffect: and then
preciseness looks down with his eyes, as if he were only religious, when
inwardly, a whore is not more deceitful.

As for covetousness, rich men make that a part of their Religion, and adore
gold as much as their God; Voluptous wantonness has her Conventicles, where
the Spirit enlightens the understanding to see a Sister in the dark; and to
wench with policy is but a City courtesy and a civil humanity, yet there was
never so much hatred of the Sinner, condemning themselves therein in loving the
same sins, nay hatred of the reprobate is such a sign of a good estate, that
some are accounted religious only for hating their Brethren. Then for
hardness of heart, and contempt of Gods word, the poor complain of the one,
and the Priests of the other, for the world is troubled with the stone that
lies in the heart; which makes their charity dead, sick and so feeble; that it
cannot stir it self in any good actions, and it is so mad with a supposition
of knowledge, that whereas heretofore there was the Priests and the people, now
the common people will be Priests, and because they are ignorant they will
despise Learning, Lastly for lying, falsehood, and hypocrisy, it is accounted
nothing but a familiar expression, the gloss of trades, and the maintayner of
life, Qui nescit dissimularae nescit vivere. How to live he cannot tell,
That knows not to dissemble well.


Now from these premises of discord and faction where truth is made the object
of every contentious fancy, and so becomes opinion, needs must there proceed
much tumult, much division, and much distraction to the great disgrace and
scandal of the true Protestant Religion, and the glory and renown which has
been in this Kingdom and to the encouragement of wicked people, who seeing that
there are so many Sep^ratists and Sects, will therefore be of no religion; and
another cons^quent is as was mentioned at the beginning, the hardness and
deadness of the present times, there being no employment but a general
doubtfulnes making every one put confidence in their present Estates, for where
there is no unity, there can be no peace or quietness, and where there is no
peace there can be no plenty amonst the poor and inferior sort of people. Let
us pray therefore unto God the Author of peace and lover of concord that he
would please to establish unity in opinion, piety in profession, and a general
conformity to the Protestant Religion, to the glory of God and the peace and
tranquillity of the Commonwealth of England.

The doleful Lamentation of Cheap Side Cross, which was basely abused and
wronged,

IIasper Cross, situated in Cheap Side, London, upon Monday night, being the
24 of January, the sign being in the head and face, which made me the more
suffer; and in the year one thousand six hundred forty and one, when almost
every man is to seek a new Religion; and being then high water at London
Bridge, as their brains and heads were full of malice and envy: I the foresaid
Jasper Cross was assaulted and battered in the Kings high way, by many violent
and insolent minded people, or rather ill-affected Brethren; and whether they
were in their height of zeal, or else overcome with passion, or new wine
lately come from New England, I cannot be yet resolved; but this I am sure, and
it may be plainly seen by all that pass by me, that I was much abused and
defaced, by a sort of people which I cannot term better than a mad and giddy
headed multitude, who were gathered together from all parts, to wrong my
antiquity, and ancient renowned name, so much spoken of in foreign parts. Had
I ever done these my Brethren the least offense, I should be sorry, and am
still willing to submit and refer my self to the grave and most just
Senators now assembled.

Love and charity, those my brethren had none at all; for what benefit or
credit did it bring to them to come by night like thieves, to steal from me
here a leg, there a head, here an arm, and there a nose; they did all go away
from me the Cross with prefit: they have not done me so much dishonor as they
have done themselves, and the honorable City, whose civil government is a
pattern to all Nations: But I will tell you, my cross brethren, you both at
that time wanted wit and money: wit to govern your hot and over-boyling zeal,
and cross money to pay your Landlords rent: that is a cross to you, not I:
and so wanting such crosses as those, would be revenged of me, to satisfy
your malicious cross humors; I am but your stocking horse, and color for
your future malice, your rage will not cease though you should pull me down,
and make me levill with the ground: And when so done, then you will cry out that
there be crosses in the goldsmiths shops; which is plate and jewels, standing
upon cross shelves, those be the crosses you intend, though your pretense be
other wais: Next the Mercers shops whose Satin and Velvet lie a cross, and
whose Counters are a cross their shops: Then the next crosses which you will
find fault withal; will be with those rich monied men, whose bags lie crose
in their chests; then with their wives if they be hand some which you will
make to be crosses too, in a short space: I say dear brethren, if you be
suffered to pull down all things that are acrosse you will dare to pull a
Magistrate of his horse, because he rides acrosse his horse back, and pull his
chain to pieces because it hangs acrosse his shoulders, and if a millers horse
come to market with a sack of corn acrosse his horse back, and if you say it is
a cross, you then violently will run and pull it down, and share it as you have
done part of me the cross: And at length then our Churches will prove crosses
to you, specially if the have bin builded in popish times, and so in process
of time every thing will be a cross to you that you either love or hate: But I
will conclude with this caution that as long as we have such cross people,
cross every way, especially to Majestrates and men of Authority, and still go
unpunished, we shall always have such cross doings, and so I poor Ieffery
Cross leave you to your cross wives, and your own cross opinions.

FINIS.

