THE DOVVNFALL OF Mercurius Britannicus. Mercurius Pragmaticus. Mercurius
Politicus. That three Headed CERBERUS.
THat proverb which of late by him was spoken
In him's now crossed, the threefold cord is broken
Brit. Prag. and Pol. in Print must lie no more.
By The Rumps authority, that is out of door.
He and the Rumpe were birds all of a Feather,
And it is most fit that they should fly together.
But by the way there is a triple tree
May well become this triple Mercury.
And there perhaps he will find one cord may hold
Far better, then his own that was threefold.
This was the Scribe that sold himself for gain,
To work iniquity against his Sovereign.
'Twas he blasphemed his Prince, and with his Pen
Murdered the best of Kings, and best of men.
His cursed Siquis never well be forgotten
Against his Prince, when he is dead and rotten.
And it is the Nations crime (which God forgive)
That they should suffer such a Rogue to live.
He that Diana's Temple burnt, could be
Not half so famous for his infamy.
But now the time is coming, which no doubt
Will do him Justice, vengeance will find him out.
Though Foulk may guiltless prove of Royal blood,
Scobels Certificate can do thee no good.
Thy Books will rise up to condemn thee here,
And to confound thee in the other world, I fear.
When there was hopes that Caesar would prevail;
He then was for the head against the tail;
And who but he for Kings? and Monarchy
Was better far then Aristocracy.
But when the Rumpe had got the upper hand,
He was all theirs, and at their sole command;
And then there could be found no saving health
But in a Free State and a Commonwealth.
Thus with the times he turned, next turn I hope
Will up the Ladder be, and down the Rope.
And when you are gone from hence, it is like thou wilt be
In Pluto's Parliament a Mercury,
From whence perhaps thy friends may look to hear
From thee, what news, and the nocturnals there.
But first let Oliver thy Patron know
Our revolutions here, and how things go.
How Dick and Harry both have lost their station,
Wanting his courage and dissimulation.
How his Son Fleetwood, and the Clown his brother, Disborow

Betrayed them both, and so betrayed each other.
And how at present we are Governed all
By a wise Council, and honest General.
How all the Lords and Knights which he has made
Are now returning each man to his trade.
That Corbet, Vane and Scot, are out of favor
And now stand bound unto their good behavior.
That Haslerigg his old Antagonist,
Of being Knight in Leicestershire has mist.
And that his friend the Surry Knight and Squire Ainslo(...)

Have lost the day for being Knights of the Shire.
And that young Tarquin (often so called by thee)
Must now of England CHARLES the Second be.
And when thou'ast told him this, tell him withal
The money's owing still for's Funeral.
What news there is from below let us here; and thus
Farewell Mercurius Acharontichus.
Finis The Rump.
Printed in the year that the Saints are disappointed, 1660.


