Gospel-Mysterie: OR, The great Union that is betwixt CHRIST and the SAINTS.
From Cant. 2. 16. WITH A true Way to discern a Godly man from a Carnal or
Ungodly man: AND The way how the Saints return after Backsliding.

Also, The Worth of a good Conscience.

By Robert Dornford.

Revel. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock: if any man will open, I
will come in and sup with him. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, and
are to be sold at the three Daggers in Fleet street, near the
Inner-Temple-Gate. 1652.

Christian Reader,
I Have made bold to present thee with a few lines, in which it is like thou
may find much weakness: I shall humbly entreat thee to bear with that, and
to lay aside all prejudice that may arise in thy heart, and do desire thee to
read it over on this consideration, That God makes use of weak Instruments for
many good ends. And this I will assure thee, that I do not tell thee of that
which I partake not of, but of that which I have both heard and learned, seen
and felt: and do offer it to thee, not as my own fancy; but thou see it no
more then the Word of God witnesses: and therefore whether I please man or no,
it matters not much. I know many Pretenders to be Saints, yet deny the Power of
Godliness: The Lord turn all the hearts of his People away from them

In a few words; my desire is, that thou and I may not have a name to live, and
yet be dead: that we may not own the titles of Saints, and yet live as carnal
as others, which many do at this day: But it is no more then we may expect, in
regard the Lord CHRIST and the Apostles have foretold of Wandering Stars, and
Clouds without water, carried about with wind.

I tell thee, whosoever thou art, either Spiritual or Temporal, here is
something for thee to do: And therefore weigh that which thou read in the
balance of Truth; and the Lord make both thee and me, not only hearers of his
will, but doers also. Which is the earnest desire of

Thy Christian Friend, R. D.

A great Neerness Betwixt CHRIST and the SAINTS.
THe words of Scripture on which I shall discourse, is in the 2. Chap. of
Canticles,

My Beloved is mine, and I am his.

In this, and also in the whole Treatise, we have the Expostulations of Love
betwixt Christ and the Saints. I shall not stand upon the variety of it, but
shall keep to the words, in which we have chiefly these four parts.

1. We have the Spouses assurance of Christ; My Beloved is mine.

2. We have her great esteem of Christ; He is her Beloved, or, He is greatly
beloved of her.

3. We have her assent to Christ; I am his.

4. We have the Union betwixt them.

I shall endeavor to open these Heads in order, according as they lie. And
from the first thing I take notice of, the Observation will be this;

That every Saint of God has a full assurance of the love of Christ.

My Beloved is mine. There is no being a Saint, until thou can say, Christ
is my Christ: until Christ be thine, and in thee, thou art but a Reprobate, 2
Cor. 13. 5. But the Spouse here has a full assurance, that Christ her beloved
is hers: the Spirit of God does witness this unto her, as it appears by that
Scripture in Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. where the Apostle says, that the Spirit of
God does witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. This in it
self were enough to prove the truth of what has been said: but take a place or
two more for confirmation. 1 John 3. 1, 2. The Saints, they have a full
assurance that they are the sons of God, (says John) And if thou art a son of
God, then thou can not fail of the love of Christ. See Romans 8. 9. If any man
has the Spirit of God, then Christ is his; if he has not, Christ is none of
his. It is this assurance of the love of Christ, that makes the Saints so
confident; it was that which made them lay down all, lives and all for him. I
know that my Redeemer lives, says Job, c 19. v. 25, 26.

From the second thing I take notice of, the Observation will be this;

Obs. 2. That Christ is deerly beloved and highly prized by every believing
Soul.

I am now upon the cleerest truth, and the easiest proved that is, and
therefore shall not stand long on it. Only by the way, take notice, That it is
one thing to love Christ after this manner, and another thing to tell of loving
him. Many speak high words, and fine smooth speeches; but they love not Christ
so, as to part with all for him. But Christ is so deerly beloved to the Saints
that are Saints indeed, that all things are as nothing, when it comes to
competition with Christ. To you that believe (says the Apostle Peter) Christ
is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. There is nothing so dear to a poor Saint, as his dear
Christ, who shed his blood for him. The Apostle Paul, how does he declare his
dear affection to Christ, Phil 3. 7, 8, 9. I (says he) account all lost for
Christ; nay more then lost; I account all dung, that I may win Christ, and be
found in him. You may take notice a little, how the Spouse, by which is meant
the Saints, does express her love to Christ, Cant. 1. 7. O thou whom my soul
loves! and so almost all the Canticles is filled with the like expressions, by
which you may easily see that it is a dear love the Saints have to Christ.
Christ is so highly prized, you see, by Paul, that all things are by him
accounted dung; nothing is so lovely in all the world, as the Lord Christ.

Thirdly, from the Spouses assent to Christ, we may draw this Observation,

Obs. 3. That all the Saints do give themselves freely to Jesus Christ. Or,

That all the Saints are given to Christ.

Thev are given to him by a twofold gift. First, God gives them to him. Joh. 6.
37. All that the Father gives me (says Christ) shall come to me. and Joh 10.
29. My Father which gave them me, is greater then all, and therefore no man is
able to pluck them out of my hands. Secondly, the Saints give up themselves to
Christ. I am his (says the Spouse) to do what please him with me; and now I am
to follow him whithersoever he goes, as it is in Mat. 16. 24. He that has
given himself to Christ, (as the Spouse, as all the Saints do) he is to bear
his Cross, although in a field of blood. The Saints, they give themselves to
Christ, to be at his dispose, to obey what he commands; as appears plainly in
Joh 10 27. My sheep hear my voice (says Christ) I know them, and they follow
me. But I shall not stand here, in regard I know that all that are Gods, must
witness to this, That the Saints do give themselves to Christ, and follow him
in that way he commands.

I shall draw one Observation more, which lies in the way; that is,

Obs. 4. That there is an unseparable mutual union betwixt Christ and every
Saint.

From these words, My Beloved is mine, and I am his, there is the union; as if
the Spouse had said, I am united to Christ, and he to me; as the Vine is to the
branches, Joh 15. 5. so is Christ to me, and I to him; and as the head is to
the members, so is Christ to the Saints, and the Saints to Christ; and as the
head is governor of the body, so is Christ over the Saints, and the Saints act
by his light and motion.

This union is mutual: as it is with the consent of will, and truth of love, so
it is unseparable; the love of Christ never changes it holds out for ever. As
the Prophet Jeremy, c. 31 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love,
therefore in loving kindness have I drawn thee. Christ will never depart from
his Saints; he will never leave them, until he has saved them to the utmost
point of salvation, Heb. 7. 25. There is no peace, no quiet, neither in Christ,
nor in the souls of the Saints, longer then they enjoy each other. And that
made the Apostle Paul say, Our life is hid with Christ in God. Our life is in
Christ; there is no life for a Saint out of Christ.

Again, God has given all the Saints to Christ. All that the Father gives me
(says Christ) shall come to me; and all those that come to Christ, shall never
be plucked out of his hands, Joh. 10. 28. So likewise in Hos. 2. 19. I will
betroth thee unto me for ever. The Spouse of Christ is joined to him for ever,
there is no separation. See one Scripture more, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. At the time of
death, when all ungodly men shall for ever be separated from Christ, then is
the time for the Saints to enjoy their Beloved fully and for ever.

You see now that this is a truth, that there is both a mutual union and
unseparable between Christ and the Spouse, which is his Church or the Saints.
Well, now from these Heads or Observations there will proceed Uses.

The first will be a use of Examination to all in general; whether we have this
assurance of Christ, yea or no.

The second will be a use of Exhortation to all the Saints, that they love and
prize Christ dearly, as it is their duty.

The third, to all that as yet are without Christ, that they be persuaded to
give up themselves to him.

The fourth is a use of Comfort to the Saints in general.

The first Use is of Examination; to search our hearts and souls thoroughly,
whether we have Christ or no: And in the doing of this, beware that you do not
look on those Evangelical Marks and Signs in the Word of God as notions; but
bring thy heart to the Word, and see what thy Portion is there, and what thy
fruits appear to be; and what Condition soever thou find thy self in, deal
plainly with thy self; if thou find thy self yet in a state of Nature, then
think it thy duty to confess it, and do not deny it, because it is a sad
Condition; but own it, and take those courses to come out of it, that thou
find hereafter mentioned.

2. Consider the equity of this Duty, and the great need all men and women have
to be sure of Christ; You must have Christ, or else you are but Reprobates, 2
Cor. 13. 5.

Again, God chooses and sets apart the Godly for himself, as you have it in
Psalm. 4 3. and therefore I tell thee of nothing but what thou stand in great
need of, and which thou art required to do, if thou intendest to be a sharer in
the Lord Christ. Therefore now let us put the Work upon examination, and search
after our assurance; and if we are willing to see our selves in our own
condition, then take notice of these marks which follow.

First, Take notice what men and women are by Nature.

2. Consider what the work of Conversion is: and what blessed effects there is
that follows this work.

First, Consider what estate all are in by nature, All by nature are the
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. In this estate thou art in darkness, and had
nothing to do with Christ; thou had no fellowship with him; neither wast thou
any way taken with the Commands of God, as to see any loveliness in them; every
soul in the world (in this estate) is alienated from God: and as Adam hid
himself from God for fear of his sin; so do all poor creatures run from God for
fear of punishment; and as they are by nature, they never desire to have to do
with God; the guilt of sin lies hard on every unregenerate soul; and that makes
him a stranger both to God and his ways: and therefore now let us search into
our souls, and try if our condition be not such a one as this is.

2. Let us consider, what the work of Conversion is; and we shall find it to be

A changing of this nature, and a quickening of the soul; as you may see in Ephesians
2. 5. It is a working over of the soul into obedience to the Commands of God.
And usually the great God is pleased to do it by these six particular degrees
which follow.

First, By Illumination.

2. By Inspiration; stirring up the soul to do the will of God.

3. By Operation; working up the soul to the love of Christ.

4. By Direction; teaching us to do the will of the Lord.

5. By assisting us to do that which is directed to us.

6. By a full evidence of his Spirit, that we are the Sons of God.

First, The Lord illuminates the soul; the poor soul being in darkness, and
knowing no way to come out, the Lord enlightens him, and brings him to see his
miserable estate, John 1. 5. the Lord shows the soul the filthiness of sin, and
his lost and undone condition that he is in by nature; and his great need of
Christ, makes him to long for his Assurance of the love of Christ, more then
ever he did for any thing in the world: and now being enlightened, all things
to him are as bad as may be; sin is exceeding sinful to him, and he sees
himself laden with it, and therefore, he is like those in the Acts, who were
so enlightened, Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? Acts 2. 37.

2. The Lord works by Inspiration: carrying on the soul to Actions of life,
making him fit for such service as is now to be done; makes him still in
motion, and ready not only to see but obey. As Paul says in Romans 6. 17. Ye
obeyed from the heart the doctrine delivered. This is worth something to have
the heart lifted up to God in Obedience, and to have the soul at an utter
enmity with sin, striving against it in a continual motion, never making any
peace with it. Therefore now try and search whether thou have this Spirit of
the living God acting in thee, carrying up thy soul to actions of life and
power: If thou art inspired by the Spirit of God, then take it for ever
granted, that these effects will follow.

3. The Spirit of God is an operative Spirit; it acts in the soul spiritual
things: it begets its own likeness in the soul: it molds the soul in the new
mold of Obedience to the Commands of God. The spirit of God works in the soul
these operative Acts.

First, It works Faith.

2. It makes the soul live by Faith.

3. It drives him to see all in Christ, and nothing in himself.

1. It works faith in the soul, to believe that there is no way to come to God
but by Christ; and that it is the work of God to draw the soul to him, John 6.
29.

2. This Faith will work up the soul to lay hold on him; it will cause the soul
to reach forth it self to Christ, to see him to be the Son of God, and to trust
and rely on him for life.

3. The Spirit of God does by Faith work a mortifying of sin; as it is in Rom
8. 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin: Where these works
of the Spirit of God come, it operates, it carries the soul to a new frame of
life. He that is in Christ, is a new creature, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
This work of Faith lifts up the soul, to that spiritual Combat between the
spirit and the flesh. I see (says Paul) a law in my members warring against
the Law of my mind. It is by this work of Faith, that all the Saints hold out
in this warfare; that they still continue a Resolution against sin, to kill
that; and to bring every lust into subjection.

Secondly, It makes the soul live by faith, that is, it makes him (as it were)
see, feel and enjoy all the Riches of God in the Lord Christ: you may in part
see in the 11. to the Hebrews, what it is to live by faith.

It is to cast thy self with a full confidence upon God and Christ for life and
salvation. To live by faith, is to do these three things.

1. To put credit and confidence in God, that what is looked for we shall enjoy.

2. To look for our happiness only in Christ, and not in our selves.

3. To rest satisfied, as if we already had our desire: to live by faith, is to
credit what God says; to Rely on him, to trust him, with confidence that
whatsoever he has promised to us his poor creatures, he will make good: Heaven
and earth shall pass away (says Christ) but not one jot or title of my word or
promise shall fail. It is to cast our selves on God and Christ, believing that
he will, and is fully able to save even to the utmost, in every condition.

2. Again to live by Faith, is to live by something without our selves; it is
to see all in Christ, and nothing in our selves; it is to look on our own
righteousness as dung; and wholly to submit to the righteousness of Christ; as
you also may see in Phil. 3 8, 9, 10.

3. To live by Faith, is to rest satisfied in every dispensation of God, that
all is for the best to us; and to look on all things as if they were already
done according to Gods promise, or our own desire; so that our content may be
in every thing as well as if we had all things; All things are yours (says
Paul) you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, there is a full enjoyment of all.

4. The Spirit of God works also by direction, directing of every soul, whom it
has wrought the former effects in, to do the will of God, to walk in the ways
of his Commandments, whispering in every soul, and saying, This is the way,
walk in it. This duty thou must do, and that evil thou must leave undone. And
therefore examine thy self; do thou not find the Spirit of God telling
thee, thou must perform Duties of holiness, and refrain the evil of sin? if
not, I dare say, thou art yet in thy sins.

5. The Spirit of God works also by assisting us to do that which it directs us
to; it never directs us to do a Duty and leaves us: No, it stay by us and
enables us to go through it, and not only so, but even with sighs to God for us,
which cannot be by us uttered, it helps our infirmities. Romans 8. 26. Examine
thy soul, when did thou ever go to God by prayer, or any Duty else, that this
Spirit was not ready to assist thee? and to thy comfort take notice of this for
time to come, and thou shall find this truth, if ever thou have had this work
on thee.

6. God closes up all our comfort in this life, in this last degree of his
working, that is, by a full witness of his Spirit, that we are his sons and
daughters. And this is a very high enjoyment indeed, yet no higher then all the
Saints do enjoy; and indeed thou art not a Saint till thou have this Witness in
thy soul. And this the Apostle Paul affirms in Gal. 4. 6, 7. Because ye are
sons, God has sent the witness of his spirit to testify it to you, and
therefore ye are no more servants. Again, in 1 John 3. 2. Now are we the sons
of God: And in Joh. 1. 12. He gives all that through faith lay hold on him,
power to be his sons: God does evidence to all the Saints their interest in
Christ, and this is to them a sure Record; as 1 John 5. 7. 8. This is the new
name, and the white stone spoken of in Rev. 2. 17. which none knows save he
that has it. This is that earnest which Paul tells the Ephesians of, in chap.
1. 14. And this also you may see in Phil. 1. 13. and 4. 30. After you believed
you were sealed with the holy Spirit; the which Spirit you see is that which
seals all the Saints to the day of Redemption; and all this is given to the
Saints, to assure them that God is their Father, and Christ their Husband, as
the Spouse in the Text does witness. And yet further take notice how God does
this great work; he gives the Spirit as the earnest of our Inheritance: as a
man gives one pound, or one shilling in earnest to pay a thousand: so the Lord
gives his Spirit in earnest of enjoying his presence in Heaven for ever. And
the soul that has this Earnest, may be sure, that as God is God, he shall have
the whole sum made good to him. And that all the Saints may know this is true,
God will set a seal on their souls, to confirm them; and therefore thou may
say on good grounds, if thou have this seal and this earnest, that thou can
not miss of Christ.

Again, the Spirit assures us by working in us a fruitfulness. The Apostle
says, He has wrought in us grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16.

So that the soul is now endeavoring to imitate Christ, and to have some of
every grace that is in Christ; and this is also a help to try our souls by.

Use 2. The second Use is of Exhortation to all the Saints, that they love and
prize Christ very highly, that they make him the beloved of their souls, as we
see the Spouse does; the Saints should love Christ dearly, because he is their
All in all.

1. He is their Savior, who died for them.

2. He is their Root, from whence all their good and happiness springs upward
to God.

3. He is their Head, through which is given down all their enjoyments.

4. He is their Life and Crown of Glory.

1. He is their Savior, who died for them to save them, and them only, from
eternal damnation, 1 These. 1. 10. It was the blood of Christ which God
accepted; the precious blood of Christ, as Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. 19. And
therefore how can thou that call thy self a Saint choose but love Christ
deerly; and account him precious, who poured out his precious blood for thee?
Think on this; for certainly it is highly to be prized, that Christ the son of
God should die on the Cross for poor souls to make them like himself.

2. The Saints ought to love Christ because he is the Root that bears all
which God requires of them; you are complete in him, Coll. 2. 10. He is a
perfect Christ for poor imperfect Saints; he makes up the wants of the Saints,
in his own obedience; and offers it up to God as a sweet smelling savor.

How much then are all the Saints bound to love Christ as their Root or Bottom,
on which they stand, in regard they are poor weak Creatures, and can do nothing
without Christ, that is any better then dung in the sight of God.

Thirdly, Christ is deerly to be beloved by the Saints, because he is their
head, through which God gives all that they enjoy to them. Nay, God has laid
up all his fullness in Christ for the Saints, as Col. 2. 9. For in him dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and ver. 3. Paul says, All the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid in Christ. And in the same Epistle, chap. 1. ver.
19. It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. By this you may
see all Grace is laid up in Christ; and that is the way through which God gives
all these Treasures to the Saints: our Comfort, our assurance, our earnest, our
All in all is through Christ: And therefore let this exhort every Saint to
follow Christ, to love Christ, and to account him precious; and though thou see
vain and carnal hearts to slight Christ, and their Obedience, yet do thou love
him the more: it is a good warning for thee to quicken thee in thy love to him.

4. He is their life and Crown; no life out of Christ; thou have reason to love
him who is thy life, Col. ^. 3 4. Our life is hid with Christ in God; and when
Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we appear. How should this
engage all the saints to love Christ, seeing he is thy all in all, and thou
nothing at all? Love him for thy own sake, if thou have not any better
principles: For I tell thee thou ought to love him deerly, like the Spouse
of Christ.

Use 3. The third Use is to all that yet want this Assurance of Christ: That
they now whilst yet it is to day, accept of mercy; you see that all the Saints
have a full Assurance of the Love of God, and you see how God works on them,
you see that there is no life but in Christ: Let all this set your hearts on
work to look after this Christ, that you may come to have all those high
privileges made yours, and have your sins done away in the blood of Christ,
that you may no longer be children of wrath, and under the curse, but that you
may be made like the Sons of God.

I shall not stand on this Use longer in regard here follows a larger
Invitation to all such; to which I shall refer all that desire to be made
partakers of this mercy, and proceed to the next Use.

Use 4. Which is the fourth and last, and is also a Use of Comfort to all that
do enjoy Christ, and that can say upon good and sure grounds, God is my God,
and Christ my Christ; and let this Comfort all the Saints, and bear up their
spirits in every Condition; this should be indeed the very life and comfort of
the Saints, to consider their near relation to God and Christ; this made the
Apostle Paul say, as he did in 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard
what capacity God has put the Saints in; yet God has revealed it to them by
his Spirit. Here is exceeding comfort, that the great God should do such great
things for the Saints as these are.

1. He has made them his sons.

2. He has made them heirs of heaven.

3. He has sealed up their souls to the day of Redemption.

4. He has given them the earnest of his Spirit.

5. He has made them partakers of his own nature.

6. He will make them like himself.

1. That they are his sons, you may see in 1 John 3. 1, 2. Now are we the sons
of God; and not only called so, but really to be so.

2. God has made all the Saints heirs of heaven, Romans 8. 17. so in Tit. 3. 7.
They are made heirs of eternal life.

3. Their souls are sealed up; God has set a seal on them, Joh. 6. 27. Such a
soul has the Father sealed. Their souls are sealed to the day of Redemption,
Ephesians. 4. 30.

4. God has given the Saints the earnest of his Spirit, as a pledge of his
love, till they enjoy him fully, 2 Cor. 1. 22. so in Ephesians. 1. 14. it is called
the Earnest of the Saints inheritance.

5. He has made every Saint a partaker of his own nature, 2 Pet. 1 4. And

6. He will make them like himself, 1 John 3. 2. Put all these things together,
if thou art a Saint, and apply the comfort to thy self; here is an abundance of
it; well may thou cry out with Paul, O the depth and riches of the love of
God, to make poor sinners so near to himself!

Two Questions answered.
The first is, How shall we know a Godly man, or a man in the state of Grace?

The second is, How shall we know an Ungodly man, or a man in the state of
Nature?

BEcause many, nay most miscarry herein, thinking themselves godly, when indeed
there is no such matter: therefore we shall endeavor to lay open to public
view, so that every Conscience shall and must confess, who indeed is the Godly
man, and who the Ungodly. And this we shall prove by Scripture, and also by
experience, which cannot be denied.

The first Question is,

Who is the Godly man, and how shall we know him?

Ans. Thou shall know a godly man assuredly by these nine particulars; both
that he is a godly man, and wherein his godliness consists: and he may know
himself also by these marks.

First, a Godly man is a Converted man, he is newborn, his Nature is changed.
Every man must be a new Creature before he can be godly; and this Christ tells
us in Joh. 3. 3. Thou can not see the Kingdom of God, nor any thing that
pertains to godliness, except thou art Newborn; that is, except God come in
by his power, and give thee the sight of all thy sins, and (as it were) break
thy heart at the sight of them, and give thee true and unfeigned Repentance,
and that he show thee thy lost and undone condition, as thou art in thy self
for ever, and that he has caused thee to lay hold on the Lord Jesus Christ for
life; and to give up thy self to be governed and guided by him. I say, except
thou have felt this work upon thy soul, thou art not a godly man; and thou
see it is truth; Christ himself said so to Nicodemus, and if thou will
believe what he says, let this be granted. And yet further, the Apostle Paul
tells us, that if any man think or say that he is a godly man, or in Christ,
and be not a new Creature, he is a liar. And this you may see by comparing 2
Cor. 15. 17. with 1 John 1. 6. If you say you have fellowship with God, or that
you are godly, and are not new Creatures, but walk in your old darkness, then
you see the word says you are liars: And although this be indeed the work of
God alone, and that it be only between God and the soul; yet this is for ever a
true Note, that thou can not be a converted man, but it must appear in thee;
it did so in the godly men of Old; when Saul was converted, in the 9. of the
Acts, you may see how it did appear to the world, that God had called him, and
now he was not ashamed to profess that which he had so much despised, Now Paul
began to learn how to live godly in Jesus Christ.

And because this first mark is the wheel (as it were) which turns the whole
work; give me leave to come as near thee as possibly, and ask thee this
Question; art thou a changed man? have thou a new nature? is thy heart
possessed with godliness? art thou indeed a godly man? Then tell me, how came
thou to be so? Did not God work thee over by showing thee the ugliness of sin?
can thou not remember the time, when to be assured of the love of God in
Christ, was worth ten thousand worlds? and was it not the love of Christ that
has constrained thee to follow God? If this be truly to be found in thee, I do
assure thee that thou art a son or daughter of God. But if thou have received
that which thou enjoyest, either by tradition or education, or else by some
flashes of comfort upon any other ground whatsoever, I tell thee thou art but
an hypocrite, thou art not a godly man.

You shall see an example of this in Acts 16. 29, 30. When the power of God
comes, then the poor sinner trembles, and O then what shall I do to be saved?
It is the work of God to show the sight of sin in its color, that drives him
to see the want of a Savior: then Christ is desirable and not before, not
until God begin to work on him; and therefore whosoever thou art that think
thou art a godly man, and have not been thus changed, thou deceivest thy soul.
There are many, nay most of the people in this land, that are even utterly lost
here; for alas they think that they are godly, because of some moral
excellencies that are in them; and so even from the Priest unto the people many
are deluded. To all such persons I shall present that Lesson of Christ, John 3.
ver. 3. to 8. And as Christ said to him, so say I to you, Marvail not at this;
for it is a truth of God; and if ever thou see the Kingdom of God, thou must be
acquainted with it: therefore stifle not thy conscience which tells thee thou
art not yet such a one as has been thus changed; and therefore now mark the
godly man, and thou shall find him to be such a one as I tell thee of: But
when God is working on his Saints, you look on it as a poor contemptible thing,
and many of you have mocked, as you did at those poor Saints of God, whom the
Devil and wicked men together called by a nickname of Puritans; you would not
be such for a world, such poor despised creatures as they were. Well, you must
know, that of such is the Kingdom of God; they were godly men. And so now at
this day, they that are begotten again by the Spirit and power of God, they are
the godly men indeed.

A godly man is a new man, and you shall see it in his life; I warrant you, he
has given sin farewell. It may be he was a Drunkard, a Swearer, and what not?
But now what is he? Can thou discern no change? Is it not apparent that he
has put off the old man? as Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. This old man must
be put off, and the new man put on; assure thy self whosoever thou art, that
thou art not a godly man until it be done in thee. A godly man is a cleansed, a
washed man, Tit. 3. 5. his filth is done away in the blood of Christ, Rev. 1.
5. A godly man, his scarlet sins are made white in the blood of Christ, Rev. 7.
14. A godly man is a new man, his affections are new, he has a new mind, he is
renewed by the Spirit of God, yea in some measure he is sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.
11. The Spirit of God now dwells in him, and acts him in spiritual acts. Oh how
his mind is now taken up about that infinite love of God in sending the Lord
Christ to die for him, and how is his desire now after Christ? Give me Christ
(says he) whatever I want; all is dung to him (as Paul says) in comparison of
Christ; now he can see the nothingness of all things below the enjoyment of God
in the Lord Jesus. A godly man, his heart is much taken with the righteous
commands of God; there is nothing grievous to him, as John says 1 John 5. 3.
Would thou know a godly man, then take notice wherein he is employed, thou
shall find him employed for his God in acts of holiness; thou shall find him
much in holy duties; thou shall find him fitting himself for the Bridegroom,
that he may go in with him into the marriage-chamber; and whilst thou see
rugged and hot-spirited men gnashing at one another about carnal privileges
and empty shells, thou shall find a godly man endeavoring to search out the
great mystery of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and therein lifting up the praise
of God, and trying his heart by the Word of truth, keeping a Diurnal of his
daily practice, and so can say as Hezekiah, Remember O Lord how I walked before
thee I see 2 King. 20. This work is fit for a godly man, and by this thou
may know him. So much of the first mark, He is a new man.

2. A godly man, would thou know him? thou shall know him in the second place
by his Will; his will is now subject to the will of God. See an example of this
in Saul, Act. 9. Although he was going with a full consent to persecute the
Saints of God, and that with zeal; yet so soon as God does but speak to him,
see the change in him, Lord what will thou have me to do? And let the will of
God be what it will, he will be willing to submit to it; and therefore it is
that the godly man sets such a high esteem upon the Word of God in the
Scriptures, because the revealed will of his God is discovered there; there he
finds it the will of his God, that he should hear the voice of his Son; This is
my dear Son (says God) hear him. To which the godly man answers, Must I hear
the voice of Christ? nothing in the world is more sweet to me. He looks not on
it as a burden, but as a high privilege, and would be content to enjoy it
continually.

Further, the godly man eyes the will of God in all things, and endeavors to
bring his will under it. As to instance in some things: first, in that which
Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. The will of God is our Sanctification; the godly man
sees it to be the will of God, and therefore he endeavors according to his
strength to possess his vessel in honor and sanctification; I mean, acts of
godliness, by humbleness, patience, prayer, thanksgiving, etc. By which thou
may see clearly that he is such a one as I have told thee of. And so
likewise in all things, in every dispensation of God, the godly man is willing
to yield to God, either to take up or to cast down; in all things he is
content, as Paul says of himself, content in every condition.

And yet further, he is very inquisitive after the knowledge of Gods will: a
gracious heart is not content to follow God in some things, and neglect others:
no, he is inquiring still further, and strives to go on to higher seize:
he presses forward (as the Apostle Paul says) to the mark. And here thou
may discern him also from the formal man, who keeps much ado about his
knowledge, as if he knew all things, and would force all to live as he, and
that none should step beyond him: but a godly man in the state of grace, he is
so far from this kind of temper, that he sees nothing in himself; and as Paul
says, 1 Cor. 8. 2. neither knows as he ought to know: Therefore his desire is,
that all men who are godly, should press forward; he knows there are yet higher
seize to be enjoyed, and therefore is industrious to find out truth; and
when he has found it out, he confers not with flesh and blood, but goes on to
do as he is commanded.

3. Would thou know a man in the state of grace, a godly man? thou shall know
him by his love to God and his ways; such a soul loves the Lord Christ
dearly. O how delightful are all these to him! he cries out as the Spouse, the
Saints of Christ, Cant. 1. 2. and 7. O thou whom my soul loves! the heart and
soul of a godly man is engaged to love God and Christ, and the ways of God,
that he thinks he never loves them enough; and cries out as David, Psalm. 31.
23. O love the Lord ye his Saints! and then for his love to Christ, he is sick
of it, longs to be with Christ, Cant. 25. Tell such a soul of what thou can,
it is in vain; his love cannot be drawn from his God and dear Redeemer; and
therefore that is the reason why a godly man holds on in his love to God, and
his ways, because it is fixed firmly, and on good and sure grounds; and here
now thou may discover why those that have made fair shows in Religion, have
fallen away, because they had not this love firmly fixed; they reserved to
themselves other lovers which at last stole away the heart after them. And
again, the hearts of such were never new modeled; they never saw as yet what
it was truly to enjoy the love of God; and therefore how should such love him,
so as to hold out all weathers? God will by one way or other discover all such
Wandring-stars; but chiefly his way is to do it by themselves; he gives them up
to that lust which they were most in love with, so that all the world may see
that they never loved God nor his ways in truth.

We see many in these days so laid open and made manifest: I hope it will not
be long that such rotten-hearted men shall have any shelter under the
profession of godliness. God has begun to lay them open, some of every form.
Some in turning with the sow and dog, to build that which they cried so often
to destroy; and to accomplish their ends, join themselves with that Crew which
God has (as appears) designed to ruin; and this they do (as it is pretended)
out of zeal. But will thou know what the practice of a godly man is? then see
Gal. 5. 22, etc. to the end of the Chap. thou shall in spite of thy teeth by
this word be condemned; for in no part is this to be found in thee: in stead of
these, thou art no better then a rigid Railer, who art not content with Gods
will, but would have thine own accomplished, as appears by thy late actings,
which it is a shame to name: And instead of admiring at the goodness of God in
delivering his people from that trouble which they were in before these wars,
and in bringing down the proud looks of the greatest Enemies they had, even
Mighty and Noble ones are fallen; and that he has raised a poor despised small
Number, and given them the Rule of this Commonwealth, and has by them in some
measure sorely wounded the hairy scalp of the wicked: I say, in stead of thy
admiring and blessing God for this, thou art discontent, and have not a heart
for, but against this great work. I tell thee, and thou shall find it true,
that if thou return not from this, thou will even perish with the enemies of
God and his people. I can only lay it before thee; Be not wise in thine own
conceit.

To be short: Thou see many others discovered. Some for defrauding the State,
and such like, have been Cashie^'d, with their sin on their head; Others more
wicked, for denying the Lord that bought them, (as the Apostle says.) Some
called Ranters, and others who deny the Word and Ordinances of God, are laid
open; Others who are more subtle, yet deny Duties of holiness, are discovered.
And now there is like to be no cloak for them, by reason those that are truly
godly are withdrawing from them. And therefore now, O ye wandering Stars! hear
what the Word of God says (which some of you deny) in the Epistle of Jude; and
let thy Conscience, if it be not seared, answer, What think thou will become
of thee, when the Lord Christ comes in flaming fire to render vengeance on
such as thou art, for not obeying his Gospel? 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9, 10. Shift it
not off, but receive this as thy portion. But to return to what was in hand
before; A godly man may be easily known from any of these, by his love to that
which they despise, namely (and in answer to the first) they delight to see the
will of God accomplished; O how sweet are his mercies! He eyes God, and
blesses him for reckoning with his enemies, and for bringing their necks to
the block, and for rooting out their posterity; and for dealing thus closely
with that hypocritical Nation of Scotland; and for discovering his and our
enemies, that plot and contrive to hinder the great work of God on foot among
us. Also by his love to the Word of God and his Ordinances, and his delight in
holy duties; by these thou may know a godly man. Mark them now for time to
come, for they only are the godly men.

4. A godly man may be known yet further by his desires; a godly man's desires
are chiefly to these following particulars.

1. His great desire is, that he may bring some glory to God, and he is earnest
about it; Thou may take notice of such a man, he is ready to embrace all
opportunities wherein he may do any good, and will not flinch back, though he
see great difficulty in it; his heart tells him that God has called him to it,
and therefore he desires to embrace it.

2. In the next place, he is earnest in his desires after Communion with God:
as David says, My soul longs and pants for thee, Psalm. 84. 2. so it is
with a truly godly man; O how his soul longs more and more to enjoy the
presence of God! how does it refresh his poor soul to have communion with him!
all his Springs are in him; the very life of a godly man is in his communion
with God; what sweet discourses are there between God and such a soul!

And yet 3. his desires are not only for himself, but also for others; as the
Apostle, 1 John 1. 3. that others may have fellowshp in this precious enjoyment.

4. Such a soul, his desires are always submissive desires, content with every
thing God sees fit for him, Phil. 4. 11. Therefore now by this try and see who
is the godly man.

5. A godly man who is so indeed, is full of the bowels of love toward the
Saints. Beloved, now observe who they are that his love is so to; they are such
as walk holily, such as he is persuaded have the image of Christ in them; and
for this only he loves them. And here by the way, thou may know him also from
those that cry up Forms, and love one another because they are under the same
form, and so judge carnally of spiritual things; and as the Apostle Paul says,
walk even as men, knowing one another after the flesh. See 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. I
say, thou may know a godly man from such clearly; a godly man loves the
Saints, because they are his fellow members of the body of Christ; he is bone
of his bone (as it were) receiving nourishment from the same root. O how dear
are the truly godly to each other! 1 Cor. 12. 27. Joh. 15. 5. Branches
springing forth from the same root, and so are dear to each other. Here thou
may discover an Hypocritical people in this Land, who would fain be accounted
Saints; and thou shall see they never take notice of them, nor show any love to
them, especially if they be poor; proud hearts cannot stoop, except to some in
places of honor. Well now, see that God has set even the poorest Saint apart
for himself, Psalm. 4. 3. Nay, God has chosen the poor, rich in faith and
grace, as James says (c. 2. v. 5.) and it is most like thou art but as a
barren wilderness, that can so easily pass by and take no notice of them.

Again, the godly man loves the Saints because they have taken up the Cross of
Christ, because that now they are resolved together to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes; though in a field of blood, famine, nakedness, or
whatever come, they will never leave Christ; see an example in the 11. of the
Epistle to the Hebrews at large. A godly man loves the Saints, because he sees
the beauty of holiness upon them, because they are ready still to obey the
Commands of God; by this thou may know a godly man.

Sixthly, Would thou know a godly man? then observe this, a godly man, he is
the greatest enemy to sin that can be, he strives to kill it. O how he sees the
ugliness of it! and how he cries to God for power against it! the sight of it
makes him to say as Paul, Romans 7. 24. His body seems to him a body of death, by
reason of the remains of sin: well, but his work is to kill it, he gets on the
Armor of God, and fights it out till it is destroyed; even the least appearance
of it is tedious to him; take notice of such a man, and see how his heart is
set against it both in himself and others; he has a perfect hatred against it,
as David, Do I not hate them that hate thee? yea, with a perfect hatred; see
Psalm. 139. 20, 21, 22. Well, what is the reason David hates them so; it is only
because they sin against his God: it is because they do wickedly that he hates
them; and not only in others, but also in himself: he hates every false way,
Psalm. 119. 104.

By this you see a godly man is an enemy to sin; he will kill and destroy it,
if possible, as the Apostle says, Rom 6 6. He thinks it the greatest shame in
the world, to sin against his God; and therefore who ever thou art, assure thy
self, except thou find in thy self this hatred of sin, thou may conclude
thou art not godly; thou may conclude so, because that every godly man is of
a nature utterly opposite to sin; the Spirit of God in him sets up a standard
against it; he cannot endure it because it is so contrary to his loving God:
and here thou may know him from one who makes no great matter of sin, takes
little notice of it, neither in himself or others: I say, thou may know him
clearly from such; for he makes it his work to kill, and destroy both open sins
in others, and secret sins in himself; and he is most busy with that at home;
he will harbor no sin so near the spirit of God.

Seventhly, A godly man makes Conscience of time, he accounts his time
precious, and therefore he takes much care how he spends it; and by this indeed
may every man be discerned, in taking notice how men spend their times. A godly
man takes all opportunities to do his duty, is carfull that he waste not that
which was bought at so deer a rate; he knows it cost the blood of Christ, as 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. And also the blood of many a Saint has been spent for it; to
gain this liberty and time we now enjoy, and therefore the godly man will not
squander it away, he knows how to employ himself in it; he is not like to those
that say they know not how to pass away time, and therefore use foolish gaming
and carnal mirth; no, he is not to seek what to do in any spare time; his heart
is on God and his glory; and therefore when time is to be had, he studies how
he may advance that glory.

Again, he knows that Fellowship and Communion with God is sweet to him, and
therefore has no time to spend wherein he desires not this enjoyment. Also he
sees much of the mind of God in his Word, and therefore all spare time that he
can have, he imploys himself to search it out. He sees Communion with the
Saints, and Communion with the godly, both precious and profitable; and
therefore his heart is so after it, that he cannot waste any of his precious
time in carnal and fruitless Discourses; his delight is to meditate in the
precepts of God day and night, as David says in Psalm. 1. where thou have this
largely set forth; there thou shall find what are the ways of the godly; and
also what kind of men wicked men are, which make no conscience of time how
they spend it.

And here now let none deceive themselves, and shift off this Mark, as though
it did not concern them; for assure your selves, it is a truth that godly men
account time precious, and make Conscience how they spend it. Lord teach me to
number my days (says David) that I may spend my time in wisdom.

Again, the godly man knows that time is uncertain; and therefore whilst he
has it, he will not be employed about base and unfruitful Acts. And therefore
now who ever thou art that have not thus valued time, look into that 1 Pet 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. Is it not a shame that a godly man should live in sin? what shall
he spend his time as does the wicked? Did Christ die on the Cross for a people
to make them sons of God, Heirs with himself; and shall they live to the flesh?
and spend their time after that? as 1 Pet. 4. Then I pray from what did Christ
Redeem his Saints? was it not from sin? from dead works? as 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18.
if not, what means that saying of the Apostle Paul, in Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3? and
what means that 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15 and also that in 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10 11, 12.
Read and lay these to heart, for thou see it is a truth that the Saints make
conscience of their time: A godly man sees that he was called to that end, and
therefore makes aright use of it. I shall end this branch with the same Advice
and Caution that the Apostle used to the Hebrews in chapter 3. 12, 13, 14. And I
say take heed lest thou have an evil heart in departing from the living God,
and from the ways of godliness, to spend thy time in idleness and profaness,
lest thou find thy heart besotted with the deceitfulness of sin; and so
instead of holding out, and persevering in holiness, thou art cut off and cast
out as a dead branch, and so witherest away even to destruction. See what
Christ says, Joh. 15. 6. Read and consider this Chapter.

Eighthly, Would thou know a godly man? thou shall find him out by his manner
of performing holy duties, thou may perceive his heart to be affected with
what he does. If he prays, thou shall see how his words savor of the Spirit
of God in him; so in his Discourse his experience of God flows from him; And
here thou may know him from one who enjoys not the Spirit of God easily thus;
though the godly man's abilites be small, yet his duties are performed rightly;
the other out of fear of Judgment, or out of formality, or to appease
Conscience, keeps much ado, as the Pharisees did, of whom Christ speaks in
Matthew. 6. thinking to get something by it, and so salve up their wounded
Consciences who cry guilty. But the godly man does his duties out of a tender
love, and obedience to the object who has so loved him, and so makes good
that word of the Apostle John; we love him because he first loved us: so he
does them out of love, and also out of Obedience to his Commands. A godly man
performs holy duties because God commands them; and so makes good that saying
of Christ, If ye love me keep my Commandments. A godly man in his duties rests
not on them, but flies from them to Christ, and accounts all that is done in
the creatures strength but as dung and dross.

Again, a godly man has a low esteem of himself, and he thinks he is in his
best but an unprofitable servant. He desires not a high esteem in the sight of
men. This thou may see in a godly man's performances of duties.

Ninthly and Lastly, Would thou know a godly man? then take that course to
find him as Christ speaks of in the 7, of Matthew, ver. 16. to 21. See what
fruit he bears; a godly man brings forth good fruit, and by that thou may
know him. He is as David says. Like a tree planted by the rivers side, which
brings forth his fruit in due season; his leaf withers not; it is not so
with the wicked; see Psalm. 1.

Here thou may know a godly man from frothy turbulent-spirited men; the godly
man brings forth fruit with patience, Luke 8. 15. But the other three sorts
there mentioned, were carried away: they could not have patience to wait so
long on God: something choaks their hearts: therefore be not deceived (as Paul
says) neither mistake in this; for if thou do miscarry here, all is lost,
Ephesians. 5. where from ver. 1. to 26. the Apostle discourses what godliness is,
and what kind of men godly men should be, and also the ungodly what they are.
Read and Consider. A godly man is a fruitful man; and therefore be not
deceived: Let men go under what title or name soever they will, pretend what
they will, it is to no end, except they bring forth fruits, they cannot be godly;
and therefore now we come to the last pinch; give me leave to tell thee who
ever thou art, great or small, rich or poor; let thy mind be what it will, let
thy judgment be how it can; I tell thee except thou find these in thee, thou
art yet a stranger to the life of God and godliness. And yet further, see what
fruits these are in Gal. 5. 22. and so to the end of the chapter; a spiritual
man brings forth spiritual fruit, as you find in this Scripture; he is full
of love, humbleness, patience, thanksgivings; these are fruits fit for a godly
man to bear, and by these thou may know him.

Further, Do thou not see now who are the godly men in these days? if thou
do not, I will tell thee; the reason is, either because thou art carnal, or
else blinded with some forms or other, in which thou do take more delight
then in the power of truth; and that is also the reason why thou love not the
godly man for his godliness, but for his Judgment sake; the examples of which
are so sad in these days, that it is a shame to name them. Well now, know that
it is not thy form but thy fruit, that makes it appear that thou art godly; and
God is glorified in thy fruits of righteousness, and not in thy foolish fancy,
for which thou so frettest thy self. See what Christ says, Joh. 15. 8. To be a
disciple is to be fruitful, and in that God is glorified. I shall close up
this first Question with the saying of David, in Psalm. 4. 3. Know that God has
set apart the godly man for himself; and therefore they must needs be fruitful.

Now a word or two by way of Comfort to such as are truly godly, and also of
advice.

Dear Saints, Is it so that a godly man is such a one as these nine particulars
prove? and art thou so indeed? delude not thy self, but speak to thy soul, art
thou so? Then to thine everlasting comfort; consider in what relation thou
stand.

1. To God. 2. To Christ. 3. To the Saints and Angels.
For the first, As thou stand to Godward, thou art his son, a son of God.
See 1 John 3. 1, 2. And because thou art so, he has sent forth his Spirit into
thy heart, whereby thou art made acquainted with that adoption of Sonship. Now
God is thy Father, and when thou have to do with his name, thou do it in
that relation, My Father, as Gal. 4. 6. Consider of what comfort this is to
thee, God is thy Father; and this is not all; thou shall be made like him; nay,
thou shall see him as he is in the brightness of his glory. And therefore let
this advise thee, that thou set not thy heart on any thing wherein thou may
grieve his Spirit; for he has given it thee as thy earnest, till thou enjoy
him fully.

And further, Thy life is hid in God; therefore live up in thy affection to
him, where thy life is.

Again, thou art a Child, therefore with all dutiful reverence honor thy
Father; thou have heard already how it must be done, great will be thy comfort
in the doing of it.

Use 2. Secondly, consider in what relation thou now stand to the Lord
Christ; he is thy Lord, nay he is thy friend, he is thy brother, and he is not
ashamed to own thee so, Heb 2. 11, 12. nay, thou art a joint-heir with him. If
thou art a godly man, here is comfort enough for thee; thou art an heir of
heaven; I say, if the Spirit of God does witness this to thee, what can thou
desire more? see Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. and Gal. 4. 7.

Well, take this advice now in thy way; if Christ be thy Lord, give up thy self
to him, honor thy Lord; if he be thy friend, be faithful to him, deal not
deceitfully with thy friend, (I am brief in this for want of time, else how far
might I enlarge it!) I say, if Christ be thy brother, then love him dearly; let
thy love be as the Spouses in the Canticles. Thou art also betrothed to him.
Art thou an heir of heaven? then fit thy self for thy heavenly society; prepare
thy self to meet thy Lord, thy brother and husband, in the air, that thou may
for ever be with him.

3. Art thou godly? then see how thou stand in relation to the Saints and
blessed Angels: thou art a Citizen of the same City, one of the same family, a
member of the same body, and a branch of the same vine; and much more might be
said: Thou art a Citizen with the Saints; see Ephesians. 2. 19. and of the same
household; Thou art come unto Mount Sion, to the Assembly of the Saints, as Heb.
12. 22 23, 24. and this is of infinite comfort to thee, that thou art a Citizen
of the new Jerusalem, and that thy Companions are to be all Saints and Angels.

Take this advice now, that thou make the Saints thy fellows here; love them,
for they indeed are most fit for thy company; it will be a great happiness to
thee. Art thou a member of the same body? a branch of the same Vine? what
comfort is this to thee! thy nourishment proceeds of the same root; if thou art
such a one, thou can not conceive of half thy comfort it affords thee. I
shall end my desires to thee, with that advice which I know is wholesome for
thee; namely, seeing thou art a member of the body of Christ, act like a
member; and seeing thou art a branch of the same Vine, let thy fruit appear
abundantly, that God may be glorified in thee, through the Lord Jesus Christ.
Phil. 2. 14, 15. Mat, 16 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee. A
wicked man, an ungodly man knows not one title of this, Psalm. 92. 6.

The second Question is,

How shall we know a man in the state of nature, or an Ungodly man?

I shall briefly and plainly discover such a man, and in doing of it I shall
observe the same method that I did in the other Question. Then, if thou would
know an ungodly man, my answer is, Thou shall know him by the same nine
particulars that I used to prove a godly man by, I mean by the Rule of
contraries. And then the first Mark will be this;

An ungodly man is an unconverted man; he is still in the Old man, he has not
yet had the work of God upon him; such a man has had no change wrought in him,
he is the same that ever he was; he sees no ugliness in sin, neither does he
apprehend any loveliness in Christ; such men live ungodlily, they are men of
unclean lips, nay their minds and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1. 15. They are
to every good work reprobate.

Again, an ungodly man never yet repented truly, neither can he endure to be
governed by Christ; the yoke of Christ is too heavy for him, he cannot endure
it.

Again, an ungodly man walks in darkness, and therefore note him, his works are
so; he can delight to swear, or lie, or to be drunk, or else to scoff and mock
at godly men: and by these he is discerned.

2. To come more nearly to the business; Thou shall know him by his will; he
has yet a perverse will; his will is not subject to the Law of God, Romans 8. 7.
Tell such a man of the righteous laws of God, and of his sad condition, what
cares he? it may be he will mock, or else bid you hold your tongue; his will is
so set upon sin, that you may see his shame daily. As for the Word of God, it
may be he reads it, but to no purpose, for he never carries away any part of
it; and for any duties or service of God, it is not pleasing to him, and he
sees no life in it, Mal. 3. 14, 15. He eyes not the will of God, but his own
will he delights in. Further, his desires are not to know God. Then, his
Conscience terrifies him.

3. Would thou find out an ungodly man? thou needst not go far; For thou
may know him by his hatred to God and his ways. Do thou not hear him
blaspheme, curse, swear, revile, and rend the name of God? this is easily
proved by most of the sad souls in England. Others are more Civilized; yet some
secret sins keep off their love from God and his ways; pride, covetousness,
and such like. Alas, if thou set thy heart upon any sin, though thou think it is
not worth taking notice of, yet this is enough to keep off thy heart for ever
from God. See Ananias and Sapphira, in Act. 5. They kept back part of the
price, and that did undo them for ever. And now here thou may take notice of
many in these days, who pretend they are godly; do but mark them, and thou
shall see they keep much, or at least part of the price: they, when time
serves, can break out, so that discovery is made; a rotten heart cannot hold
out, because his love is where his treasure is, as Christ says, Mat. 6. 21.
Read and lay this to heart.

4. We may discern an ungodly man by his desires: What is that which he desires
most? It Is mostly to be rich, to have honor, to live without care, and enjoy
outward contentments. Mark him now: when did thou ever see him lament in his
desires after the enjoyment of God? when did thou ever find him disputing for
God and his ways? It may be thou shall find them going to hear the Word, and
thrusting among godly men; but do but mark them, and as soon as he is departed,
his mind is on what he desires, and that he follows. And this is the sad tone
of many poor Professors at this day; they profess to know God, but in works
deny him.

5. Thou may know an ungodly man by his hatred to the Saints: such a man
loves not the Saints; he can see nothing wherefore he should love them that are
indeed the Saints; he looks on them as simple, poor, mean-spirited fools; he
knows no better Saint then himself, for (says he) I hope to be saved as well
as the best of you that are so precise; and so shifts off all upon an unsound
rotten hope. Poor soul, know, thou art yet in the gall of bitterness: what
account will thou give to the Lord Christ, when thou shall stand naked before
him with all thy sins about thee? what think thou, would thou not love a
Saint then? Remember, Christ is coming in flaming fire to render vengeance on
thee and all others that hate his Saints, and obey not his Gospel, Mat. 25. 41.
to the end. If thou have ears to hear, then hear.

6. Would thou know an ungodly man? thou shall know him by this; He loves
sin; it is so sweet to him, that he cannot part with it. Tell such a man a
carnal story, let him see another drunk, and hear another blaspheme, he laughs
at it; let it be what sin it will, it never troubles him, he delights either in
these or some other: poor soul, he knows not how hateful it is in the sight of
God. Take notice now in these times, where in the hand of the Magistrate is
lifted up against sin, and thou shall see what shift poor souls make to sin!
They will be drunk in the night; others more secret, yet God finds them out; of
which we have many examples of late, and its like more will follow speedily.
Fear then and tremble at your sins, and repent, that thou may be hid in the
day of the Lambs wrath. See Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.

7, and 8. A man in the state of nature is known by this: He makes no
conscience of Time, neither cares he how it is spent; he never considers what
it cost, and that had it not been for the sakes of the Saints, he had now been
in hell; he minds not holy duties, they are irksom to him. Take notice of him,
and thou shall see him employed about his own lusts, most of his time is spent
in vain company; he thinks not of his uncertainty, except it happen that
sickness fall on him, and then his Conscience flies in his face; but being
recovered, he returns with the sow to wallow in the mire. This is the sad
condition of many poor souls, who if they continue so, will one day cry for the
hills to fall on them, to hide them from the presence of God.

9. And lastly, an ungodly man may be known by that mark which Christ used,
Mat. 7. 18. A corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. Thou may know a wicked
man by his fruit: See what his fruit is, it is of the flesh, it is sin that he
bears, as the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 19. 20, 21. Well, know now from this Word
of God, that being in this condition, thou have a sad sentence lying on thee;
Thou shall be cut down and cast into the fire, Mat. 7. 19. They are the words
of Christ, and thou art under this condemnation; and whither will thou fly
from his presence? See in Psalm. 139. v. 7, 8. God will find thee out one day,
do what thou can; and then what will become of thee? See Rev. 22. 15. there is
thy portion; The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all that forget God.

Use. Is it so that a natural man is ungodly, and that we have found him who he
is; and that he is in so sad a condition? O then poor soul, take this advice,
fly to the Lord Christ; there is no way but that, or be damned. Let no time
slip now; yet whilst thou have life, it may be thou may find grace: Christ
came on purpose to save sinners; Cry to him that thou may be one of them.
Turn now from sin, and set thy face against the appearance of it. Love the
Saints, get acquainted with them, thou have heard who they are: they will
inform thy dark judgment. Leave off thy old Companions; think it no shame to
do it, for thou must do it if ever thou be saved. Turn from Satan to God, that
thou may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among those that are
sanctified. Read the 3. of the Acts from ver. 19. to the end.

The Manner of a Godly Man's Return after some Backsliding from the ways of GOD.
FIrst, Experience tells me the heart is deceitful; the Old man being not
wholly crucified, strives to ensnare our poor souls, and many times gets
advantage, and brings us to a lost Condition. I am sure in these days many a
poor soul has even run himself off from holy duties and from the society of
the Saints, and so has lain, and not seen his evil: nay, grew dead (as it
were) and hardened in it. Many such are returned already; and all the rest that
are God's, will follow.

But before I go any further, I shall show some of the Reasons or Causes that
have made this disorder, which otherwise it is like might not have been.

The first cause was the terrible outcries of some Ministers against all that
separated from their National Worship, calling them Heretics, Blasphemers, and
such like, calling upon the Parliament, and Magistrate to punish and destroy
them, with these ensuing punishments.

1. With threatenings and scourgings. 2. With imprisonments. 3. With
banishments. 4. With death.
This was common in their Pulpits, for which I am confident God will reckon
with them, because this was the first offense, and the cause of much
bitterness. And truly, most of the reason that moved them was fear that now
they should not keep the people in blindness, and that their Lord-like power
would not stand over the Consciences of men. And the Reason why I thus conclude
is this, because they only are the men that uphold Formality; how loath are they
to part with their old Relics? nay, we see that many of the Grand fathers
among them, still wear their old weed; the rags of Prelacy will hardly come
down. Nay, that which is far worse, their patching up a body for Christ, of
their carnal hearers, and calling them his Church, and giving them the
Ordinances of Christ, which are left only for the Saints, the proof of which is
so plain that none can deny: and now it should do well if you would look and
see if your Members are such as Christ says his be, John 15. And see then what
fruit they bear; are not most of them mere sots in any thing of God? have thou
found a change in them? does not thy conscience tell thee that not one of them
is truly godly? what then have thou to do to give the childrens bread unto
them? And now one thing more I have observed from thee, thou art overjoyed to
see any one that is not in thy Form fall into sin: thou never art troubled that
God is dishonored by it: neither do thou take notice of the daily wickedness
committed by those of thy own form: but this thou say, This was one of the
fellows under new light, and so endeavourest to cast dirt on all. And by such
like courses have thy ways provoked many to slight thee and that justly. And
envy and evil has been by thee procured even to the hurt of the Saints. VVo be
to him by whom offenses come.

2. Another Reason why many have backslidden, is because of many rotten hearts
among themselves, which always waited to find holes open, that under some
pretense they might run forth to sin, and by this means many were befooled with
them.

3. Another was the rigidness of them under forms, so that there was no
Communion with them unless a man agreed in every part of their judgment, which
many could not do, and therefore were fain to withdraw from them, and so to
abide alone, which has caused much evil.

But to return to the matter in hand: It Is truth many have back-slidden: the
Question will be from what they did back sl^de?

Answ. It was from the ways of God: and in particular these.

From the Communion of Saints.

From holy Duties: As Prayer and Thanksgigiving, and such like. These have been
neglected, and reading and meditating on the Word of God: or, that there has
been a yielding to some sin, or that there has not been that watchfulness over
the heart and lips as there ought. These are the things both omitted and
committed.

Now a godly man lies not here, but he returns; and the manner how he does
return, here follows.

First, God brings him to see the evil of it: as in Jeremy 31. 19. And then the
heart is ashamed and repents for what has past; and it works in him a Revenge
against sin, and a searching of the heart: there shall no sin now lie in quiet.
He longs now for the ways of God, and he sees what it is to want Communion with
the Saints, and now he longs for it again, and loves them dearly, where he sees
fruitfulness in grace.

Again, his heart is much for holy duties; he will keep close to God by prayer,
his soul longs for Communion and fellowship with his God; as David says, His
soul pants for God, and longs to enjoy more of him: he sees his own
nothingness and weakness, and he flies wholly to the Lord Christ; he dares not
trust himself any more. His delight is in the Law of his God, as David says.
And this is the manner how a backslider returns to God and his ways.

I shall only add a word or two more, and that shall be of Advice.

1. To those that are not yet returned, but are still in a backsliding
condition. Come off now, and lie not in this sad lukewarm condition, and mind
what Christ says in Rev. 3. v. 15, 16, 17. Think it no small matter to be
lukewarm in the ways of God and godliness, lest thou be spued out of his mouth.

2. To those that have seen the evil of it, Let this also advise thee that thou
keep close now to thy God, and the ways of Godliness: thou see that it is not
in vain to serve thy God; set about it then with a perfect heart, and keep a
narrow watch that thou be no more ensnared: Let it appear of a truth, that the
power of God and godliness is in thee.

A SHORT TREATISE,
Wherein is contained.

1. The worth of a good Conscience. 2. The Happiness of a holy Conversation. 3.
The Blessed and Comfortable Estate of those that have a true fellowship, with
God, Christ and the Saints. 4. What it is to bear the Cross of Christ. 5. The
Reward in holding out to the end. 6. An Invitation of all sorts of sinners to
the offer of Grace. 7. The woeful Condition of all that accept not of it.
A wise man will hear, and will increase learning, Pro. 1. 5. You therefore
that are wise, and endued with knowledge, show it in a holy conversation,

Jam. 3. 13.
THe first thing we are to speak of, is a good Conscience and the great Worth
of it. Because most men and women keep much ado about it, and yet deceive
themselves, we shall proceed,

1. To show what a good Conscience is:

2. To prove the worth of it.

1. What is a good Conscience?

A good conscience is a conscience washed in the blood of Christ; that is the
first step of a good conscience, Heb. 9. 14.

I say, the first step is to be washed in the blood of Christ; that is, to have
the guilt of sin clean done away in him. As in Rev. 1. 5. He is the faithful
witness, that has offered up to God a Sacrifice which has fully satisfied
him; as Isa. 53. 11. This Chapter is full of this Discourse.

Again, A good conscience being so washed, will endeavor to avoid all offenses
both to God and man; as you see in Acts 24. 16.

This washing and purging does not only make clean, but also keeps it clean. It
does not only justify the soul, but also it sanctifies, Heb. 9. 14.

2. A good conscience, is a quick-sighted conscience, and that two ways,

In seeing what is Good. Bad.

1. He sees the good, and rejoices, as Paul in 2. Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing
(says the Apostle) is in the testimony of a good conscience, that with godly
sincerity we have walked. Here the conscience sees the good.

2. A good Conscience sees the evil, and strives against it: As you see the
same Apostle, Romans 7. 23, 24. But I see (says Paul) another law in my members;
O wretched man that I am! here is a quick-sighted Conscience; he sees the old
man striving, sin endeavoring to make inroads upon the poor soul very often;
and therefore it is happy for any soul that has a sight of it. By this you see
that a good Conscience is quick sighted.

And yet further, such a Conscience will not deceive thee; he will not lie
quiet when thou do evil, but will tug with thee for repentance: and
therefore whoever thou art that have a dead Conscience, and that lie quiet,
see no evil in thy corrupt nature, thou may have cause to fear that the
guilt is not washed away, but that thou art still in the state of nature.

Again, a good Conscience fears to sin, nay he trembles at it; and the reason
is, because it is against his God; because God hates it, therefore he hates it.
See an example of this in Genesis 39. 9. How shall I do it (says Joseph) seeing
the sin is against my God? I dare not do it.

Let this teach all that love God, to answer Satan and all their tempters
thus: I will not yield to any thing that is against my God.

Again, a good Conscience fears to wound it self by leaving und^ne those duties
which God requ^reth of him; and therefore his work is to keep it self pure and
unspotted, as Paul says in 2 Timothy 1. 3. and his work is to find out and do the
will of God. Such a Conscience is always fearful that he does too little for
God, and that his heart is never right enough in what he does.

These are the marks to know a good Conscience: there are many more marks to
know a good Conscience by, but for the present these are all that I shall name,
this being only by the way to make the other more clear.

The next thing is, the worth or value of a good Conscience.

Although I cannot tell or declare the just value, yet I shall show some of the
worth or value of a good Conscience, by which you shall see how good it is to
have such a Conscience: and to do it, I shall lay down these four grounds,
which will make it appear why it is at such a rate.

1. A good Conscience is worth much, because it tells thee thou art at peace
with God; thy Conscience testifies to thee that thou art so, as Paul says, 2
Cor. 1. 12.

2. A good Conscience speaks peace to thee, and excuses thee, as Paul says
To. 2. 15. When Satan and all thy accusers fly in thy face, thy Conscience
tells thee Christ has paid and satisfied the just Law of God to the full, and
that thou art acquitted fully. This is of much worth to thee, and thou can
not set worth enough on it.

3. The comfort of thy life is much in this, that thou have not a feared
Conscience, neither a dead Conscience, neither a Conscience subjected to dead
works; but that thy Conscience is awake, and feels and is sensible of evil, and
also of good; and that it tells thee daily without flattery, how the case stands
with thee. I say, such a Conscience is much to be valued, that deals plainly,
and flies in thy face when thou sinnest, and that will never leave thee till
thou see and repent of it: and also when thou do that which is good, that
Conscience will also tell thee thou do thy duty, and thou may expect God
and his Spirit with thee in doing his will. Search and see now whether this be
not worth much.

4. The worth and value of a good Conscience, is very high at the time of
death. When death comes to take thy life, what is a good Conscience worth then?
O then it is worth much! What would a man whose Conscience condemns him, give
then for this good Conscience? even ten thousand worlds, if he had them. I tell
thee, that then it will bring thee into the presence of God with joy; whereas
on the contrary it will be as that saying of our Lord, Mar. 9, 46. a worm which
will not die.

Is a good Conscience of such worth? O then strive to keep a good Conscience;
let thy exercise be much in it, as the Apostle Paul says, Act. 24. 16. both
toward God and man: first to God; see thou do those duties he requires of
thee, and see thou wound not thy Conscience by thy neglect; hearken what thy
Conscience says, and quench not those whisperings, when it tells thee thou must
do this duty, and forbear that evil: I say, whatever thou do, keep it clear
between God and thy soul.

Again, keep a good Conscience toward God and man; and to do it, observe these
things.

1. That thou avoid carnal company, and carnal speaking; for that will much
offend thy Conscience; because thou should make the Saints thy companions,
and thy Experiences of God thy discourse.

2. Be often in private speaking to thy Father; for he longs to hear from thee,
and thy Conscience will soon tell thee that thou have found him meeting thee;
God is a loving Father, and he delights to have his Children often speaking to
him, and keeps a book of Remembrance, as in Mal. 3. 16, 17. God will make up
such among his Jewels; and as a father spares his son that serves him, so
will God spare such a soul.

3. Have a care what thou do in thy dealings among men; keep a good
Conscience: here thou shall find many idle words not fit to come out of thy
mouth, and many times thy Conscience tells thee that it is evil; avoid it now,
and set a watch before thy heart and lips, that thou may keep a clear
Conscience. And be sure that thou defraud no man: but deal justly, or else thou will hurt thy conscience; seek truth as the Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 25. And
grow up unto him, who is thy head, as in Ephesians. 4. 15. Thus much for the first
Question.

The second thing is,
A holy Conversation, what it is? and the happiness that comes by it.

1. What is a holy conversation? A holy conversation is this, When a man walks
in the ways of God and godliness, then he is said to have a holy Conversation,
as in 2 Pet. 3. 11. The Saints of God they are called to it, as we see in 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16. Our God is holy, says the Apostle, and therefore ye ought to
be so in all manner of Conversation, that is, as if he had said, O ye Saints!
your God is a holy God, and cannot endure sin, especially in you; therefore be
ye holy, that is, be ye obedient unto your God, do what he has commanded you;
be ye godly, call upon your Father, walk in his ways; let thy conversation be
in heaven, as the Apostle says in Ephesians. 3. 20. A holy conversation is a
heavenly conversation. I shall not stand here any longer, in regard I have laid
down nine particulars, whereby a godly man may be known. I shall proceed to the
benefits that come by a holy life and conversation: you shall find them to be
many: As

1. Thy Communion with God and the Lord Christ; if thou live a holy life, God
will delight in thee to do thee good; and will show thee his salvation, Psa.
50. 23. and will have Communion with thee. God is Light, and therefore he will
not have communion with darkness, as Paul says in 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16, 17, 18.

2. The Saints will love; and own thee if thou live a holy life, then thou will
have the benefit of their Communion; otherwise if thou live ungodly, they will
not own thee. Consider the benefit of this, what it is to be owned among the
Saints and servants of the Lord.

3. Thou will find comfort in the course of thy life, when the judgments of
God fall on the wicked, for disobeying his Commands, and that they know not
whether to fly from his hand; and that the Lord say to such unprofitable
servants, get you from me into utter darkness for ever, as in Matthew. 25. 30. Of
what benefit will this holy life be to thee, that when thy Lord Christ comes,
he shall find thee doing his will? as in Matthew. 24. 46.

4. At the time of death, thou will find a benefit indeed, when thou can
say, as Christ said, I have finished thy work which thou gave me to do, Joh.
17. 4. And I have glorified thee on earth. What think thou? will it be of no
value then, that thou have lived holy? Thou may see of what worth the
Apostle Paul makes it in 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. My departure is at hand, but here
is my comfort, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, and kept
the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness; and for
all them that love the appearing of Jesus Christ.

5. And lastly, After death thou shall find that God intends to judge the
world by thy conversation in 1 Cor. 6, 2, 3. Nay, even the Angels shall be
Judged by it; thou had need be holy indeed; what a shame will it be to thee
that thou have lived fruitless and carnal? when God shall open every man's book,
and shall judge the world and angels by thy life, of what comfort will it be
that thou haft been holy?

If it be so, then let all that are Saints endeavor to outstrip one another in
a holy life and conversation, and that they all watch, and have their Lamps
ready with oil to meet the Bridegroom. Matthew. 25. Read and consider this, for
the Lord Christ will come when we are not aware; and as a thief in the night:
and as lightning that is soon come, so will the Lord Christ, Matthew. 24. all the
chapter.

Thirdly, What it is to have a true fellowship with God, Christ, and the
Saints: and the blessedness and comfort it brings to those that have it.

First, What this fellowship is with the Father and the Son, as the Apostle
John speaks of in his 1. Epist. chapter 1. ver. 2. 3. To have fellowship with God
and Christ, is a very high fellowship indeed: Our fellowship is with the Father
and the Son, says the Apostle: that is, God and Christ have given themselves,
with their treasures unto us, and we are made partakers of the Divine nature of
God; and Christ dwells in the Saints, as you may see 1 John 4. 13. They dwell in
them by the spirit: and the Saints they dwell in God and Christ; their very
life is in God. Here is a near one-ness indeed; this fellowship is worth much,
it is to live in the bosom of God, it is to be very nearly acquainted with God.
God speaks by his Spirit to the Souls of his Saints, I am your God and Father,
Come unto me in my Son, and I will hear you: The Saints, they bring the Lord
Christ with them, and come into the presence of God, and there they make their
minds known unto him, they lay their souls open before him: and then the Lord
drops in some refreshing, and sends the soul away with sweet content. And this
is the fellowship the Saints have with God and Christ.

Before I go any further, I shall speak a word or two by way of advice to the
Saints, and it is this.

Is it indeed such a neerness that you have with God and the Lord Christ? Let
this then advise you that you behave your selves with holy reverence. Is the
holy God so near you, and the Lord Christ in you? Dear friends, how ought you
to carry your selves then in the presence of your God and Lord? God expects
reverence from you, as you see in Psalm. 89. 7. Look to your hearts, that they
wander not from God, when you come into his presence; and that you walk holily
with your God, wherever you are. Consider (I say) the great neerness that is
between God and you; and let the consideration of it drive away all carnal
delights, that thou may delight in thy God, to have fellowship with him.

Secondly, What is it to have fellowship with the Saints? To have fellowship
with them, is to be partners in the same enjoyment. I shall draw a comparison
here of fellowship in outward things; And although indeed spiritual things
should be compared with spiritual things, yet this will much open the word
Fellowship, and make it plain.

There are many things to be observed in fellowship amongst men that deal
together, as

1. They give in their names. 2. They promise to hazard all alike. 3. They
bring in every man his share. 4. They send all away to Sea. 5. They patiently
wait for a Return. 6. When it returns, they receive the profit.
For the first, the Saints all give in their names to follow the Lord Christ,
and the ways of God together.

2. They promise to hazard all, even their lives and all, rather then to
forsake Christ and the waves of God: and this they will do, they will suffer
alike; if one member suffer, all the body is a sharer; they will not forsake
each other in a time of distress.

3. Every man brings his share, that is, every man helps on the work when they
meet, either by prayer or exhortation, or some word or other, so that they
among them make up the sum.

4. They send all up to God by Jesus Christ.

5. They wait with patience upon God for his answer.

And 6. When God answers, they all rejoice together; and this is the profit;
their souls grow in grace, and the knowledge of God.

And yet further, there are several things wherein the fellowship of the Saints
exceeds all other. As,

1. They never receive any loss, there is no damage to them; let them send unto
the Father by the Lord Jesus Christ as often as they will, there is no
miscarrying.

2. Though that which they send be never so weak, if it be with the heart, it
is accepted at the greatest rate.

3. There is never no difference among them about the profit.

Much more might be added; but I shall close up all in one word of advice, that
thou may highly prize the fellowship of the Saints. Thou see they have
fellowship with God and fellowship with Christ, and that God appears among
them: it will be happy for thee to appear with them, that thou may partake of
their rich favors.

Fourthly, What is it to bear the cross of Christ? He that will follow Christ,
must take up his Cross, as it is Luke 9. 23. and he must deny himself; and take
up not only one or two days, but every daves Cross. This thou shall find the
Saints of old did; Look in the 11. to the Hebrews, those (there mentioned)
finished their course, and kept the faith, (as Paul says of himself) even to
the death. To carry the cross, is to bear the reproach of Christ: see Heb. 13.
12, 13. Here is a Camp with which we are beset, Flesh and blood, and all the
temptations of the world, and also of the heart to hinder us from taking up
this cross, from bearing the reproaches of Christ; and therefore the Apostle
advises us to go out of the camp, and to take up this cross of Christ; and the
motive he uses, is, For here (says he) we have no continuance, your City is
yet for to come; you must follow Christ in sufferings, before you enjoy the
City: to bear the cross, is to do as Moses did, Heb. 11. 25. to esteem the
reproach of Christ great riches; and choose affliction with the Saints, rather
then the pleasure of any thing in the world. To carry the cross, is to go on in
the ways of God and godliness: let the Devil and wicked men say what they will,
call them what they please, mock how they can; yet to continue faithful unto the
death, never to forsake Christ, come what will, this is to carry the cross.
Again, to carry the cross, is to rejoice in suffering for Christ, that thou art
found worthy to bear his reproaches, and to suffer for his names sake, as did
the Apostles in Act. 15. 41. and to bless God with a joyful heart that ever
thou had this great mark of a Saint, to be mocked and despised for the sake
of the Lord Christ. If thou would know what it is to bear the cross of Christ
then search the Scriptures, and thou shall find there both what it is, and who
they are that bear it? It is to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; in a
field of blood, nakedness, famine, reproaches, scandals, and whatever come, to
follow him still with rejoicing and comfort. To account all dung and dross for
Christ, this is to carry the cross. Thou may also see who they are that carry
it, and that follow Christ; they are Moses and the godly men of old; they were
the Disciples of Christ, namely, all that believe unto salvation, that are the
bearers of the Cross.

Thou may find them now under the reproach of Heretics and Sectaries, and
such like, with a multitude of lies and scandals cast on them: and thou shall
the more clearly discern them, if thou take notice with what patience and
meeknes they carry it, and how they not long ago in most places were cried out
at as the only disturbers of the Nation, and those that were hardly fit to
live; especially by carnal Priests and their disciples: I say, thou may see
who they are by these things, and by their good carriage to such at this day,
endeavoring to win them in love.

To carry the cross, is to submit to God in all things willingly, and to yield
to Christ in all things, and to carry his yoke, and learn of him, as you have
it in Mat. 11. 29, 30. in all things Christ should be our pattern. If we be
found to bear the cross after this manner, we shall then be found good
soldiers for Jesus Christ, and the reward follows in the next place.

Fifthly, What good comes by holding out in the ways of God and godliness?
There is much comfort in it; some of which I shall speak of, as

First, if thou hold out and never flag, then herein thou will be like the
Saints of old, who went through fire and water for Christ, who forsook all for
a naked Christ. I say, this is not a mean thing, to be like those in practice,
that are now in the arms of the Lord Christ.

Again, if thou hold out to the death in the ways of God and godliness, as the
Saints formerly did, then thou may expect the same reward they did. And this
will be of much comfort to thee. Heb. 11. 26. Moses had a respect to the
recompense of reward; and so may thou too, if thou hold out as he did in
the ways of godliness; and for further encouragement to thee, thy reward will
be great, Heb. 10. 35.

See to thy everlasting comfort what the Lord Christ says, Matthew. 5. All the
first part of the Chapter, but in ver. 10, 11, 12. There thou may see that
it is thy portion, and the end of it is blessed: I say, rejoice and be exceeding
glad; for great is thy reward. The men of the world did ever do so by the
Godly; therefore rejoice now; for there is a reward for the righteous, verily
there is so, as David says, Psa 58. 11. Thy reward will be an inheritance
which shall never be taken from thee; it is a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. It is a
Kingdom that cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 28. If thou hold out to the death, see
then what Christ promises to thee, Rev. 2. 10, 11. even a Crown of Life;
therefore fear nothing, let wicked men say and do what they will, let the Devil
do what he can; all is only to try thee, and fit thee for the Crown of Life,
which Christ thy Lord and Righteous Judge will give unto thee, and unto all
that hold out to the end, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

6. We cannot end our discourse, but that we must speak a word or two to those
that are yet in a state of nature; and endeavor to lay before them the bread
of Life; and offer to them that which is so lovely and precious; and that thou
may prize it, and accept of it, I shall tell thee,

1. In what condition thou art. 2. What will help thee out of it. 3. How happy
thou will be if thou accept of it.
For the first: Thy condition is sad, and therefore hearken hither, thou art
without God in the world; and so is every one that is in a state of nature. You
have it in Scripture at large; we shall search it out, Ephesians. 2. 12. Here thou
art without Christ, and without God; thou art a stranger to the ways of God.
Consider what will become of thee: Again, you shall find in 2 Cor. 13. 5. that
you are Reprobates. It may be you may think it strange: But here you see it is
true; thou art but a Reprobate, though thou art civilized, and would make
show of Religion; yet it is most certain except Christ be in thee: and
therefore mark now some few things that I shall tell thee: Every man and woman
is by the fall of Adam under the wrath of God, and so thou wast as soon as thou
wast born liable to the curse, Romans 6. 23. and thou art polluted in sin. Also
by thy actual transgressions thou art cursed: As thou art in thy self, thou
can not keep the holy Law o^ God, and that also is a curse to thee, Gal. 3.
10.

Now take notice of thy self; art thou yet in that state? Art thou yet in thy
sins? can thou tell of nothing? do thou look for any thing from the Law to
do thee good? have thou not yet seen the worth of Christ? then now hearken; for
thou art in a sad Condition, all thy sins are lading thy poor soul down to
hell: and I tell thee, except thou take this Advice in the following Remedy,
thou art undone for ever.

2. Thou must take this Remedy, come to the Lord Christ, and get thy sins
washed away in his blood, that thou may become clean and white, and that thou
may have thy guilt done away in him. He came from the bosom of God to the end
that he might save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Come unto him now that thou may be
one of them. And that thou may not be deceived here, I will tell thee how
thou must come to him; and how thou must accept of him; thou must forsake all
thy sins, and become a new man; forsake all thy old lusts, as the Apostle Paul
says in 2 Cor. 5. 17. Forsake all thy old Companions with whom thou have
formerly delighted to commit sin, and thou must give up thy self to Christ, and
enquire what his will is, and begin to do his will; thou must now love Christ,
and let thy soul long for him; take up his yoke and learn of him; lay down all
thy own righteousness at his feet, and let him be thy righteousness; make
choice of the Saints to be thy Companions, love them, and be often with them.
Nothing but this will help thee, therefore make no delay, come to the Lord
Christ: he has promised that those which come to him, he will in no wise cast
off. Joh. 6. 37. Christ stands at the door and knocks; wilt not thou open to
him, and let him in? Rev. 3. 20. Entertain him whilst it is called to day, lest
thou die in thy sins. Turn unto God, that thou may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified, Act. 26. 18. That when
the time of refreshing shall come, and the Lord shall send Jesus Christ, which
now is offered to thee, thou may have the witness of a good conscience,
washed in his blood, and may with rejoicing be ready to meet the Lord, and
get in with him into the Marriage-Chamber, as thou see the Saints shall,
Matthew. 25. 10.

3. If thou accept of this, how happy art thou? thou art happy indeed; if thou
have Christ, then thou art a Son of God, Joh. 1. 12. Thou shall be made like
him, 1 John 3. 2. and thou art an heir of heaven, Gal. 4. 7. and thou art a
Member with the Saints of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30. Consider this now,
and thou shall find more comfort then I can tell thee of.

In the eight place, I shall only speak a word or two of the sad condition all
they will be in, that accept not of this offer of grace, that will not hearken
to the voice of Christ: poor soul, thou will be in a sad condition indeed; for
that Christ whom thou slightest, will come in flaming fire to render vengeance
on thee, 2 These. 1. 8. Then shall thou cry to the Mountains to fall on thee, to
hide thee from the wrath of the Lamb; then shall thou hear that sad sentence,
go ye cursed into everlasting perdition, Matthew. 25. 41.. Read this Chapter, and
see thy condition, and flatter not thy self; for this will assuredly fall on
thee. I shall leave thee with the saying of Christ, Matthew. 24. 35, 36, 37, 38,
39.

FINIS.

