Strange News from SCOTLAND AND Their young King his Dream concerning England:
with the appearing of a wonderful Vision to him in the night, and what happened
thereupon: Together, with his Speech to the Lords of his Privy Council; And a
dreadful Prophecy of Mr. Douglas a Scotchman, written by his own hand, and
sent to their young King, full of wonder and admiration; wherein he foretells
the great things that shall befall his Person, this present year 1651. With a
great Battle to be fought on the ^5. of May next, between the English and the
Scots, the event and success thereof. 20. Lords to be beheaded, and 20000 Horse
and Foot totally vanquished and subdued, and what shall happen upon the
obtaining this great Victory.

Signed by James Douglas, the Author of these prophetical Observations, and
Licensed according to Order.

Behold and read.


For Loyalty, it is now I die*


depiction of an execution by beheading

LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1651.

A strange and wonderful Prophecy of Mr. James Douglas, a Scotchman, etc.
COURTEOUS READER,
SCotland being the seat of War, on which all Europe (at this present) have
fixed a most steadfast and vigilent eye; and considering that there are many
things of great concernment and pertinency, that have not as yet been presented
to public view: I shall therefore endeavor to represent thee with a most
faithful and infallible Narrative in relation thereunto, and the first thing
that I insist upon shall be, the strange and wonderful Prophecy of a dumb
Scot, living in the Town of Sterling, aged about 50. and written with his own
hand, which follows in these words, viz. The Wars shall begin in the Spring,
Much woe to Scotland it shall bring:
Then shall the Lads cry well away,
That ever we lived to see this day.


For the beginning of the month of May, 1641 a great battle shall be fought
between the English and the Scots, and that for the space of 10. hours, the
victory shall seem both dubilous and doubtful; but at last it shall fall to the
English; and their heads shall be crowned with the Trophies thereof; insomuch
that above 20000 Scots shall be totally subdued, their Lieut. Genesis and many
other Officers of note, taken and killed; and their King himself enforced to a
poor Cottage in the North Islands with a small party, where shall come an old
Woman with an Axe, and shall say to him, what art thou? and he shall answer and
say, with tears trickling upon his Cheeks, I am the King of Scots: Then shall
she make this Reply, make haste and be gon^ for thy enem^es are near at hand,
and betake thy self to the Isl^^ds of Orkney, where a strong Band of men shall
unite together for thy safeguard and security.

This being done, he shall then attempt to make the field again, which shall
provo more fatal then the former; insomuch, that Treachery either by Sword or
Bullet, threatens to take him off, and above 20 Noblemen shall loose their
heads.

Then shall the English summon Sterling Castle, and toward the later end of
June, it shall be surrendered. After this St. Johnstons shall yield, and many
other formidable Castles in the North, but the quarrel disputable till August;
at which time an agreement shall be made, and the whole Confines of Scotland
become subject and obedient to the Parliament of England: the Scotch King shall
end his days in the field, and none of that race or Family for the future,
shall any either England, Scotland, or Ireland.

And further, this dumb Prophet verifies, at what time this great Battle shall
be fought, which Verses with great Art, he enclosed in a paper, and sent to the
King, a Copy whereof follows. The 15 of this month of May,
Shall be a sad disastrous day;
And they that Charles his part do take
Shall dearly suffer for his sake:
And many of his friends shall fly
Like dust before the Enemy.


These lines were written by the Author, and his name with this further
position prefixed. Signed by James Douglas, an enemy to the usurping Norman
Race, a cordial friend to truth and unspotted liberty, and a loyal Native to
the freedom of his Country, etc.

The young King had no sooner perused these despicable lives, but he waxed
exceeding wroth, giving strict charge and Command, that he should forthwith be
committed to safe custody; and accordingly he was with great rigor sent to
Sterling Castle, where he now remains close prisoner; but by the help of some
friends, promising Pen, Ink, and paper, wrote this ensuing Declaration.

God the absolute Sovereign Lord and King of all things in Heaven and earth,
the original Fountain and cause of all causes, who is circumscribed, limited,
and governed by no Rules, but does all things merely and only by his sovereign
will and unlimited good pleasure, wgo made the world and all things therein,
for his own glory, and who by his own will and pleasure gave man (his mere
Creature) the sovereignty (under himself) over all the rest of his Creaturrs,
and endued him with a rational soul or understanding, and thereby created him
after his own Image, and by his sovereign and absolute creating power, made a
female or woman, called Eve, which two, and the earthly original Fountain, as
begetters and bringers forth of all and every particular, and individual man
and woman, that ever breathed in the world since, who are and were by nature
all alike in power, dignity, Authority and Majesty, none of them having any
Authority, Dominion, or Majesterial power, one over or above another, but by
institution, or donation, that is to say, by mutual agreement or consent given,
derived or assumed by mutual consent and agreement, for the good, benefit, and
comfort each of other, and not for the mischief, hurt, or damage of any, it
being unnatural, irrational, sinful, wicked, and unjust for any man or men
whatsoever, to part with so much of their power, as shall enable a Prince to
destroy and undo them therewith.

And unnatural, irrational, sinful, wicked, unjust, develish, and tyranical; it
is for a Prince to appropriate and assume unto himself, a Power, Authority, and
jurisdiction to unite, govern, or reign over any sort of men in the world,
without their free consent; and he that does it, does thereby as much as in him
lies, endeavor to appropriate and assume unto himself the Office and
Sovereignty of GOD, who alone does, and is to rule by his will and pleasure.
And wickedness [in the highest] it is for any King to reign and govern by his
Prerogative will and pleasure; although his late Father Charles the first,
would needs maintain this erroneous maxim, That Kingdoms are Kings own, and
that they may do with them what they will; as if Kingdoms were for them, and
not they for their Kingdoms.

Therefore again I say, that their ways are wicked, unjust, and tyranical; and
as it is a great wickedness for any sort of men to suffer them so to do, so it
is a great sin and presumption of all Gods Saints, if they do not use all
possible means for the casting off the yoke of usurpation and tyranny.

From my Captivity in Sterling Castle, this 8. of Jan. 1651. J. DOUGLAS.

Since the writing of this Declaration, the prophetical Scot having received
advertisement, that the King was crowned, desired to speak with his Keeper, who
coming to him, took him by the hand, uttering these words.

My bony Lad and prerogative Jailer,
J Understand that your good Stuart is crowned, and that he intends to cause a
great Army forthwith, to match against the English Saints; but I tell thee, he
has had such a Dream, in relation to them, that his Majestical spirits are not
a little danted; and withal, take notice, that when he marches over
Sterling-Bridge, to give them battle, the tame and domestigne Fowls, as Hens,
Geese, Peacocks, and the like, shall all vanish, and fly to the Mountains, and
become exceeding wild; but after the Fight is over, they shall all of them
return again to their respective places, where formerly they were bred up.

The Jailer hearing this, reproved him, and swore by his soul he was a mad man,
and so locked the doors and departed; but within 2 days after, he came to him
again, having heard what the Dream was, and asked him, whither he could expound
the Kings Dream, which he formerly told him of; he answered yes: well, pray let
me hear it then, quoth the Jailer; why said Prophet Douglas, the same night
following that he was Crowned, falling into a slumber, he dreamed, that he
should never wear the Crown of England and Ireland, etc.

With that the Jailer shook his head and departed, and acquainted the
Governor with the m^raculous things revealed by the Prophet; insomuch, that
the said Governor seemed to be very well satisfied therewith, and ordered him
fire and other provisions, which before he was restrained of; but it is with as
much secrecy as may be.

The Dream before hinted at is said to be thus, That on the 2. of Jan. in the
morning, many of the Nobles of Scotland went to give the King a visit, and
coming into his Bedchamber, according to their usual Custom, said, Good morrow
my Liege for all day; but finding him to be so^ewhat (...), the Lord Ogleby
^^ke^ ^^m the reason and cause of his malancholy humor, who replied, that he
was much troubled the last night, and that in a slumber he fell into a Dream;
at which instance, he espied a poor Spider, with one Crown, as it were hanging
over its head, transcending and working her self lower and lower by a
Cobweb-thread; and at last he espied two other Crowns at the end of the thread,
and the Spider endeavoring to work her self down to them, imediately fell and
lost all: upon which, awaking, he began to meditate and commune with himself,
what had been suggested to him, by apparition in a Dream, and upon serious
cogitancy thereupon, these thoughts possessed him,

That upon the adventuring one Crown, to gain two, he was very doubtful he
should hazard the loss of 3, etc.

But the Lord Ogleby put it off with a laughter, saying, that Dreams were but
Fables, etc.

The Scot is now more full of prophetical Predictions, then Marshall actions;
for another of their good Lairds has foretold, the dread and terror that shall
befall them this year 1651, by the English; and moreover, he does further
affirm, That the Son of the Eagle, shall in this ensuing year, have his wings
so close cut, by an English Rampart, that he shall be wholly subdued, and
utterly discomfited, and deprived of all earthly bliss and happiness: And that
after 3 battles fought for the faith, the Land shall be quite overrun and
conquered, and then there shall be a firm and universal peace throughout 3
Nations of Scotland, England, and Ireland.

FINIS

