Before the Lords second coming, OF The last Days To be visited, Signed with
the Tyrant Pharaohs Overthrow.

ACTS 3. 22, 23. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
Brethren, like unto me, etc. And it shall come to pass, Every soul which will
not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed among the people.

September* octo: or November Printed in the year, 1650.

The most Mighty his Messenger, ELEANOR DOUGLAS, Dowger; Daughter of Lo:
Audeley, Lo: Touchet, E: of Castlehaven:
To them of England, France, Scotland, Ireland and Wales;
BRethren of these distracted. Dominions, hereof in a word, without which, that
tried Gold in the fire coveted, and whitened Raiment, eyesalve, of that sort or
anointing, do but bathe an Ethiopian, spur Balaams ass, since other Balm or way
none beside, when have tried all, but by the word to try the Spirits, whether
counterfeit or current, Scriptures to search, those Mines, a business worthy of
as serious dispute as whatsoever: namely, whether for blaspheming against the
holy Ghost has not brought upon us this judgment unexpected, wherein delay no
less perilous then heretofore pernicious, untimely tasting that paparadice
fruit, whose precious gates when as come to pass set open, The crystal
flowing living fountain to all passengers free, supposed to have been dried
up: The reserved Tree of Life likewise given gone, monthly rend^^^^g its golden
Largess, attained not to its maturity till now: whose wholesome leaves dispersed,
daily for asswaging the Nations festered wounds assigned, so requisite those
Supernaturals against unnatural waged wars: These not the first time pressed,
But Gallio cared for none of these matters, (Acts 18.) although deny the holy
Ghost; by consequence The Lord that bought them. Moreover accompanied with
frequent Blasphemies, by the Trade called Religion set abroach, Scriptures not
more in thraldom to Romanists, their state of Ignorance, then the holy Ghost
endeavored to be enslaved (Arrogance the worst) by them styled Our Reformers
and Deliverancers, distraction of no common consequence, destructive to concord
among Brethren-Nations, in their Brothers eye n^rrowly observed, discern a
mote: Execrable Opinions theirs, nevertheless a Beam such a mountain in their
own, esteems it not considerable: Foes of our grand Freedoms and Liberties,
whatsoever they pray, Thy Kingdom come, say in their hearts, Torment us not
before our time; not only entrenched Sion about, have scaled new Jerusalems
walls, undermined her Bulwarks: But outstripping Savages of late have slain most
barbarously our two Sacred Ambassadors, Those VVitnesses as impreached (Revel.
11.) The last days, whose Ringleader the foul Beast ascended out of the Abyss,
by undeniable evidence charged with the gift of Prophecies Lamp extinguished,
trodden under foot that holy City, etc. exchanged for their gifts sent one to
another, or Symony, triumphing over their corpse, because tormented them with
their published Commission, testified that solemn Oath taken, (Rev. 10.) of
Tyrant times being cut off, and unhappy generation, such to be no more.

And so much for these precious passages, all plainly speaking of Prophecies
return or resurrection, like the Eagles renewing her strength, immunities not
inferior to former times, withal informing what Mutiniers in Court and City,
against these 2 books in special of the Prophets, Daniel and John, both which
men revived but by a touch, etc. the one continuing until King Cyrus, the other
until the Cities destruction, Types and Figures before the Churches Deliverance
time: How long in captivity under Tyrants, Lawless wretches, not unlike those
ruins of the Temple, darksom uninhabited Vauts in the possession of Owls and
their Mates, whose Houses and Riches become their Heaven and god.

And so come to Times Mystery, his golden Hourglass, whereof thus, (Revel.
II.) he where bidden to arise, etc. his casting it up to be forty two Months,
in short as much to say, By three years and a half, pointing to the number of
Seven, extends not only to the Seventeenth Century, but expressly to the
present Jubilee, from that moiety or dividing of Time, so over and over pressed by
those sealed Writs of theirs: The Prophet Daniel his multiplied weeks, as
informs, saying Seven weeks, and Seventy weeks are determined, etc. And in the
midst of the week, etc. but several voices all in one, expressing the aforesaid
Jubilee or fiftieth year, appointed that of pardon, whereof our Lord on this
wise, It is impossible but that offenses will come, (Luke 17.) But woe unto him,
etc. no less then Great Britains neck-Verse, that shall offend one of these,
styled his Little ones, a Millstone then other Ornament more proper for such a
one, as in reference hereto, bears date even his last return (an. 49.) seven
times seven. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven
times in a day turn again, thou shall forgive (or receive) him: bear witness the
Disciples, Lord increase our Faith, to wit, Defenders of the Faith styled,
never at so low an ebb, as that sure Oracle replied, had they Faith as a grain
of mustard, etc. Need not fear the day of Judgment tidings, or Worst of
Tyrants concluding it, how faring with them when the Son of Man revealed, verse.
24. one taken the other left, demanded where Lord such Massacre, and woeful wars
refers them to the Roman Ensign, the Eagle, where the corpse, etc.

And so much for this, be it known to all, Touch not mine anointed, do my
Prophets no harm, with a touch of Times week its Mystery, the most Supreme, set
at naught for Onions and Garlic, those anointings in sted of Canaans Grapes
and Olives, by Oxford Naamans, are not the Rivers of Damascus better?

So proceeding with Sodoms Map of those two Prophets crucified, exposed like
some Malefactors not suffered to be interred, where three days and half (and
years) beside sounding the general Resurrections Alarm, Months forty two,
theirs contributing thereto, for a time, times, and dividing of Time, with one
consent crown the Seventeenth Century, 500 years fulfiilling a period, shadowed
under Hyergly pick figures, how honored the Spirit of prophecy then powered out,
as by those two in Sackcloth Liveries, their agreeing in one, and them whosoever
hurts or dishonors with untimely death repaid, fire proceeding out of their
mouths.

At whose word (that wine) Waters turned into Blood, Wars foreshewed,
restrain the Heavens, smite the Earth with Plagues as often as they please,
styled The two Olive Trees, and Two Candlesticks, expelling darkness; the
healing nature of Oil not unknown, requires no farther amplification, showed to
be the Books of the greatly beloved Man, and that Disciple whom the Lord loved:
So, Come, says the Spirit, and Come, says the Bride, and those will take
gratis: and If any man take away, etc. for I testify unto every MAN: Lest the
last Error worse then the first, when the bad Spirit tempting, and the woman.

Thus passing on, when the Spirit powered out a passage when opened in Heaven,
the Holy Prophets giving thanks, the time come of their awakening, opened also
the gates of Hell, such an uprore about Father Times being cut off, those
tidings the City setting on fire, the Nations stung, their time come forth to
be judged, (Rev.) the Devil wild for company, loses no time by Sea and Land,
because his but short greatly wrath.

On all sides thus, how the Mystery abounds of Iniquity, witness our wandering
Stars, visible in this horrible Age, so many though charged with abusing their
Tolleration or Liberty of conscience: no wonder, when higher Powers express no
better use made of theirs, then by leasing and scoffing to abuse the Holy
Ghosts long-suffering, of whose Apostasy and Erroneous actings, extending to
delay of the day of Judgment, not sensible of ou^ entrance thereinto: And
detaining the Kingdom of Heaven from the true owners, By reason of certain
Reserves or doubtful Speeches, matter of Reality failing, our fluent
Tertullus's inform: Because said, Of the day and hour knows no man, and to
Thieves approach likened by night; hold forth, need not be beholding, or
farther consolation expected for Sion, that fear causless, lest set at naught
their Trade, no farther watch requisite, teach the good man of the house may
take his ease, (Mat. 24.) as upon that mistake went abroad of that Disciples
not dying, taken for a second Elias, Job. etc. Because of the concealed day and
hour, which matters not: Go on in deferring amendment, sufficient tokens come
forth of the last Day, though pricking the hearts of very Jews.

Of which store not all expended, Aarons distillings, or her renowned anointing
to the end of the world, tendered not by way of ostentation or selfends,
seasonable as looking toward Sodom: Showing extant on Record in several Courts
since an. 1633. and asore to a year, a Month, and the very day, under her hand,
foreshewed matters then of highest nature of late executed as by so many years
durance undergone, since then when deemed impossibilities or distraction.

As farther, by credible persons to be testified, no few about the City, how
accompanied with Miracles no inferior ones: Beside Devils, also dumb Spirits
cast out, most outrageous of all other, with as ample commission and convincing
testimony, as ever Moses and Elias, if not a greater, except the Age become
more deaf or unmovable then that pillar of Salt, Lots metamorphosed wise, her
Execution sign, or then our Wyldshires stonage wonder, as proper for Pharaohs
of these days.

And as closes (displaying his pedigree offspring of the Prophet David,
saying, I come shortly) with that Benection, Blessed are they that do his
Commandment, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, whose Leaf withers
not or changes: And may enter in through those everlasting gates, twelve of the
new City, so Monthly Humiliations and other like Superstitions observed, no
other then (Dan. 3.) when ye hear the sound, etc. Whosoever falls not down, etc.
and If any man buy or sell, save he that has the mark of the Beast, etc. alike
acceptable, leaving the other undone, (to be excommunicated with Dogs, etc.) Be
it ordained (even) upon pain of Death.

Deo sit gloria, etc. From the Queens Bench. September, etc.
FINIS.

