ELIJAH THE TISHBITE's SUPPLICATION When Presented the likeness of Hand, etc. (
Kings 18.)

Lady Elnor Davis

MARK 13. But when ye shall see the Abomination of Desolation (or makes
desolate) spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing where it ought not; Let him
that reads understand, etc.

November: 22 Printed in the Year 1650.

Elias Intercession preferred.
O Lord of Hosts our God, How long thou Lord of Sabbaths, thus shall silence be
in Heaven? How long whilst they suppose like their sitting Gods thou likewise
fallen asleep, slumbrest, or hear not at all; as theirs pursuing the Enemy, or
on a march; thy thundering Voice refrain no longer: O this day be it known That
art God, I beseech thee, I thy Servant also, hear me for thy Words sake, above
all hasten to Answer, hear me, bidden in thy Name but ask Fire, fire, from the
Wheels of thy Seraphin Throne, vouchsafe the light of thy presence, a spark
thence to lick up at once or Reconcile (a Deluge such of Divisions) threatening
no less then quenching Celestial flames; Thy Incense smoke to extinguish thus
armed to re-edifie Babel-Rout these Giants then as fared with those false
Prophets both of one Spirit, Lo crying from morning to night too, Let none
escape either, despising not the Birthright only (sure Promises) But where
thou blessest, filling up with inveterate hatred the measure of such
Long-suffering, the World, made believe thy Spirit confined in the Hemisphere
of their Studies; That the Jews how much blessed, uncalled in such revolted
times, where beside Confusions Mark set on the Age present, confounded alike as
that first Generation after the flood, their aspiring Towers Erecting when
scattered, whether then turned Turks and Saracens, that Mother of Abomination,
bear witness, Mahomets Blasphemous ALCORAN also, at Paul's, Cum Privilegio the
Great Whore stilled well Babylon, never more Brutish after once enlightened,
the Night past, that whosoever runs may read, not a tittle failing, whose presence
likened to Lightning out of the East, even shining unto the West, coming not
short of the Jews Visitation, notwithstanding in as much want (if not more) to
be reingrafted standing themselves, to Babylon lo returned.

As moreover witness to this day in the first place, without Baptism;
supperless both; Nuld by them such a Deed of Gift bestowed on those Masters of
Art our Rabbis, whereas in the Ark its first figure all at full Age, till
after the Flood none born unto them; imposed nevertheless by these Gog and
Magog Admintstrators on such, knowing not the right hand from the left,
retaining other Character, none but hearsay; together with the other left off,
or taken as some morning potion, and other like Tradition: armd with thy
Brimston Bow, appeal to thee, O righteous Judge, thus where turned into
Wormwood, the Waters of Life no few perishing that way the Springs of Justice
answerable, if weighs not Naboths Case down Ahabs sword, instead of Solomon's
seasoned in the strife of that now despised Sex, of Turkish slavery more then a
taste partaking, Widows Estates put into the Balance, in the Worlds state of
Infancy, that if repentest at the heart, thou made him not a Beast. Rather
leave it to the world also of such an Expression the extent how much since
concerned in it, that in Expectation of New Jerusalems Nuptials were it not,
better a Thousand times the Gentiles Church since the Apostles Age, to have
perished in that foreshewed Siege and Destruction, not a stone left on a stone,
also they as obdurate.

Which Petition wherein without farther Process, not like Attorneys BILLS,
supposing to be Heard for their much Repetition.

Where lastly to be short with the time like that little dark Cloud a Hand
like, to the waiting Prophet no small welcome token, as gathered therefrom these
of Palmistries Science, extending to the present Jubilee or Number of Fifty; so
points to a Blow when as much attention lends to their Note, as they of such
took notice sent from him, those Baals Sons the Image of God both alike, as the
Baboon or such like theirs carried with the current of the Cormorant Times. And
so far for them drinking at the Brooks side their farewell, Four hundred and
fifty, for Fish and Fowl such an unexpected evening Banquent. And for the
peoples hearts turned back, trusting in heartless Leaders, attended with that
blessed shower expected as little so long after the Heavens restrained; and in
Israel no few Widows too, but unto none of them, save to Sareptas Widow of
Sidon, etc. As thereby that line behold measured the present Abominable Age its
coming to it self again, cleansed the unparalleld Leprous Time.

October
The Lambs Wife. By Eleanor Tichet.
FINIS.

