The dovvnfal of Dagon: OR, CERTAIN SIGNS OF The Sudden and Unavoidable Ruin
Of this PARLIAMENT And ARMY.

With ACAVEAT To the City of LONDON.

Printed at LONDON. 1653. Feb: 16 1652

The DOWNFALL OF DAGON.
I Having in a former Treatise laid open the rise, growth, and some of the
practices of this everlasting Parliament and Army; I shall now enlarge my self
a little farther, to show you the Fate that is hanging over their heads, and
the unavoidableness of their fall; with some signs that the present Government
is in a declining state.

I shall first lay before you their breaking Covenants, and sweating their
souls to the devil, to promote their wicked ambitious ends; having raised
themselves from the very scum of the people, to Lord it over their Superiors;
and all by an Arbitrary, power, being backed on by a few Cobblers and
Shoo-makers, and a company of Desperado's.

As for their Perjury; Swearing they regard not, nor Forswearing, so it conduce
to their profit: and in that, they imitate their elder brother the Turk, who
holds that there are no Oaths to be kept with Christians, any longer then they
serve for their advantages. Nay, these Independents go beyond the Turks: for
they are Heathens, but these are Atheists; these acknowledge not Christ, many
of them; witness that blasphemous Book, entitled, THE THREE GRAND IMPOSTORS,
written by an Honorable Member (forsooth) and printed for Giles Calvert,
dwell^ng near the westend of Paul's, at the sign of the black Spread-Eagle;
that pure Saint, who, if he had had his desert, should have been hanged long
since, for the many blasphemous Pieces by him dispersed. And now my hand is in,
pray take notice of another Book by him lately printed in English, called, The
Racovian Catechism: This Book, full fraught with damnable doctrines, denies the
Divinity of Jesus Christ. (O horrid Blasphemy!) One of these I bought of
Calvert, and he told me, That in that Book there was contained more sound
Divinity, then in any book that over was printed.

O England, wh^t a pass art thou brought unto! In stead of a pure Reformation,
and a propagating of the Gospel, with an establishment of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, here is nothing but holding forth Confusion, as their Ranting spirit
moves them.

Nay, I must needs say, they are very zealous for the Cause of Christ (as they
pretend) when they make a Laughing Stock of the holy Scripture, denying the
Holy Ghost to be God, and taking away the Divinity of Jesus Christ; and withal,
terming the Sacrament of the Lords Supper a holy Fiction.

You may plainly perceive, what temper our Sword men are of; when lately there
came forth a small Pamphlet, entitled, A Beacon fired, humbly petitioning
these Saints for a suppressing of Popish Books, which lately are come forth
without control; whereupon, Colonel Pride takes up the Buckler against the
Petitioners, and stands in defense of Popish Books: which made the Petitioners
(at first) much to admire, seeing him write so contrary to the Principles that
he had always seemed to profess; so that upon good considerations they answered
him so effectually, that they have stopped his mouth with a Non obstante.

Here, you may plainly see, that the Turks are better Christians then these
men: for they acknowledge Christ for a great Prophet sent from God; but these
Saints in their Book (as I mentioned before) called The three grand Impostors,
(the main scope whereof is to prove Christ, Moses, and Mahomet, to be
Impostors) have the impudence to do their endeavor to prove Christ an
Impostor. These are the men that do stand up in the Cause of Christ, to pull
down Anti^hrist, while they set up the Devil.

But what will not these men stick to do, that have by a base Arbitrary power,
and an unheard of Barbarism, after they had sworn Allegiance to their King, and
taken a solemn Oath, in the presence of God, to bring him home to his two
Houses of Parliament, and make him the most glorious Prince that ever reigned
over. Great Britain? and yet CROMWELL, with his Minions, hurried him into the
Isle of Wighl, and kept him a close prisoner: but then these Cameleons, that
can turn themselves into any color, began to show themselves in their right
hue.

And first, Cromwell in the House of Commons stands up, with his nose flaming
like some prodigious Comet, that threatens devastation to some Kingdom; and,
with his hands laid upon hss hypocritical breast, told the Speaker that it was
unsafe to trust the King (a man of Blood, one that had betrayed that Trust
which the people had reposed in him) and therefore he desired them that he
might be brought to a strict account for all the blood that had been shed in
this Nation in the late War.

I shall insist no longer upon their perfidious and barbarous dealing about the
King, seeing it is so notoriously known all the world over.

No sooner had they murdered the King, contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance,
and solemn League and Covenant, the many Imprecations, whereby God has been
called to witness that they never intended any harm to the Kings Person; but
now you may see what force an Oath is of, to bind these Miscreants, that,
rather then they will miss of their ambitious ends, will damn their souls.

With what face can these men appear before God at the last day, having their
hands imbrned in the blood of their native Prince, to give an account of all
their diabolical actions?

They have not only stretched out their hands against the King, God's
Viceroy; but also against the M^n^stery, by sending some to heaven, where (I
am very sure) none of them will ever come; imprisoning of others, and
sequestring their estates.

These are pure Saints, that thus do tyrannize over the Church, persecuting
Christ in his Members, and, in as much as in them lies, endeavor the utter
subversion of the true Protestant Religion, by tolerating of all manner of
Heresies and Blasphemies, advancing Schismatical persons both in Church and
State; their main end being to bring in Atheism and Confusion.

And thus they do (like Julian the Apostate) by taking away the maintenance of
the Ministry, that so by Poverty, they may (of necessity) beforc'd to leave
their Call^ngs, and betake themselves to some other employment, to keep their
wives and children from starving. And thus Julian the Apostate, (as we read)
when his persecuting Sword prevailed on the Christians but little, took this
course to make them leave Christ, and follow his wicked example.

But there can be no men, let them be never so infamous for wickedness, but
these men will (as nigh as they can) tread in their steps!

O what a miserable thing it is, to see Great Britain, that has been the most
free and flourishing Monarchy upon the face of the earth! that has been
famous for the many Expeditions this English Nation has made both by Sea and
Land; to vindicate its honor against its foreign enemies! and by Land, how
many Trophies of their Victories have they erected in France, and diverse other
parts of Eu^ope! how has it flourished for the many excellent Laws in it
established, and blessed (I may say) for the light of the Gospel, which it
enjoyed, when other neighbour-kingdoms wandered in the darkness of Popish
Errors.

But now, O England, how is thy former glory vanished away! how contemptible
art thou become to all round about thee, a scorn to all Nations! This is fallen
upon us, by suffering a base mercenary Army, and a few men that carried the
name of a Parliament, to murder our lawful King, that so they might establish
a Government that the like was never heard of before: but now when they had
murdered the King, they immediately leap up into the saddle, and spur out the
very heart and blood of the people, by their Oppressions.

The first thing they do, is to make us a Free State; that is, our estates,
purses, and persons must be free at their disposing. Then next, we must sit
down like silly Asses, and let them load us with Excise of all things,
Contribution, Free Quarter, Taxes, Vexations, and what else they please to lay
upon us. And yet Ship Money, that was a tyrannical illegal Tax, although the
King did it out of a pure necessity: his Neighburs at that time (he being so
weak at Sea) offered him many affronts, denying to strike Sail to his ships, as
the custom of the Sea is, when they came in the Narrow, between France and
England; His Guard of sh^ps being then so slender, that our Neighbors had them
in contempt. Yet for all this, the King was so unwilling to impose any new Tax,
that first he would have the advice of his Council, then of his Judges, that so
he might not go contrary to the Laws of the Land. They all agreed that it was
warrantable, and produced diverse Records, how that many of his Progenitors had
done the like before, in case of necessity.

The King being thus convinced of the lawfulness of it, he then commanded that
it should be levied, but in such a manner, that it should be employed to the
same end and purpose that it was levied for, and not to run in by-Chanels, into
any private men's purses, nor to the enriching of himself or any of his Court,
but for the good of his subjects, and the honor of the Nation.

Compare Ship money to those many Taxes that we lie groaning under, and judge
who have been the greatest Tyrants and Oppressors of the People, either the
late King, or (as you call it) the Parliament.

We will begin first with Excise, that insensible devourer of the Poor and
impoverisher of the Rich: you see our Curs, our Powdering-Tubs, our
Washing-Bowls, our Kettles, our Hats, Doublets, Breeches, Stockings, Shoes;
and nothing we eat, or drink, or wear, is free from being devoured by these
men, that thus complained of the King for that inconsiderable Tax of Ship Money.

Sequestration, that is another way they use, to gull men of estates. How many
thousand families in this Nation have they utterly beggered by Sequestration?
Most of the Nobility and Gentry, if they have had out the least spark of
honesty in them, they have brought into as great a Want and Poverty, as some of
them were in, when they waited on the Drays with the Slings on their backs, or
with the Tallies by their sides. But now they have killed, and have also took
possession: the King's, Queens, and Prince's Lands, the Lands of the Nobility
and Gentry, they have shared amongst themselves; and yet all this, and much
more, is too little to satisfy their insatiable appetites. And for all this,
our mouths must be buttoned up, so that we are not suffered that filly comfort
of venting our griefs by way of complaint; but upon every light word, a man is
in danger to be made an offender, to the utter ruin of him and his posterity.

O London, these are thy golden Calves that thou have set up, and do worship;
these be the Idols to whom you have sacrificed your sons and servants, to
maintain their Oppressions over you.

Excise and Sequestrations are too little to quench their insatiable
covetousness: but they have another way to drain the Treasury of the Nation,
and that is by Contribution. These Monsters of men (that like Vipers eat out
the bowels of their mother) having no regard at all to the groans of the poor,
nor the miserable slavery that we lie under (worse then the Israelites under
their Egyptian Taskmasters) do persist in their abhorrible practices, to suck
the blood of the people, and will at last enforce us to sell our wives and
children, for to satisfy their greedy desires. You may see plainly that they
are fully bent to strip us naked of all that we have, by that late Act of
theirs for the raising the Tax thirty thousand pounds a month more then ever it
was before. I shall say nothing of Free Quarter, and many more exorbitancies
and outrages committed in the Country by the Soldiery.

But now we see, by woeful experience, the difference between the mild
Government of our late Sovereign King CHARLES, and the destructive domineering
of our newfangled State. They cried out on him for his Oppressions, and have
themselves gone beyond him, and all others that our Modern Histories ever make
mention of.

But who have been the main causers of all our sorrow? even this rebellious
City of London, a most ungrateful City: the King making it his Royal Seat, and
place of abode, (whenas he might as well have removed his Court to York, or
some other place, for the more commodious addresses of his people of Scotland
and Ireland unto him) and all to make it famous and flourishing: but in
requital, they have been the only stirrers up of Sedition and Rebellion
against his person, and at last have made themselves infamous, by being
accessory to the murder of their King.

But now behold the just judgment of God, that ere long will undoubtedly fall
upon them for their unparalled wickedness. I may very well pronounce this
judgment against it, which was once pronounced against Jerusalem, in Ezekiel
the twenty fourth, and the sixth: Wherefore thus says the Lord God, woe to the
bloody city, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out
of it. Bring it out piece by piece, let no lot fall upon it. And in the two and
twentieth Chapter; the Prophet gives a reason for the Woe he had pronounced
against it: For, says he, thou art become guilty in the blood that thou have
shed, and have defiled thy self in the idols which thou have made, And thou
have caused thy days to draw near. and art come even unto thy years. Wherefore
I have made thee a reproach unto the Heathen, and a mocking unto all countries.

Without question; the judgments of God will suddenly fall upon this City: and
Gods Justice will the more man^festly appear, in causing those Idols that they
have set up (the Parliament, that they so much adore) to be the main causers of
the depopulating, and finally the destruction of it. For now the main Project
that they have in hand, is the altering of the Law, and joining the Counties
into Provinces, and then to adjourn the Terms into the several Provinces! so
that the Term, that is the main supporter of the Retayll Traders, and upholder
of the pride of the City, being taken away, the inhabitants must either be
enforced to go down into the Country to self their commodities, or else starve
for want of Trading.

Besides this, diverse other ways there are now under consultation, for to bring
down the pride and arrogancy of this London, and make it know that God can and
will make wicked men the executors of his just indignation against this so
rebellious and seditious a City as this is and has been.

And moreover, if it does not suddenly repent for all the blood that it has
been the only causers to be shed in this Kingdom, God will very suddenly pour
out his vengeance upon it, and, as the Prophet says, will make it a reproach
unto the heathens, and a m^ unto all Countries.

Next of all, I will show you that God, who is the avenger of the oppressed, a
father the fatherless, and the comforter of the widow, is now making
inquisition for the blood of the King, of the Noblemen, of the Ministers; and
all the blood that has been spilt in these Nations of England and Scotland,
among the privy actors of their murders; And that he is now bringing the
Destroyer to destruction, as it is said in the twelfth Psalm, and fifth verse:
For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighting of the necdy, now will I
arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.
God will not let blood go long unrevenged. And although there can be no account
given to the Nation of all or any of the vast sums that they have raised in or
since the late Wars; yet God he will make them account for all their
wickedness, and make them know there is a God, although they deny him in all
their actions.

We may see plainly that God has designed them to destruction, in raising up
the Dutch against them, and giving them good successes this last year, by
beating their invincible Navy (which they so much vaunted of, as if no power
on earth could overcome) out of their own Sea (as they call it) burning and
sinking their ships in their Harbors, landing their men, and plundering the
Country: so that the very name of a Dutchman is enough to fright their guilty
consciences into a Tertian Ague.

Besides the Dutch, the Dane is making great preparations against next Summer,
for to jerk their spiritual Army by Land.

The Highlanders in Scotland have beaten them out of the High-lands into the
Lowlands, and do there get ground of them every day more and more: but not one
tittle of this must come into their feigned Letters out of Scotland, that are
printed in their weekly News-books.

The Irish, they quit themselves like men, standing up manfully in defense of
their Country, and will accept of no Parley, since Cromwell (in the year 1649.)
under a pretense of a Confederacy, lurched Oneal: they have gone so resolutely
on, that they cannot deny but that they have taken some petty Garrisons (as they
call them.)

The King of France he demands satisfaction for Pyracie that they have
committed; and withal, for taking his Ships going to the relief of Dunkirk; so
that he having received no satisfactory answer as yet by his Ambassador sent
to them lately, is making all the preparations he can to join with the Dutch,
and right himself as well as he can of all the wrongs he and his Subjects have
received from them.

Now join all these Preparations of our Neighbors together; and consider
withal, these men's guiltiness of Conscience, and despairing of Pardon; their
distrustfulness of one another, and the divisions among themselves; and then
consisider also, whether it is not plain that God has a special hand in all
this.

How has he beset them on every side! above, before, behind, and every way.
God he is above, fighting against them; their Neighbors round about them: so
that they stand like a Murderer on the Gallows, hedged in with Halberdiers to
perform the execution.

Then at last they shall see that there is a God that does ^^^^ in heaven, and
from his all-seeing eye there is nothing (...): he knows their secret
consultations, as well as their open practices: He has suffered them for a
while to Lord it over us; and to run their courses, that so the measure of
their sins might be full, and that then God might pour out the vials of his
wrath and indignation upon their heads.

So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord.
FINIS.

