A DANGEROUS FIGHT AT Pembrooke Castle, BETWIXT The Forces Commanded by
Lieutenant Genesis CROMWELL, and the Forces Commanded by Major Genesis Laughorne, and
Colonel John Poyer. WITH The number that were slain and taken Prisoners on
both sides, and Poyers Declaration to his Soldiers, concerning Sir Marmaduke
Langdale. LIKEWISE, Another Fight near PONTEFRACT Castle in Yorkshire, between
the Cavaliers Commanded by Col. Bonevant, and the Parliaments Forces, Commanded
by Col. Fairfax, and the success thereof. TOGETHER, With the proceedings of
the Lord Genesis Hamilton, concerning the bringing of his Army into England, and
3. Acts of the Parliament of Scotland, touching the same. Proclaimed and read
at the High-Cross in the City of Edenburg.

LONDON. Printed for R. G. 1648.

Certain Acts agreed upon by the Parliament of Scotland, concerning the
managing of a War against England. Proclaimed at the High-Crosse in the City
of Edinburgh.
Honored Sir,
THis Parliament here has adjourned for two years, knowing well that
Parliaments are not the best at Government, at least in time of War. A
Committee of 36. is to manage Affairs, D. Hamilton General, and Governor of
Edinburgh Castle; most suitable: there is no doubt of an Army that will come for
England. For when it was asked in Parliament, where was money for to maintain
the Army, it was answered by the Genesis let the Lads come into England once, and
then shift for themselves, the number of this Army in view is 3550. Horse, 500.
Dragoones, and 6000. Foot, besides the forces which Major Genesis Langdale, for
Sir Tho. Glemham is Genesis and the most Courted Englishman that ever set foot on
Scots ground: the Countries here are in sad condition, the peoples adversnesse
to the War occasions their flight; that flight is accompanied with plundering
of their houses, and if taken, imprisonment, and if in Arms death: is this War
for Presbyterian Government jud^e; that there may nothing be wanting. For
completing his expedition, certain Acts are past, Sanc Le Roy: First, that no
Minister publicly or privately speak against this engagement: (will not their
sighs and tears think you be Registered) on pain of being distmist his place
and imprisonment, and who ever relieve him are to be proceeded against as
Malignants their persons imprisoned, and goods seized. 2. That what Parliament
man or Minister of justice that will not join with them in this engagement
shall lose his place, his person imprisoned, and his goods seized. 3. An oath
to impose upon all that they shall swear to approve and consent unto, and with
their lives and fortunes to maintain any Act or Acts, and all the proceedings
of this Parliament, and of this engagement: this power is given to recommit of
estates to execute: the refusers to be proceeded against with imprisonment, and
ceasing their estates.

The Lord Marquis Argile, Lord Eglinton, and Lord Cassils, with diverse others
are fled into the West of Scotland for security, against whom is gone the Lord
Calendor and Middleton, with 2500 horse and 3000 foot (for the Presbyterian
cause) who will undoubtedly overcome the other, because they have no horse: the
Scots in Ireland halt between their good quarter in Ireland, and a War in
England but, because they will seem willing, they offer some of them to come
upon receipt of money which its said was sent, and fell short of them: Lord
Lowden Lothian Car and Warison with others are gone from Edinburgh as it is
thought to Argile.

Edinburgh June 17. 1648.

Sir, The action in these parts between Major Genesis Lambert might have been
before this time, but the first has no mind to fight, expecting suddenly by
an incraease of power to overflow England: carryng all before them, unless
gravel; he has made several flourishes but still drew back, yet so as to
leave straglers behind him. Major Genesis Lambert is now about Perith, and
Langdalo at Carlisle, in case he be flighted, he may step into Scotland. You
would little think what joy would be in Scotland to hear that the English Army
were drawing Northerly: and how soon hereupon they in Scotland would be
formidable against the forward party for England. The Lord Balmerino plundered
for not taking arms, and some killd, the like means is used to others, and
that this War may be charged on by Sea and Land, their is past lately toward:
Scotland a fleet of 14 sail. The Admiral of them is Mr. John Gilapsby, as
they passed they gave Barwick a salute, they came from Holland, brought
ammunition and other necessaries for War. Many of Langdales men run from him, 3
Ministers and 15 of the Countrymen that came with petitions to Edenburg against
the War are imprisoned: From the present state of affairs in Scotland appears
a War in England, but sure not so dangerous as to fright into any unsound
accord, if circumstances be weighed and powers on each side considered.

Sir, Upon the 16. of this instant, Major Sparrow, joined with part of the
Lieutenant Generals Regiment, having notice of about 500. foot, and 100. horse
about Walden resolved to dispute their quarters, but upon arrival, found the
birds were flown, about 3 in the afternoon, to a place called Hinton, (a small
market Town in Cambridgeshire, 4. miles from thence) their weariness inviting
them to a refreshment for certain hours, and therefore resolved to take what
pleasure a grass Close within a mile of Walden, and a rainy night would
afford; the entertainment of the place affords them little encouragement to
stay, and therefore they advance with the Phosphers first dawning to Walden;
the resolute forlorn advances, and Captain Wallington, with the Lieut. Genesis own
Troop, who had the Van, (the rest of the party cheerfully following) equalizes
their resolutions; but the work seems difficult, by the enemies bar cadoing
of the way with Carts, in the face of some Musketyers, and Pikes, who wanted no
valor, nor sparred any endeavors to maintain it; and Captain Wallington was
gallantly opposed by Major Muschampe, with 20. Muskets, a stand of Pikes, and
20. resolute horse, the service was hot on both sides, but disputed in a short
time. A Trumpeter of Wallingtons was shot through the hand, some of our horse
hurt; of theirs; slain Maj. Muschame, and 10. more, Col. Thornton, Mr. Steward,
(who was very active in the rising at Mindel hall in Suffolk) Sir Barnaby
Scudamore, and Mr. Henry Sanders, taken prisoners, but not in this action; our
party then entered the Town, scoured the streets, and made all clear till they
came to the Church, where the main Guard, of about 100. foot, was Commanded by
an old stout Soldier; the passages thereunto being very narrow, caused our men
to retreat, and upon debate it was resolved to summon them, upon which, a
Treaty was desired and granted, and the result thereupon thus.

1. That the Countrymen should go to their own homes, leaving their Arms
behind them, and engaging never to bear Arms against the Parl. for the future.

2. That 6. horsemen should march away with their horses and Swords: There were
taken for the public store, 100. Arms, besides 100. more the Soldiers had
amongst them, 2. Colors of foot, 4. Drums, and 2. Barrels of Powder, a
considerable party of horse, but few prisoners, (in respect our party was not
able to surround the Town, and effect the surprise at once.) This knot had been
stronger tied by 11 a Clock that day, if not timely broken.

From the Head Quarters June 22. 1648.

Another Fight near Pontefract Castle in Yorkshire.
SIR.
THe enemy in Pontefract Castle, takes much liberty, and goes where they
please, on the other side of the Castle, and upon Sunday last about three of
the Clock in the morning; we received a stron Alarm from them on this side the
Castle, the manner thus: Col: Bonevant (the Governor) made a salley, with a
party of horse and foot to surprise some of our men who were upon the guard,
and Officers in their quarters: but his design were frustrated; for we
received the Alarm very timely, and prepared to receive them, and upon their
advance toward the Bridge, our musketeers gave fire, they answered them with
another valley insomuch here began a very hot encounter, and sharp dispute,
but after a furious and violent conflict, Col. Fairfax with a party of horse
advanced over the Bridge, charged the enemy in the streets, and performed his
action with abundance of gallantry, kill, d 3 of the Castle Soldiers, took 6
prisoners and persued the rest to Pontefract Towns end, with the loss of 20.
men, the Cannons played from the Castle, but did no execution. Bonevant
threatens a sudden revenge upon Col. Fairfax.

Ferribridge, 19. June 3. in the morning. 1648.

SIR, THis Town is almost at the last gaspo, being much discontented and
divided, occasioned some want of Victuals; but Col. Poyer studies, how to
delude the Soldiers declaring to them, that before Monday next, he will warrant
them relief, from M. G. Langdale: Our great Guns have played against the walls,
and a breach was made by battery, and the assault attempted, but fruitles,
being repulsed with the loss of 23. and 4. on their part: Since which time, we
have had another fight with them, upon a salley forth with their horse, the
business was not long in dispute, but very hot, and gallantly maintained by both
parties, but at the last, we put them to flight, killed 9. of them, took 20.
prisoners, with the loss of few men, as is said, Maj. 6. Laughorne made one
amongst them; we also took: about 30. horse, and some Arms, M. G. Laughorn is
recovered of his late wounds, and it is supposed, there are 2000. fighting in
the Town, We doubt not but to be masters both of Town and Castle very suddenly.

Pembrook June 19. 1648.

FINIS.

