THE DAY OF IVDGEMENTS Model.

By the LADY ELEANOR DOUGLAS.

REVELATION, Chap. 7. To day if ye shall hear his voice.

Printed in the Year, 1646.

FROM THE La: ELEANOR DOVGLAS. Upon the 7. Chapter of the REVELATION.
THe Time come to remove, the Covering having NO short space been shutt up in
the ARC, our present state also have presented an Olive-Leafe plucked from the
Tree of LIFE, of the Waters abate dried up, as it were, those Tears from the
face of the Earth, as appears finished a tedious Vale of Vanity: for souls
imprisoned without release and restless, till Times utmost minnit run out, or
Expired.

So of the DOVES-LAST return finds rest for the Sole of her foot, as
follows: Revealed even the most holy and reserved of Time and Seasons conseald
Mystery; Except that of the unknown DAY and Hour imparted NOT to Angels:
Namely, NOT Years; But forty days, The day of Judgments Last Warning-peice;
AS the number of forty no stranger to the present either: which here bears date
from Easter-weeke 1646. to the ASSENSION thereabout, for appearance before the
Judge of quick and dead; His great Tribunal extracted out of that sealed
Number, a Hundred forty four etc. Saying, he heard the Number of Them
Revelati. 7. Chap. Wherefor the Keeper of the great Seal, and the Cryers voice,
Thus (verse 2.)

Where farther contains These, belonging to Our Clymate or Jland described for
a Trial before a Thron of Judicature, NOT heard till such an appointed Time:
witnessed by those restrained Winds four, withal points at Easter Term in
May, the first Term; VVinesse the fresh Boughs in their hands, (all in white
Robes) Where the innocent Lamb, as it were, araignd before Them: And by Them
also evident, where the Jury called by Name Judah, the Foreman of those Twelve
godfathers or Elders sealed in the Foreheads, or sworn-men; And such
innumerable attendants as though the great day Come: Such Legions of ANGELS
standing about the Throne, and about the Jury, where face to face the four
VVITNESSES all Thronging to hear their Testimony, Namely the four Beasts,
what they produce, These makes it plain enough: About this Prisoner, his
holding up the hand at the BAR, the very MODEL of a Court, representing it:
where shows withal in the Peerlesse Lambs Livory and posture; This his humble
Servant, (by the Lamb represented) presents his Person before the Throne,
together with the woeful state of so many Prisoners at this Time, being
accompanied therewith:

But proceeding with this, the day of Judgments Usher; doubtless where made
by Them, such Low Obeisance to HIM sitting on the Throne, subscribing and
submitting to his Pleasure, saying, Amen, etc. (verse)

And so the Jury also, those Elders No ordinary MEN: declares this Prisoner one
of their own degree: NO Common ONE, pleading Not guilty, neither deserving
death or imprisonment: The Lamb acquits HIM here, though Condemned.
Nevertheless; The white Robes suffers, where so many hands (as it were) held
up; AS goes the VERDJCT: SO the sentence LORD have mercy on Them; And so theirs
the KINGDOM of Heaven, as declared; The Lamb has Compassion on them;
HIMSELF shall Lead Them to Living-Springs and Fountains: Celestial
FOVNTAINS and SPRJNGS, which never fail, or shall be taken away, intayld so
sure.

And in which portion of Scripture, as inclusive Whitsontydes mystery: Shadowed
too under the White Robe, (as much to say) The great and dreadful day in the
Month of MAY: NO more Whitsontides, as by the Suns not Lightning on them, etc.

And so much for Easter and Penticost, a feast observed by Jew and Christian,
clearly expressed by that sealed Number, and by the others without Number of so
Many several Nations, whereas Noting withal; Baptism, and the LORDS Supper
adminstred (only) at those two Feast-times, as heretofore an Old custom:
(verse) So they shall Thirst no more, NOR hunger either in that Kind, an
unlawful restraint, without doubt points at the Present. Where Virgins
excluded from living Waters those.

Herewith, one Thing more: Making known, touching That question By one of the
Grand-jury-Elders, saying (verse) What are These which are Arrayed in white,
and whence come They? Answered HJM, Sir, Thou know; (as much to say,) The
present Reigns character or Colors: Serves both for the Year 1644. to be
accomplished before the Church her Triumphs or rejoicing show: And his
Crownation solemnized in March 1624. complete about EASTER: HE, the four and
twenteth since the Conquest, of those Elders Jn-Thrond: As Not unknown, both
Father and Son about the aforesaid RESVRRECTION Feast Crowned. Who needs
Then inquire what STRANGERS These? Much like as in the Glass, one knew not his
own FACE: Or these in the SPRING, as it were, going a PRECESSION, with those
Palms in Their hands, extended from the year, 1625. to the year, 1645. That
deliverance Time: Hitherto for born, (as it were, the Winds restraind) as since
Year, 1605 so long since that Powder-Blowe intended.

Revelation, CHAP. XIIII.
ANd thus, abrupt for Expedition sake; Farthermore a touch of This the final
blow, for the sake of his Chosen: As the Time shortn'^ in consideration of
which, the hastened END, So shows how the VVO^^^ ^^nistical Week abated, how
much, (...) the hour COME of HIS Judgem^nt: By that great ARMEY a hundred
forty and four Thousand, singing both one song, with the former sealed Number,
as Chap. the 7. informs: Extoling such a Year accomplished of our SALVATION,
with these harping The same Note, The year of our Redemption, 1644. to be
accomplished, Accompanying the Day of JVDGEMENTS hour, immediately which
follows, Who before hand tune the MARRIAGE-SONG, so all following the LAMB
whethersoever he goes. Also which Number includes the 4000. year of the world,
his Incarnation Then. Chap. 21

And so much for the Brid, prepared the LAMBS Wife: Compared to such a uniform
CITY; where a Hundred forty four Cubits the measured wall; (called Salvation,
Isaiah 60.) Namely, the aforesaid Year of GOD, and serves for Days and Hours
too, with the 4000. years of the World, our Saviors first Coming.

As here the MISTICALL-VVEEKE of six Thousand Years current, expressed in the
Number of the Lambs followers: The Hundred forty and four, etc. standing on
the Mount:

Even the Hours fulfilling of SIX DAYS, amounting to a hundred forty four
Hours; or Six times ^24 (or 12 times 12.) As the equal Hours distributed to
DAY and NJGHT about EASTER: And six days, and six thousand years, all one
with HIM Eternity, so much suffices.

Where also forty odd DAYS, (Chap. 14.) between Easter and Whitsontyd: By his
sitting on the WHITE CLOVD proclaimed, One like the Son of MAN crowned; (to
wit) Whitsontyds figure or expression:

As this for another, Cast in the same mould, (Chap. 19. and 20.) sealed with
Him that satt on the White HORSE, with his Albion-trayn. And again, He, who
satt on the great white Throne: from whose dreadful face, EARTH and HEAVEN
fled away; And hell and death delivering up iheir Prisoners, as the sand of the
SEA: as the World Then to receive Condign reward, NO better which have
improved their precious Talent of TJME, sixteen complete Centuries since OUR
blessed Saviors JNCARNATJON, proved by Scripture account.

Witness that Universal imposed Tax, in the Year ONE and FORTY of Caesar
August-reigne: Yet not like to the present heavy days since (1641) but
weighed: Of whose difficult Number 666. so obscure; The truth of it, even so
many Months as styled the Number of a MAN. And the Months of WOMAN her
Reckning too; As fullfils HIS 55. years Reign and a half. Wherein the
peacemaker, the Lamb of GOD, came into the World: So the cruel Beast, bearing
seven heads and ten horns (Chap. 13.) it being considered, who Needs to be
unresolved, who the MAN of sin; Or what Date that writing bears
(mistery-Babylon) Or whom it Concerns (Chap. 17.) No less then the LORDS
second Coming which points at it; The day of Judgments express Character, by
those Sabbaticall heads, and sinful horns ten: When as the MAN OF SIN, the
ROMAN Beast aged 17. Centuries. And the servants of the Lamb as sealed in the
foreheads with his Fathers Numbe^: Likewise the Beast with his mark, shows
what Communion his Factors have, with (...) their Father.

And thus in the 15. Year of Tiberius Reign, (as Saint Luke bears witness)
Our Savior about ^^ Years of age Then, That was about the age of Years 15,
When as Augustus HE deceased, since when the Month of August Continues in the
Name of the BEAST ever since; So then the aforesaid Months his Numbered
reign. Who that Other, with two Horns like a Lamb, That exercises all the
Power there, where NO Man buys or sels, etc. No more but referred to themselves.

So praise him the ancient of days, for ever more Day and Night, his ancient
servants, He that has beginning None or ending.

Lastly, for which premises concerning Prisoners araignd, These keys of
darkness, excluds Not these, of expressing the Churches power of binding and
loosing: As here The Model or pattern Thereof: What Discipline Agreeable with
the APOSTLES, Rules Included: where The PEOPLES approbation and Consent: As it
were shadowed under That Multitudes Holding up their HANDS, with Those Sealed
ELDERS Verdict or Judgment, joining Their Voices, saying; AMEN, etc. As
directed to Eastern and Western Churches both, (Verse 2) By that Angels
ascending from the East.

And thus concluding with the Number of his rageing Reign, the Antichristian
Beast: Even since that Sea Monster 88. With that Admirable Victory, Just 666.
months, or 55. Years and a half; So just and true are Thy ways: Thou King
of Saints.

FJNJS.

