AS not unknown. This Petition or Prophecy on record, presented to His
Majesty in the year 1633. Along time Though has waited, yet be it known was
accomplished, then this present year: 1644. When He on a Friday morning was
killed or suffered. Who little thought such a sopp prepared was for him to be
his Lords blow (Mat. 24.) The Lord of that servant shall come in a day and an
hour he looks not for. For supposing or saying he defers his coming, because
unknown the hour and day.

And shall cut him assunder, or as the word renders it, Cut of his head: to
wit, as much to say with that Hypocrite Judas, receives his portion due to him
or the same sentence.

Not dreamed of in his Diarie, where sets down the 19. of September 1633. He
was translated to be Arch BB. The Lords day by whose heigh authority was
translated into a Lawless day of Revells and drinking. And so fullfils these
also Revel. 17, 8. His Sabbaticall time: who was seven years complete, and
eight current Arch BB. of LAMBETH (or BETHLAM:) before his going into prison
rewarded as he had shut up and silenced others.

And as in His Majesty's reference, how presumptions so ever the imprinting
then seemd of those Books concerning the Lords coming reveald, etc. And this
Petition styled so detestable and odious to be preferrd yet since has proud
not so detestable as true, in applying great Babylons judgments to great
Britain, with that hand writing (Dan. 5.) dedicated to the present reign, or
his the last of the Assyrians weighed with this not more weak and found
wanting then since so carried was away.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTJE.
The humble Petition of the Lady Eleanor. 1633.
Most humbly shows to Your Matie.
THat the word of God spoken in the first year of Your happy reign unto the
Petitioner, upon Friday last did suffer early in the morning: the B: BEAST
ascended out of the Bottomless pit: having seven Heads, etc. seven Years,
viz: making War, has overcome, and killed them: Books sealed by the
Prophets. By the Bishop of Lambeth horned like the Lamb, hearted like a Wolf,
are condemned to be burned at Pauls-Crosse, where our Lord crucified, etc. This
is the third Day, that their dead Bodies shrouded in loose sheets of paper. Lie
in the streets of the Great City, etc. more cruel and hard hearted, then
other tongues and Nations, who will not suffer them so to be buried. If your
Highness please to speak the word, the spirit of life will enter into them,
they will stand upon their feet, etc.

Craving no other pardon, humbly as in duty bound shall pray for your Matie.

The word of God to the King, Revela: 17. October, 1633.

The BEAST that was, and is not: Even He is the eight, and is of the seven,
and goes into perdition.

At the Court at White Hall, October the 8. 1633.

His Majesty does expressly command the Lord Archbishop of Canterburyes Grace,
and his highness Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiastical: That the Petitioner
be forthwith called before them, to answer for presuming to Imprint the said
Books, and for preferring this detestable petition.

Sydney Mountague;
Concordat cum originale fact a'collatione, per me Thomam Maydwell, no librum
publium.

