READER,
THe heavy hour at hand, that it should not as a Thief surprise us in the
night, Babylons scattering whirlwind our final or utter blow; or lest should
say, There had not a Prophet been amongst them, could not refrain giving thee
warning, though like rolling the restles stone, prove but labor in vain.

Where Line upon Line, no vain repetition, styles them A house of Rebellion,
and Most Rebellious, Cap. ver. etc. Nay (as it were) had been sent to the house
of Austria their Churches, replied, Had long ere this in sackcloth and ashes;
or to a People of a deep lip, of another language, etc. The first fruits of
which Embassage, showing Israel being cut off, as by Ezekiel tasted of,
watchman over the rebellious house of Israel, made to eat the roll or writ,
Lamentation, Mourning and Woe, superscribed within and without; so by all signs
and tokens without doubt served on our three sinful Kingdoms, home charged with
open Rebellion, neither harkening to the Prophet bidden, stamp with the foot,
smite with the fist, with the breaking of thy loins sigh, their music but made
and song, The Lord of Hosts when uttering his thundering voice, roaring; as a
Lion, the tokens of his coming, an end come on the four corners of the earth,
ready to fall asleep, or sitting in the seat of scorners, All their elbows
grown to the pillows, they and their fathers.

And so farther informing whether silent or otherwise, as it came to pass in
the fifth year of such a Kings captivity accomplished (Ezekiel Cap. 1.) the
hand of the Lord when upon him, his word coming expressly to him, saw the great
Vision of God, he amongst the captives; Also from this place, the Kings Bench
Prison amongst this Society, give to understand, to accompany this warning
piece of the Turkish Armado's preparation, added a sign, as Isaiah sometime
gave one of the Suns going back so many degrees retiring, before their
captivity at hand foreshewed then; Another given of the Moon, from his giving
the Three half Moons, whose Army harbors at Argier, attending Sions being
delivered up into his possession: These Islands three to be under his lash of
Jurisdiction, drawn from which premises these, for his Crest or Coat-Arms who
gives the Half Moon, not far off his house called Sion, committed to whom three
prisoner Princes, one of no inferior estate, under Babylons Bashaws, typyfying
even our estate, those Mahometans our guardians, the third Earldom of this
Realm, assigned thereby to Algernon Earl of Northumberland by Name, sometime
Admiral of the Seas, paralleld with that Northern scourge, The Assyrian Army,
how given up into his protection the houses of the Lord.

And so much (Reader) for this flight of ours, and this new sign of the New
Moon going before it, where cannot pass over Ezekiels portraying our Cities
siege, showed by those battering rams or brazen Engines, so to the life their
swift doing execution; and dreadful wheels motion and thundering voice, in those
living creatures (as shadowed under the Seraphin work of the Tabernacles
Curtains, the Lord of Hosts Pavillion, each loop of which not without a
Mystery, as observable Fifty in one curtain, and fifty in the other, (Exodus
26.) containing the mystery of winged time, the midst of the Century, even
directed to, joined like those Cherubin wings of theirs.

And of this your day drawing near, whose silver and gold the stumbling block,
Author of unhappiness all, as he unto all the people of Judah, saying from such
a year of the King of Judah, even unto this day; that is, the Three and twenty
year (Jer. cap. 25.) Also the word of the Lord have I spoken unto you, rising
early, but, etc.

1648. 23. of the present Reign.
FINIS.

