THE DOWNFALL of the Fifth Monarchy. OR, The personal Reign of Christ on Earth,
confuted.

Discovering the desperate and dangerous Principles and Designs of these
frenzy-conceited men of the Fifth Monarchy; who pretending to do the work of
their generations, seek to involve these Nations again in blood and misery, had
not the Lord prevented them in their design; With a brief manifestation of the
true generation work which every good Christian ought to do.

JOH. 18. 36. My Kingdom (says our Savior) is not of this World. LUKE 19.
14. We will not have this man to reign over us. small image of lion The Lord
has roused them up.



London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion in the Old Bailey, 1657.

THere is lately published a most excellent, pious, and profitable Book,
entitled, Christ's first Sermon; or the necessary duty, and Christian practice
of Repentance.

Also, five other small Books, of singular worth and use for hese times. The
one is called The Plain Man's plain Path way to Heaven, directing every one how
they may be saved. A second, The Charitable Christian, or Comfort and Council
both to the Rich and Poor. A third, Dooms day at band; or the great Day of the
Lord drawing nigh. A tourth The Devils Discase or the sin of Pride arraigned
and condemned. The fifth and last is called, The Black Book of Conscience. Very
seasonable for these licentious times, and are but of two pence a piece price.
All to be sold by John Andrews, at the White Lion in the Old Baily.

Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord has propered his throne in the heaven and his
Kingdom uleth over all. Psalm. 245. 13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom
and thy dominion endures throughout all ages. Heb. 1. 9. But unto the Son,
says he, thy chrone O God is for ever and ever a Scepter of reghteousness is
the Scepter of thy Kingdom.
THe great design of the Devil beloved in all ages, has been to undermine the
Church and People of God, and to seduce poor souls, by drawing and entising
them into most desperate and gross errors; the better to do this, he sometimes
ransforms himself into an Angel of Light; which design of his, as it has been
vatiously carried on and managed in all. Ages, so most especially in this last
and worst ^ge of the world, wherein we live.

Among many other stratagems and devices which the Devil has to delude people,
one main if not chief design of his, has been to exalt his Kingdom by
infusing strange and unheard of principles and opinions into the hearts and
minds of men, in which exploit of his he has very notably, like a cunning
deceiver acted his part in this last age of the world in which we live, witness
his notable delusions of thousands of poor ignorant souls into strange and
unheard of principles: among many other, our late Quakers in whom how greatly
he has prevailed, the Lord knows has too too evidently been seen in our days
-- but the folly and madness of these simple sottish deluders and deceivers,
has been sufficiently declared to the world.

Another sort more seeming wise and confident then these, are such as now among
us, are known by the name of Fifth Monarchy men, that are for their generation
work, as they sa^, but not in their actions; whose windy principles, by reason
of the eminency of some chief deluders of that Sect, has not a little poisoned
and infected the minds and spirits of many thousands of malecontented persons
among us, and this Leven of their false doctrine has so wrought with them, as
that they dare desperately set themselves to throw down and oppose all, both
Government and Governors, that shall stand in the way of their designs; under
pretense of setting up the Kingdom of Christ in the earty, and doing the works
of their generation as if they would cross God himself, and appoint him what
Government and Governors he shall set up; Who sets up one, and pulls down
another, and there is nothing that may say unto him, what do thou; but as
God has discovered and disowned, as well in his providential actings as in his
holy word, the designs of all other deluders hitherto, blessed be God, so
likewise has he now of late the design of those overconfident and
self-opinionated persons, who cry up the personal reign of Christ, on earth and
doing the works of their generation, the great work wherein these
super-confident men have most busied and employed both their wits and parts,
has been mainly to throw down whatsoever in the world crosses or opposerh
their designs.

Witness that notable, but perniticus design of theirs lately on foot, against
the Ministers and Ministry of Christ, a most notable and cunning device of the
Devil, in which most destructive design, the Devil and all his instruments are
most deeply engaged in, but as God was then pleased to blast that wretched
design of theirs, against the whole Ministry and School of good learning, so I
hope he will still be pleased to ensnare them in all their undertakings
whatsoever. The great policy of these men is to lay down all, both Learning
Ministry, and Governors though never so just and right as Antichristian and
Babylonish, thereby I ying an odium as it were upon the ways and institutions
of Christ himself, that so by their specious pretenses they may work themselves
and their doctrines into the good opinions of such, whose affections (like
filly people) are itching after Novelty. But how greatly Antichristian these
men are in those and all other their designs, I shall here endeavor, God
willing, to manifest and declare to all the world.

First, these generation Workmen both in their Writings and preaching, labor
to possess men's minds, heads and hearts, with fond faneies and conceits of the
Personal of Reign of Christ for a thousand years upon earth; which doctrine is
both erroneous and also Antichristian, having no foundation or footing in the
blessed Word of God, and is also derogatory to the honor and dignity of the
Lord Jesus Christ himself. For our Savior Christ himself Joh. 18. 36. says
expressly, that his Kingdom is not of this world; And if not of this world,
then no personal reign upon earth.

Secondly Jesus Christ when he left the world, ascended (...) heaven and is
there sat down at the right hand of God the Father; from whence he will not
return till such time as he shall come to judgment. I will come again (says
Christ Joh. 14. 3. to his Disciples) but mark the words, it shall be not to
reign personally upon earth with you but to receive you to my self, that where
I am there ye may be also, which is at the right hand of God the Father, in
heaven.

We have not any one place or text of Scripture which mentions any coming of
Christ to reign upon earth in his humane nature personally, which these men
fondly dream of: We read indeed of a second coming of Christ, but then it is
to judgment, Jude 14. 15. Behold the Lord comes (says the Text) with ten
thousands of his Saints to execuee judgment upon all, and to convince all, And
Psalm. 96. 13. For lo he comes, for he comes, faith the Psalmist; but it is
not personally to reign, but to judge the earth: Even so come Lord Jesus come
quickly. I deny not but that the Lord Jesus Christ shall in these latter days
have amost glorious Kingdom in the world, but then it shall be a spiritual and
holy Kingdom in the hearts and lives of his people. And thus has Christ
reigned in some measure more or less, ever since his coming in the flesh, yea
ever since the beginning of the world; and thus, and thus only shall Christ
reign, till we all come to reign with him in heaven. For he must reign, says
the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. till he has put all his enemies under his feet.

Likewise also consider, how detogarory this doctrine of an earthly reign, is
to the honor and dignity of the Lord Jesus Christ, what is Christ gone to
heaven, there to live and reign as Lord and King for ever with his Father, and
shall men conceit or imagine that he shall leave his Fathers glory, and a most
glorious and heavenly Kingdom for an earthly Kingdom! Certainly this is a most
gross absurdity, and great affront to the honor and dignity of the Lord Jesus
Christ thus to conceit: is not he King over all, and does he not rule in the
Kingdoms of men? Is not the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and shall any
ignoble him so as have him to have but an earthly Kingdom, to rule and govern
like a Monarch in the world? O horrible indignity. This fond conceit of Christ
personal reign upon earth, may be likened to the fond conceit and blind opinion
of the Jews, who looking for the glorious coming of Christ as their King, to
live and reign as a King and Monarch upon earth, could not stoop so low as to
see him lying in a manger; which fond opinion of theirs, they were and are even
at this very day so confident of, that they both flight and despise the coming
of Christ indeed; and so I pray God out Monarchical generation. Workmen, who
would pull down Christ from his throne in Heaven to set him up upon earth, I
pray God, I say, that these men be not found to be the men that resist and
withstand both the Kingdom and power of Jesus Christ, Certainly these men's
doctrines, let them say what they will, are altogether Antichristian and
abominable.

Another design of these generation Workmen, in which they have not been a
little active, is to cry down all institution of Government both in Church and
State, though never so sacred, as Antichristian and unlawful thereby seeking
like cunning Engineers, to undermine both Religion and Government in its very
foundation; but how Antichristian and unlawful the designs and actings of
these very men themselves are, is not a little apparent: Has God in his word
set up Governors and Government in the world, and as he himself says, it is
by him that Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, and shall these men in
their blind zeal go about to throw them down? Did Christ himself and all his
Disciples after him pray for, and quietly submit themselves in all godliness
and honesty, to the government of these men when they lived, giving them all
honor, and paying tribute and custom to them, and shall Mr. Feak and Mr.
Rogers and others of this generation, preach against and pray against all
Government and Governors? O horrible Antichristian doctrine: Do these men
preach the Gospel? certainly no. Does the word of God, 1 Timothy 2. 2 commend men
that are in authority, and shall these men go about to pull down all rule and
authority? May we, if we our selves will, lead a quiet and peaceable life under
our Governors and government, in all godliness and honesty, and shall we with
tumults go about to embroil our selves and the whole Nation in blood and
misery? Does the word of God Romans 13. 1, 2. say expressly, that there is no
power but of God, and that the powers which now are are of God, who sets up
and pulls down whom he pleases, and shall these men say they are not of God
but of Antichrist? Certainly this is no other then to give God the lie. Must we
be subject (as the word of God says) not only for wrath but for conscience
sake, and shall men under vain pretenses of they know not what, refuse to yield
subjection, and contrive, plot and conspire against them and their authority?
What is this but instead of setting of Christ up to reign, but to pull Christ
down from his throne? Are not these then strange and unheard of doctrines? the
Lord convince them of their folly, and give them a sight and sense of their
errors.

Another doctrine and design of these men altogether as derogatory from the
truth as the other, is this; That that the government of the world shall be
invested into the hands of the Saints, of whom they think themselves to be
chie^; which doctrine how pernicious and destructive it has been, former ages
have sadly experienced. I confess it were a good thing and desirable, and I
would to God it might so be, that all Governors whatsoever might be good and
upright men, men fearing God and hating covetousness, that our Princes may be
Peace, and our Exactors righteousness, that so judgment and justice might run
down like a mighty stream; this indeed were a good thing, and a thing greatly
to be desired, and which indeed ought to be endeavored after by all: And I
could wish that all those whose right it is both to choose and constitute
Officers of all sorts, would on all occasions make choice of such men. But to
teach or maintain that Saints as Saints ought to bear rule in the world, is
derogatory from the rule of Scripture, and would be pernicious if not
destructive to all humane society.

Lastly, I wish those men themselves thus engaged in the work of their
generation (as they say) and all others, seriously to consider how greatly they
advance thy Kingdom of Satan above the Kingdom of Christ; for it is the Devils
doctrine to preach down government and Governors, it is his work to pull down
Ministers and Ministry: yea, it is the Devils main design to root out of the
world both Ministry and Magistracy, and all other Schools of Learning, good
education, and knowledge; for it is the Ministers by their preaching the Gospel,
that oppose the Kingdom of Satan. And it is not a little considerable, how
highly these men go about to gratify as well the bloody Papists, as the Devil
also; what more can the Devil or the Papists wish or desire, then to see
Learning and knowledge taken away from among us? who then shall be able to
resist or gainsay their ridiculous, soul-damning, desperate doctrine, and
tradition? how soon then will men be infected with the poison of Popery? and
how easily may men be drawn aside, when there is none to guide or iustruct them
in the ways of truth? men are of themselves too too apt to be led aside with
error, and they must needs fall into the snares of the Devil when they neither
see it nor hear of it; and as for the Devil, how greatly does he rejoice at
such workings as these?

Certainly these generation workmen, I mean those of the Fifth Monarchy, would
save the Devil a great deal of labor, if they could but beat down Ministry and
Magistracy, which is the great work which the Devil has been doing ever since
he was a Devil: if once that work were done, then he might easily go on without
contradiction in deluding and deceiving poor souls. The Lord prevent both him
and them, and still keep up a Gospel Ministry, a powerful preaching Ministry
in the world, especially in these nations, which I am confident shall be even to
the end of the world so long as there is a soul to save, there shall be, in
despite of the Devil and all his instruments, a Minister to preach salvation;
for Ephesians. 4. 11. Christ gave some Prophets, some Apostles some Pastors, and
some Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
which must continue to the end of the world. But these men will say, they would
pull down Antichristian Ministers and Learning, of which sort they account all
our learned, reverend, and godly Divines; yet they would set up a more heavenly
way of preaching, which should be all by the inspiration of the spirit, without
either learning, gifts or tongues: Certainly these men do not know what spirit
they are of themselves. What ground or promise is there in all the word of God
for any such extraordinary inspirations and infusions of the spirit which these
men dream of? Does not the spirit of God say, To the Law and to the Testimony?
And ye do well (says St. Peter) to take heed to the word, as to a light that
shines in dark places. In the Epistle to Timothy, St. Paul advises Timothy to
give attendance to reading to exhortation, and to doctrine, and not to neglect
the gift that was in him: But certainly these men would not only deceive
themselves, but also the whole Nation. And should these men (which God forbid)
these generation workmen, have but their wills and ways, what fad and
disorderly doings should we have? where should we look for justice, conscience,
or honesty among men, seeing the spirits of these men are by Divine
inspiration, as they say? Certainly, in stead of having our generation work
done, we should have Satan's design carried on, which would be to kill and
destroy all that shall gainsay them, which the Lord forbid.

I shall conclude all with this exhortation to all men, first, to fear God; and
secondly, to submit peaceably and quietly to all that are in authority over us,
that we living peaceably under them, may lead a godly, quiet, and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty; and not to plot or conspire either directly
or indirectly against either the persons or power of those under whom we live,
whom God has set over us to rule and execute authority over us for good. The
good Lord either convert or confound the devices of all those that bear evil
will to the peace and prosperity of these three Nations, and continue
Government and Governors amongst us, both Ministry and Magistracy, in despite
of all opposers: And the good Lord grant that none may be suffered under
pretense of the Kingdom of Christ upon earth, to set up themselves as Christ's
Deputies to rule and reign. And my desire is, that all the Kingdoms of the
world may become the Kingdoms of Christ, I mean spiritually, not in a
Monarchical manner; that Christ may live and reign in our hearts by the power
of his grace and spirit, in a more heavenly life and conversation, that so we
may every one of us submit to the blessed Scepter of his Kingdom, which is a
Scepter of righteousness and holiness, peace and quietness; not of envy or
malice, hatred or revenge: that so we may every one of us be doing the works
of our generation, which is not to raise tumults and commotions in the world,
but to live peaceably and quietly in those places and conditions which God has
set us in, submitting our selves (as the Apostle says) to the higher powers,
and, as we are bound to pray for them; giving to all their due, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13.
7. as we have Christ and his Apostles for our examples, that the name of Christ
and Religion may not be evil spoken of; and as for the Government of the world,
let us leave that to God, who alone pulls down and sets up: Let it be our
work and our business to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling,
that so we may at the end of our days receive the end of our faith, even the
salvation of our souls.

You have seen now what the Kingdom of Christ is, an holy and heavenly
Kingdom, not a carnal and earthly Kingdom, as vain men fondly conceive, but
an eternal Kingdom in the highest Heaven. Let us therefore receiving this
Kingdom which cannot be moved, have grace in our hearts, whereby we may serve
God acceptably with fear and reverence, Heb 12. 28. that so after this sinful
life is ended, we may live and reign with Christ for ever in the world to come.

AMEN.
FINIS

