A DEFENSE AND VINDICATION of the Right of TITHES, Against sundry late
scandalous Pamphlets: SHOWING, The lawfullnesse of them, and the just Remedy in
Law for them, as well in London as elsewhere.

MAL. 3.8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye say, Wherein have
we robbed thee? in Tithes and offerings. Penned by a Friend to the Church of
England, and a lover of Truth and Peace.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, dwelling in the Blackfriars, 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ADAMS, Lord Major of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
IT is storied of Diogenes (a wise Philosopher, though a sullen Cynick) that
when he was about to dis, he desired his friends about him to bury him after
his death with his face downward; they thinking this request to proceed rather
from his humor then from his wisdom, demanded of him the reason; he told
them, That very shortly the world would be turned upside down, and then his
face would lie upward: I need not apply this story, your Lordship is no
stranger in this our Israel, and cannot but observe this manner of Change, you
now sitting at the Helm for the government of this goodly City, I had almost
said Nation (for England is in London at this day.)

I will not speak of that lovely Gemini, Religion and Law, which in the
judgment of V^i Religio est ibi bon^ mores, and bona disciplina, etc. Sublata
vera R^ligione cor^^ere Re^r. necesse est: Quta sublato timore Dei sequ tur
impietas, and ex ca ruina Imperiorum. Match. lib. ^. in Dec. l. iv. c. 11. Psalm.
4^.
Machiavell himself do rise and fall together: I will only call upon your
Lordship with the Prophet, to come and behold the works of the Lord, what
alterations he has made in this great City of London; which I have sometimes
known, as a City like Jerusalem, at unity within it self: not a convicted
Recusant, nor a notorious Heretic or Schismatic to be found within the walls
of that City. London, whose twelve Companies, like the twelve Tribes of Israel,
were wont to go up by multitudes to the House of God, not in the sound of a
Trumpet and Alarm of war, but with the joifull voices of Peace and Praise,
like those that kept holy day. London, whose Lord Majors sword was almost as
formidable within that City, as the Scepter without. But is London so now? I
will say no more, but weep out the rest for that City where I was born and
bred, and where I have spent most of my days; whose prosperity and welfare I
have ever sought, Quae peccatis perijt, stetibus stetit. Jer. Epist al D^n^^ium.
and shall daily pray for, in the sense of Jerome concerning Nineveh, that what
sin had thrown down from the firmness of rocks, grace might re-establish in
the softness of tears.

The subject of this ensuing discourse (being in the number of those things
that are turned upside down) is no stranger to your Lordship (though the
Author be) and cranes your patronage which in justice you cannot tell how to
deny, your Lordship being appointed by the Law of the Land the sole Chancellor
and Judge of Tithes in London (a felicity beyond all the Kingdom besides, where
the Law is at this day somewhat loose and unsettled, but only in London.)

Fourteen years are not yet elapsed and gone, since it was a common Question
among the Divines of England, not whether Tithes were due, but whether they
were not due jure divino. Since it was accounted a most pious and religious
work, in diverse of your Lordships predecessors, to be appointed Trustees for
the buying in of Impropriations of Tithes, and restoring them to the Church.
Since conscientious men could not die peaceably in their beds, till they had
made restitution of subtracted Tithes. But now of late, a strange New-light
has appeared to a generation of men, displeased with old Truths; not such a
light as appeared to the Wisemen leading them to Christ, Mat. 2.11.
and presenting him with their gold, frankincense and myrrh, but such a kind
of light as appeared to the soldiers, by which they took our Savior in the
night, and stripped him of all he had: Joh. 18 3.
These men in their Petitions to your Lordship, confidently tell you (for they
seldom speak modestly) that Tithes are Popish, yea Jewish, and therefore to he
abolished; the endowment of Churches by them, superstitious; the withholding of
them, lawful; and the payment of them, injurious. Whether Will not this spirit
of error (in the appearance of an Angel of light) at last lead them? nay, unto
what height has it not already carried them, when they can turn Beast into
Best, and plead for a very Saul to be a true Paul?

My Lord, Fame has reported you to be a Judge of the old Portraiture, To have
an Eagles eye, by an exact and diligent search into the Cause before you; a
Ladies hand in the transaction of Causes with much tenderness and compassion;
and a Lions heart, to break the jaws of the wicked, and to pluck the prey out
of their teeth.

God and the Law, by diners ancient and late Charters, which the Kings and
Princes of this Nation, in their grace and favor have granted to the City of
London (which they made and called their Chamber) have armed your Lordship with
Power to do great things: if you exercise it with your Parts, no Garrisons
either of schism or sin, can long hold out in this City.

In this great accomplishment I need not prompt your Lordship what to do, I
doubt not but you will make it your study, your care, your duty, to purge this
City from that accursed and execrable sin of Sacrilege, by causing the maws
of such guilty persons (like the belly of Ionahs whale) to disgorge the law
full patrimony of the Church; that the blessing of him that was ready to
perish, may come upon you, and that you may cause the hearts of the poor
Ministers of London to sing for joy; that your days may be multiplied as the
sand, and when they expire, that God may then make you to die in your nest,
leaving a blessed memorial behind you.

It was the praise of Constantine the Great, to be called the Advocate of Gods
Church, which be thought a greater glory to him, then to be Emperor of the
whole world. And let it be a greater Honor to the great Lord Major of London
(for so has bis Office made him) to be accounted the Churches Advocate, in
helping the Ministers of London to their just Patrimony, then to be Governor
in Chief of that great City; which Honor, let it be the portion and
inheritance of your Lordship, and of your virtuous Successors for ever; So
prays he that makes it his utmost ambition, to be to your Lordship and to
that whole City, an

Avowed obliged servant, (...).

Imprimatur

May the 9th 1646. John Downame.

A DEFENSE OF TITHES.
THE common Law of England, K. James Parl. Speech, 1609.
the best Law for this Nation in the world (as might easily be proved, were it
incident to the argument I have in hand) does lay forth all it is interest and
jurisdiction in the preservation and maintenance of three things, The just
privileges and preeminences of the Crown of England, The just rights of the
Church of England, And the just rights and liberties of the people of England.
The first is called by the Register of Writs, Pririlegium Regis, or Jus Regium.
The second is called, Jus Ecclesiae, or Jus Ecclepasiasticum. The third is
called, Jus Populi, or Libertates Angliae. These three make up the whole body
of the common Law, a Law so peaceable for the keeping all these three in unity,
that for this very cause it is, by the ancient Laws of this Realm, styled by
the name of Peace; Pax Dei, in reference to the rights of the Church, Pax
Regis, in reference to the rights of the King, and Pax Regni, in reference to
the rights of the people. I shall write only of the first, and but of some part
of that neither, viz. concerning the endowments of the Church with Glebe and
Tithes, by occasion of diverse late scandalous Pamphlets, or rather Pasquils,
calling them Jewish, Popish, Antichristian, etc. scarce fit to be named, less
fit to be answered with any other answer, then that of Seneca, Solocontemptu
respondere.

He that reproves a scorner, Pror. 9.
says Solomon, gets himself a blot, which falls out especially where a
man is to deal with the Vulgar, more fitted to quarrel then to judge, and much
apter to wrangle, then to resolve, whose discourses when you shall have raked
into the^ to the very bottom, you shall find more slanders of truth then
objections against it, and scandals in stead of arguments. And to strive with
such kind of men, whose contention is more for victory, then for truth, the
match is not equal; which has made me often to pity the lot of many learned
men in these days, who for their religious and painful writings against
Sectaries, have received no other rewards of their labors then those that
meddle with wasps. And therefore I will at present answer all their erroneous
papers concerning Tithes, ostendendo veritatem, by holding forth the truth to
all that will see it, the light whereof, if it appear not to them, it is
because their minds are either darkened through ignorance, or obstinated with
error; like those men who in a clear Sunshine see no light, because they are
either naturally blind, or wilfully close their eyes. Veritas (says the
Philosopher) est index sui and obliqui. I shall therefore in this short
discourse handle only two things.

1. That Tithes are justly and lawfully due to Ministers under the Gospel.
2.That those Ministers have a just remedy in Law to recover them in all places,
and particularly in London.
For the opening and understanding of the first, it would not be impertinent to
handle four things.

1. The original of Tithes. 2. By whom, and to whom they ought to be paid. 3.
Out of what things they are to be paid. And 4. By what right Tithes are due:
wherein there is a great controversy and a large dispute between the
Schoolmen, the Canonists, the Civilians and Casuists, whether Tithes be due
jure Divino, or jure Canonice, or jure Imperatorio, or jure mixto. But I intend
a short discourse, and not a volume. All these things are handled at large in
Summa Rosella, and Summa Angelica, in Azorius, Navarra, Rebuffus, Linwood, and
others; and therefore. I shall pass them over, all of them agreeing in this,
that Tithes are rightfully due to Churchmen, and the detension of them is no
less crime then sacrilege. I will only apply my self to show by what right
the endowment of Churches by Tithes and Glebe are due here in England, a Nation
that exceeds any in the world for liberality and bounty to Clergymen (which is
an ancient and very proper name for Ministers of the Gospel ordained to that
function, as I shall show anon.)
For the clearing of which I shall lay down these grounds.

First, That in all ages of the world, as well in the time of the Gospel, as in
the time of the Law, holy and devout men, not out of superstition or blind
zeal, but out of conscience and honor to Almighty God, whom they served, and
in duty to him the supreme Lord of their earthly substance, as well as of their
souls and bodies, have ever given and bestowed upon him and his service, as a
free gift, some part and portion of their goods and possessions. And the first
that in the book of God we find to have offered in this kind, were two of the
holiest men that ever trod upon Gods earth, Abraham and Jacob; the one the
father of all the faithful; the other of all the twelve Tribes of Israel; and
that which they both pitched upon in their gifts, were Tithes. For Abaham, says
the Text, gave to Melchisedech Priest of the high God Tithe of all, Genesis 14.20.
and Jacob in his journey to Haran vowed a vow to God, that if he would be with
him, and bless him in that journey, Of all that thou shall give (said he, Genesis
28.22.) I will surely give the Tenth unto thee. Whether these two Patriarks did
this by instinct of nature (the very Heathen, according to Pliny in his Not.
hist. lib. 12. doing the like) or whether by a divine comparison they thought
it not as fit a proportion to give to God a tenth of their goods, as a seventh
of their time; or whether there being at that time no law written, nor Prophet
to instruct them, they were not taught of God so to do (with whom they had
familiarity by his frequent apparitions to them) and as a proportion which he
afterward would require and command to be given to Levi, one of their
children, and to his posterity, out of which he chose the Priesthood, I will
not now dispute it. After this, they and their posterity built Altars and
Tabernacles to God, and Solomon built him a sumptuous Temple, the glory of the
world, and the infinite riches that were given to these in Cedars, Shittim
wood, marble, brass, iron, silver, gold, precious stones, etc. are invaluable.
In the time of the Gospel, and at such time as the Church was in persecution,
as in the times of the Apostles (all of them suffering martyrdom, says
Dorotheus, but John the Evangelist) the first Christians sold* all their
possessions, and gave the price of them to God, laying them down at the
Apostles feet, Act. 4. And since the days of persecution, when the Church of
God had rest and peace, those most Christian Emperors Constantine and
Theodosius, what by the Churches and Temples they built and dedicated to God,
the large and liberal endowments of them with Glebe and Tithes, the honor and
respect they gave to Churchmen, the strict Laws they made for the quiet
enjoyment of those endowments, and against the alienation of them from the
Church, have rendered them famous for piety and virtue to all posterity. And
here in England, about an hundred years before, Lucius the first Christian
King; and first anointed in the world, and diverse more Kings of England, long
before the days of superstition (which I will not meddle with, abhorring
superstition as much as any) followed the same pattern, and the first words of
their Charters and grants, began like that of Magna Charta, Mag Ch^ chapter 1.
Concessimus Deo and Ecclesiae.

2. The second ground is this, That the Law of God penned by Moses, concerning
the payment of Tithes to the Levites, from whom were the Priesthood, as to the
letter of that Law, as it refers to a precise tenth part of the fruits of the
earth, neither more nor less, and the manner of the payment of it, in relation
to the sacrifices of the old Law, is merely Ceremonial, and abrogated by
Christ, who being a living Sacrifice, put an end to these dead ones under
Moses; but as to the equity of Tithes, that a competent portion (I do not say,
quota pars, a just tenth, but quanta pars, a fit maintenance) should out of the
fruits of the earth be allowed for the livelihood and support of the
Evangelicall Priesthood under Christ, which came in lieu of the Leviticall
Priesthood under Moses, it is moral and lasts to this day. This I prove by the
Law it self, Numb. 18.21. Behold, I have given the children of Levi all the
tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service* which they serve, even
the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. This was the reason of that
Law, now that kind of Priesthood being changed, and a better come in the room,
and such who serve at a better Tabernacle, and at a better Altar, being Christ
himself (for so he is called, Heb. 13.10.) and who offers a better Sacrifice to
God then the Leviticall Priesthood, even a Sacrifice of praise to God
continually, as the same Apostle speaks, Heb. 13.15. It is great reason that
these, performing the same service in substance, should partake of the same, or
like wages. This is the very Argument of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
Do not you know (says he) that they which minister about holy things, live of
the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar are partakers of the
Altar? even so has the Lord ordained, that those which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. This will better appear by comparing the Law of
Tithes with other things under the Law, which are now abrogated by the Gospel
as to the Ceremony, but as to the substance and morality remain to this day. I
will, in stead of many, give but two or three instances.

1. The Law of the Sabbath by the fourth Commandment, tied men to the
observation of a seventh day, which seventh day the Jews observed from the
first day of the Creation, this, as to that day, is now as much abrogated as
the payment of Tithes to the Levites; there is no precept in all the new
Testament for altering of that day to the first day of the week, but only the
constant custom of the Church, ever since the time of Christ. Is therefore the
morality of the Sabbath gone? God forbid. Here might I take occasion to commend
the Church of England above any reformed Church in the world, for the holy
observation of this day; but I will not digress. And therefore, I say, as the
morality of the Sabbath still continues, as to give God one day in seven for
his worship, so, I say, the morality of the Law of Tithes, as to a fit
maintenance for Gods Ministers that attend the worship, continues to this day
in England, and I hope ever will. 2. The Law of Circumcision, as to the cutting
off of the foreskin of the flesh in Infants, is merely Ceremonial; but yet
the morality of it, as to baptizing of Infants, still continues, and yet there
is no precept in the Gospel for baptizing of Infants. 3. The like instance is
in the Paschall Lamb, abrogated as to that Ceremony, but still continues, as to
the celebration of the Lords Supper, which comes in the room thereof; from both
which may be concluded strong inferences of reason for the continuance of
Tithes in that sense I have expressed of them.
3. The third ground is this, that this way of maintenance of Churchmen by
Tithes, is the most ancient, and the most just way that can be named.

1. For the first, it is as old as Melchisedech Priest to the Ancient of days,
and from the time of the Law; and all the time of Christianity, it has
continued a constant Church-maintenance thorowout Christendom, till the
Reformation of Religion in the days of Luther and Calvin. In those places of
reformed Religion, where the Reformation was orderly, which are far the
greater number, that kind of maintenance continues to this day. But where it
was done by popular tumult and power of the Sword, that kind of maintenance
was taken away, and with it the very Churches themselves, and the most part of
their revenues.

2. Secondly, It is most just. There were three principle reasons why Tithes
were to be paid to the Levites of the Law. The first, in respect of their
persons. The second, in regard of their work. And the third, in regard of their
wages.

1. For the first, The Law is given in Numb. 18.20. and Deuteronomy. 10.9. that Levi
was not to have any inheritance in the Land, like the other Tribes; for that
God was his part and inheritance, and they were his, and that they should
wholly depend upon him, not upon the gifts of men; which he showed, in that he
gave them their maintenance by the increase of the fruits of the earth, being
an act of his immediate providence, all the men in the world being not able to
make the smallest herb of the field to grow. And is not this the case of Levi
under the Gospel? Are not the Ministers under the Gospel truly, and properly,
and very anciently called, Clerus Domini, the Lords portion or inheritance, for
these two reasons? First, As the Levites were separated from the rest of the
Tribes for the Lords Sanctuary: So are Ministers under the Gospel separated
from all the people by Ordination from God in imposition of hands. The Text for
this is very plain, Act. 13.1, 2, 3. For when at the Church of Antioch certain
Prophets and teachers were met; amongst whom was Barnabas and Saul (afterward
called Paul) As these ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them, etc.
Here is the proper sense of the word (...), Gods lot or inheritance, in that
they are separated by the holy Ghost to God, and to his service.

2. As the Tithes which the Levites received out of the fruits of the earth
were called Gods portion: so are the Tithes paid to Churchmen under the
Gospel, frequently called Gods portion, or patrimonium Ecclesiae.

2. The second reason why Tithes were paid to the Levites, was for their work
and continual attendance at his Altar, for they were either praying or
sacrificing, or preparing for the sacrifice all the day long, and therefore
they were not to be troubled with plowing and sowing, and other labors that
should hinder them from the Sanctuary. And does not the same reason hold for
Ministers under the Gospel? are they not in the work of the Ministry, to be
instant in season and out of season. The ancient Fathers in the Primitive times
(I will not say it is so now) were either praying or preaching, or writing, or
studying, all the days of their lives, and meddled not with secular businesses;
And this is the reason why by the Statute of 21 Hen. 8. chap. 13. Ministers are
not to take Lands to farm, under the pain of ten Pounds a Month, that they
might not be distracted in their Ministerial function, in preaching and
teaching Gods Word, as it is expressed in that Statute: and this is the cause why
the maintenance by Tithes was provided for them, as having the least
distraction in it. A man may take Tithes (as the English proverb is, in his
shirt) The meaning is, there is no plowing, nor sowing, nor mowing in the
gathering up of Tithes: nor any such toylsom labor, as to wear out his old
clothes, nor at such a time of the year, as to put him to the charge to buy new.

3. The third reason is in respect of their wages, as their persons were to be
holy, so their wages were to be just. The hire of a whore, and the price of a
dog, was not to be brought into the house of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23. If the
payments had been made to them, or to Ministers now, in sums of money, they
might have been the wages of bribery, extortion and oppression: But their wages
were to arise out of the innocent and harmles fruits of the earth, whose
natural productions are not guilty of any manner of bribery or corruption.

4. My fourth and last ground is this; Admitting there were no Law of nature to
warrant that duty, of giving part of our goods and possessions to God and his
Church, nor no ground in Scripture to warrant that Law, yet when such things
are by solemn and deliberate Acts of men, and sometimes by instruments under
their hands and seals given to God, they remain the proper possession of God to
the worlds end, and cannot be alienated, nor taken away from that pious use to
which they were given; if they be, God accounts it as a robbery done to him.
When things are given to God and his service, the property of those things are
in God, and so he accounts of them: When Solomon built him a Temple, and
dedicated it to his worship, God calls it his; My house, says he, shall be
called the house of prayer. And as God thus accounts of the things given to
him, so was it the intent and meaning of all those that honored him with these
gifts to invest him with the whole property and interest of them: In which
respect the style of ancient Graunts and Charters run according to that of
Mag. Charta. cap. 1. We have given to God, for us and our heirs, etc. We know
says Charles the great, Cap. Car. lib. 6.
that the goods of the Church, are the sacred indowments of God. To the Lord
our God we offer and dedicate whatsoever we deliver to his Church: And the
taking away of such things from the use they were given, has been in all ages,
and by all Laws accounted Sacrilege.

And so was the Law of Nations, as appears by that Law of the 12. Tables,
Sacrum sacrove commendatum qui d^mpserit rapseritve paricida esto: He that
shall take away any sacred thing, or that is given to a sacred use, let him be
accounted a Parricide; And we know that Annanias and Saphirah were for this
cause smitten with death, and the reason was given, because that after they had
given the ownership to God, the price of their Lands was not their own. And who
ever shall but read the solemn execrations, used in those ancient Charters of
Church-endowments, against those that shall alienate them to other uses: a man
would wonder, how any man durst presume to fetch but a stick from that Altar to
kindle his own fire; lest it should utterly waste and consume his habitation
for ever.

We may observe by daily experience, in the ordinary cases of Charitable uses,
upon the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 4. When Lands or goods are given by men for
the mending of a Highway, or the repairing of a Bridge, if the Trustees for
this charitable use, shall turn this gift to their own private profit, it is in
Law a misimployment, contrary to the intention of the donour, for which they
forfeit their trust, and other men shall by the Commissioners be put in their
rooms, and their estates shall be answerable for that misimployment: Nay if
they bestow this gift upon a more pious use, as the repair of a Church, the
maintenance of a Preacher. etc. yet this is a misimployment, because it was not
according to the mind of the donour, whose intention is in this case of such
esteem in Law, that all Decrees made by Commissioners upon that Statute, if
they be against the apparent intention of the donour are void, whose intention
is so respected in Law, that rather then it shall not be performed, the
fundamental rules of Law shall not be observed: as to give one example in
stead of many. By the rule of Law, Copy hold Land cannot be aliend but by
surrender, but yet if. a man devise Land, not formerly surrendered to a
charitable use, 15 Iac. Rivers Case in Cane.
yet this is good, and shall be construed an appointment to a Charitable use
within the Statute of 4* Eliz. though by the rules of Law it could not pass
without surrender. How much more is the Law of England careful to preserve the
endowments of the Church, given to the highest uses, wherein the founders are
so careful to preserve them in the continuance of those uses, that you shall
commonly find in the end of their Charters of grant, words to this effect; If
any shall take away, or apply to any other use, that which I have here given,
let him be Anathema, and let his account be without mercy at the dreadful day
of judgment, when he shall receive his doom from the Judge of Heaven and
earth, to whom I dedicate the same.

And thus have I done with my Grounds, in all which, as likewise throughout my
whole discourse, I desire to be only understood concerning Tithes and Glebe,
being the only subject matter of this Treatise, and the only things now opposed
by those Pamphlets.

These four grounds being laid, it will now be no difficult matter to prove the
first head I laid down, viz.

That Tithes are justly and lawfully due to Ministers under the Gospel.

First, They are due to them by the Law of the Gospel, that Law which the
Apostle Paul calls the Ordinance of God, in these words, 1 Cor. 9.14. Even so
has the Lord ordeigned, that those which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel: The reason of this Law is rendered in the verse next before, Do ye not
know (says he) that those which minister about holy things, live of the things
of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar;
Even so has the Lord ordeigned, that those which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel. So that the Law of Moses, and the Law of the Gospel agree both
in this, that the Ministers of the Gospel are to have as due to them, a
proportionable maintenance with the Levites and Priests under the Law: The
Levites that ministered about holy things, they were to have of the Tithes
belonging to the Temple, but were no offering of the Altar: The Priests that
attended at the Altar, were to have as their due from the people (for so is the
Law, Deuteronomy. 18.3.) of every sacrifice offered on the Altar, whether Ox or
sheep, the shoulder, the two cheeks and the maw; even so the Ministers of the
Gospel, are to have from the people, as their due, not as an alms, the Gospel
maintenance, that is, those endowments of the Church, being for the most part
Tithes and Glebe given by Christians to God and his Church, for the propagation
of the Gospel: And the equity and justice of this Law, the same Apostle
confirms by many more reasons, in the six next precedent verses. First, From
the Law of War, Who goes to warfare, says he, at his own charge? Secondly,
From the Law of nature, Who feeds a flock, says he, and eats not of the
milk? Who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit? Thirdly, From the
Law of God, ver. 8, 9. Say I these things as a man, says not the Law the same
also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the corn. And from all these infers this conclusion,
ver. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing that
we shall reap your carnal things? The later end of these words of the Apostle,
Those that preach the Gospel, shall live of the Gospel, are in the Original,
(...), and have this sense in the judgment of very learned Interpreters, viz.
Those that preach the Gospel, shall live of the gift or reward of the Gospel;
for which they give two reasons: First, These words are an (...) to a (...)
next before, and have this sense, that as those which wait at the Altar, shall
partake of the gift of the Altar, so they that preach the glad tidings of the
Gospel, shall live or the gift or reward due for those glad tidings. Secondly,
The true and proper signification of the word (...) will bear it, for though in
the New Testament it commonly signifies glad tidings, yet in many other Greek
Authors, it signifies a gift or reward for good tidings. That text of the 2 Samuel 4.10. as it is rendered in Greek by the Septuagint, leaves no place for
contradiction; where King David speaks thus to Rechab and Baanah, who brought
Ishbosheths head unto him; When one told me (says he) Behold Saul is dead
(thinking to bring me good tidings) I took hold of him and slew him in Ziglag,
who thought I would have given him a reward for his tidings, for these words (I
would have given him a reward for his tidings) the Greek is (...), cui oportuit
me dedisse euangelium: The vulgar latino renders it, mercedem pro nuntio: The
Chaldee Paraphrast, Donum boni nuntij; the reward of good tidings: Many more
Authors might be quoted, where that word (...), or glad tidings, is taken for
a gift or reward of them, which for brevities sake I shall omit.

Secondly, Tithes are due by the Law of Reason, from which law the Imperial
laws which are very severe in the enjoining the payment of Tithes, derive
their principles: to which law of Reason most Nations in the world, Pagan as
well as Christian, have consented in the payment of Tithes, to men employed
about the administration of holy things: Especially Christian Nations, as might
abundantly be showed. It is true, that within this last hundred years, some few
Reformed Churches have taken away from the Clergy their ancient endowments of
Tithes and Glebe, to their own use, and have allowed them in liew rhereof,
certain yearly stipends not answerable to the huge fleeces they took from them,
as may appear in diverse Country dorpes or villages in Germany, the Palatinate
and else where, by which means the Ministers in those places are become very
ignorant and poor, and that ignorance occasioned by their poverty in wanting
money to buy them books, and their preaching as well as their persons despised
(A contemptible maintenance making a contemptible Ministry) This calamity
learned Gualter saw and lamented in his time, complaining that not only
Papists, but such, Qui Religionis sectatores videri volunt, tamen opes
ecclesiasticas, sacrilega manu ad se rapiunt: even such (says he) as would
seem to be professors of true Reformed Religion, yet do with sacrilegeous hands
take the Church-goods to themselves. Whence he foretells, that it will come to
pass, ut Scholae frigeant doctissimi quique dilabantur: That the Schools will
every where be neglected, and learned men utterly decay: Whereas here in
England, by means of better maintenance of the Church, allowed to Ministers as
their own, and not dependant on the people, (agreeing to that law of reason I
spoke of) their persons are more esteemed and loved, their preaching more
learned, laborious and effectual, and the Word of God more graciously and
fruitfully received then in any Nation in the World.

Thirdly, Tithes are due by the Positive Laws of the Land, and have been due to
Churchmen ever since Christianity was planted in England.

These positive Laws derive as much from the Law of Reason as any Laws in the
world, insomuch that it is a maxim in the Law concerning Tithes, that they are
due of Common Right, de Communi Jure, and that therefore a prescription de non
decimando, to pay no manner of Tithes, is against Common Right or Common
Reason, and therefore void. This Law concerning Tithes, is likewise established
and confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, of which I will only name six: The
Statute of 13 Ed. 1. called Circumspecte agetis,: The Statute of 9 Ed. 2.
called Articuli Cleri: The Statute of 27 Hen. 8. c. 20.32 Hen. 8. c. 7. 2 Ed.
6. c. 13. and the Statute of 37 Hen. 8. c. 2. for Tithes in London.

Having thus proved the Right of Tithes, I come now to the second head, being
the Remedy at Law for the recovery of these Tithes when they are detained.

Remedy and Right do usually go together at Common Law: 2 Head.
That Right which is in Law called Remediless is very rare, and happens only
in such cases whereof there has been no precedent seisen or possession, which
falls not out in the case of Tithes, of which there has been a constant seisen
and possession in the Church of England: But the remedy for Tithes were
anciently in the Kings temporal Courts, Mic. 7 Ed. 1. rot. 21. Linwood de Fore
competenti. 71. Co. 2. Instit. fol. 489, etc. 18 Ed. 3. c. 7. (as it was by the
Imperial Laws in the Civil Courts of Emperors) sometimes in the Sheriffs
Turn, sometimes by scire facias in the Chancery: And the Right of Tithes were
likewise tried in the Kings temporal Courts, as by the ancient Writts of De
recto de Advocatione decimarum, and the Writ of Indicavit may appear: The
first Statutes that annexed Tithes to the Ecclesiastical Courts (agreeing
therein with the Common Law) are the Statutes of West. 2. cap. 5. and
Circumspecte agatis, made both in one year, viz. 13 Ed. 1. The next Statute is
9 Ed. 2. called Articuli Cleri: but because the remedy in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, went no further then spiritual censures, the highest whereof is
Excommunication, numbers of persons cared not to hazard their souls so they
might save their Tithes. And to this purpose is the expression of the Act of
Parliament of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 20. That whereas numbers of evil disposed
persons, having no respect of their duty to Almighty God, but against right and
good conscience, did withhold their Tithes due to God and holy Church, as is in
that Statute more at large expressed: By which Statute it is provided, that if
any person refuse to obey the Process of the Ecclesiastical Court for the
payment of Tithes, that then upon complaint or information of the Ordinary, to
any of the Lords of the Council, or by two Justices of Peace, whereof one to be
of the Quorum in the County where such offender dwells, that then the said
Lord of the Council and two Justices, shall commit such offender to prison,
without bayl or mainprise, until he shall put in surety by. Recognisance to
such Counselor and Justices of Peace, to obey the Process of the
Ecclesiastical Court.

The like remedy is given by the Statute of 32 Hen. 8. cap. 7. for a lay person
Farmor of Tithes, by two Justices of Peace, after definitive sentence in the
Ecclesiastical Court, for the recovery of the Tithes withheld and subtracted
against any person refusing to obey the said sentence.

The Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. decides the suit for Tithes, to be partly in
the spiritual Court, partly in the temporal Court of the King; for personal
Tithes, as Wool, Lamb, Flax, Hemp, Apples, etc. the suit is only in the
Ecclesiastical Court; but for prediall Tithes, as Corn, Grain, Hay, etc. the
suit may be either in the Kings temporal Court by action of debt for the
recovery of the treble value, or in the Ecclesiastical Court for the double
value.

And this was the Law for the recovery of all Tithes whatsoever in the Kingdom
of England, till the Statutes of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 21.37 Hen. 8. cap. 12. did
alter the course of Law for Tithes of the houses in London, which I come now to
speak of.

To speak properly: No Tithes are to be paid out of houses; for Tithes, by the
Law, are out of things that increase, not out of things that diminish; out of
things that grow, not out of things that decay: But because Houses are built
upon Lands, out of which Tithes issued, compositions were made by the owners of
such houses with the Incumbent, for a yearly rent or sum to be paid to him,
in liew of Tithes for the ground on which they were built; 11 Rep. D. Grants
Case.
this composition was called, a modus decimandi, for which they sued in London,
before the Statutes of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 21. and 37 Hen. 8. cap. 12. in the
Ecclesiastical Court, as they did in other Cities and Buroughs thorowout
England, but these two Statutes made an alteration of the Law, and that the
suit of Tithes should be before the Lord Major of London, and in his default,
before the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of England; which is the reason why the
Statutes of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 20.32 Hen. 8. cap. 7. and 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. do make
special provisoes and exceptions of the City and Inhabitants of London,
concerning their payment of Tithes.

It appears by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 21. that there was much
contention and strife in the City of London and liberties of the same, between
the Ministers and Citizens of London, concerning the payment of Tithes,
oblations and other duties within the said City; for the appeasing whereof, a
certain Order and decree was thereof made, by Tho. Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Tho. Lord Audley, Lord Chancellor of England, who made their
Order and decree thereof about the Feast of Easter, Anno Dom. 1535. which was
confirmed by the Letters Patents of King Hen. 8. and his Proclamation
thereupon: Afterward at the Parliament on the fourth of February, 27 Hen. 8.
it was then enacted; That the Citizens and Inhabitants of the same City, should
from Easter next following, pay their Tithes to the Curates of the said City
and suburbs, according to the said decree, until such time as any other Order
or Law should be made and confirmed by the Kings Highness, etc. and that every
person denying to pay his Tithes, according to the said decree, should by the
commandment of the Lord Major for the time being, be committed to prison, there
to remain, until such time as he should have agreed with the Curate for the
said Tithes; as by the said Statute already printed in the old Statutes at
large may more appear: According to which Order and decree, the Citizens and
Inhabitants of London, duly and orderly paid their Tithes to their several
Curates, for the space of ten years together, until the 37th year of Hen. 8.
at which time diverse variances and contentions did newly arise between the
Ministers and Curates of the said City, and the Citizens and Inhabitants of
London, touching the payment of the said Tithes, oblations and other duties;
which strife did grow, not from any unjustnesse in that Order and Decree, but
because certain words and terms specified in the said Order and Decree were
dark and obscure, and not fully and plainly set forth, as by the Statute of 37
Hen. 8. cap. 12. may appear: Whereupon, as well the Pastors, Vicars and
Curates of London, as likewise the Citizens and Inhabitants of the same, did
voluntarily of their own accord, and merely for the appeasing of the said
strife then newly grown, submit themselves, to stand to such Order and Decree
upon compromise, touching the payment of Tithes, oblations and other duties
within the said City and liberties of London, as persons whom they had mutually
chosen for the appeasing of the said strife (being the greatest Lords and
Officers of Justice then in the Kingdom) should make and ordain; viz. Tho.
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Wryothsly, Lord Chancellor of
England, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Lord Treasurer of England, Sir William
Pawlet, Lord Sr John, President of the Council, John Lord Russell, Lord Privy
Seal, Edward Earl of Hertford, Lord great Chamberlain of England, John Vicount
Lisle, high Admiral of England, Sr Richard Lister, Chief Justice of England,
Sr Edward Mountague, Chief Justice of the Common Bench, and Sr Roger Cholmely,
Chief Justice of the Eschequer; by which Statute it was enacted, that what
Order should be made, or decreed and concluded by the said Archbishop, Lords
and Knights, or any six of them, before the sixth of March then next following,
concerning the payment of Tithes, oblations and other duties within the said
City and liberties of the same, and enrolled in the Kings high Court of
Chancery of Record, should be as an Act of Parliament, and should bind all
Citizens and Inhabitants of London, and all Vicars, Parsons and Curates of the
said City, and their successors for ever: And that every person denying to pay
Tithes or other duties, contrary to the said Decree so to be made and enrolled,
should by the commandment of the Lord Major of London, and in his default, by
the Lord Chancellor of England, be committed to prison, there to remain, till
such time as he or they should have agreed with the Curate or Curates for his
or their Tithes, as by the said Statute may more appear, eight of which ten
persons made their Decree accordingly, the 24. day of February, in the year
1545. ( Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Sr Edward Moumague were only left out)
which Decree I affirm to be enrolled in the Court of Chancery, and a true Copy
of that enrolled Decree, is at this day printed with the Statute of 37 Hen. 8.
And I make no doubt, but the City of London has likewise an exemplification of
that enrolled Decree under the broad Seal: And though Mr John Claydon, by Mr
Norburies direction, searching in the Chapel of the Rolls could not find it,
does it follow therefore, that an other Clerk cannot find it? Or if it cannot
at this day be found, does it follow in the negative, that never any such
Decree was enrolled? How many printed Statutes have we at this day, by which
the Judges of the Realm do adjudge cases in Law, of which the original Records
cannot at this day be found? and the like has been of this printed Decree for
these hundred years, without reference to the Record in Chancery.

But admitting there was never at all any such enrolled Decree, will it
therefore follow, or will any Lawyer affirm, that then there is no remedy for
Tithes in London? does not the former Decree of Archbishop Cranmer, and the
Lord Chancellor Audley then take place? For that Decree is not repealed by the
Statute of 37 Hen. 8. by any words in that Law, but was to continue in force,
till the Decree upon arbitrament and compromise was made; if this later was
never made, then that former Decree continues still; and if that former Decree
was extinct and gone, to which the Provisoes in the Statutes of 27 Hen. 8. and
32 Hen. 8. do only refer, then Tithes in London, are due and paiable as
formerly by the Ecclesiastical Law, so that quacunque via data, there is a
ready and certain remedy for the recovery of the Tithes of Houses in London: So
weak and feeble are those weapons which are lifted up against the force and
strength of truth, which I hope I have clearly laid open in the point of
Tithes, both for the Right and for the Remedy, even to the Pamphleters
themselves, unless they will caecutire ante solemn, as the Proverb is. And
therefore they begin to shift their weapons, and in stead of arguments against
the Statute of 37 Hen. 8. and the Decree of Tithes upon it, they slander
downright that very Parliament of 37 Hen. 8. I abhor to do them the least
wrong, and therefore I will quote the very words of one of their champion
Pamphlets, like another Goliath of Gath, called The Indictment of Tithes. By the
many scandals and errors but of one passage in that book, you may easily judge
what to think of the truth of all the rest contained in that Pamphlet. The
words to the Lord Major, among other reasons and grounds against Tithes, are
these; May it please your Lordship to take into consideration, what an
overruling hand King Henry the eighth and his Privy Council did bear over the
Parliament at that time, which as it appeared in other things, so especially in
this of Tithes, in Anno 37 of his reign, prevailing so far, as to induce that
Parliament to delegate their power in a matter of so great concernment to the
then Archbishop and other Lords and Knights, Enacting that whatsoever they
should decree therein, should bind at the Citizens for ever: an unheard of
strain of Parliament, to confirm (with reverence we speak it) they know not
what, and which to this day has had no other confirmation: In which Decree, we
pray your Lordship to observe the ignorance and superstition of that age, that
followed the steps of their erroneous predecessors, both in Episcopacy and
Tithes, without comparing them to the word of God; also the unequal dealing of
those entrusted, providing that great men's dwelling houses should be free from
Tithes; whereby it may appear, this Decree or Law for Tithes (if it deserve to
be so called) is not so valid or reasonable as it is generally conceived, and
however ought not to be pleaded or stand in force, against the word and mind
of God.

what an overruling hand King Henry the eighth and his Privy Council did bear
over the Parliament at that time, which as it appears in other things, so
especially in this of Tithes, in Anno 37 of his reign, etc. There are no less
then these three slanders. First, of the person of King Henry the eighth, who
did nothing in this business of Tithes, but as a tender father to the Citizens
of London, who loved him and he them, not as an overbearing Prince; for it
appears plainly by that Statute, that it was an Act of grace in him; the words
are these; To the intent to have a full peace and perfect end between the said
parties, their heirs and successors touching the said Tithes, oblations and
other duties for ever; Be it Enacted, etc. Secondly, of his actions, making him
in this matter of Tithes, and in other things to be unjust, not naming the
things; which in that those things not named, are referred to the business of
Tithes, wherein he did no wrong, it increases the slander. Thirdly, of his
Privy Council, who as appears plainly by the Act, were only used as referrees
and arbitratours chosen by the Pastors, Vicars, Curates, and Citizens of
London, for the ending of the strife amongst them concerning Tithes, and made
their Decree accordingly.

Henry the eighth and his Privy Council, prevailed so far as to induce that
Parliament to delegate their power in a matter of great concernment, to the
then Archbishop and other Lords And Knights, Enacting, that whatsoever they
should decree therein, should bind all the Citizens for ever; an unheard of
strain of Parliament, to confirm (with reverence we speak it) they knew not
what, and which to this day has had no other confirmation. In which words
these scandals and untruths are to be observed.

Hen. 4. n. 70. which very thing by the printed Statute of 1 Hen. 4. cap. 3.
chiefly occasioned the repeal of the whole Parliament of 21 Ric. 2. And what a
strange unlimited power that Parliament committed to a few persons, may more
particularly appear by the Statute of 21 R. 2. cap. 16. in the old printed
Statutes at large, to which I wholly remit the Reader.



First it appears plainly by that Statute, that the matter was only concerning
Tithes, oblations and other duties within the City and suburbs of London.

Secondly, the Names of those Lords and Knights, to whom the differences
concerning those things were referred, are particularly mentioned in that
Statute, and their persons particularly known to that Parliament.

Thirdly it appears by that Statute, That the Ministers and Citizens of London,
did voluntarily submit themselves, and the differences between them concerning
Tithes, etc. to the decree and arbitrament of those persons.

Fourthly, that those Arbitratours are limited and tied up to a former Order of
the Lord Chancellor Audley, and the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. upon it, concerning
the Tithes of London, for it appears plainly in the Statute of 37 Hen. 8. that
the differences about Tithes, did not arise from any matter touching the
substance of that former Order, but from certain ambiguous words, and obscure
terms in it not plainly set forth, whereby it is evident and clear, that that
Parliament did particularly know what it did, but the Inditour did not, when he
laid so foul and false a charge upon that Parliament.

The ignorance and superstition of that age, that followed the steps of their
erroneous predecessors, both in Episcopacy and Tithes, without comparing thins
with the word of God: Therein there is a double slander;

First, of that whole age, that in the business of Tithes did nothing according
to the word of God: when as it appears plainly by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. c.
20. That that Parliament, being the best representation of that age, did
compare Tithes with the word of God, and the nonpaiment of them, to be first, a
detestable enormity, secondly, against right and a good conscience, thirdly,
against men's duty to Almighty God, as may more appear by that Statute.

Secondly, it is a particular slander of the then Archbishop of Canterbury (for
there was no other Bishop mentioned in that Decree,) as if he followed the
steps of his erroneous predecessors in ignorance and superstition, when for
that very cause he was persecuted to death, by only such kind of Bishops whose
steps he is surmised to follow; a man so holy, that even M. Brightman himself
(no friend to Bishops) does make him to be that Angel in the fourteenth Chapter
of the Revelations, Lib. A^ocalyp^ Apo^alypseos.
that in the meaning of the holy Ghost, had power over the fire. And whereas he
is supposed by the Inditour, to follow the ignorance and superstition of that
age, as not to compare things with the word of God, I have seen a Treatise of
his against Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, wherein lie professes that
the word of God was the Rule that guided him in the Reformation of Religion,
wherein he had a chief stroke, both in the days of King Hen. 8. and King Edw.
6.

the unequal dealing of those entrusted, providing that Great men's dwelling
houses should be free from Tithes. It is as great an untruth as it is a gross
slander; for the words of the Statute are these; Provided always, that this
Decree shall not extend to the houses of Great men, or Noble men, or Noble
women kept in their own hands, and not letten for any rent, which in times past
have paid no Tithes, so long as they shall so continue unletten. Which proviso
upon the construction of the whole Decree, does belong to all other men who had
never letten their houses to farm, but kept them still in their hands, as was
resolved by all the Judges of the Common Pleas, Co. 2. part. Inst it p. 6, 5.
Mich 5 Jac. in a Case between John Scudamore and Robert Air in a Prohibition
against John Bell, and so has that Decree ever been construed and taken: so
that there was no self-respect, injustice or partiality at all in the
Commissioners which made that Proviso in the Decree, as is untruly cast upon
them by that Inditour.

The rest of all that Pamphlet is of no better stuff, but may wholly be reduced
to these three-heads.

1. Manifest abuse and misinterprerations of the sacred Scriptures, common to
all Sectaries and Innovatours. 2. Notorious mis-quotations and misunderstanding
of Authors, as of M. Seldom, so. Husse, Pierce Plowman, S^ John Oldcastle,
etc. 3. Gross railing and reviling of men's persons, as namely of M. Thomas
Clendon, by the name of Priest Clendon, which he puts upon him as a term of
scorn, though revera, and in truth it be a name of Honor, for Priest is
nothing else but an old english contraction of Prester in French, of Presbyter
in Latin, and of (...) in Greek, signifying Elder in our english tongue, and
is the very same Honorable name given to the four and twenty Elders, R^v. 4 4.
(...).
mentioned in the fourth and fifth Chapters of the Revelation, which are there
described to sit about the Throne of Christ, clothed in white raiment, with
crowns of gold on their heads, and golden viols in their hands full of odours,
which are the prayers of the Saints. And besides this scorn, to render him more
odious to the people (which is the studied design against many good men at
this day) he is reported by the Pamphleter, to be a contentious man, a sower of
strife and debate* etc. as great an opposite as can be to a godly Minister of
the Gospel (as I hear he is) being also a man of whom I cannot easily be
induced to think any ill, having his education from godly parents and a
religious Schoolmaster, and under as Orthodox, pious and powerful a
Ministry, as was (at that time I knew him) in Northamptonshire.
And thus have I, as briefly as I could, vindicated the lawfullnesse of Tithes,
and the payment of them to Ministers under the Gospel, sufficient I hope to
satisfy any reasonable man that makes godliness his gain, not gain his
godliness: especially such gain as taken from the Church and Churchmen, will
prove to the possessours of them, like aurumTholosanum, the gold of Toulouse,
which beggered all those men and their families that had any of it; Numb. 5.
or like the bitter and cursed water to the guilty woman, which caused her
belly to swell, but her thigh to rot; a very emphaticall and significant
expression, noting a successive curse upon posterity, thigh, intimating so much
in a Scripture phrase; as to give one instance for all, Genesis 46. v. 26. where
it is said, that all the posterity of Jacob that came with him into Egypt, came
out of his thigh; even so, though the revenews of the Church shall cause a
swelling in their estates at the first, yet it will bring upon them, their
posterity and estates, a rot and consumption at the last, according to that
experimental saying of Charles the Great, In Cap. Carul. lib. 2. c. 104.
Novimus multa Regna and Reges eorum propterea cecidisse, quia Ecclesias
spoliaverunt, resque eorum vastaverunt; we have known (says he) many Kingdoms
with their Kings brought to ruin, because they spoiled Churches, and made a
prey of their revenews.

Much more might be said in confirmation of so well approved, and so ancient a
truth as the Right of Tithes, which I do for the present purposely forbear, for
that I am loath to call into question so solid, so settled and so well principled
a verity, in so vain, so fickle, and so uncatechised an age, which at this day
brings into dispute the most fixed Principles that are: a thing so abhorring to
Aristotle (though but a Heathen,) that he would have such kind of contentions
to receive confutation, verberibus non verbis, baculis non argumentis. Besides,
the eager contestation about Tithes, falls out at this day amongst such kind
of men as are not so conversant with learning and reason, as with ignorance and
clamor, of whom Tacitus gives this character, which I will leave for others to
english, plebi non judicium, non veritas, ex opinione multa, ex veritate pauca
judicat.

I shall only for conclusion, desire these men to lay aside that gall of
bitterness with which they have hitherto overabounded, as incompetible with
that spirit of meekness that is required in true Christians; to suspect
always that truth which is not accompanied with peace: those men that have
bitter envying and strife in their hearts, are in the judgment of the Apostle,
James 3.14.
liars against truth, so that to strive against peace, is to lie against truth;
to consider the infinite poverty and confusion that would be in the Church of
England, if it should be quite stripped of its ancient endowments: and lastly to
remember the example of the Emperor Julian, who in the beginning of his reign,
gloried in nothing more then in the profession of Christian religion, in so
much as he became a public reader of holy Scriptures in the Church, and never
fell into apostasy, till he fell to Church-robbing; whereby his persecution of
Christians was accounted far greater then that of Dioclesian, who though he put
far more Ministers to death then ever Julian, yet he did not occidere
presbyterium, he slew not the Priesthood, is Julian did, by depriving the
Church and Churchmen of their maintenance; whereupon in the opinion of
Theodoret, after he had robbed the Churches of all their plate, and in a
scoffing manner asked, whether those were sit vessels for a Carpenters son to
be served with, God wounded him suddenly to death with an arrow shot from
Heaven: exemplum audisti, cave supplicium, I have told them the example, let
them take heed of the punishment.

I began this discourse with the Law of the Land, I will conclude it with the
Law of the Gospel, being likewise the Law of Moses and the Prophets, mentioned
in the Gospel of St Matthew, cap. 7. v. 12. being the words of our Savior in
his Sermon on the mount, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so
do ye to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. The people of England
would think themselves much wronged, if Ministers should preach against their
property of goods: and is not the same wrong offered to Ministers, when the
people speak and write against their patrimony of Tithes? the same Magna Charta
that confirms the one, establishes the other. Do is ye would he done by, is the
Law of Moses and the Prophets: Render to every man his due, is the Law of
Christ and his Apostles: Quod tibi sieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, is the Law
of Nature and Nations; triplici nodo triplex cuneus, and such a three fold cord
is not easily broken; if it should, I tremble to think of the misery and ruin
that will fall out to a people or Nation at such a breach. The Lord make us all
wise and just, in an age so wilful and wicked.

FINIS.

