JOHANNES BECOLDUS REDIVIVVS: OR, The English QUAKER; The German ENTHUSIAST
REVIVED: Visible in this Narrative.

Translated into English, for the use of his Contrymen, by J. S.

Written long since in French by Guy du Brez.

ECCLES. 1.10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it
has been already of old time, which was before us.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by John Allen, at the Rising-Sun in
Paul's Churchyard.

1659.

1659 Post Tenebras Splendet Ip s^^iche John Allen at the Rising sunn in Paul's
Church yard



TO THE READER.
THe Sovereign disposer of beings, the times thereof, and the changes therein
appointed to Adams sons; having allotted ours to be in these last and perilous
days, signally parallel unto those which this Narrative relates: there being
then, as now, Deceivers sent forth, and judicially commissionated to execute
the writ of vindictive justice, upon the non-receivers of truth in love: God
sending energy of error, that they may believe a lie, the more effectual
vigilance is required of us all, that in this our now we may carry it, as those
which have found the favor to be preserved and accounted faithful therein; and
that the present must be of heresies, may be subserviently tending to the
manifesting of us approved.

Now see the prodigious practices, and blasphemous belchings of these then
Satan's Emissaries, comply with these his late Agents in itching and bewitching
times. I leave to judicious consideration, when at the Frogs crept out of the
mouth of the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet, content not themselves to sprawl
in ponds and fresh waters, but have ominously crawled over the vast brynish
Ocean, attempting our Nova-Albion shores, whose daring designs by the Lords
good hand have hitherto been frustrated; that the frantic opinions of such
fanatics, may not unto the vulgar sliely pass under the mask of new unknown
light, but barely may appear (as indeed they are) Satanical illusions by the
old wily Serpent, under such specious shows now again ushered in: he being
again let loose to try our Gospel-stedfastness, and to punish the wanton
ingratitude of this our present age.

Let it be considered, whether in this small History, which though printed near
a hundred years since, the spirit, countenance, language, garb, gestures and
practices of those which pass under the name of Quakers, do not lively appear;
declaring themselves to be the genuine offspring of such a father, the first
and second brood so resembling the deceiver; his masterpiece in both being to
break in sunder all natural, civil, and sacred bonds and policies: not with
Amalek contenting themselves to fall upon the rere of Gods Israel; in their
march out of spiritual Egypt; but in the day of this our Jerusalem crying, Raze
it, raze it, even to the foundations: and also whether the adversary of mankind
has not in our native soil, already acted the comical part of the German
interlude represented in the sequel; and whether he watches not his season to
bring in the Tragical part also.

As for the Author of the Original of this book, he is unknown to us, but by
his works which now follow him. I have only translated the Historical part of
the first Book of his larger Treatise; it being about the tenth part thereof,
the rest not unworthy of the same labor, being spent in the solid eviction of
the great truths of the humanity of our Lord Jesus: of the necessity of Baptism
to believers Infant seed: of Magistratical power under the Gospel: of the
lawfulness of an oath, and of the immortality of the soul; all which were both
questioned and opposed by those which in this book he styleth Anabaptists:
between whom, and mere dissenters in the point of Pedobaptism, being otherwise
Orthodox and peaceable, the Reader ought always conscientiously to distinguish.

He titleth his book, Le source raeine and fondement des Anabaptists ou
rebaptises de nostre temps. I find him quoted by Mr. Rob. Baily, in the second
part his Disswasive from the errors of the times. The second Book he dedicated
to Christ's scattered Flocks in Flanders, Brabant, Artois, etc. thereby
manifesting how there lay upon him the care of the Churches. Affectionately he
provokes the faithful therein to a more awful enquiry, serious study, and
cordial receiving of the truth. By the sight of these pillars of salt, if any
wandering misled souls should be reduced from the error of their way; or if any
others who through grace have hitherto been kept, should be encouraged to hold
fast the truth, and order of the Gospel, he shall rejoice, who desires to
approve himself,

Thine in Christian duty, Joshua Scotton.
Boston in New England, the 26. of November. 1658.
JOHANNES BECOLDUS REDIVIVUS.
IN the year 1521. and the year ensuing, there arose a certain number of
mutinous and seditious persons, who secretly made Factions: they chiefly dwelt
in the quarters of Saxony, which border upon the River Salah; among whom their
chief was Nicholas Stork. They dreamed dreams, Nicholas Storks and his
accomplices, they preached dreams,
and said, That they spoke familiarly with God by Visions, they preached their
dreams for truths and Divine Oracles; and because that there should come a new
world, wherein should dwell righteousness: therefore they ought to exterminate
all the wicked, with all the Princes and unbelieving Magistrates from off the
earth oppose Magistrates
(they called all those unbelievers which were not of their Sect and Faction.)
From out of this School came Thomas Muntzer, Dr. Balthazar Hubmore, Melchior
Rink, John Hutt, John Deuter, Lodovike Hetzer, etc. All these boasted that they
familiarly conferred with the Lord. In their teachings, they with heat of
affection did defame and detract from the Ministers of the Gospel: and
Ministers.
afterward with the like violence fell upon the Magistrate, thinking that if
they could make void these two Orders unto the Church, the wolves might safely
fall upon and dismember the Flock; wherefore these wolves, (i.) these false
Teachers, have always principally set themselves against the Ministers of the
Church, and the Magistrates, to see if they could drive them out from the
Flock, or at least disgust some of the sheep against their Pastors; that so
estranging them from them, they might undo them.

Their Doctrine spreads
Their Doctrine suddenly spread throughout all the Country, and in a little
space they gathered much people after them, and Rebaptized many thousands;
Rebaptize thousands.
insomuch as many simple people were led by a zeal without knowledge, being by
their fair appearance ensnared. They tied themselves unto the only simple and
naked Letter of the Scripture, They varnish over their foul intentions with
fair pretenses.
without regard to the sense thereof; they carried it very fairly before all
men: for they had always in their mouths, the love, faith, and the fear of
God, the mortification of the flesh, and the cross; which were the garnish
wherewith (that they might be of value to the simple) they painted and adorned
themselves: but inasmuch as such colors were false, they lasted not long, but
they soon began to fade, and without fraud to appear what they were.

Muntzers Doctrine.
Thomas Muntzer (of whom we formerly spoke) said; That whosoever would be saved
must firstly fly all manifest vices, Murders, Blasphemies against the Name of
God: that be must chastise and macerate his body by fastings and mean apparel;
that he must hold forth an austere visage, speak little, etc. he called these
things the Cross, the Mortification of the Flesh, and discipline: after that he
had so fashioned his people, he said, That they must withdraw from the
multitude, and conversation of men; and often to think upon God, who he is, and
whether he has care of us; whether Christ suffered death for us, and whether
our Religion were to be preferred before that of the Turks: moreover, that we
ought to ask a sign from God, to be assured whether he has care of us, and
whether we owned the true Religion: if instantly he gave not a sign, that we
ought to persist and pursue in prayers, yea, lively to complain of him, as of
one that does us wrong; for seeing the Scripture promises that God will grant
what he is asked for, he does not well in not giving a sign to the man who
desires his knowledge. He said, that this anger and reproach was very pleasing
unto God, because that he thereby saw the inclination and heat of our spirit,
and that without doubt being thus urged, he would declare himself by some
evident sign, quenching the thirst of the spirit, and doing unto us as formerly
unto the Fathers. He said moreover, that Gods will was declared by dreams, and
there laid the foundations of his doctrine; insomuch that if the dream of any
might be interpreted, he praised him greatly in his Sermons.

After that by this means he had by little and little gained some, he
discovered what he had long before plotted in the City of Alsted, which is in
the Marches of Turing; he began to enroll the names of those that were entered
into league with him, Enrouled the names of his disciples, and swears them to
assist him, to cut off the unbelieving Magistrates.
and by solemn Oath they promised assistance, to dispatch the wicked Princes
and Magistrates (for they generally accounted all Superiors wicked) and to
substitute new ones: he said, That he had given him in charge from God so to
do: so did he speak of his dreams and such like things.

Luther intercedes for him, with the Elector of Saxony.
Frederick Prince of Saxony did at first bear with him, and that at the request
of Luther. But when in the year 1523. he set himself seditiously to preach and
publicly to fasten not only upon Ministers of the word, but also upon the
Magistrates; and furiously declared that their liberty was violated, But
publicly opposing Ministers and Magistrates, is driven out of Alsted.
and that the poor and miserable were tyrannized over, and oppressed by
insupportable charges, and that their goods and labors were devoured by the
Princes: He said then, That it was time to bethink him; and then he was driven
out of the City of Alsted; who after that he had been some months hidden, he
came to Norimberg, Comes to Norimberg, and Mulhuze, where he becomes a Preacher.
and to a City of Turing called Mulhuze. Now inasmuch as when he was at Alsted,
he had gained to his Girdle some of the Citizens of Mulhuze, by means whereof
he received the charge of preaching. And now being but in small favor with the
Senate, he so wrought upon the communalty by Mutinies, Drives out the old
Senate, chooses a new.
that they chose a new Senate; which was the beginning of the future stirs:
afterward the Citizens drove out the Friars, and seized upon their
Monasteries: with one of the principal-lest and most rich of them, Muntzer
furnished himself; Furnishes himself with the spoil of Monasteries.
and for the future carried it not only as a Preacher, but also as a Senator
and Counselor; for he said, that he must by his Divine revelation judge of the
Bible; Judges of the Bible.
and gave sentence upon all according to his will and fancy; and all this was
received as an Oracle and Divine answer: so were they befooled by him. Sows
seed of, sedition.
In the mean while, he wrote here and there to the Subjects to take up arms
against their Princes, to the recovery both of their spiritual and temporal
liberties; this speech was so acceptable unto the people, that in the mouths of
many he was the true Prophet.

Having then changed the Magistrates of Mulhuze, and having put in Anabaptists,
there arose many troubles as we have formerly declared; for he taught the
Community of goods, Taugh community, equality of dignity.
and that the equality of dignity did very well resent humanity; and that all
the world should abide in the liberty wherein it was at first created; and that
there should be an indifferent usage of goods: he said, That this was divinely
revealed unto him, and that Princes and great ones must be rejected; and that
the sword of Gedeon was given unto him, against all Tyrants, to restore the
liberty, and new Reign of Christ upon earth: By this, people desist from their
labor.
all these pretenses made the people desist from their ordinary labor; and
when they had need of any thing, they took it from those that had, whether they
would or not.

Diverse Months he thus led on the train, so as in the year 1525. They take up
Arms,
the Husbandmen and Laborers, took up arms in Swabe and Francony to the number
of forty thousand, who slew the greatest part of the Nobility, kill the
Nobility.
sacked and burnt their Castles and Fortresses; he went on to prosecute his
Game, thinking the time now to be come, to bring into action what he had
formerly deliberated: he after caused them to found some Artillery in the
Cordiliers Church; he called much people from the fields out of hopes of
pillage, and to make themselves rich.

He in all his affairs consulted with a bold foolish fellow called Phifer,
Phifers Dream.
who had dreams and visions in high esteem; and among other discourse he said,
That in a dream he had seen multitudes of mice in a stable, which he had made
to fly: which he interpreted so as he had command from God, to take up arms,
and to set himself in array to discomfit the Nobility.

Muntzer was somewhat more cool; though he preached with great violence, yet he
would not run any hazard until that the Neighborhood had taken up arms: and
the more easily to bring about his enterprise, he wrote unto the Laborers in
the Mines of the Territories of Mansfield, admonishing them to fall upon the
Princes without any respect or consideration; for these that were ready in
Francony drew near unto Turing. Thereupon Phifer, who could not forbear, took
the field with his, and sacked the Country about Isfield, pillaged the
Fortresses and Temples (or Church^s) and slew diverse Gentlemen, taking others
prisoners: which having done, he returned laden with plunder; and having so
well sped, the popularity were encouraged: in the mean time they skirmished and
ravined in the Country of Mansfield; wherefore Muntzer thinking that there was
a revolt in all parts, came forth from Mulhuze with three hundred seditious
men. Upon these stirs Albert Count of Mansfield at an instant assembled some;
Troops of Horse, and fought Muntzer, so as two hundred were left upon the
place; the rest being astonished, with drew, and fled toward Fraucuse, and
sojourning there, waited for the recruit of their Army; which was the cause of
retarding their stirs.

In the mean time the Princes gathered together, to the number of 1500 horse,
with some foot: the Peasants being encamped in a mount near Fraucuse, they
could not easily be assailed, by reason of the Carts they had furnished
themselves withal. The poor people being unprovided either of Arms or
Artillery, and for the most part not acquainted with Soldiery; the Princes
bring moved with compassion admonished them by messages, that they would
deliver up the Authors of this sedition; and that laying down their arms, every
one might with assurance and without fear of punishment return unto their
houses. Muntzer then fearing his skin, advanced into the midst of the Troops,
and with a stern countenance made his Oration.

Muntzers Oration.
You see, fellow Soldiers and Brethren, how these Tyrants near unto you have
conjured to put you all to death, and yet they are so saint-hearted, as that
they dare not fight us; they make foolish and unworthy tenders to make you day
down your Arms: you know that I am the Author and mover of this enter prize,
but not upon mine own authority or particular fancy (for it is not of mine own
head) but by the command of God: these things being thus led on, you and I must
obey, and not abandon the place and rank where God has set us: heretofore he
commanded: Abraham to sacrifice his son; who not knowing the issue, without
difficulty obeyed the Divine command: Genesis 22.2
wherefore God preserved his son, and adorned his faith with great benefits: we
then who are in the same estate, ought to persevere, leaving the event of
things unto God: howsoever there is no doubt, but all will fall out according
to our wish, and ye shall with your eyes behold the Lords relief: for we shall
destroy as many as there be enemies. In many places of Scripture, Psalm. 72.4,
13.
God has promised to help the poor and needy, which does truly belong unto us:
for we are poor and miserable; and inasmuch as we desire to return and increase
in the knowledge of God, none should doubt of the Victory, or of an happy
issue. Behold on the contrary the condition of our Enemies, they call
themselves Princes; but indeed they are very Tyrants, for they take no care of
any one of you; but they squeeze out all your estates, and swallow them down
with all greediness. Among the people whom God particularly chose, it was
ordained that their Kings should not be unprofitable spend-thrifts; and they
were commanded diligently to read in the book of the Laws which he had
constituted: but what do these Tyran^s now? and how do they spend their time?
they think that they are not concerned in the Commonwealth, nor do they inform
themselves, how it fares with the poor and miserable: They see not to justice,
but suffer Robbers upon the highwaies they punish not thieves, nor do they take
order against evil doing: they in no wise comfort, the fatherless, nor the
widow; nor do they take care for the instruction of youth: they not only do not
advance Gods honor, but they hinder the same; nor have they any thought, but
how get other men's estates unto themselves: wherefore they daily find out new
inventions to raise money; nor do they care to procure or maintain, peace (with
many the like speeches) and afterward he exhorted them saying. Be then
courageous, and rid this great unprofitable troop out of the way; knowing that
in so doing you shall fulfill the good pleasure of God. I perceive no means
either of sure or safe composition; for they will never be otherwise minded;
they neither will grant us our liberties, nor the true service of God.
Wherefore we ought rather to die, then to approve of their wickedness, or to
let them snatch the Doctrine of the Gospel from us. In sum, I do assure you
that God will help us, and that the day shall be ours, for be himself has
promised me it openly; he himself, I say, who can neither lie nor deceive, has
commanded me, thus to proceed to punish the Magistrate. Behold, how Gods power
appears! when as a small handful of people overcomes a great number; as for
example, you know what Gideon did with his small company, and Jonathan with his
armor-bearer; what David did alone against that monster Goliath: I put it out
of doubt that this day shall be noted by the like Victory, and that posterity
will always have it in remembrance; for though we be in bad equipage, not well
furnished with arms, and things needful, we shall not fail to worst them; and
this frame of heaven and earth will sooner fail, then we shall be forsaken of
God. Take heed left Reasons judgment make you shake, or the appearance of
danger, that presents, make you fraid; but lively fall on the enemies: be not
daunted with their Guns or Artillery, for I will receive all their bullets into
my Gown. Behold, see how our God is for us! contemplate, I pray you, the
witness and sign of his good will toward us; lift up your eyes, and behold the
heavenly how: I could wish that in our Ensign the same Rainbow were pourtraied.
God evidently shows by this sign which appears on high, that he will in the
Battle assist us, denouncing ruin and perdition unto the Tyrants our enemies:
be courageous then; and being assured of his fvaour, fall on, for God will not
that you should make an agreement with your enemies.

His Oration being finished, the greatest part of his company, by reason of
their present peril, ceased not to be much afraid, all being in disorder, and
without any conduct. Yet there were in the band some bold and desperate ones
bent to do mischief: they being over-forward and ready to do evil, were
inflamed the more by reason of his speeach, especially the Rainbow before
spoken of did encourage them; and they judged it as a most sure sign of
Victory: there was this further to their advantage, that their Army was great
(it being about 8000 men) and the place advantageous for their defense: these
Varlets cried out, that all should take up their arms, and with courage they
came to close with the enemy, singing an hymn, whereby they did implore the
aid of the Holy Ghost. There was sent unto them to parley a young man of a Noble
Family, whom Muntzer against the Law of Arms had slain; herewith the Princes
being provoked, caused the Alarm to be sounded, and ordered their Battle in
array.

The Lantgraves Oration.
Philip Prince of Hessia, exhorted the Soldiery to carry themselves
courageously, and to perform their duty; showing them that although the
accusation charged on them by the enemy should be true, yet it was unlawful for
the Communalty to take up arms against the Magistrate; which might be proved by
Testimony of the Scripture; 1 Pet. 2.13.
and that yet be would neither excuse himself nor the other Princes from their
faults. They cover themselves with the Name of the Gospel, but in truth they
forge nothing but thefts, robberies and the like mischiefs; their endeavor is
to take from others, to abolish Magistracy, to offer violence to other men's
wives and children; and to commit all crimes without punishment: and seeing
under the fair and holy Name of God, they cloak such villainies, and execrable
misdeeds, there was no doubt but God would avenge those injuries: wherefore
every one ought to fight against them, as against robbers, and so to maintain
the public peace, and to defend every ones estate with their wives and
children. The cause of the war is most just; and had be not been assured, that
the work had been acceptable unto God, Romans 13.2, 3, 4, 5.
who has put the Sward into the hand of the Magistrate, he would not have
been, there.

This Oration being finished, they came to close; and no sooner were the
Artillery and small shot discharged, but these poor people, as men amazed, and
deprived of understanding, neither defend, themselves, nor set themselves to
flight for safety; but sang their vulgar song, to invoke the aid of the Holy
Ghost: some trusting in the promises of Muntzer, waited for succor from
heaven. The Harquebusses being discharged, they began to reinforce the battle,
and to slay them right down; then they betook themselves to flight all in a
rout toward Francuse: some of them drew off to the other part of the Mountain,
and some the while bare the brunt of the Battle in the Valley against the
horse; of whom there fell one or two: but so hotly were they pursued, 5000
Slain.
that there were 5000 left in the place: soon after this slaughter, the City of
Francuse was taken, 300 Prisoners.
and near 300 prisoners, which were beheaded. Muntzer having gained the City by
flight, hid himself in an house near unto the Gate; whither by accident there
came a Gentleman, whose waiting-man going up to see the rooms, he found a man
laid upon the bed; who asked him who he was, and whether he was not fled from
the Battle, and whether he was not one of the seditious? By accident there lay
a purse near unto the bed; the other takes up the booty, and having opened it,
he found therein Letters, whereby Albert of Mansfield did admonish Muntzer to
desist from his enterprise, and not to cause the poor people to mutiny: these
Letters when he had read, he asked him, if the Letters were not directed to
him; which he denied very stiffly, until being sharply threatened, craving
pardon, he confessed; Munzter taken.
that he was Munzter: being taken, he was brought before George Prince of
Saxony, and the Lantgrave; being asked of them, what moved him so to abuse the
poor people, he replied, that he had done but his duty; and that those
Magistrates that would not receive the Gospel, were so to be dealt withal. The
Lantgrave puzzled him, proving by Testimony of Scripture, that the Magistrates
ought to be had in reverence; and that all seditions were forbidden by God, and
that it was not lawful for a Christian to avenge his private quarrel: whereunto
Muntzer had not to answer: Tortured.
afterward he was put unto grievous torture; and as by greatness of the pain
he cried out, George Duke of Saxony said unto him, Truly Muntzer you endure at
present, but think also upon the ruin of so many people, which this day by
occasion of thy sedition are slain; he answered, much laughing, that they would
so have it: he was afterward brought to Welderung a City of the Signory of
Mansfield, where he was sharply drawn and put to torture, and confessed what
was his deliberated purpose, and who were the accomplices of his Conjuration.

The Princes being come to Welderung and Mulhuze, they caused many of these
seditious persons to be beheaded; and among the rest, that bold fool Phifer, of
whom there has mention formerly been made: then afterward Muntzer was brought
into the field, who found himself very much discouraged, and overwhelmed in
this extremity; so as without help he could not give account of his faith, as
it commonly falls out with such in the like case: Henry of Brunswick, to help
him, caused him to say after him: when he was ready to die, he confessed
clearly and loudly his fault and error; and being surrounded with Soldiers,
he exhorted the Princes to use greater pity toward the poor people, and that
by this means they should not need to fear; he admonished them also to read
diligently the book of Kings, which are in the holy Scripture: his discourse
being ended, Executed
they cut off his head. From this marvelous defeat and discomfiture several
escaped, who seeing their sedition profited them not, and that the Prophets
were slain with their brethren and companions, instead of repenting, and
acknowledging the pestilential venom that lay hid in their Sect; they assemble
at Munster the chief City of Westphalia, Those that escape get into Munster.
Pretend humility, carry out against the Magistrates power.
and first made semblance of humility, holding forth nothing in them, that was
splendent or magnificent; yea, they reproved and cried out against all
excellency, greatness and magnificency: they held forth outside-holiness, and
cried out against the sword and power of the Magistrate: riches and honor were
rejected by them as loathsome vomit (at least, as they made show of) they spoke
of nothing, but of the mortification of the old man; and of the renewing of the
spirit, and of a life wholly dedicated unto God: above all, they despised the
world and the things that are therein, but it was because they could not yet
play their pranks, nor themselves have dominion, nor make a new world according
to their model, as they afterward showed unto all.

Bernard Rotman preaches the Gospel. with success. He and other Ministers
present Articles against Popish errourr.
In the year 1532 Bernard Rotman began to preach the Gospel, without the City
of Munster, in the Temple of St. Maurice, and that not without great effect;
insomuch as that there being certain Ministers, they presented thirty Articles
unto the Magistrates, wherein all the errors of the Papacy were contained;
submitting themselves unto all punishment, if they did not prove all these
Articles to be false, and repugnant to the word of God: the Senate sent for the
Papists, and proposed unto them those Errors: and because they had always given
them to understand their Doctrine was pure, and founded upon the word of God,
Papists are convinced,
(which these Preachers denied, and upon their lives would evince the contrary)
the Magistrates asked them, if they would by holy writ confute what was said
unto them; and by the Senates command resign their places to the Ministers.
being thus questioned, and seeing the Senate laid the matter much to heart: in
brief they answered, that they had not wherewith to defend their doctrine; and
as for what they had said of their Ordinances, and manner of doing to be good,
it was but upon opinion and ignorance; whereupon the Senate forbade them from
that time forward, not to meddle with preaching, seeing they were convinced of
Errors and false Doctrines, and commanded them to resign their places unto
those teachers, which had discovered their errors and abuses: soon after there
was assigned to each his Temple to preach in, by the consent of the Senate: and
all the City was in peace and tranquillity.

Satan stirs up Anabaptists, who disturb their peace,
But Satan the enemy of peace and truth, could not long endure the peace and
publication of the Gospel; wherefore as he had already done in other places,
with might and main he labored to hinder and overthrow the Gospel; and in its
place to set up these seditious Anabaptists: so he did the same at Munster, to
the great damage of the faithful, the destruction and infamy of the Gospel.

By John Becold a Tailor of Leyden, who
For in the year 1533. there came to Munster an Hollander named John Becold of
Leyden, by trade a Tailor or Sower of Garments; but rather a Raveller or rearer
in pieces: he was a witty fellow, eloquent, cautelous, and very audacious,
having a little read the Scripture, he could fully dissemble matters: in sum,
he was a true and perfect Anabaptist; in the beginning of which familiarity,
Insinuates himself into the company of the Ministers.
he insinuated himself into the company or the Ministers of the Gospel, and
asked them whether they thought it was well done to baptize little children?
they answered him, Yes, and then he began to deride and jeer with disdain: he
thus carried matters near nine months; often disputing against, and debating
with the Ministers concerning Baptism; notwithstanding in the mean while,
wheresoever he could, he secretly sowed the Doctrine of the Anabaptists. Rotman
opposes them,
Then Bernard Rotman of whom we spoke before, seeing the drift of the
Anabaptists; in his Sermon exhorted the people to pray unto God, for his grace,
that they might keep his Doctrine pure: and to preserve it from the corruptions
of enraged men, especially from the Anabaptists, who secretly crept in among
them; and slid into their companies: for if their Opinion prevailed, the state
of the Commonwealth, and Religion would be poor and miserable. but is soon
seduced by his Coadjutor, Herman Staxrede.
At that very time there came to Munster one Herman Staxrede, who was Rotmans
Coadjutor; who seduced him, and caused him to turn Anabaptist, against whom he
had so much combated and cried down. This Herman had been the disciple of Henry
de Rolls, Henry Rolls an Anabaptist executed.
whom they of Vtrecht had lately executed, because he was an Anabaptist; he
publicly reproved Childrens Baptism, saying, That it was an abomination before
God. Because of this, there arose great stirs among the people; and those who
formerly were secretly seduced by John Becold of Leyden, now vented their
Opinions, Becold's disciples vent their opinions, hold nightly meetings.
and almost throughout the whole City oftentimes held Conventicles, and
secretly assembled in private houses: and their Ministers taught only by night,
when as others took their rest, which was the fittest time for the working of
their mysteries: By the Senate prohibited, commanded to depart; which they
refuse.
these things much provoked the Senate; and because the nightly meetings and
Sermons of the Anabaptists were ill resented, they were prohibited and
forbidden, and command issued forth to all the lovers of that Sect, to avoid
the City: but they cared not for this command, and were no sooner gone out at
one Gate, but they came in at another, and hid themselves in the City with
their Sectaries: and boasted that they had command from God not to stir, but
fully and gravely to prosecute their Commission. This troubled the Senate, and
they were somewhat astonished at it. Wherefore to prevent further trouble, it
was commanded, that both Anabaptists and Preachers of the Gospel, should repair
to the Townhouse with the learned men. A Disputation, wherein Rotman declares
himself: Herman Busch confutes him.
In this Disputation Rotman, who had for some time covered matters, openly
declared himself an Anabaptist; and condemned Childrens Baptism, as wicked and
detestable: but Herman Busch so contradicted him, as by the word of God he
confuted him; which may yet be proved, by the Acts drawn up by the public
Notary. This being done, the Senate commanded the Anabaptists to depart the
City; yea, and that forthwith: but again they hid themselves according to their
custom, until fair opportunity presented, that they might come in sight; and
then upon a deliberated rage, they fell upon a Minister named Peter wirtem,
They fall upon a Minister Peter Wirteme. Run about the City, crying, Repent and
be Rebaptized.
as he preached in a Temple or a Church by the authority of the Senate, and
they turned him out. Then many of them ran about the City, as if they had been
divinely transported in their spirit, crying, with a loud voice, Repent and be
re-baptised, otherwise the wrath of God will fall upon you. Many good people
fearing the wrath of God (whereof they so much talked) and in their simplicity
being deceived, and some for fear of loosing their estates, obeyed them: for
after the Anabaptists had got the upper hand of their adversaries, Take away
their estates.
they turned them out and deprived them of their estates These things were done
in the year 1533. and in the beginning of 34. and when they had been hidden,
they came forth out of their dens and caves, and they went all together unto
the Market place with great cries and howlings, Command all unrebaptized to be
put to death, seize on their Arms and Ammunition.
and commanded that all that were not rebaptized should be put to death, as
Pagans and wicked: and forthwith they seized upon the Artillery, Arms,
Ammunition and Townhouse: the rest, namely, the Protestants and Papists, began
to run, and to betake themselves unto a place of the City, which was naturally
strong, for defense both of themselves and the people; and they took sundry
Anabaptists prisoners: Opposed, come to Composition.
this hasted until they came unto Composition, and Hostages on both sides were
given; and it was agreed that every one should hold his own Religion, and
return unto his own house, and live in peace.

The principal Anabaptists then were Rotman, John Becold of Leyden, Bernard
Knipperdoling, Gerard Cipperbrok, Bernard Crechting.

But sent for aid to the neighboring Towns.
In the mean time Rotman and Knipperdoling (the superlatives of this faction)
though they had approved of this Composition, yet they sent unto the
neighboring Towns; whereby they gave notice unto those of their Sect, Promise
ten times more then they lost.
to leave all their goods and repair unto them, and that they should not fail
to receive ten times more then they left behind them. Mutitudes of the poorer
sort, on hopes of preferment repair to them.
Great multitudes both of men and women harkening unto these magnificent
promises, came in unto them, and upon hopes of preferment repaired unto
Munster; The Citizens leave the City: Anabaptists are Masters, and Rules all.
chiefly the poorer sort, who knew not how to subsist: the Citizens and more
wealthy among them, seeing the City to swarm with strangers, withdrew as fairly
as they could, abandoning their place unto the Anabaptists: this was about
Lent, in the Month of February 1534. By this means the Anabaptists became
Masters, and chose a new Senate of their own party, with Consuls; among whom
were Knipperdoling and Cipperbrock:soon after they fell upon the Temple of St.
Maurice, Burn the Church of St. Maurice.
which was near unto the City, and burnt it with the neighboring Edifices; and
Pillaged all the Temples, and spoiled the chief Temple: within a few days
after they flocking together ran about the streets, Cry, Repent, repent, depart
if ye will not die.
and in a dreadful manner, cried out, Repent, repent, and suddenly changed
their tune, saying, Quickly depart ye wicked, if ye will not die; Drive out all
the Citizens, that were not of their Sect.
and at that instant in arms ran to and again, and drove out of the City all
that were not of their Sect, without having regard either to Age or Sex; so as
many woman miscarried in these troubles and confused flight; In this flight
many woman with child miscarry.
these being driven out, they fall upon Pillaging their estates: by this every
one may know by what spirit these Anabaptistical hypocrites were led: They
Pillage.
there is no act so fellonious, horrible, cruel and wicked, tha^ ever was done,
which they did not commit. In the beginning they talked of nothing, but the
Spirit and holiness; they said, it was not lawful for a Christian to be a
Magistrate, and that it was not lawful to bear Arms: but after they had brought
all under their paw, and in their power; then it was lawful to take the
Public Arms with the Townhouse, and to choose a Magistrate to their mind,
yea, with rejection of him that was ordained of God; and thrust themselves into
his place, and to make themselves Consuls and Senators as they have done:
there is not need of much speaking, for the world knows it. Where now are the
fair speeches of those Anabaptists? Do not resist evil: He that will take away
thy coat, give him thy cloak also. These have not only pillaged and stripped
honest men of their clothes, but of all that they had, and have driven them
miserable out of their houses, with their wives and little ones, and have
exposed them to death by the Besiegers of the City.

At that time there arose in the City of Munster a great number of Prophets
(for they usurped that name) the principal of whom were John Matthews of
Harling, Their Prophet John Matthews, commands all their Goods to be common.
and one Pistor, who were both audacious, and prating fellows; they boasted of
Visions, and of the Spirit of Prophecy. By Prophetical authority, this holy
Prophet commanded all the City to bring in all their Gold, Silver, and other
movable Goods to be common, and that none upon pain of death, should reserve
any thing for his own private use: and to this end, there was a Public house
appointed. The people were very much astonished at the rigor of this Edict,
yet notwithstanding obeyed it: it was not possible to retain or conceal any
portion; Divineresses reveal such as retained the goods, and all books besides
the Bible, to be burnt.
for there were two Maids Divineresses, who did reveal it, if there were any
that did retain any thing. Afterward these Prophets commanded that none should
keep any Books except the Holy Bible; and that all others should publicly be
brought forth and abolished: he said, that he received this command from God;
wherefore great numbers of books were brought together and consumed by fire.

Hubert Trutelin calls them Prophets of a Turd, and slain.
It came to pass that an Artificer named Hubert Trutelin, who being displeased
with the acting of these Prophets reproached them, calling them Prophets de
Merde: he was accused, and all the people were caused to come together in their
Arms: they sentenced the poor man to death; whereat the people were marvelously
frighted. John Matthews the chief Prophet laid hands upon the poor man, and
when as he was thrown down, gave him a stab with a Pike, without wounding him
mortally, whatsoever his endeavors were; then he commands him to be taken
from thence, and that he should be carried to another place; and taking the
Musket of another young man that was near him, he shot him through with a
bullet: when he was falling to the ground, the Prophet said, That it was
revealed unto him from heaven, that the time of his death was not yet come; and
that God had accepted him to favor, though he died a few days after: whereof
when the Prophet had notice, he took a long Pike, and violently ran through the
City, crying out, that God the Father had given him in command to repulse the
Enemy from the City. As he drew near unto the Camp, John Matthews slain.
a Soldier called M^saicus faced him, and shot him quite through the belly:
This was the woeful end of this mad Prophet: and although the fraud of these
Prophets was well known, yet the people were so bewitched by them, and so
deprived of their reason, that they much bewailed this their goodly Prophet,
saying, That there would some mischief befall them, because such a Prophet was
taken from them.

John Becold of Leyden commanded the second Prophet after him, to be of a good
courage; because that of a long time before, it had been revealed unto him,
that he should come to such an end, and that he should marry his widow. Two
days after Easter, they ran to the Churches, Knipperdoling prophecieth.
and rang all the Bells together: some days after, Knipperdoling prophesied,
that all lofty things must be laid low, and the poor, and the mean, and the low
things must be exalted; and forthwith commanded, that all the Churches should
be demolished; with a very great gravity assuring them, that this command came
from God: wherefore he was without delay obeyed, and the heavenly command (as
he called it) put in execution. At the same time John Becold gave the sword
unto Knipperdoling, Becold makes Knipperdoling Hangman,
and appointed him to be executioner, because it so fell out that he was the
Consul, and had administered the chief Magistrates place. Being now made
Hangman, he is put in a lower rank. Knipperdoling made no scruple of it, and
received this place very acceptably; which he accepts.
and whereas the Camp had now been some months before the City, They sally
forth, and make a great slaughter, to the number of 4000.
they stormed it; and of the chief Nobility, and best Captains and Soldiers
there were slain before the City about four thousand: then all hopes of taking
them by force failed. A few days after Whitsontide, John Becold of Leyden,
after that assaults had been given without effect, Becold for three days
dreams, and feigns himself dumb as Zachary, and writes the names of twelve
chief Commanders.
he went to sleep, and laid and dreamed three entire days together; and when
he awaked, he spoke to no man; but as Zacharias, John the Baptists father, so
he made signs that they should bring him paper; wherein he wrote the names of
twelve men, and among them of some of the best rank, who were to have the
Supreme charge, and to have the whole Government as it was in Israel; for he
said, it was the will of the heavenly Father, that Munster should be governed
as the heavenly Jerusalem. By this means this wicked one made way that he might
be King: afterward he proposed direct articles unto their Preachers, and
required them to confirm them, Propounds diverse Articles.
by testimony of Scripture; otherwise he would bring them unto the people, that
they might ratify and approve them.

The sum of these Articles was, that a man was not bound to have but one wife,
The chief concerning plurality of wives.
and that it was lawful to espouse as many as he pleased: but as their
Preachers did confute this sentence, he assembled them at the Councel-house
with the twelve; where in the presence of them all he pulled off his cloak, and
cast it upon the ground with the New Testament, and swear by these marks and
signs, Swears it was so revealed to him from God.
that these Articles by him proposed were revealed to him from heaven:
wherefore he threatened them, that if they consented not unto them, God would
never be merciful unto them. Finally, they agreed, and were of his Opinion, and
the Preachers for three days space spoke of nothing but of the point of
Marriage. Without delay, John Becold married three wives, one of whom was the
widow of the great Prophet John Matthews: He marries three wives.
others like lewd men followed his example, so as it was a praiseworthy thing
to have many wives. The Citizens are displeased, take the Prophets.
Some of the honest Citizens were sorely displeased to see Marriage thus
profaned, and they gave a sign to gather all those together into the Market
place, who loved the Doctrine of the Gospel; and then they ran into the Market
place, and laid hands upon the Prophets, and took Knipperdoling, and all the
rest of the Prophets: The Common people rescue them, and cruelly torture and
kill fifty.
But the common people having notice hereof, took arms; and having rescued the
Captives, killed about fifty with great torments, tying them to trees and
posts, discharged Muskets at them: in the mean while the great Prophet cried
out, that he that would do God service, should fire first. They killed others
With another sort of death.

Becold has fifteen wives at once.
This great Prophet John Becold of Leyden, having by his vision gained this
point, that it was lawful for a man to take together as many wives as he
pleased, played his pranks; for he married but fifteen, and had them all at
once; and it was lawful for any one to have six or seven: for they must thus
renew their Marriage, as they had done their Baptism. And that none might take
ill what they did, they merrily colored over their villanny with testimonies
out of Gods word; they brought the examples of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Jacob,
David and Solomon, and diverse others, and said that the word of God commanded
it, Genesis 1.28.
saying, Increase, multiply, and fill the earth. When that sentence was
brought, 1 Timothy 3. That a Bishop must be unblamable, the husband of one wife,
they answered, That it was clear from the text, That the Apostle required that
of none but the Bishops, and that for several reasons; That he might not
burden the Church, and that he might the better attend upon his Office; but
this was not forbidden to any other.

Upon the 24. of June 15.34. there arose a new Prophet, by Trade a Goldsmiths
named John Twiscoscar; A new Prophet John Twiscoscar, declares that God
appointed John Becold Emperor of all the earth.
he having assembled the people into the Market place, made known that the will
and command of the heavenly Father was, that John Becold of Leyden should be
made Emperor of all the earth; and that should march into the Field with a
mighty Army, and that he should without making any difference destroy all Kings
and Princes, pardoning only the people; that is to say, those which loved
righteousness; that he might hold the throne of his father David, until that
the Father did deliver up the Kingdom unto him; for the Saints should reign in
this world, after that they had destroyed all the wicked. These things were
soon brought to John Becold of Leyden, Who accepts it,
who falling down upon both his knees, and lifting up his hands to heaven,
said, It is several days since I knew this, Brethren, yet I would not divulge
it; but now the Father has made use of another Minister to persuade it. He
made semblance as if he received the Kingdom against his will; yet he laid hold
on it with both hands, and had long before bribed for it, and plotted it.

and cashiers the twelve Commanders.
Being now King, he who before was but a Tailor, at that instant cashiereth the
twelve; and on the sudden attireth himself with more then Royal Pomp and
Magnificence: he chose great Lords, Invests himself with kingly Robes.
and commanded that they should make two Crowns of pure Gold: he bore a Scepter
with a Chain of Gold; and likewise his Spurs with Rowels of gold: in brief, he
was not clad but with Silk, Velvet, and Gold, which they had stolen out of the
Churches: his horses were accordingly accoutred: he appointed certain days to
give audience to all such as addressed themselves unto him for any business;
His Pompous Train and attendance.
and when he went abroad, he was attended upon by his Servants, and Gentlemen
of his Court: next unto him there went two young men on horseback magnificently
clad; he that went on the right hand bare the Crown and the Bible, the other on
the left hand bare a naked Sword, the Pommel whereof was of pure gold, and
richly adorned with precious stones: the King had his chain of gold about his
neck, and he was all glittering with gold and precious stones: he bare in his
hand a Globe of gold. His waiting Gentlemen were twenty eight, clad like
Courtiers, with garments of mixed color of green and blew, to signify his
heavenly and earthly power. Upon the Kings Girdle was written, The power of God
is my strength: thus was the Name of God profaned and blasphemed, to cloak
this Villains stinking infamy: Farthermore, his Title was, The King of the new
Jerusalem, King of Righteousness, throughout all the World. The pomp of his
chief wife, (for he had many together) was equal to his own: his servants were
clad in green, and bordered with a brown color; and upon their sleeve there
was a world with a little cross about it, and two swords thwarted across. He
had his Throne set up aloft, whereunto he ascended by three steps, and all was
beset with gold and Jewels. The Lawsuits which ordinarily came before him, were
for the most part about women and divorces, insomuch as some who had lived
almost all their life long together, now separated one from another. It came to
pass one day, that when the people were in the Market place, close crouding,
and in a throng to hear; that Knipperdoling leaped on their heads,
Knipperdoling's blasphemy.
and scrambling with his hands and feet being now above them, he breathed upon,
the men one after another in their mouths, saying, The Father has sanctified
thee, receive the Holy Ghost. Confesses himself an whore-master.
One day he fell a dancing before the King, saying, Thus I am wonted to do with
my whore, but now the Father has commanded me to do it before the King: but
because he did it too long, and would not make an end, the King was angry, and
went his way. He suddenly mounted into the Throne; but the King surprising
him, threw him down, and three days kept him in prison.

Is there not here to be seen a wonderful rage and madness? Who could have
believed that any bearing humane shape, should have been left to commit things
so foolish, absurd, villainous, and execrable? but it cannot be otherwise with
such as violate, trample upon arid reject the word of God; they are by Divine
judgment smitten, so as to be an example unto the elect. But let us behold
their goodly glorious King, now mounted with more then Royal Pomp: where is
the spirit of these Anabaptists, who were so ready to reprove and reject
others? at first they cried out against all; if they saw any Matron wear silk,
or any man of fashion to wear a gold Ring, they cried all down: but now their
glorious King Tailor omitteth nothing, that may set forth his Pomp and State.
In the beginning they would not bear to hear, that any honest man should be a
Bailiff, or Governor of a Village; but soon the wind is changed, and now by
command from the Father, their King is not King of a Village, but of the whole
World; for so he caused himself to be styled. During this Siege, the Prophets
of Munster published a Book, which they entitled, The Restitution: wherein
they maintained Muntzers damnable doctrine, and an infinite of errors.

Afterward in the Month of August, on the day which is called St Bartholmews,
the new Prophet called John Twiscoscar sounded the Trumpet through the streets,
and cried out, that all should meet in arms about the way to the great Church;
for they must give a repulse to the enemies of the City: being thither come,
they find a Supper ready, which the King had provided; and by command the
people did sit down, to the number of four thousand: the King, Queen, and
Courtiers waited at the Table. Supper almost being finished, the King gave
unleavened bread to all, Becolds mock-Lords Supper.
saying, Take, eat, declare the death of the Lord: then the Queen presented the
cup, saying, Drink, declare the death of the Lord. Behold the brave Supper of
these Anabaptists, which was rather a voluptuous Banquet, the Table of Devils,
then the Table of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now when the Supper was ended, the new
Prophet gat him up into the Pulpit, and asked them whether they would obey the
word of God? they all said, Yes: Twiscoscar reveals that twenty eight Teachers
must be sent forth.
he told them then that the command of the Father was, that they must send
twenty eight Teachers of the word. Then he named them in order, declaring the
place whither each should go: six were sent to Osemberg, as many to Warrendort;
eight to Susar, and as many to Corsfield.

The King and Queen and the 28. Teachers sup together.
The King The King and the Queen with tho served at the table, supped
afterward, and those which were appointed to be sent forth. As they were at
Supper, the King rose up, and said, That he had received a commission from the
Father: whereas upon an adventure there was a Soldier which had been taken,
the King accused him that he was a traitor as Judas, and with his own hands cut
off his head. This being done, he returned to sit down at Table, and by way of
merriment recited what he had done. After Supper within night, they caused the
twenty eight above mentioned, to depart out of the City; and over and above
their expenses, they gave to every one of them certain pieces of gold, to leave
in such places where their doctrine should not be received, in witness of their
perdition, and eternal damnation; for their refusal of the peace and doctrine
of Salvation.

And when they were arrived at the places assigned unto them, they began to run
through the City with horrible cries, crying, Repent, repent, otherwise ye will
suddenly perish: then they cast their garments upon the ground, and threw
their pieces of gold which were given unto them upon their garments, assuring
them that they were sent by the Father, to bring peace unto them if they would
receive it: they commanded them to put all their goods in common: if they did
refuse it, by this sign, and as by a mark, they did bear witness against their
ingratitude, and evil deeds: for behold the time now is come, which was
foretold by the Prophets, wherein the Lord God would, that righteousness should
reign through all the earth: and after that the King shall have discharged his
trust, and shall have so done; that righteousness shall reign every where; Then
Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father.

Upon these words they were apprehended, and in the beginning fairly demanded,
then by the rack examined of their faith, life, and ammunition of the City.
They answered, that they alone had the true doctrine, which they would unto the
death maintain: for since the Apostles time the Gospel was not truly preached,
and that there was no righteousness: that there were four Prophets, two of
which were true, namely, David George, and John Becold of Leyden; two were
false, namely, the Pope, and Luther worse then the Pope. Being asked why they
drove the honest people out of the City, against their faith and promise, and
detained their goods, wives and children; and by what text of Scripture, they
could warrant that unrighteousness: They answered, that the time was now come,
wherein the word of Christ should be fulfilled, that the meek should possess
the earth; and that God in this manner gave the goods of the Egyptians unto the
Israelites: after, they declared their ammunition and victuals that was in the
City, with their Garrison, some of whom had above five wives. Moreover, that
they looked for Soldiers from Friseland and Holland, who being arrived, the
King would take the Field with all his Army, to reduce the whole World under
his power and subjection, after that he had slain their Kings which did not
righteousness. After that they were questioned, and still persisted in their
opinions, they were all beheaded, except one who escaped.

At the same time the arose another Prophet, called Henry Hilvers a wicked man,
subtle and wary; he came to declare unto the King and the people, that the
heavenly Father had revealed unto him, that three rich Cities with all their
goods should be given unto them by God, namely, Amsterdam, Deveater, and Wesel.
The King hearing this, set himself to consult with his Council, by what means
they might bring these three Cities unto Anabaptism; and to this effect they
sent certain men unto these places. In the first place he sent James Campense
to Amsterdam, and commanded him to be Prince in that City, and ordered him John
Matthews of Middleburg to be his consort: they went into Holland, and hid
themselves at a Sectaries house, and there with their mischievous doctrine they
impoisoned many, rebaptized their disciples, and secretly by night held
Conventicles and Meetings; yea, also they scattered their poison in the
neighboring Cities: for in the City of Leyden, in the Month of January, in
the year following 1535, many were put to death for Anabaptism, and for their
seditious counsels and enterprises. Moreover, in the end of the year 1534 the
King sent into Friseland, John Gelen, a subtle man, and well versed in arms, he
having formerly had charge in the Army; the King gave him good store of gold
out of the spoil of the Churches, and gave him in charge to raise an Army in
Frise; and acted so by certain men that assisted him, that on the 30. of March
1535. he mustered up and raised an Army, and took a Monastery, and drove out
the Friars, and there quartered his Camp, until his Army should augment and be
completed. George Schonk who then was Governor of Frise, speedily assaulted
them as seditious persons: they valiantly defended themselves, but he gained
the Victory and defeated them; but not without great loss: they were all cut
off except sixty, who were brought to Leanard, and after were punished
according to their deserts. Their Captain John Gelen escaped and fled to
Amsterdam, to be the author of some further sedition; where he found many
Anabaptists, whom John Campense had seduced; he promised them great matters,
highly exalting the glory and liberty at Munster, magnificently preaching the
new reign of righteousness upon earth. For by this time the renown of Munster
was spread, which animated the courage of many; seeing so great an Army had
besieged them, yea, and had stormed them often, with the loss of many; and that
they saw the Anabaptists to persist in their purpose: many who were desirous to
be freed from their debts, and to triumph, did greatly desire to enjoy the
liberty of Munster. Henry Gesbell a Citizen of Amsterdam, a stout man, and of
renown for Soldiery, was gained by the Anabaptists, and was very familiar with
John Gelen; who being drawn to their party by large promises, much was wrought
by him: for in the conclusion 600 Anabaptists met together, with whom they
intended and attempted to take Amsterdam, to set up their new reign, as they
had done at Munster: for upon the 10. of May, the first and the chiefest of
them, assembled in the house of Peter Gale; where after consultation they came
forth into the street; for that day the Citizens were merry, and had according
to a custom among them been at a Game.

About 10. a clock, the Anabaptists ran together in the streets, about the
Cross, which was a public place, crying out, Amend your lives, etc. whosoever
will this night be ^ich and happy, let him march along with us: and as the
number of their people increased more and more, they slew part of them who had
charge of the watch, and the other part they took prisoners. Now the Citizens
assembled themselves, and assaulted the Anabaptists; but they carried the
matter so ill, as that their Consul was slain, and the rest put to flight; but
then they reinforced their strength, and gave battle unto the Anabaptists, who
were then defeated, though with much blood which then was shed; among whom John
Gelen and Henry Gesbell were slain.

James Campense was taken, and executed by the hand of Justice. Afterward in
many parts of those places of Holland, the Anabaptists raised tumults and
seditions; not without loss and great damage unto several honest people, for
they could not keep themselves quiet: for when they were defeated in one part,
they began in another; making in secret many disciples, who waited for the
restoring of the Kingdom unto Israel.

There was a certain man in the Town of Leyden, who being forced unto it by
torments, confessed that the King of the Anabaptists dwelt in Utricht; but that
he was not yet crowned, but only designed to be Prince in the Kingdom of
Israel: this prisoner was not only found possessed of vessels of silver and
gold, which by evil practice he had stolen; but also guilty of several horrible
crimes, for which he was executed: there is no doubt, but that by this King
they did intend David George.

In the mean while, although at Munster their King and Prophets had made unto
the poor people most great and magnificent promises; yet now everyday they were
oppressed with great necessity, and chiefly through famine; insomuch as many
were starved, and died for want of bread.

The Inhabitants secretly resolved to apprehend the King, and to deliver him up
unto the Bishop, and by this means to purchase their peace: the King making
doubt hereof, and not trusting to himself; he chose twelve men, whom he judged
would be most faithful unto him, and appointed them to be Captains of each
Quarter of the City, that he might be in the better rest and assurance;
afterward he promised the people, that by Easter they should be freed, and
delivered from this siege, and all their poverty: for he hoped that the Legates
which he had sent into Frise, and Holland, and other Regions, having raised
Soldiers, would make some stirs; and that by this means the siege would be
raised before Munster: but he was deceived by his vain hopes, as we have heard
(for there was a goodly dispatch of his Legates:) He promised great matters to
the Captains which he had chosen; how when the Camp should be raised before the
City, he would make them great Lords and Princes; and particularly he gave unto
John Dents the Empire of Saxony: whereby appeared the brutishness and
Diabolical rage of this pleasant and goodly King Tailor, to promise to give
that which was none of his own; and to take it away from him, to whom God had
given it.

In the Month of February, the famine was so great, that many died through
hunger and want. One of the Queens (for there were many) called Elisa, out of
pity to the people, occasionally said, That she did not believe, that it was
pleasing unto God, that the people should thus perish through famine: The King,
who had store of good provision in his house, not only for necessity, but also
to make good cheer; withal knowing this, brought her into the Market place with
all the other Queens, and commanded them all to fall down upon their knees
about her; and unsheathing his sword he struck off her head from off her
shoulders: and not being contented herewith, he reproached her as a bawd: the
other wives fell a singing after this goodly deed, Glory be unto God in the
highest; and gave thanks unto the heavenly Father: and then then they fell a
dancing; the King led the Galliard, and exhorted the poor people to leap,
dance, and to rejoice also, who had naught left but a little bread and salt.

When Easter was come, and that there appeared no sign of deliverance, the
people were, and that not without cause, much grieved: the King who all along
fed them with fair promises, fell sick, and continued so six days together,
that he might cover himself with some excuse: after those six days, he came
into the Market place, and there showing himself, he told the people, that he
had promised them deliverance: but it must spiritually be understood, and
behold this was the deliverance; he said, That he had rode the blind Ass, and
that the Father had laid upon him the sins of the multitude; and that he had
borne them, and taken them away: and that now they were delivered from all
their sins; which was the deliverance that he had promised unto them. Thus must
the poor and miserable people content themselves, to hear this execrable
blasphemy. The blind Ass of this Gallant, whereupon this devilish and
desperate man rode, was the poor people, that endured and did bear the
enormities of such a villain, whom they adored.

If we should reckon up the miseries, calamities, and other evils which those
of the City endured, it were a miserable thing to hear. Diverse who could not
bear the famine, fled to the enemy; not so much looking for mercy, as that
their pain might be expired by death: many crawled upon their bellies in the
streets, and others died in the ways: it was an horrible thing to see many
walking quite stripped of flesh, nothing left but skin upon the bones. Their
ears, lips, cheeks, and noses were so shrunk up, as one might almost see
daylight through them, as through a piece of paper. Through feebleness, they
could not carry their bodies: some went to the enemy disarmed, trailing a staff
in their hands: whiles provision lasted, none talked of going to the enemy; but
now when this was spent, they began their desolation and discontent: yet they
helped themselves as long as they could: They sowed in the sides of the walls,
and in all wast places, rapes, pease and such seeds, and with this they made
shift to pass the Summer: But when this crop was spent, then it was as Venison
to them to feed on dogs, rats and mice; and when the City was taken, there were
but two horses left alive: many were so pressed with hunger, as that they did
eat the flesh of dead carcasses. Finally, they boiled shoos, old leather, and
skins, and beat them together, and put them into a pot, and mingled all sorts
of matter together which they could find: this was instead of bread; and yet
this villain and wicked cheater deceived them, telling them, God tried them, to
see whether they would be faithful and constant; and that certainly the Father
would deliver them in a short time. Now they that would depart out of the City,
to be delivered from these mischiefs, were to present themselves before the
King: and there this Robber took from them all that they had; and when they
were ransacked, he said, Now get you gone to the Heretics.

The King had yet provision of victuals in his Palace, for about two Months;
but it was only for his Courtiers. They consulted how they might victual the
City. Then there stood forth one named Hansken-Vander Langke-strate, he was one
of the Kings Secretaries, and one in whom he confided much: he undertook to
re-victual the City, and to bring in three hundred Soldiers to their
assistance, and all within 15. days: he departed out of the City; and under
this pretense went unto the enemy; and for a certain sum of money sold the City
unto the Bishop, offering to lose his life if he did not accomplish it: the
time for this Plot to be put in execution; was the even of S. John's day, at ten
a clock in the night; and that he would open the Gate unto them, provided they
came without noise, to the Gate of the Cross. Then this Purveiour returned unto
the City, and comforted the King, telling him, that he had well ordered his
business; and that within 15. days, they should have a recruit of Victuals and
Soldiers. When the day was come, he told the Watch, that this night their aid
and victuals should come; and therefore when they saw them approach, that they
should take heed that they made no noise, but be very quiet: At the very time
appointed, at ten a clock in the night, the Gate was opened; and the enemy
entered. They killed the Sentinels, and the Corpse du Guard, having got the Word.
Being thus entered into the City, the trumpets sound an Alarm; suddenly the
King and his men put themselves into a posture to fight, and to repulse the
enemy back again to the Gate, which was now shut by some of the Citizens. The
enemies without broke up the Gates; for they heard how they charged upon their
people within: and being now entered in, they display their Colors. Those of
the City abode the brunt a little at first, and were drawn up in the Market
place: the Battle was very great. The King, Knipperdoling, Chretchting, were
taken: then Rotman seeing no hope to escape, thrust himself into the middle of
the enemies, and there was run through, because he feared to be taken alive.
But when the Anabaptists heard, that their King was taken, their courage failed
them; and they hid themselves here and there in Cellars, holes and Shop-bulkes;
yea, if it had been possible, would have ran into mouseholes. They were ten
days in pillaging the City, and they found in the Kings Palace provision for
200. men for two Months: whereas the poor people were for a long time starved.
This was called, to have things in common; when as some had to eat, and others
were starved. This was like Ananias and Saphira's dealing before the Apostle
Peter.

Thus was the City of Munster taken, the 25. of June 1538. the King was three
days after, by a guard of Soldiers brought to a Castle three leagues from the
City, called Dulme. As soon as the Bishop perceived the King, he cried out, Oh
thou wretch! how have thou brought spoil and wast to me, and to my poor people!
The King readily and proudly answered, lifting up himself, and despising the
Bishop, said, Priest, we have not damnified thee one mite, but we have
delivered a strong City into thine hands, which is able to stand out against
all strength: yet if We have done thee damage, if thou will hearken unto us, we
will make thee rich. The Bishop hearing that, could not forbear laughing, and
asked him, how he would do it? The King answered him, Get Baskets made of Iron,
and cover them over with leather, and put me in one of them, and cause me to be
carried through the Country, and let no man see me, but he that shall give thee
a penny; and by this means, thou shall receive more money then thou have spent
in the War.

The better and most holy Anabaptists hung about their necks the mark and
ensign of their King engraven in brass, marked with these three letters, D. W.
E. which in their language signified, The Word was made flesh. The King had for
his title, I John by the grace of God, and by virtue of the new Kingdom to
come in the temple of God, Minister of righteousness, etc.

Thus the King with his two companions were carried prisoners here and there
unto the Princes, by which means the Ministers of the Lantgrave had opportunity
to confer with the King, and to dispute with him, about the principal points,
viz. The Kingdom of Christ, The Magistrate, Baptism, The Incarnation of our
Lord, The Lords Supper, Marriage: and by testimonies of Scripture unto them, so
acted, as though in all things they changed not: notwithstanding all the
oppositions they made, to defend their opinions, yet they yielded somewhat;
which the King did (as some thought) in hope to save his life: for at the
second time of their return, he promised them, if they would grant him his
liberty, to silence the Anabaptists, which were in great numbers in Holland,
Brabant, England, and Friseland, and to bring them in subjection to the
Magistrate.

The 20. of Jan. 1536. the King and his two companions were brought back to
Munster: and put in several prisons; the two next days were spent in holy
Remonstrances, to reduce them from their errors. The King acknowledged his
sin, and had recourse to Christ by prayer: The other two acknowledged not their
faults, but stood out. The next day the King was brought forth upon a Scaffold,
and tied to a post; where were two executioners, with hot burning tongs: he
endured the three first pinchings of the tongs, without speaking word;
afterward he ceased not to call upon the mercy of the Lord. Thus for a whole
hour and more, was he torn, and dismembered; and to dispatch him out of the
world, he was run through with a sword: his two companions had the like end.
Their bodies were put into iron cages, and hung upon St. Lamberts Tower, for a
perpetual memorial. Let none think we recite stories of the Anabaptists, which
are not to be believed, by adding thereunto of our own; God forbid that we
should so do: for there are many yet living, who were eyewitnesses of these
things, and present when they were done. I speak this, that none might be
hindered from getting profit by this History, which is true and certain, and
brought to light for the instruction of the people of God.

In the year 1535. upon the 3. of February, in the City of Amsterdam, in the
street of the Salines, in the house of one John Silert, who then was far from
home, there assembled seven men and five women then called Anabaptists, among
whom there was one called Theodore Sartor, who was there inspired; he lay
stretched out flat upon the ground, for some space of time, before the other
brethren and sisters: who in the end awakened; and prayer being made with great
gravity, or rather fair hypocrisy, he then said, That he had seen God in his
Majesty, also that he had a vision of all things in heaven and in hell; and
that the great day of Judgment was now come: afterward he pulled off all his
Garments, not leaving so much as to cover his shameful parts withal. He
commanded the rest of his brethren and sisters to follow his example, upon this
pretense, for said he, The children of God must strip themselves, and put off
whatsoever is made, and born of the earth; inasmuch as truth is naked, and
cannot abide to be wrapped up in any thing: therefore, they to show themselves
veritable and true, ought to uncloath themselves. The poor people hearing this,
put off their clothes; and being no ways ashamed, became quite naked. Theodore
commanded them all to imiate him: he leapt out of doors into the public quite
naked, as also did the rest of the men and women, who followed him, trying,
after an horrible manner, Woe, woe, woe, Divine vengeance, Divine vengeance, etc.
and in this manner they ran furiously through the City, like mad people, crying
out so hideously as never was heard.

Then the Citizens ran to take arms (for they knew not whether the City were
surprised by enemies, or what would become of this stir.) Finally, these
impudent people were taken being quite naked; and being questioned upon the 5.
of March, these seven men were beaten and scourged: the first of them cried
out, Praise the Lord for evermore: another said, Lord av^nge the blood of
thine: the third, Open your eyes: the fourth said, Woe, woe. Afterward the women
were brought to punishment: when they were taken, they offered them garments,
but they rejected them, saying, That the truth ought to be naked. What men ever
heard of such impudency or fury? In the ancient stories we read of Adamites,
who also went naked: but it was only among themselves, and at their Festival
days; but these far surpass them.

When Adam saw himself naked, he sought for covering; and finding nothing more
fit then leaves, he made use of those of a Figtree: but these, when as garments
were tendered unto them, they refused them; and like dogs ran without shame.
Behold, what befalls those that leave the word of God, to cleave unto dreams
and Satanical illusions! but behold their madness, in that they dare attribute
such villainy unto the holy Spirit of God, and to make him the author of their
nakedness: they ought to have in remembrance, with what gravity the Apostle
Paul commands women to have their heads covered in the Church: what would he
have said if he had seen or known women to run without shame quite naked like
Bitches, who commanded that women apparel themselves in decent habit, with
shamefacedness and modesty?

The things which were done by these Anabaptists in the Town of St. Gall in
Switzerland, are not less hideous nor horrible then these, whereof we have
already heard. For in the year 1526. two brethren which came out of the same
womb, Thomas and Leonard Schitker, inhabiting near unto the Town in the Mount
called Mulleg; the 7. of February, by night there assembled a great number of
Anabaptists in their Fathers house, who spent all the night in preaching and
doing marvelous deeds, and receiving of visions: at Sunrising, upon the 8. of
February, Thomas took his brother Leonard, and set him in the midst of his
kindred, and of all the company, commanding him to fall down upon his knees:
now as the rest admonished him, to do no unbeseeming thing unto his brother, he
answered them, That they needed not to fear, for he should do nothing there,
but the will of the Father: in the mean while unsheathing a Sword, he cut off
his brothers head, who was upon his knees, before them all. As all the company
were smitten with great fear, and made great and lamentable complaints, Thomas
who had committed this murder, suddenly flies out of the Town, using
horrible behaviors, as the custom of the Anabaptists is to do.

This Enthusiast at that time came, before the Consul in the Town of St. Gall.
Mr. Joachim Vadian, an excellent man, and renowned for piety and learning,
being present, this Anabaptist cried out fearfully before him, The day of the
Lord is at hand, the day of the Lord comes: he added further, that at the
break of day, there had been some great thing done, (but he concealed the
matter) and that the will of the Father was accomplished, and that it had been
steeped in gall and vinegar: the Consul reproved him, and chid him sharply,
because of his fury and immoderate cries, commanding him to cloth himself, and
to return to his house, and to behave himself peaceably. Suddenly his
villainous murder was divulged, and he was apprehended and diligently examined
by torture; and afterward for his villainous fact, by the hand of the
Magistrate executed and put to death. This poor Anabaptist had forgot the
doctrine of the Apostle, 1 Job. 3.12. etc. but God by his righteous judgment
and providence, suffered such villainous and execrable deeds to be committed by
these persons, that these ways may be abhominated.

There was found at Appasell in the Country of Switzerland, a woman, A
She-Messiah.
a sister of this Sect, who taught and persuaded many of her brethren, that she
was Christ the Messiah of women, and chose twelve Apostles.

That befalls these persons, which is common to such as once stray, and turn
aside from the right path, and the good old way: by how much further they are
off and distant from the right path, and the more progress they make; so much
the farther do they wander from the right way: after that they had built the
Tower of Babel, God so consounded their language, that they understood not one
another; and they are divided among themselves, yea, they have damned and
excommunicated one another, and made diverse Churches apart, without
familiarity, or communion together. But not to weary the Reader with such
diversity, I shall only name fifteen.

1. In the first place, there is Thomas Muntzer with his rout. 2. There are the
Apostolical ones, as they call themselves. 3. The Spiritual ones, and separated
from the world. 4. The holy and sinless ones: these are the Perfectists. 5. The
Silentiaries. 6. The Praying ones, and wholly trusting in God. 7. The
Enthusiasts. 8. The great free Libertines. 9. The Brethren Huttikes. 10. The
Augustinians 11. The Glorians, and Triumphant Anabaptists of Munster. 12. Those
of Melchior Hoffman. 13. The Meherlanders. 14. The Mennonites, the disciples of
Menno Simons. 15. The Franiques, which also within these few days are divi^ed.
Let us now come to behold some of their strange opinions; for that were a work
never to be done, to describe them all. We shall begin with Thomas Muntzer, of
whom mention was made in the beginning of the History.

Firstly, He wrote and taught publicly, that the Ministers and Preachers of
the Gospel, were not sent of God: and that they preached not the true word of
God, but were Scribes and Pharisees, preaching only the dead Letter of the
Scripture.

Moreover, he said, That the writing of the Old Testament, and the preaching of
the eternal word, was not the word of God, but was only the testimony thereof:
and that we must search for the word in the internal part, i.e. in our hearts,
where God has put it, that we need not go far to seek it from without us: The
Scribe-Ministers (says he) think that faith comes by the Scriptures and
preaching, but they are very-far off: for all the Scriptures lead us hither,
that we must be taught and learned of God, Joh. 6.45. Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.34.

It was very needful for these Anabaptists, to begin here to set up their Sect
and Faction: Paul's writing to Timothy, where he says, Be an example, 1 Timothy
4.12.
etc. whereby the Apostle shows it is needful for the Minister to approve his
calling by purity of life, otherwise it will be vain and false; 1. Tim. 3.2.
also the Bishop must be unblamable. Our new Mennonists and Franiques are of
the same opinion. But in the mean while, who sees not that they endeavor
above all things, to set up their own works and righteousnesses, and
Pharisee-like to judge and condemn all such as do not as many works as they? It
is many times so, that Harlots will boast themselves more of their chastity
then honest Matrons: so it was with the false Apostles at Corinth, that they
might bring the true Apostles of Christ into disrepute; they so boasted of
their own virtue and lowliness, as if the true Apostles were in no wise to be
compared with them. But the Apostle is in no wise astonished at their vain and
foolish braggings; yea, he plainly derided them, saying, We dare not make ours
of the number, nor compare our selves with some who commend themselves: but
they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with
themselves, are not wise: as if the Apostle should have said, They so please
themselves in themselves, that they think and esteem, that there are none in
the world equal or to be compared with themselves: they consider not the gifts
wherewith others are endued, but their sight is so fixed upon themselves and
their own fair deeds, as that they are persuaded, that they are the only ones,
and the Nonesuch in the world. In the mean while, the Apostle lively
upbraideth them, saying, Such false Apostles are deceitful workers, disguising
them selves into Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, says he, for Satan
transformeth himself into an Angel of light; it is no great matter then, if his
Ministers transform themselves into the Ministers of righteousness: whose end
shall be according to their works. Moreover, who knows not well, that
Doctrine far surpasses works? so as if the Doctrine be not sound, pure, and
true; the works, how holy and fair soever they may be, will never prove the
calling of a false Prophet, that he is sent from God.

If it were lawful for us to boast, it should not be in our sanctity,
perfection, and mortification, as they do; but only in the pure mercy of God
through Jesus Christ: if so be that gravity and honesty of life, were the true
sign of the vocation to the Ministry; it would follow that all honest and good
people, should be Ministers of the Church; but that is well known to be false,
1 Cor. 7.10. nor can it be: for there is a command for every one to walk in the
calling wherein he is called, 1 Cor. 12.29. he asks also, are all Apostles?
are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Every Christian may or ought to read, and
discourse of Scripture: it follows not therefore that all Christians are
Preachers and Ministers of the Churches, but only those which are lawfully
called; nor does the calling cease for any failing that may be found in the
life of the called (which is not spoken to give occasion to make Ministers
negligent; (God forbid:) But the exhortation of the Apostle Paul, is always
necessary to the Ministers) no more then Peter ceased to be a true and lawful
Apostle, Act. 6.6. Act. 13.3. 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
when he so grossly failed, Gal. 2.11, 12. It is well known that our Ministers
are called to Office by the voice and common consent of all the Church; and
that after fasting and calling upon the name of God, according to Apostolical
institution, and are confirmed in their Office by imposition of hands: what
reason is there for these Sectaries to say, That their Ministers are called of
God, but ours only by the world and men? if their Ministers have a special
calling as the Apostles had, let them prove it by signs, miracles, gifts of
tongues, and Apostolical Doctrine, as they did: the Church has no need of your
Ministers; for the Doctrine of Repentance, Amendment of life, and of Remission
of sins in the name of Christ, is abundantly declared in the Church of Christ:
to teach the same thing is superfluous: if you teach any other Doctrine, then
you and your Doctrine is accursed, and not to be heard.

I shall say no other thing, then what the Apostle Paul before spoke to the
like glorious Ministers as theirs be, Gal. 1.18. If their spirit be so full of
knowledge and light, so as they cannot contain themselves from preaching
without calling; why do they not preach where the Gospel was never yet
declared? they insinuate themselves into such places, where the holy Gospel
has been preached to the people, with great labor and hazard of life unto the
poor Ministers. It is a marvel, how they will vouchsafe to enjoy, and partake
of the labors of those Ministers, whom they so much hate: they secretly by
fraud and deceit, seduce and disturb in such places the poor sheep of Jesus
Christ, which ought not to be withdrawn from their true Pastors. Joh. 10.5.
I pray all the flock of Christ, not to give heed to such strangers; but rather
hearken to the voice of the Apostle, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.17.

These Sectaries do defame and reproach the Ministers, and speak all evil of
them; but it is because they touch them at the quick, because they cry out upon
these wolves, and pluck the sheepskins from off their backs, that none might be
surprised by their fair appearance: seeing the Gospel Ministers are styled the
Salt of the earth, none must think strange that the Salt biteth and pricketh,
and makes it self to be Salt: the Salt biteth not where there is no wound, but
it is felt where there is a raw place. It will appear then, that they have lost
their spiritual senses, who say, That our Ministers are not called of God: God
has put singular honor upon the Ministers; yea, what greater could he put
upon them, then by saying, He that hears you, hears me; and he that
rejects you, rejects me? the Lord not only by words, has recommended the
Ministers unto the Church; but also by example, has shown what honor and
reverence all ought to have them in. Act. 8.
The holy Ghost could have taught the Ethiopian Eunuch, without the Ministry of
man, but he would maintain this order.

So Cornelius; Act. 10.5.
God could have taught him by the Angel, but he is bid by him to send for
Peter. When our Lord called Paul, he could have instructed him himself, yet he
is sent to a Mortal man, to receive the Doctrine of Salvation, and Baptism:
behold, a case which fell not out by rashness, that an Angel of God should
withdraw from entering upon the Ministry; Act. 9.6.
and should send him to a man, a Minister, to preach unto him. Who with a good
Conscience dare then despise the true Ministry, so highly honored of God; and
to disgust men from the same, and to cause men to run after those which were
not lawful Ministers, but thieves, robbers, and grievous wolves, which spare
not the flock of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Let us now come to the second point: Muntzer after he had spued out his poison
against the poor Ministers of Christ; he falls upon the word of the eternal
God: and there that he may leave nothing entire, with open throat he spits out
his blasphemies. It is no marvel if he fall upon the Ministers of the word, to
speak evil of them, seeing he dares so outragiously to set himself against the
very mouth of God: Behold his own words

That the Scriptures of the Old. and New Testament, the Scripture says, that
they shall be taught of God. These are his own words.

We plainly confess, i. e. that the Letters written with ink upon paper, by the
hand of the Writer; and that the voice sounding out of the mouth, is not the
word of God, inasmuch as it is written and spoken by man? yet we do
notwithstanding affirm, that the sense of these words written, and spoken by
the mouth of the Minister, is the true and indubitable word of God: as it more
plainly appears, Jer. 36.4, 6, 8.
where the Prophet Jeremiah commands Baruch to write from his mouth, all the
words of the Lord. The words of Jeremiah written with ink in a Book, are called
the word of the Lord.

How often do we hear in the Prophets, Thus says the Lord! read these
Scriptures. Jer. 25.15. Jer. 20.33. 1 Pet. 1.23. Isa. 40.6. 1 These. 2.13. Deuteronomy.
10.18. Acts 4.31. Acts 6.2. Acts 8.14, 25. Acts 11.1. Acts 13.5, 7, 25. Acts
17.13. Acts 18.11. Heb. 13.7. Ephesians. 1.13. We ought rather to give credit to so
many evident testimonies of Scripture, then unto such Ravers, who do nothing
but rave and dream.

Muntzer cares not for that, but dares give the Apostle Peter the lie. Now
they which thus leave the Scriptures, finding out another means to come unto
God, through pride, they are deprived of their senses. They pretend unto
Revelations of the Spirit; and despising all reading, they mock at the
simpleness of those, which yet follow the dead and killing Letter (as they call
it.) By what spirit is it, by inspiration whereof they are so highly rapt, as
that they dare reject all the Doctrine of the Scriptures, as a babish and
childish thing? they say, It is the Spirit of God, but it is plain mockery so
to speak. For they must needs grant us, that the Apostles and the faithful in
the Primitive Church, were inspired by the Spirit of Christ; yet none of them
durst contemn the word of God, and the holy Scriptures: but rather each of
them, had them in very great reverence; as we may see it by their writings,
which are furnished with many testimonies from the Old Testament: and certainly
thus was it promised by God, through the mouth of the Prophet, Isa. 59.21.
where we see, that the Lord joined these two together, his Word and his Spirit:
wherefore should we separate, what God has by an inviolable bond conjoined?

Moreover, 2 Cor. 12.4.
Paul, who was rapt up into the third heaven, and there heard things unlawful
for man to utter, notwithstanding, gave not over diligent reading, nor
profiting by the Books of the Old Testament; Commanding Timothy to bring with
him the Books which he had left at Troas with Carpus. 2 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 3.15.
1 Timothy 4.13.
Yea, he exhorts Timothy, who though he was an excellent Teacher, and well
instructed in the holy Scriptures, to give himself to reading: and what praise
does he put upon the Scripture! 2 Timothy 3.16. I would ask these men whether they
have received another spirit, then our Savior promised to give his Disciples:
they will not dare to vaunt of another spirit: now what Spirit our Savior
promised to send unto his Disciples, he shows plainly, when he says, Joh.
14.26.
This Spirit shall not speak of himself, but should bring to their remembrance
what they had formerly heard of him. It is not the Office of the holy Spirit,
that which Christ promised, to dream of dreams, of new and unknown revelations,
or to hold forth new doctrine: but it is the work of the Spirit of God, to
confirm us in that which he has already spoken, by the Prophets and Apostles;
seeing also that the Lord promises not to send us another doctrine, saying,
Hold fast that which thou have, until I come, Revel. 2.24. Gal. 1.8, 9. whereby
it appears, that we ought diligently to travel, as well in the hearing, as in
the reading of the holy Scripture, if we will feel the benefit and fruit of the
Spirit of God. Luke acknowledges the diligence of those of Baerca in searching
the Scriptures, Acts 17.11. To this purpose tend these Scriptures: 2 Pet. 1.19.
Joh. 5.39. Luke 4.21. Mat. 4.4. Ephesians. 6.16. Mat. 22.19. Luke 24.27. Joh. 2.22.

And Paul would have a Bishop, to hold fast the faithful word, Tit. 1.9. etc.
Apollos was mighty in the Scriptures, etc. Acts 14.24, 28.

If it were otherwise, how could we take heed of the deceits of Satan, who
daily transformeth himself into an Angel of light? whereupon should our faith
rest? we should be carried to and fro without any stability.

But they do allege,

As if it were a shame and ignominy to the Holy Ghost,

But they say,

Is is very clear, smiting them with a spirit of giddiness, for having despised
the true and only means of coming unto God, which is the Scripture and the Word
of God. In that passage of the Corinthians where Paul says, 2 Cor. 3.6.
The letter kills, and the Spirit quickens; let any closely consider,
against whom the Apostle disputes, and they will understand his drift. It is
very evident that Paul in this place, had to do with false Apostles, who
preached and extolled the Law without Christ, and caused the people to recoil
from Salvation purchased by Christ, and the grace of the new Covenant,
whereunto the Lord had promised to write his Law in the heart of the faithful:
the Law then being separated from Christ, as a body without a soul; Jer. 31.33.
Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel. 36. Heb. 8.10.
and nothing comes from it but death, to those that are under it: it does
nothing but beat and strike the ears, without any quickening the soul, until by
faith we are sent from it unto Christ, as from the Usher unto the Master; and
then the Law will be found such as David sings it, Psalm. 19.8.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord
is faithful, making wise the simple: the commandments of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart, etc. Thus must we understand how it is said, The Letter
kills: Paul calls the Law, The killing Letter, and faith, The Spirit
quickneth; i e The Ministry of the Gospel, which he opposes unto the naked
Law; and he himself calls his preaching, The Ministry of the Spirit: we must
not understand this place as those dreamers, who as often as they meet with an
obscure place that makes against them, say, The Letter kills, i.e. According
as they say, to understand the meaning of the Scripture this kills, but we
must come to the Spirit, i. e. to forge Allegories. Paul never thought of such
fopperies, as we may see in reading the same Chapter, 2 Cor. 3.8. It is then
wretchedly and wickedly done, to cast off the Scripture upon such pretense of
the Spirit, Luke 24.27.
seeing our Lord gives us his Spirit to understand his word: as we see Christ
opened the understanding of the two Disciples, not by making them wise in
themselves, nor setting them to look for a new kind of word, or natural and
innate in them, in rejecting the Scriptures; but that they might understand the
Scriptures. After this manner the Apostle Paul exhorts the Thessalonians not
to quench the Spirit: he would not have them fly in the air, after vain and
unprofitable speculations, without the word of God, but consequently he adds,
Despise not prophecy: thereby showing, that then the Spirit is quenched, and
suffocated, when Prophecy is rejected; what will those poor souls answer, who
have rejected the lanthorn, Psa. 119.105.
which God has given to be a light unto their feet? We confess that the
external word preached by men, of it self, nor alone, cannot convert the heart,
but the Spirit of God must work internally, to beget faith in us: now this is
done in good order by the preaching of the Gospel, as appears by Lydia the
Purple-seller, Acts 16.14. she heard Paul preach, but the Lord opened her
heart, to understand the things which Paul spoke: for this cause the preaching
of the Word is called seed; we know that if seed fall upon a spot of ground
which is desert, and not tilled, it is lost, without producing fruit: but on
the contrary, falling upon soil tilled and well manured, it brings forth fruit
in abundance. So the word of God, Luke 8.15.
if it fall upon the hard and rebellious brain, it remains without fruit, as
upon stony soil: but upon an heart prepared by the operation of the Holy Ghost,
then it brings forth much fruit; and as the Husbandman when he has sown his
seed, he can do no more, he cannot make, his grain to grow, but leaves it to
God: so must the Ministers do; when they have preached and sown the Word of
God, they cannot make it grow, they must commend it unto God: as the Apostle
says, He that planteth is nothing, 1 Cor. 3.7.
and he that waters is nothing, but it is God that must give the increase: he
does not therefore reject him that planteth, nor him that waters, that is to
say, the external Ministers; for he soon adds, We are co-workers or laborers
with God; ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building. It appears that the
Ministers are joined in the work with God; inasmuch as God makes use of them
as instruments, and he works by his word, by giving virtue in the internal
man: one may see as plainly as day light, the error of Muntzer, the first
father of these Anabaptists, and that there is no reason in his speech.

Our Mennonists have condemned their father in this point, notwithstanding
there be others who maintain this opinion, or rather blasphemy, as some strange
spirits, the disciples of Sebastian Franque, who this day do renew the
question: yea, some little space of time since, one of the chief of that Sect,
whose name I shall forbear to declare, in the City of Frankfort, before several
honest people told me, and with might and main maintained, with diverse of his
disciples, That the earth never bare a more abominable Idol, then that which is
called the Bible; and that all the World doted upon it, looking therein for the
word of God, whereas we should look for it in our hearts: and one of them
redoubled it, and said, in the presence of Mr. Alosco and of us all, What do
you talk so much of the Scripture! I assure you on my part, I have learned more
by seeing an Hen or a Capon killed, then ever I learned by all the Sermons and
Lectures of the Books that ever I read. Unto whom I answered, It must needs be
that you eat often of Hens and Capons, seeing you have learned so much by their
death: but I pray you, said I, What good did you ever learn thereby? he
answered, That he had learned to know, the obedience which Jesus Christ rendered
unto God his Father upon the Cross: and that as the fowl was slain without
making resistance, and that for the good and life of man; so was Jesus Christ
slain for the life of mankind: it was said then unto him, How do you know that
ever there was such an one as Jesus Christ, and that he died for man? do you
find that written in the Capons belly? the Turks also do kill Capons, but they
cannot read there, that Christ was their Savior. In the end they were very
angry, and like people deprived of their senses, when they were hampered by the
word of God, and by their own reasons. What man is there that would not wonder
at such foolish and irrational discourse? is it not just that such people
should be so handled, seeing they have rejected the word of the living God;
which the Angels themselves desire to pry into, that they should be sent to
School unto the bruit beasts?

Further, I come to the Proposition of Muntzer, who says, That the Ministers
are much deceived, thinking that faith comes by hearing, and that it is
written, Brother shall not teach brother any more, saying, Know the Lord; for
they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest of them, being all
taught of God.

If Ministers be deceived by so thinking, Paul also deceived; for he thus
spoke, How shall they believe, etc. yea, Romans 10.14, 17.
he says, That the doctrine which was preached, was the word of faith: but one
may easily see their pretense, which is, totally to make void the Scripture,
and the Ministry of the Gospel, to come unto Revelations. We have already
showed that God will instruct men by Ministers, Romans 10.8. the Eunuch is sent
to Philip, Cornelius to Peter, Paul to Ananias, etc. As for that passage of the
Prophet, where it is said, Brother shall not teach brother, etc. the Lord would
not hereby banish from out of the Church the Ministry of the Word, (God forbid)
to draw men after visions and revelations now they fail, in that they do not
narrowly look into the place; for the Prophet does not say totally, that they
shall not teach no more; but these are his words, They teach no more, saying,
Know the Lord: as if he should say, Ignorance shall not possess the judgments
and understandings of men, as formerly when they knew not who the Lord was:
yea, in this restoration of the Church, the true knowledge of God should
become so common and vulgar, that all should know how that the Son of God, who
is the lively image of the Father, is descended here below upon earth, to be
united unto us, being made our brother to guide us unto eternal life. We know
there is a double us^ of teaching: one is for those who are altogether
ignorant, to whom the first rudiments, as points of Catechism, are to be held
forth; there be others, who being entered in, must make further progress: seeing
then that none has so profited, but that he has need farther to be taught, so
it is the greatest part of our wisdom to become teachable. Paul shows how we
should profit by teaching, Ephesians. 4.11.
if we would be Christ's Disciples, saying, That God has constituted Pastors
and Teachers, etc. that we be not unstable, children, tossed to and fro with
all winds of strange doctrine, etc. whereby it appears that the Prophet never
intended to bereave their Church of an ornament, so precious and necessary: The
Prophet only would tell us, Joel 2.2.
that God would manifest himself both to small and great, Isa. 54.13. Jer.
31.34.
and that the Church should have children instructed and taught of God, as was
promised by Isaiah. This passage then is very clear: behold, the Prophet says,
That they shall no more teach every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord;
and why? because, says he, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their inward parts: he does not reject the external Ministry of the word,
but he shows, that the knowledge of God, comes not properly by the labor
and travel of men, but it is because the Lord engraveth the Law of his Word in
the understanding: Ministers by their preaching strike upon men's ears; and God
by engraving his Law, works upon and teaches their hearts, as he dealt with
Lydia at Paul's preaching. Acts 16.14.
Therefore it is, that Jesus Christ, Joh. 6.45. seeing the Jews to murmr, and
storm against the external Ministry of the word, says, None can come unto me,
except the Father who has sent me draw him: it is written in the Prophets, And
they shall all be taught of God: whosoever then has heard, and learned of the
Father, comes unto me. Christ thereby shows, that those who have heard, and
learned of the Father, do not disdain and reject the Ministry; but they come
unto it, and receive profit thereby: and all this shows, that we are of our
selves altogether indisposed, to come unto this knowledge of God; for otherwise
God would not promise, to cause us to walk in his statutes; and if it were in
our own power so to do, and that neither great ones by their wisdom, nor little
ones by reason of their ignorance can mount so high, unless by the holy Ghost
they be drawn: Behold, the true sense of the place, so woefully corrupted by
these first Anabaptists, and all they pretend unto, tends not, but after they
have deprived the Church of the Ministry, and the preaching of the Word, to
open the door unto Visions and Dreams, as they already have shown at Munster
and Amsterdam, as Munzter their first father had begun unto them. Was it not a
pleasing thing to hear this always sounding from their mouths, The Spirit has
revealed it unto me, The Father has commanded me? and when any brought a
testimony of Scripture contrary to their dreams and visions, suddenly they
replied, What have we to do with the dead Letter, seeing we have the lively
word of God imprinted in a living spirit? as if the holy Ghost, who is the
author of the holy Scriptures, could contradict, himfelf. The Apostle Paul
foreseeing, that such Sects would rise up, who would despise the preaching of
the Word; he adjureth his Disciple Timothy before God and the Lord Jesus, who
shall judge both quick and dead, to preach the word, and to be instant in
season, etc. Satan knows, that he must take off men from the Ministry of the
word, when he will have them at his beck, to put into their heads what shall
seem good unto him: and therefore his labor is to bring men unto this, that
they might hold nothing certain; but that they finally being disturbed and
uncertain, he might make them despair. Thus in the beginning he wrought with
our Mother Eve, denying the express word of God: the Lord had said, In the day
that you eat thereof, you shall die the death. The Devil on the contrary
denies it, and says, No, no, you shall not die: so now he labors to take
from our eyes the word of God; but what may we look for afterward, but that we
may be confounded, not knowing what side to turn unto? for if we acknowledge no
more the Scriptures to be the true word of God, which as the Apostle Paul
says, Was before time written for us, that we through patience and consolation
of the Scriptures, might have hope; what will our estate be? certainly we shall
be more miserable then the beasts; and we must give up our selves to Dreams and
Fables, as those who have rejected this light, and must perish woefully.

Of the Dreams of the Anabaptists, and how they are condemned by the Word of
God.
Muntzer preaches dreams and revelations
Muntzer having thus profaned and rejected the word of God, he preached
dreams, very goodly revelations, which he at his pleasure forged, as did the
false Prophet Mahomet, saying, That he had seen Angels, and gloried that he had
talked with them: by this means to cheat and deceive the poor ignorant people:
but all was feigned and counterfeit, to make music unto poor and inconstant
fools: and the Apostle Paul gives warning of such gallants, that we should
take heed of them, saying, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward,
etc. Yea, the Scripture forbids us lending ear to such dreamers: the Lord of
Hosts speaking in the book of Jeremiah, says thus, Hearken not unto the words
of the prophets, which prophecy unto you, Jer. 23.16, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28.
etc. we shall have intelligence of this in these last days: are they not in a
dead sleep, who Will not be awakened by the noise of this strong hammer of the
word of God, which breaks the stones in pieces? who can be cleansed by such
dung? and what truth can come forth out of a lie? dreams have deceived many,
and those have fallen, who have trusted to them. These words of God are true,
and sufficient to entangle all our dreamers and ravers, with all their
celestial visions, whereof they do falsely, and out of a certain malice vaunt.
Let us then reject such cheaters, and follow the counsel of God in his word;
and we shall always find it to be a strong buckler against all assaults.
Prove. 30.5. Isa. 8.19, 20.
The Lord sends us to the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no morning-light in them. And
when Dives desired, that the living might be taught by some other means besides
the word of God, it was answered, That they had Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them.

Moreover, Muntzer comes from thence to grapple with the sacrifice of the Son
of God, Muntzers denial of Christ's satisfaction, and justification by faith.
to vomit out stinking blasphemies against it; saying, The Ministers are liars,
when they say, That Jesus Christ has satisfied for us, and that we are
justified by faith alone without works: thus speak these Scribes, when they
mince unto men. These are his words, as they may be read in his Books. But I
pray you, is not this filthily to blaspheme the Son of God? it will not only
follow, that the Ministers are only delicious and mincing, and make men's
consciences drousie; but also all the Prophets: Acts 10.43 Jer. 11.3.
for thus spoke Peter in the house of Cornelius the Centurion, All the Prophets
bear witness unto Jesus Christ, That whosoever shall believe on him, shall
receive remission of sins through his name. Yea, John Baptist held up the
finger at Christ, Joh. 1.29, 36.
saying, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world. Isa.
53.7.
Isaiah witnesses and testifies, that Christ has surely born our
languishing, and sustained our dolours: what can be more plainly said, then
when he says, He has born the pain and punishment which was due unto us; and
that we are healed by his wounds? the same is affirmed by the Apostle Peter, 1
Pet. 2.24. and Jesus Christ himself says, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world,
etc. The Apostle John testifies, 1 John 2.2. If any man sin, etc. so Paul,
Col. 1.20. He made peace, and reconciled us, by the blood of his cross. Read to
this purpose, 2 Cor. 6.21. and Romans 5.19. and diverse other Scriptures testify
unto this truth, so as nothing is more clear: and yet Muntzer dares to accuse
the Prophets and Apostles, with the Ministers, as those that flatter men's
Consciences, because they teach not righteousness by works. It is a marvel how
that sentence of the Apostle is forgotten, Gal. 2.22.
who says, That if we be justified by the works of the law, Christ is dead in
vain. We teach to do good works, and live holily, but not to be justified by
them; and that we live only by faith in Jesus Christ. Preaching of
justification makes not careless of well-doing.
Muntzer thinks to mend the matter, by saying, That thus to preach Christ, is
the way to make men careless of doing well: but on the. contrary, to preach
Christ who died for our sins, and that he gave himself out of perfect love a
sacrifice for our Redemption, is the way to be stirred up with burning zeal to
good works. Furthermore, we must not preach the Gospel as we please, but as it
is appointed of the Father, and as the Scriptures testify, that the Apostles
preached it: of such men the Apostle Peter warns us, saying, That there shall
arise false prophets, etc. 2 Pet. 2.2. Let notice be taken whether Muntzer and
his companious be not of that number, who dare not plainly say as much, but
they will say as we do; but being put unto it, they make Jesus Christ but an
half Savior, by bringing in good works. We say, That faith without works is
dead: but they justify us not before God, neither blot out our sins. Simile.
As the flame is not without light, otherwise it were not flame; yet it is light
burns not, it is the fire, and the flame only that does lighten: so faith is
not without works; but works burn not, i. e. take not away sin; it is faith in
Christ only: thus we speak of the virtue and property of faith, showing that
those who have this true faith, cannot be lazy, so as out of love to God, they
should not do good works to glorify God, Rails against Marriage.
etc.

He likewise fell upon Marriage in a foollish and villainous manner, saying,
That the marriage of Pagans and other ignorants and unbelievers was polluted
and unclean, and that it was fornication, and a very show of Satan: so as many
light spirits being moved, and spurred forward by this woeful doctrine, took
occasion to break many marriages; 2 Timothy 3.6.
leaving houses desolate, and drew after them silly poor women laden with
lusts, to leave their husbands; persuading them, that the believing wife, i. e.
after their account, the rebaptized, ought not to abidewith the unrebaptized
husband: Holding, that a wife dwelling with her Gentile husband, is polluted
and defiled, and cannot be saved. They called the marriage of those that were
not of their Sect, whoredom, and the fleshly bed; and their marriages were
spiritual. Heb. 13.4.
The Apostle was of another mind, when he faith, Marriage is honorable, etc.
But it may be they will say, This is to be understood of the Marriage of such,
where both parties are believers; and not of the believer with the unbeliever.
But the Apostle Paul takes off all objection, when he says unto the married,
1 Cor. 7.10.12.
I command them; yet not I, but the Lord, etc. what could be more plainly said,
to prove the marriages of believers with unbelievers, to be true marriages,
though they were joined together in the time of their unbelief? See how these
poor people are become shameless, in laying open their filthiness before all
the world! who would not wonder to see such spiritual people as these pretend
themselves to be, to live upon the goods and riches of whore-mongers! this is
the honor that they put upon their Fathers and Mothers, that begat and brought
them forth, yea, and upon themselves.

Apostolical Anabaptists.
As for the Apostolical Anabaptists, they are so called, because they follow
(as they say) the Apostles, and Apostolical Church step by step. They regard
the naked letter of the Scripture, They walked as Vagabonds through the
Country, and Regions, without shoes, without staff, without girdle, and
without money: they said, That they were sent by God; and because Christ says,
What I told in your ears, preach upon the house-tops; they got up upon houses,
and preached there: they washed the feet one of another; and because Christ
says, He that will enter into the Kingdom of heaven, must become as a little
child, they said, We must play the children with children, and therefore they
so did: and because our Lord says, He that leaves not all that he possesses,
whether wife, children, father, mother, lands and inheritance, etc. they often
took slender occasions, and left their Country, leaving their wives and
children, and went as spiritual Lanskeneths: they said, That a Christian ought
not to possess any thing as his own, and that it was impossible for any to be
both rich and a Christian.

Who would not wonder to see the foolishness of these poor people! they would
carry neither shoes, staff, nor money in their purses, like begging Friars:
they consider not the meaning of that Scripture. The use and practice of the
Apostles declare fully, that our Lord said that, to prevent his disciples from
being sollicitous for things needful for their journey, seeing they should not
want, because the labourer is worthy of his hire: this Christ instructed them
in, when he said, When I sent you without purse, without scrip, Luke 22.35
without shoes; lacked you any thing? They said unto him, Nothing: He says
unto them, Now he that has a purse, let him take it, etc. As for preaching
upon house-tops, what he had told them in their ears; it is no more, but that
what he had told them in secret, they should preach openly. And as for washing
of their feet, he would signify nothing else thereby, but that out of love we
should be helpful one unto another: for then they had other kind of shoes then
we have now, so as their feet were soiled with traveling, and therefore they
rightly washed their feet, which now we have no use of, being shod after
another manner. Our Anabaptists who practice this, I would have them to
consider, how comely this is: for it may fall out through want of women, that
men must wash their feet; which how seemly it would be, let them judge. When
Christ says, we must be as little children, Mat. 18.
it is not said, We must be children, and become foolish; but that we should
imitate the plainness and integrity which is in little children; and that is it
which the Apostle Paul holds forth, when he says, Be not children in
understanding, but in malice, etc. in understanding be men: and every where in
the Scriptures, their wanderings and vagations are condemned; 1 Timothy 5.8.
for he says, Whosoever takes not care of his own, etc. And let every one
abide in the calling wherein he is called, etc.

As for the Community of Goods, whereof they make so much, Plato taught it; the
Essenes had all things common; Community of goods,
and this was sometimes practiced in Jerusalem: but when it is said, Act. 4.32.
They had all things common, etc. Luke understands it of many, and not of all;
for it is manifest that all did not so, because it is particularly specified of
some, saying, And Joses also sold his possession: if all sold their
inheritances, there was no need of naming particular persons, for particulars
are comprised in the number of all: he intends not that all the faithful sold
all that they had, but as much as necessity required: it was in the liberty of
every one, as Peter told Ananias, When the field was sold, was it not in thy
power? Act. 5.
etc. It is very evident that Christians possessed proprieties, and that there
were some very rich, who left not their riches to put them into a common stock.
Abraham was very rich: this is not to be rejected, though in the old Testament,
Genesis 24.33.
for he is in the new Testament called the father of the faithful. Yea, Christ's
speech, Mat. 25.35. fully teaches us propriety in goods.

So Paul, 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8.10. 2 Cor. 9: 6, 7. Romans 12.13. Gal. 6.6. This
communion was not in the Church of Ephesus, Ephesians. 4.28. neither in the Church of
the Philippians: see Phil. 4.18.

The Apostles charge concerning rich men, proves propriety, 1 Timothy 6.17. John
allows propriety, 1 John 3.17. so Heb. 10.34. Jam. 2.25. Theft is forbidden
by God, and therefore no community. Were not Isaac, and Jacob, and Job, and
Joseph of Arimathea, rich, and retained propriety in goods? Lazarus with his
two sisters retained their house. The women and Luke ministered of their goods
unto Christ: Dorcas, Lydia, Cornelius, had propriety in their estates, etc.
Much more is said to this purpose, but this may suffice.

Moreover, then the multitude of believers, for the most part, were very poor,
as Paul says, Brethren, you know your calling; not many noble, etc. This was
not done in a disorderly way, but in good order, it being committed unto the
Apostles, to distribute according to their judgment, to poor believers among
the Jews, who were hated, and had not means to get bread: and because they who
had estates were plundered, or were in danger of confiscation of their estates;
for this cause it may seem, the Holy Ghost timely set them a work, thus to
dispose, and expend their estates, which otherwise would have been lost at the
destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus and Vespasian, which came shortly after:
before which ruin, the Christians were retired from Judea, as Eusebius
recites: but these Anabaptists would put all the world in a confusion by their
community of goods, and that they might enjoy other men's labors: but it is
worse for them to bind all men unto it, upon pain of damnation.

Of the spiritual Anabaptists, who are separated from the world.
AS for the Anabaptists who call themselves separated from the world, and are
wholly spiritual; they say, they will have nothing in common with the Gentiles,
as they call them, not fasting, observation of days, life, eating and
drinking, etc. These establish a rule how plain their garments must be, of what
stuff, how long, how large, of what matter, and how for manner: they forbid the
use of all costly garments, calling such as use them Gentiles, and Pagans: when
they see any laugh or be cheerful, they cry, Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye
shall weep. They fetch continual deep sighs, and are always sad: they reject
all feastings and banquets at Weddings, all use of music; and as for that
speech, Romans 12.1. they have it always in their mouths, Fashion not your
selves unto the world: they allege it, as if the Apostle had intended to
change the nature and property of all things, and as if so be he commanded us
to go upon our heads, because the Gentiles go upon their feet; or to speak with
our feet, and hear with our heels, because the Gentiles speak with their
mouths, and hear with their ears. Whereas the Apostle understands no other
thing, then that we should not imitate the world in that which is evil; which
the Apostle John says, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world: for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father. And the Apostle Paul
expounds this, Ephesians. 4.17. when he charge that we should not walk, as the
Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their understandings. It is folly in them to
draw these words from the true sense, to make them condemn a multitude of
things indifferent; as some of them will not put on a clean shirt upon Sunday,
because unbelievers do so: some will not call Monday or Tuesday, but the first
and second day of the week; binding their Consciences unto such things: they
make themselves ridiculous, because they condemn garments and trimmings, which
are not according to their cut and rule, by their Tailors, and according to
their pattern and fashion. We would not here let loose the reins to pomp and
vanity, but we say, We are not to condemn him, who is clothed according to his
estate, and according to the custom of the Country; young people and all
according to the received custom, Gentlemen according to their ranks,
Merchants, and consequently all men of estate according to their qualities. We
condemn, with the Apostle Peter, all sumptuousness, and vanities which are
unprofitable: notwithstanding we say, That when Princes and the like carry it
magnificently, they are not to be condemned as Pagans; for Christ and his
Apostles never gave us rules for our Garments. Let every one hold forth
mediocrity, and cut off all superfluity, for the profit of the poor. Meat and
drink is not less free to Christians then garments; wherefore to forbid them, 1 Timothy 4.
is to hold forth the doctrine of Devils, as Paul says. What hurt can be found
therein? when God shall by his blessing give a Christian means, that he may
make use of good meat and drink; and the faithful receive it with giving of
thanks, without gluttony, but with sobriety: wherefore should any say, That
this gift of God is a curse? have not the servants of the Lord, praised the
Lord for it? as David for the Lords filling of his cup, Psalm. 23.
and spreading his table. Was not Christ at Feasts and banquets with his
friends? there were none but the hypocritical Pharisees offended at it, calling
him glutton and drunkard. Paul says, He could tell how to abound, as well as
to want. If a believer has little, let him be contented without murmuring; if
he has much, let him use it with moderation and sobriety, and giving of
thanks; remembering that passage of the Apostle, Whether you eat or drink, do
all to the glory of God. ^ Cor. 10.21.
They condemn all mirth and laughter as bad. It is true, Christ says, Woe unto
you that laugh, for you shall mourn: yet Paul exhorts to rejoice with them
that rejoice; Romans 12.14.
and Solomon says, There is a time to laugh, Eccles. Abraham laughed, Genesis
18.10. and yet these men would banish all mirth and laughter. All civil mirth
is not to be condemned, nay, rather their hypocritical sighings, and their sad
and melancholy looks, are to be censured; whereby they would, as more holy,
extol themselves above other men: the Kingdom of God consists not in these
things; the Scriprure no where condemns honest mirth, but every where
hypocrisies. In the time of Solomon, Israel held a Fe^st for fourteen days
together, because of all the goodness of God vouchsafed to David his father. As
mourning proceeds from adversity, so joy from prosperity: which Jeremiah
plainly holds forth, when he says, The joy of our heart is ceased, and our
mirth is turned into mourning, Lam. 5.15.
etc. They condemn also the honest banquets at Weddings, as unlawful and evil;
and yet we see the Scripture speaks often of the voice of the spouse and
espoused: we read it no where condemned, either in the Old or New Testament.
Our Lord was not only at a Wedding being invited, but wrought there his first
miracle, by turning water into wine: he sat down there, and his Disciples.

David says, Psalm. 104.15.
God has made wine to make glad man's heart, and oil to make his face shine:
Feasts and Banquets which exceed Christian modesty, are not to be commended.
Lot made a feast to his two guests, and Abraham did so at Isaacs weaning: who
ever will read of the feast of the faithful, let him read these Scriptures,
Genesis 26.30 Genesis 43.31. Judge. 14.10, 12, 17. 2 Samuel 3.20. 1 King. 3.15. Job 1.4,
5. It is said, Matthew made a feast, where many Publicans were: Christ does not
forbid them, yea, he fetches comparison from the Bride and Bridegroom, Luke 14.
from the Wedding-Supper and the Wedding-Garments. We would not here encourage
intemperance in any, but to show the liberty which Christians have of the good
creatures of God, that none may condemn those, who in Gods fear do make use of
their liberty: the Kingdom of God lies not in such observations; bodily
exercise profiting little, but godliness being profitable in all things.
Moreover, if we should reckon up all their errors and several opinions, time
would fail us to refute them.

There be some who hold re-baptizing so necessary, as that without it none can
be saved: Nor will they salute any, nor give the hand, nor acknowledge any but
such to be their brethren: some hold it not so necessary, and make no scruple
to be found with honest people, and to account them as brethren: but their
number is but small.

Some account Childrens Baptism so bad, as that they will rather be dismembered,
and suffer, then to let their children be baptized. Others suffer it as an
Ordinance, which neither hinders, nor profits. Some account themselves holy
and pure; these are separated from others, and have all things in common; none
says among them, This is mine: and to have any thing in propriety, is
accounted a sin. Some have endured great torments, because they would not keep
Sundaies and Festival days, in despite of Antichrist: seeing they were days
appointed by Antichrist, they would not hold forth any thing which is like unto
him. Others observe these days, but it is out of charity.

Some say they are come so high, as that they cannot sin any more. The most
pure of them preach up the Cross, and persecution so high, that they seem to
make it an Idol, and a new Savior, putting of it in the place of Christ, for
salvation, as the Papists do their works. There be some who have daily some new
command from God, to make known unto their brethren and strangers. Some are
rapt into an ecstasy, and have their visage and countenance changed, lying upon
the ground certain hours. Some Tremble and Quake for two or three hours
together: after that, when they are come unto themselves, they prophecy and
speak strange things, as if they had been in another world, or as if they had
fallen from out of heaven: 2 Cor. 12.
and they account to have that in common with the Apostle, when he was taken up
into the third heaven.

Many cannot speak nor declare the great secrets, and mysteries which they have
seen.

To some this Ecstasy or Trance comes often, to others not so often, to others
of them not at all. Some among them fall down upon their faces, and dream;
others do not, but keep themselves to the Letter of the Scripture. Some do
nothing else but pray as the Friars do, and say, That they do hinder and keep
back, by their prayers; all the mischief which otherwise would befall the world:
these will not that evil should be resisted by any other ways then by prayers;
and in no sort will permit the use of arms.

John Denk did admit of swearing by way of witness. Some hold not the Trinity
of persons in one Essence, saying, That the Son only is a person. Some esteem
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper as we do; but they preach it up so highly,
as that it will be very hard, to find so much as two fit to communicate
therein; and therefore some are of opinion not to do it until their death. In
some places they banish and excommunicate all those, which will hear any
Preacher or Minister preach: they speak all the evil of them that may be,
calling them Scribes and Pharisees. Others endure that one may hear, see, and
read any thing: but in the mean while the manner of Ministers living pleases
them not. They have the Cross in such estimation, that they despise and reject
all those which are without it, and persecution, and say, That their case is
not good: for (say they) if they were in the Lords way, they would suffer
persecution: some therefore seek the Cross, others are of another opinion. And
many times they break fair households by separating the parties, when one of the
parties is excommunicated, the party which is not excommunicated must withdraw
from the other party: and their excommunications are for very small matters;
yea, when they are married one to another, they make them promise, that if one
of them come to be cast out of the Church, that the innocent party shall
withdraw from the nocent; and by this means their marriages are all
conditional: when one is thus separated, the party offended cannot be
remarried, if the other party being married be not delivered by the death of
his adjoynt: yea, sometimes it falls out, that some who have been
excommunicated, are received in again, and find their party married to another;
and there they must see their wives before their eyes to be unto another man,
and they themselves cannot remarry; yea, though they have not the gift of
continence, they say unto them, as unto the Friars, that they must make
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heaven. Behold, how the Devil makes
himself sport with these men! They are in mortal war with the Franiques: upon
this occasion the Mennonists have excommunicated the Franiques, because they
would not approve of these goodly marriages.

They say also, That when a man has sinned, though he does repent, that he is
to be excommunicated: and then if he does persevere therein, he shall be
received in again. Behold, the fair stir of Satan, how he plays the game with
these men, which follow not the true light of the Gospel. Our Lord be pleased
to give eyes to all the world, that they may take heed of these Sects, which
make men turn aside from the way of truth. So be it.

FINIS.
Books sold by John Allen, at the Sunrising in Paul's Churchyard.
Viz.

Caryl on Job, Vol. 5. quart. Vol. 7. quart. Vol. 9. quart.
Beza Novum Testamentum. fol. Allen's Scripture-Chronology. quart. Baxter's
Call to the Unconverted. quart. Lukine's Practice of Godliness. twelve. Burges
of Original sin. fol. Davenport and Hook of New England, their Catechism.
Gataker against that wicked Cheat, Judicial Astrology: proving it to be the
Abomination of the Heathens, and that it ought not to be tolerated in a
Christian Commonwealth. Isa. 47.12. Jer. 10.2. The Faith and Order practiced in
the Congregational Churches in England, agreed and consented unto by their
Elders and Messengers, at their Meeting at the Savoy. October 12. 1658. Cases
of Conscience concerning Astrology. octa. Cotton on the Covenant. octa.

