A NARRATIVE Of the Great SUCCESS God has been pleased to give His Highness
Forces in Jamaica, against the King of Spains Forces; Together with a true
Relation of the Spaniards losing their PLATE-FLEET, As it was Communicated in a
Letter from the Governor of Jamaica.

Published by His Highness special Command.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field, Printers to His Highness.
1658. June 20

Right Honorable,
SInce my last to Your Honor, the First of October last, I have had
intelligence, that the Galleons with Plate, I then mentioned to be at
Carthagena, bound for Spain, were cast away by a Hirecane; and as an evident
token thereof, the Burmudans, our Informants, being in a small Shallop, brought
in hither about Twenty thousand pieces of Eight, which they had taken in the
Rack. And according to my former to the Committee for Jamaica, having by a
Prisoner notice, that about Five hundred of the Enemy were landed here, and
that the Governor Don Christopher Arnaldo Sasser was fortifying himself at St.
Anne, about Thirty five miles from us, I was resolved to give him time to
fortisie so much, that he might think himself secure enough to stand us, (that
we might not perpetually be put to the toil of hunting them in the Woods) and
yet so that he might not be able to give us any strong resistance: which
accordingly being done, I sent a Party of Stout, Well and Willing men, under
the command of Major Richard Steevens, to whom about Sixty of our Officers
joined, Volunteers, exceedingly desirous of action (after so long a cessation)
who advanced to the place, very strongly situated on a Rock: as soon as the
Enemies Sentinels discovered them, they threw down their Arms, gave the Allarm
to the Governor, who with the rest fled to the Woods, leaving behind them all
their Arms and Ammunition: so, finding the vanity of following them in the
Woods and Mountains, we left them.

Before our Party came in, our Ships brought in a Portugal running in to Cuba,
who examined, told me that there were Five hundred landed about the middle of
July, that they had marched up the Country, and finding the scarcity of
proviosions, (contrary to what was told them) were almost starved, had
endeavored to mutiny; and that about Three hundred of them were by the Spanish
Commanders returned to a place called the Chareras, in the North, over against
Cuba, where they first landed, where was their Magazine, and Provisions, and
more men and Provisions daily expected, where likewise they were fortified and
received their relief, which he had Twice carried them.

Upon this intelligence, I met the Party coming home, and dismissing about a
hundred to their Plantations, (which wanted them) I shipped the rest under the
same command, on Board the Indian, and went my self with them for the better
carrying on and expediting the business.

The 24 of October we set Sail from Cagway. point, and the 30 stood over
against the place. Early in the morning we spied a Sail from Cuba, running in to
the place we were bound for, who had come with relief, but told them he could
not unlade himself, because he saw Ships at Sea. Our Party landed Six miles
below the place intended, there being no place nearer, and marched on; who ere
they had marched Two miles, were saluted with a round Volley out of a Wood, at
which ours, prepared for before by their Orders, never made stand, but fired in
boldly at the Ambuscado, in which the Enemy had Four wounded, we One; the
Captain with the rest made have to their Fort, and ours so fast after them,
that only the Captain, and Four of forty could get in.

Our Party found them very well prepared with Matches lighted in the
Stockadoes, (for that is the manner of their fortification, with great Trees
and Flankers) ours leaving a Third for a reserve, without any gradual
approaches, presently ran up to their Work, and with their Muskets possessed as
much advantage, as the Enemy, (the Work being not at all Lined) between whom
for the space of near Three quarters of an hour, was a stiff dispute, till some
of ours with the help of Hatchets, (which they were ordered to carry) made a
Breach, and entered; as soon as the Enemy saw that, they betook themselves to
run over the Rocks, leaping into the Sea, and shifting for themselves (though
the Officers endeavored to rally them) yet made not such have, but that they
left One hundred and twenty, or thereabouts dead on the place, and many
wounded, amongst whom were most of the Officers; the Mastre del Camp Don
Francis De Prencia, by means of a Prisoner of ours, whom he kept by him, got
quarter, and some others whom we found in the Rocks, (whom though we had
received barbarous usage from them) we could not kill in cool blood.

We took here Thirty three Barrels of Powder, with Match and Bullet
proportionable, and good store of Bread and Salt, and likewise their Musters,
their Commissaries book; which Powder, and what we took before from the
Governor, within less then Two Barrels did balance the Commissaries Account,
so that they were wholly deprived of that: And that which did more indear our
Success; we had only Four men killed, and about Ten wounded, some whereof I
have sent home, and humbly and earnestly desire they may be provided for.

After I had refresht the men, I put them aboard again, and with small Parties
in several little Boats, Scoured all the Coast, and left them that fled neither
Boats not time to get away; since which time some are come in to us almost
starved. The Negroes, formerly their Slaves, using them roughly, and denying
them Provisions, so that I saw a Letter from Don Francis de Liva, the
Deputy Governor, to one of his former Slaves, woefully bemoaning the condition
of his Majesty's Infantry, and giving him the Title of Worship at every word:
to such a necessity are they reduced, and we have not been idle to pursue them
in all quarters, though we now lie still for want of Shoes, if there should
any more of the Enemy come, which we have reason to expect; for that I find by
Letters, that the Governor of Cuba, Don Peter de Bayona, being an old Soldier
in Italy, does not only heartily solicit it, but makes a great benefit by it,
having received money from the Vice Roy, for the payment of Three Months to
the Soldiers, according to their Kings express command, whereof they never
received any; and since that, has received Twenty thousand pieces of Eight
from the Vice Roy for levying more men. I shall not fail in my endeavors to
prepare for their coming, and doubt not, but that the King of Spains lessening
his Garrisons, may in time produce good effect to our Nation.

I have sent the Mastre del Camp, the Colors, some Paper and Letters; he is
the only man hereabouts, and has chiefly advised in this relief, and
therefore I hope shall not be released till we are better settled. I had almost
forgot to acquaint your Honor, that the Enemy at their first coming, sent a
Lieutenant, and two more, to scatter Papers amongst our Soldiers; signifying,
that who would come to them, should have fair quarter and transport; who being
met withal by some of our Hunters, were all killed, and so that hopeful design
of theirs had no effect: And that the Governor of Porto Rico, having set One
hundred men to demand some English, living in new Iurtola, a Coloney of the
Dutch, being refused to have them delivered up, was in his return cast away by
the Hericane, one only Mulatto escaped. The King of Spains Affairs do very
much fail in these parts, and his Trade is almost brought to nothing, by the
many Private Men of War of English and French, and ours are still abroad to
annoy them.

All I have more is, only to entreat your Honor, and all our Friends with us,
to magnify the goodness of God, who has given yet by his glimmering, some
hopes, that he altogether has not forgotten us, but does, and will at length
continue to own his Servants, who trust in him, and to subscribe my self,

Your most Obedient and Faithful Servant, Edward Doyley.
Cagway. Feb. 3. 1657.
FINIS.

