A BOUNDARY TO THE HOLY MOUNT, OR, A BAR against Free Admission to the LORDS
SUPPER. In Answer To an humble Vindication of free Admission to the LORDS
SUPPER. Published by Mr. Humphrey Minister of Froome in Somersetshire. Which
humble Vindication, though it profess much of piety and conscience, yet upon
due trial and examination, is found worthy of Suspension, if not of a greater
Censure.

By Roger Drake Minister of Peter's Cheap London.

He set the Porters at the gates of the House of the Lord, that none which was
unclean in any thing should enter in.

2 Chronicles. 23.19. London, printed by A. M. for St. Bowtell, 1653.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 20. add (In an orderly way) thus, which on the same ground in
an orderly way includes, etc. p. 30. l. 9. (as) left out, and as for me. p. 41.
l. 7. for ann, read (and). p. 48 l. 25. for converted him, read (converted his
opinion.) p. 53. l. 25. (and) left out, and a consuming one. p. 58. l. 22. for
and, read (an) thus, an It may be, granted. p. ib. l. 23. add (and) (...) no
place, etc. p. 63. l. 17. leave out (we) p. ^^. l. 13. for where, read (There.)
p. 68. l. 10. add (it) let him receive it. p. 71. l. 28. add (the) the
obliquity. p. 73. l. 12. leave out (to) and read be done. p. 77. l. 9. for
(Ex.) read Ez^k.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
It Is one of the Devil's prime Engines to pervert Divine Ordinances quite
contrary to their primitive institution: so he did in Paradise, so he did in
the Jewish Church, and so he has done a long time, and still does in the
Christian Church. No wonder then if he turn the choicest mystery of peace into
a Sacrament of war, a feast of love into a bone of contention. This he did by
disorder in the primitive Church, 1 Cor. 11. by Transubstantiation in the
Apostasy of the Church, by Consubstantiation in the Restitution of the Church;
and now by a spirit of opposition against Sacramental trial in the
Reformation of the Church.

In the managing of this unhappy Controversy, Mr. Humphrey has appeared three
times in the field in his threefold Edition, pleading free admission to the
Lords Supper for all but three sorts, against whom himself is pleased to shut
the Chancell door, though the worst of those three kinds is better many times
then sundry of those for whom he opens the door. Should we take the boldness to
ask him, by what authority he excludes any from the Sacrament (it being in his
professed judgment a converting Ordinance) or by what rule of Scripture and
charity he walks, in excluding the worst from the means of conversion, who need
it more then the best, it would puzzle him more (and that upon good ground)
then that captious Quaere of the Pharisees did our Savior, Matthew. 21.23. But
whether the Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance or not, Mr. H. must needs be
at a great loss, for if it convert not, then why should they receive it who are
visibly unconverted? If it do convert (as well as the Word preached) then why
should any at all be excluded from it?

When this Answer was almost ready for the Press, out comes his third Edition,
somewhat auctior, but I dare not say correctior. This put me upon a review, and
confirmed me in my opinion, that his Doctrine of free admission is but mere
Church-levelling, and will in a short time make this glorious Church like the
field of the Sluggard, Prove. 24.30, 31. When I seriously weigh his loose
Principles held forth to the world in this Treatise, with his being so
excessively favorable to the looser and profaner sort, it makes both my self
and others apt to suspect, his practices may possibly be as loose as his
principles. Loose principles and practices, like Esau and Jacob, Pharez and
Zarah, taking each other by the heel, and striving who shall come out first.
Twins they are, and its hard to say which is the Elder brother.

My scope in this Answer is (if God shall add his blessing) 1. To convince Mr.
H. and others seduced by him, how contrary his Doctrine is to Scripture,
reason, and his own professed principles. 2. To prevent the further spreading of
this leaven, which will sour the whole lump, and make Reformation (so much
longed for, hoped for, and labored for by the godly) to be utterly desperate.
Withal I must tell him, that this fancy of his (quite contrary to the
judgment and practice of the reformed Churches, of the Church of England even
in the days of the Prelates, to the express letter of the Book of Common
Prayer, to the declared judgment of the reverend Assembly, and to the Votes of
Parliament unrepealed) has exceedingly grieved the hearts of the godly,
rejoiced and gladded the hearts of the wicked, and has done more mischief
already, then ten. Mr. Humphreys are ever like to do good. The Lord give him a
sight of his error, and grace to burn this hay and stubble, before the day of
the Lord come to try it, and himself for it, 1 Cor. 3.13.

One scruple yet untouched, which may happily stumble the Reader, I must not
pass. What if a person by the previous exhortation, (wherein the death of
Christ is both audibly and visibly set forth) be really converted, may he not
then actually partake of the Elements, and be admitted to receive by and with
the Church? Answ. 1. A person at first conversion sees himself so loathsome and
unworthy, that he shall not need a bridle from, but rather a spur to the
Sacrament. 2. Its not enough for a person to be really clean, but he must also
be judicially clean before he be admitted to communion, Levit. 14.1, 31.
whenever Christ cleansed any, he still sent them to the Priest to pronounce
them clean, Levit. 17.14. 3. However a man be really, the Church must proceed
by the rule of visibility, and cannot admit any till he be visibly converted.

This is a doctrine cannot well down with ignorant and profane persons; it
will be a stumbling blocks to the Jew, and foolishness to the Greek; from whom
I can expect no better entertainment then far my betters have been content
with before me.

I shall close with those golden though rowsing expressions of the Provincial
Assembly, in that excellent Piece of theirs, The Vindication of the
Presbyteriall Government, published Nov. 2. 1649. page 74. which book had Mr.
H. seriously perused, it might (through Gods blessing) have darted such a beam
of Majesty into his conscience, as would have quenched this Ignis fatuus of
his, before it had misled so many into bogs and quagmires. Their words are
these: We are not ignorant that the Presbyterian Government (especially as
applied in order to Sacramental trial) has many Adversaries. The obstinately
ignorant hates it, because it will not suffer him to go blindfold to hell. The
profane person hates it, be^^^se it will not suffer him to eat and drink his
own damnation by unworthy coming to the Sacrament. The Heretic hates it,
because after two or three admonitions it rejects him. The Jesuit hates it,
because it is an invincible Bulwark to keep out Popery. The Schismatic hates
it, because the main design of it is to make all the Saints to be of one lip,
one heart, and one way. And above all the Devil hates it, because if rightly
managed, it will in a short time blow up his kingdom. Reader, let me but crave
the favor Mr. H. his Prefacer does, that thou read both this Answer and his
Book with an impartial and disingaged judgment, perusing both with a single
eye, and I am confident thou will neither be of Mr. H. his judgment nor
practice, a stickler for breaking of Bounds, or removing the Landmark set
first by God himself, and afterward by the Elders of our Israel. I leave it to
thy serious perusal, and both thee and it to Gods blessing, and remain,

Thine in the Lord Jesus, ROGER DRAKE.
From my Study in Philip Lane, Feb. 2. 1652/3. Reader, I am desired to give
thee notice, That there is now published an Answer to Mr John Goodwins Book
entitled Redemption Redeemed, by Mr Kendall sometimes Fellow of Exeter
College: with an Attestation by the Vice Chancellor and public Professors of
Divinity in Oxford.



A Bar to free Admission to the Sacrament.
SO winning a grace is Humility, that the very appearance of it will credit an
Error, Col. 3.18. where Truth it self usherd in by pride and passion, loses
much of its luster and acceptance. But where Humility leads the Van, and
Satisfaction of tender Consciences brings up the Rear, who almost dares face
such an Army, or question a Cause so maintained as heterodox and unsound? No
wonder Master Humphreys Free Admission finds so free and general acceptance,
especially with persons already inclinable to his opinion, when the Title page
is more potent to charm, then the whole Book is to convince the Reader.

An humble Vindication of a free Admission unto the Lords Supper. Published for
the ease, support, and satisfaction of tender consciences, etc.

So gracious a Porch cannot but promise a glorious Edifice, and by bribing the
affections may soon corrupt the judgment of a weak and unsettled Christian. If
Mr. Humphrey be the man this Title speaks him, I hope he will as freely admit
me to write as he will admit others to receive; nor can a free debate be
questioned, where a free admission is maintained. And if I may be free, I must
ingenuously profess, I cannot but stumble at the very threshold, especially
when I compare it with some parts of the Building. In the Title I see a
profession of humility, in the Book I read many expressions that savor
strongly of pride. Further, that a plea for free admission should ease and
satisfy tender consciences, which both has been, and is the trouble of tender
consciences (unless it be very clearly and strongly made out) is to me a
paradox both in reason and Divinity. Waving therefore the judging of persons
(for who am I that I should judge my brother) I shall present to the Reader
some of M. Humphreys expressions, and let the world judge whether they savor
more of pride or of humility.

When Christ offers himself, and grace, Page 11.
which are the things signified, to poor sinners, how can we have the
conscience to turn them away from the signs and means thereof in this
Ordinance?



Is Christ offered as a free gift in the Word, Page 16.
and must we not come without our price and money to this Ordinance? Why this
is even as they conceive of Judas, who being about to sell our Savior, went
out to make his bargain at the Supper.

What other construction will these words bear, but that the friends of
Suspension with Simon Magus think grace is vendible, and with Judas are about
to make a bargain of Christ at the Supper?

Having urged the instance of Judas as a ground of free admission, he concludes
in these words; And what more need be urged, but that men when they are willing
not to see, will let any hand put over their eyes be enough to blind them? It
seems the Patrons of Suspension are willingly ignorant, etc. a charge laid by
the Apostle upon profane scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3, 5. and by Mr. Humphrey upon
pious Reformers.

Again, page 22. he makes the selecting of people to this Ordinance, a vanity,
formality, and impossibility. An heavy Censure, though weakly made out, as
shall (God willing) appear in the ensuing discourse.

Several other harsh passages I might insert, but these fore mentioned may
suffice to convince the Reader, that Master Humphrey in suffering both his
tongue and pen so to out-lash, sinned himself very much against the law of
charity and humility. But enough of this unpleasant subject. Let us proceed to
the Discourse it self, and weigh his Arguments in the balance of the Sanctuary
and of sound reason.

His subject is free admission. His ground is Matthew. 26.27. compared with Mark
14.23. from precept and example. All the Apostles were bid to receive, all of
them did receive, and amongst the rest Judas, though really and visibly
unworthy. Humphrey is so confident upon Judas his receiving the Lords Supper;
namely, 1. That he did receive it. 2. That his receiving is a solid ground for
free admission; I shall therefore first produce those reasons which seem
weighty to me, and have moved sundry godly and learned, both ancient and
modern, to be of a contrary opinion; and secondly, Shall endeavor to make
good, that supposing Judas did actually receive, it makes nothing for Mr.
Humphreys free admission.

And 1. That Judas received not the Lords Supper, these Arguments seem
convincing.

1. Christ knew him to be an hypocrite, a reprobate, and a devil, and so
utterly incapable of any good by the Sacrament.

2. Christ's blood was shed for the remission of their sins who received the
Lords Supper, compare Mat. 26.28. and Luke 22.20. It was not shed for the
remission of Judas his sins; Ergo, Judas did not receive the Lords Supper.

3. Christ promised to drink wine in his Fathers Kingdom with those who
received the Lords Supper; He did not promise to drink wine with Judas in his
Fathers Kingdom; Ergo, Judas did not receive the Lords Supper. See Matthew.
26.29.

4. Judas went out immediately after the Sop, John 13.30. This Sop was given
him before the Sacrament; Ergo, he was not at the Sacrament. Yea, from John
13.1. some are of the mind, that Judas did not partake so much as of the
Passover, but only of the common Supper which immediately forewent the
Passover. See Aarons Rod blossoming. lib. 3. cap. 9.

5. All Christ's gracious and comfortable expressions to his Apostles, were
allayed with exceptions while Judas was present, not so at and after the Lords
Supper; Ergo, Judas was not then present. Compare John 6.70. and 13. ver.
10.18.21. with Matthew. 26.29. Luke 22. ver. 28, 29, 30. He that excepted Judas
in the former expressions, would much more have excepted him in the latter, had
he then been present. These and the like grounds, have moved sundry both
ancient and modern Writers to believe that Judas did not receive the Lords
Supper; namely, Clemens, Dionysius Areopagita, Hilarious, Maximus, Pachymeres,
Ammonius Alexandrinus, Tatianus, Innocentius 3. Theophylactus, Rupertus
Tuitiensis, and Victor Antiochenus, Among the Schoolmen, Salmeron, Turrianus,
Durandus, Barradius, And of Protestants, Daneus, Kleinwitzius, Piscator, Beza,
Tossanus, Musculus, Zanchius, Gomarus, Diodati, Grotius, etc. See Aarons Rod
blossoming, l. 3. c. 8.

Mr. H. his foundation from Mark 14.23. (which as his Text is the ground,
though mis-interpreted and mis-applyed, of that his unhappy Discourse) will
stand him in little stead. The Text says, They all drank of it. Thence Mr.
Humphrey concludes, ergo, Judas received the Sacrament.

Indus was present at the Lords Supper.

2. All, in Scripture, is sometimes put for the most part, especially in order
to the number of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.7. yea ver. 5. of the same Chapter,
twelve is put for eleven by roundness of number. Its then a mere non sequitur
to argue from all the Apostles drinking to Judas his drinking, or from the
Twelves drinking to Judas his drinking, since 1. All may very well be
understood of all present. 2. Because all in Scripture Phrase is put to
signify the most part, and twelve in Scripture-expression is put for eleven.

But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table, Luke 22.
ver. 21. and if so, was not Indas then present at the Lords Supper; and if all
present received, must not Judas needs receive also?



2. Its evident, that Luke writes per (...), not so much observing the order of
time, as the substance of the matter; which as its frequent in Scripture, so
particularly the Harmony of the Evangelists evinceth it in this subject; we
having two Evangelists for one, to prove that those words (Behold, the hand of
him that betrayeth me, etc.) were spoken before, not after the Institution of
the Lords Supper, and one of these Evangelists was present and received the
Lords Supper, so was not Luke, who stood not so much upon the order, as upon
the truth of the Narrative in this business of the Supper. See Matthew. 26. ver.
21, 24, 26. Mark 14. ver. 18, 21, 22. It follows not then, that because Judas
was at the Table, shared in the common Supper, yea happily in the Passover, that
therefore he received the Lords Supper, or was present at it.

But suppose he was present and received.

1. The Apostles scarce suspected him, though discovered, John 13.28, 29.

2. Judas had not yet actually betrayed Christ, his treason as well as Peter's
denial was yet future; and its absurd to punish any for a future sin.

3. Christ acting here as a Minister, it was not fit he should be both Judge
and Witness, and it might have been an ill president for Ministers to take upon
them by their own power to deny the Sacrament judicially to whom they please.
Its far otherwise with us, seeing none are suspended, but 1. Such as suspend
themselves by slighting or refusing due trial. 2. Such as upon trial are
found unworthy through ignorance or scandal, and that only till they gain
better information, or give the Church just satisfaction. By all which it
appears how weak Mr. Humphreys first foundation is, and that therefore the
superstructure cannot be strong. Contra from his own proof we argue against him
thus: None of the Apostles were either ignorant or scandalous, no not Judas
himself, ergo, his or their receiving is no warrant for any ignorant or
scandalous person to receive. The main question is about Judas, and not as to
ignorance, but scandal. And scandal cannot arise, but 1. From a sin committed
by a professor. 2. Known and divulged. But Judas had not yet betrayed Christ,
no more then Peter had denied him; ergo, he was not yet convicted of a
scandalous sin. You will say Judas had already done it in purpose and compact.
Answ. True, yet Christ charges him not with that, but only foretells his
actual treachery, which being not yet perpetrated, was no visible bar to his
present receiving, but a sad effect of his unworthy receiving (supposing he did
receive) the devil entering into him as well after the Sacrament as after the
Sop, John 13.27. Let all ignorant and scandalous persons take heed of Judas his
sin (unworthy receiving) lest the fate of Judas betide them; namely, 1.
Spiritual possession by Satan. 2. Christ-murther. 3. Self-murder.

State the case aright, and a mean capacity may easily apprehend how wide and
wild Mr. Humphrey his conclusion is, Judas a great professor, and an eminent
and extraordinary Minister, plots and purposes a great sin; that he shall
commit this sin, is foretold by a spirit of revelation, as also was Peter's
denial and perjury. The question is, Whether either or both of them shall be
suspended the Sacrament. For my part, I think neither: 1. Because those sins
were not yet committed, and so not scandalous. 2. Because Christ acting as a
Minister could not be both witness, judge, and executioner. If you say he acted
as God or as Mediator. Answ. Its very dangerous to make Christ's Divine or
Mediatory acts a president for imitation. Who will say, the Magistrate should
not condemn the adultress, because Christ did not condemn her? John 8.10, 11.
Christ administered the Sacrament only to men, only to Ministers, after
supper, in ah upper room, must we therefore do no otherwise? Whenever Mr.
Humphrey preaches again upon this subject, let me entreat him to take a more
pertinent Text, if at least he can find it; otherwise I must tell him, he will
scarce prove himself (what he is styled) a Master of Arts.

But to pass on. For the better managing of his cause, page 3. Mr. Humphrey
premiseth, That in the Church God has set up his Ordinances of the Word and
Sacrament. Of these Ordinances some are capable, and some incapable. Those that
are incapable, are either so by nature, as infants and distracted persons, or
by the Churches. Censure of Excommunication, and none others.

Before we proceed, lets see what water some of these dictates will hold. And
1. How can he prove that Infants and distracted persons are incapable of the
Sacrament by nature, especially upon his own principles: for now I shall
dispute partly ad hominem and partly adrem, and I doubt not but the judicious
Reader will easily reach me in both. I shall 1. instance in the word. Why are
Infants and (pari ratione) distracted persons incapable of the Word? or where
has God said they should be kept from it, unless by their crying or unseemly
gestures they prove troublesome to the Congregation? I can show him the
contrary, where God would have them present at the Word and Ordinances. Let him
consult Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. and 31.12. Josh. 8.35. Joel 2.16. and 2 Chronicles. 20.13.
and that to enter into Covenant, etc. as is evident in some of the places
quoted, especially the two first. If God bids them come, why should Master
Humphrey say they are incapable? 2. Suppose them incapable, yet who knows how
God may work at the Word, though not by the Word? May not that Word be an
occasion of conversion to Infants, which is an instrument of conversion to
elder persons?

Infants indeed may be incapable in an active, but not in a passive sense; as
to apprehension and understanding, not as to Divine Impressions. God can work
upon persons at or by his Ordinances, occasionally or instrumentally, when he
is honored by their active or passive presentation before him, which may be
the case of blind and deaf persons, as well as of Infants and innocents, and
upon which account (as well as out of a desire to honor God) some pious
persons have thought it their duty to attend upon the public Ministry, though
they were deaf. Why should not I believe that Christ is willing to speak
immediately to him that loves to be where Christ speaks mediately? If men can
speak by signs as well as words, sure Christ can much more speak by his Spirit
to such deaf persons. If some in hearing do not hear, Isa. 6.9, 10. why may not
others hear in not hearing? An hearing heart is better then an hearing ear.
More might be added, but I must contract.

Next, for the Lords Supper. Supposing that Mr. Humphrey is for Paedobaptisme.
I ask him in the next place, Why are Infants capable of Baptism, and not of
the Lords Supper? If he say, Because they cannot examine themselves, nor
discern the Lords Body, etc. Then I answer, No more can grossly ignorant
persons; who therefore (pari ratione) upon Mr. Humphrey his principles, and
according to truth, must be kept away: but that they cannot be unless
discerned, nor can they be discerned unless tried; and who have more authority
to try them, then such as are over them in the Lord, and delegated for that
purpose both by God and man?

Further, that persons excommunicated are incapable of the Word preached. How
proves he that? Upon this account I dare challenge him and all the world for
one proof of Scripture, either direct or by consequence. An excommunicate
person is but as an heathen, Matthew. 18.17. and heathens might be admitted to
hear, why then not excommunicated persons, they needing that effectual means
of conversion as much or more then Heathens.

Lastly, Whereas in the close he adds, That none others are incapable; and so
by consequence none others ought to be kept away, What thinks he 1. of persons
infected with the plague, etc. 2. What thinks he of persons stark staring
drunk, or that with Zimry and Cosby shall commit actual uncleanness in the
face of the Congregation, and the like? will Mr. Humphrey prostitute the
Sacrament to the lusts of such bruits and swine? For shame then let him not
plead that all must be admitted but infants, mad men, and excommunicated
persons.

In the same page, I wonder Mr. H. is so diffident where he may be confident.
His words are these, I dare not yet positively say, for the peoples part, that
all are so capable that they may come as they list. For my own part, I assent
to it as an undoubted truth, that none are so capable that they may come as
they list. How does this man strain at a gnat, and swallow a Camel; stumble at
a straw, and leap over a block? doubts an evident truth, and pleads strongly
for a loose and undoubted error, that all may be admitted pell mell. How just
is it with God, that he who is confident where he should be diffident, should
also be diffident where he ought to be confident?

He asserts, Page 4.
Such an universal capacity for all men indefinitely, that if any come in as
professing themselves ready to enter into covenant with Christ, desiring to
serve him in the worship of this Ordinance (the former only excepted) the
Minister and Church ought to admit him, etc.

From this Concession ler me be bold to ask Mr. Humphrey before whom shall they
make this profession? If before the Minister and the Church (as he seems to
hint) then may not the Minister before the Church desire some evidence of the
sincerity of this their profession? If not, then let Mr. H. show where he is
forbid to make this scrutiny. If he may, then undoubtedly he may try that
professor as to his knowledge and grace; and do we desire any more? nay not so
much. Let Mr. H. persuade the people but to make this profession before the
Eldership (we desire not to put their modesty to it before the Congregation)
and we shall either admit them at present, or undertake to fit them (by Gods
grace) for the Sacrament, before we have done with them, if at least they will
but submit to be ruled by us.

If he mean, that the Minister must rest in that verbal profession, without
any further scrutiny, then why may not a child of three years old, or a mad
man be admitted, since they may easily be taught the words of that profession?
Further, does Mr. Humphrey admit none but such as make this profession? Here I
appeal to his own conscience, and to his Congregation.

If yet he fly from a verbal to a virtuall profession, and think their very
coming or sending their names to their Minister over night, etc. be sufficient,
especially if betake this course with strangers also, then how does he know
whether they be Christians or heathen, sober or distracted, children or elder
persons, excommunicated or members of the Church. So that turn which way he
please, he will find himself in a noose of his own making.

Lets now proceed to his proof from analogy of the Passover, Page 4. and 5.
to which he says there was a free admission.

Numb. 9. whereby it appears there was not a free admission to the Passover,
and then where is his argument? If he plead, that only legal uncleanness
excluded them, I ask him why? He will answer, because it defiled the
Congregation, or the Ordinances and holy things, or both. Content. But what if
it be proved that not only Leviticall, but also moral uncleanness defiled the
holy things, and that therefore such persons also were to be kept away. For
proof hereof, compare Levit. 18.24, 25. Moral pollutions defiled first the
person, and then the Land, Levit. 16.16. They defiled the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 23.
verse 37, 39. Adulterers and Murderers, and Idolaters, coming reaking out of
their sins into Gods House, defiled the Sanctuary thereby, Hag. 2.14. For
neglecting to build Gods Temple; themselves, their actions and their Sacrifices
were unclean; and though the Temple were typical and ceremonial, yet their
neglecting to build it at Gods command, was a direct breach of the second
Commandment, and therefore a sin, or moral pollution. And that all unclean
persons were to be suspended, is evident by 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Where Iehojadah is
commended for setting porters at the gates of the House of the Lord, that none
which were unclean in any thing should enter in. The Lord send us many such
Ichojada's. Where then were Mr. H. his eyes, who asserts so confidently page 5.
But as for any spiritual pollution whatsoever, we read of none that might
debar them from that Ordinance. Did he not read, or did he not mind, or did
he not understand, or did he not remember any of the forementioned places? for
I will not be so uncharitable as to conclude he never read over the old
Testament, or that against his conscience he delivered the forementioned words,
or that he quibbled and equivocated upon the present Tense for the preter Tense.

Besides, the instance of Hezekiahs Passover, shows that moral uncleanness
made them more unworthy of the Passover then Leviticall uncleanness; the Lord
then accepting the upright heart, though not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chapter 30.18, 19, 20.

2. If Mr. Humphrey ground upon this instance of the Passover, then not only
elder persons, but also Infants must partake of the Lords Supper, for Infants
were admitted to the Passover, since all circumcised persons were to eat
thereof; and if so, then where is his first distinction that makes Infants
incapable.

3. Wherea page 5. he makes the secluding of unclean persons a type of our
excommunication. He must excuse me if I believe not his bare dilates without
proof. I thought legal types had respected Evangelicall graces, or spiritual
uncleanness, but not Evangelicall Ordinances, unless Christ, the only great
and effectual Ordinance. Further, had they not the Ordinance of
Excommunication amongst them as well as we, and why should that be typified
which was visibly present? And here by the way let me ask Master Humphrey,
whether amongst the Jews an excommunicated person might have been admitted to
the Passover? That they had Excommunication is evident John 9.22, 34 and 12.42.
and Matthew. 18.17. and that by the rules of the Jews such were neither to be eat
nor drunk with. Further, that Excommunication was not for Leviticall
pollutions, but scandalous sins; and in particular, that not only Leviticall
pollutions, but also scandalous sins were a bar to the receiving of the
Passover. Contrary to Mr. H. his Assertion above mentioned.

For clearing whereof consider, that there were 3 degrees of Excommunication
amongst the Jews: A person excommunicated in the first degree, was called
Niddui, separated or cast out of the Synagogue, Ioh. 9.22. The second, Cherem,
or delivered up to Satan, 1 Corinthians. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. The third, Schammatha,
or Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22.

In the Greek Church there were four degrees of Excommunication. 1. (...), such
were only barred the Lords Table. 2. (...), such might hear only behind the
Pulpit, and must depart with the Catechumeni, etc. 3. (...), such might come no
further then the Church porch, and might not join in Prayer, etc. 4. (...),
such stood quite without the Church, requesting others with tears to pray for
them, and thence they were called plorantes.

By all which it appears, 1. That Suspension is no new invention, but if
juridically issued forth, was a degree of excommunication; which being in Mr.
H. his judgment a bar to the Lords Supper, he must needs grant Suspension to
be a bar to receiving, unless he will contradict both the truth and himself.
2. Its evident, that Excommunication is not a bar to presence at all
Ordinances, since all the four degrees of excommunicated persons amongst the
Greeks might partake of some Ordinances, at least without the Church. And
Niddui amongst the Jews might be present at Divine Service, to teach others,
and learn of others, though he might not come near any the distance of four
cubits, etc. 3. Its evident, that Excommunication was not for Leviticall but
moral pollutions (at least in the apprehension of those who excommunicated) 1.
By Scripture, Mat. 18.15, 17. where obstinacy in sin is made a just ground of
excommunication, If thy brother trespass against thee, etc. John 9, ver. 22,
34. and 12.42. they looked at the confession of Jesus as Christ, as a sin that
deserved excommunication; which though a gross and dangerous mistake, yet
evinceth that moral pollution was with them the ground of excommunication. 2.
Excommunication being a Church-censure, had only sin for its object; nor did a
leprous man more deserve excommunication with them, then a plaguey man does with
us. Excommunication is the key of Discipline, to shut out of heaven, Matthew.
16.19. a bond to retain sin; compare Matthew. 18.18. with John 20.23. a
thunderclap, not against natural infirmities, but sinful enormities. Indeed
persons Levitically polluted, might for present be materially excommunicated,
as being separated or shut without the Camp for fear of contagion, and so are
plaguey persons with us; but this is as far from formal Excommunication, as a
dead body is from a living man. 3. Its evident by the practice of the Jews,
amongst whom the first degree of Excommunication, called Niddui, lasted for
thirty days, unless it were shortened by repentance; but only sin is the
object of repentance, and not a bloody issue, or other Leviticall pollutions.
See Buxtorf, Budaeus, Godwin, etc.

4. Its evident that this first degree of Excommunication, See Aarous Rod
blossoming, l. 1. c. 9. and 10. and 12.
called Niddui, was a bar in particular to the Passover (which answers our
Lords Supper) since it signified a separation from all commerce with any man or
woman for the distance of four cubits, and particularly from eating or drinking
with any. And hence probably flowed that expression of the Apostle, I Cor.
5.11. With such a one no not to eat. Which is as extendable with us to our
Sacramental eating, as it was with the Jews. I might bring as a proof of
Excommunication Genesis 17.14. which is a cutting off from the Church of God, and
that not for Leviticall pollutions, but for wilful omissions or commissions.
See Mercer upon the place.

His Argument then from the elder Brother the Passover, is like Reuben,
unstable as water. Let us see whether he can draw a stronger argument from the
younger brother our Sacrament (as he is pleased to term it.)

His first proof is from 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many, are all partakers of one
bread. Thence he concludes, That diverse of the Corinthians were ready to go to
Idols. verse 14. yet all were admitted to the Sacrament.

Cor. 8.10. This, though bad, was not (especially before sufficient admonition
given) a just bar to their receiving.

2. Yet taking it for granted, many of them were guilty of greater sins, as
appears pears by 1 Cor. 15. and 2 Cor. 12.21. How proves he from the place,
that all these were notwithstanding admitted. As all Jews might eat the
Passover, so all Church Members might receive the Lords Supper. All
circumcised persons had a right to the Passover, yet some of them might not
enjoy it at all times, Numb. 9.7. So all baptized persons have a right to the
Lords Supper, yet may not always actually use this their right; nay not all
true converts neither, till they be worthy actually as well as habitually. A
person may be capable in actu primo, yet not in actu secundo. All the Priests
had a right to the holy things, yet were not permitted at any time to make use
of that right, Levit. 22.2, 7.

3. Supposing all did receive it promiscuously, how proves he from this place,
that the Apostle did allow that free admission? does the drawing an argument
from practice, allow that practice? Then by arguing from baptizing for the
dead, the Apostle should allow baptizing for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.29. From their
actual communicating the Apostle proves they were one body; and secondly, That
they ought not to communicate with Idols. Does this manner of arguing
necessarily justify their admitting all to communicate pell mell at any time?

Whereas page 7. he urges, That they were drunken together at the Lords Table.



2. But granting this drunkenness were at their love Feasts, which preceded the
Lords Supper, I answer, Its more then Mr. H. can prove, that they were drunken
in the ordinary and strict sense, since in Scripture phrase the words (...) and
Shachar signify, though liberal drinking, yet within the bounds of
temperance, as is evident, John 3.10. Genesis 43.34. Cant. 5.1. And the Apostle
reproves them rather for disorder and uncharitableness, then for excess; that
they stayed not for their Brethren, whereby the rich fed and drunk liberally
when the poor were hungry and thirsty. Compare ver. 22. etc 33. 3. What Logic
is in this consequence (supposing they were drunk indeed?) Saint Paul reproves
them for coming drunk to the Sacrament; ergo, they ought to come to the
Sacrament, even though they be drunk. Is not the quite contrary more rational,
St. Paul reproved them for coming when drunk to the Sacrament; ergo, they ought
not to come when drunk to the Sacrament.

His next proof is from 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. By the way, where he says, They were
all admitted freely to our Sacrament. He speaks gratis. Indeed, if he speak as
to the thing signified, undoubtedly their and our Sacraments are all one, and
thus even Circumcision and the Passover were the same with our Baptism and
the Lords Supper; but as to the outward elements, I think there is a great
difference between their Manna and our Bread, their Water out of the rock, and
our Wine, But for the thing it self, if he will make that a president for free
admission, then unbaptized persons, yea persons distracted, Infants, and
excommunicated persons, by this rule may partake of the Lords Supper, as there
uncircumcised persons, etc. did partake of those Sacraments. Yea, many who were
born after their passing the Sea, and so not baptized neither, yet ate of the
Manna, and drank of the rocks. Witness 1. The mixed multitude that went out of
Egypt with them, Exodus 12.38. 2. Many of the Israelites themselves who were
uncircumcised in the wilderness, Josh. 5.5. yet did eat of the Manna and drank
of the rock.

2. Their partaking universally of that Sacramental Meat and Drink, is no
argument for our free admission, till Mr. H. can make out as great a necessity
for our universal receiving as for theirs; namely, that all who receive not,
must both starve and choke, that Sacramental Bread and Water being their daily
and necessary repast. Nor will Mr. H. evade this answer by his parallels page
8. which do not run on four feet, as we say. And however their Sacraments and
ours, their condition and ours may agree in diverse respects; and it be very
true, that God is not well pleased with many Receivers amongst us, no more then
amongst them; yet herein is a manifest difference, that their Sacramental
Elements had a double use and end; namely, to nourish their bodies as well as
their souls; nor had they ordinarily in the Wilderness other food to live
upon, and therefore they must either receive those Sacraments or die. I hope
there is not such an absolute necessity of our Sacramental Bread and Wine. Had
God made our daily food (as he did to them) a Sacrament, I say then it were
cruelty and murder to deny any man the Sacrament, and then not only monthly,
but also weekly, yea daily Sacraments had been necessary: but that must have
been by accident, not from the nature of a Sacrament.

His next Argument is drawn from the general invitation to the Marriage Feast,
Page 9.
Matthew. 22, and Luke 14.

Humphrey.

2. Since the main scope of the parable is to hold forth the rejecting of the
Jews and calling of the Gentiles (which is the rule Mr. H. himself goes by page
9.) Mat. 22.43. compared with Mat. 22.1. will it not follow then, that not
only Church members, but also Heathen should immediately be admitted, yea
forced to this Sacrament.

3. Yet further, if all must be admitted, Lu. 14 29
how came the unthankful Guests to be excluded by the Lords own command? who
yet had far better excuses to keep from the Sacrament then many of our
Professors have, Luke 14. 18, 20.

4. If this be meant particularly of the Lords Supper, then let me ask Mr. H.
whether some worldly occasions may not justly excuse our absence? and whether
all are judged there unworthy, who are sometimes kept from the Lords Supper by
their worldly occasions? The weightiest occasions cannot excuse any from the
Marriage Feast. But I think Mr. H. will not deny, but some worldly occasions
may excuse a man from the Sacrament, as is evident by analogy, Numb. 9.10.

More might be added to show the weakness of his plea from these parables. But
whereas he adds page 10. Now who is that faithful steward, that gives the
household their portion of meat in due season, but these that are thus doing,
that is, who admit all comers, as himself there interprets. What a gross,
senseless, and profane interpretation is this? For 1. What an easy matter is it
to be a faithful steward, if this faithfulness lie in admitting all pell mell
to the Sacrament. 2. Will it not follow by this rule, that the profanest
Ministers, who are most for free admission, are the most faithful stewards. 3.
That the most pious and conscientious Ministers, who dare not give this bread
of children to dogs, are therefore unfaithful stewards? Lord! whither will not
a selfish opinion lead a man?

Whereas he there adds, That John Baptist admitted all comers to Baptism, yea
even those whom he calls vipers.

John did baptize all comers. 2. Matthew. 3.6. Its noted that they who were
baptized confessed their sins, and so made public profession of their
repentance. Let our people do that privately before the Eldership which these
did publicly before all the world; or (if they please) let them do it
publicly before all the world, as the former did, and see if we refute them to
the Sacrament. Should we require confession of sins in every Receiver before
admission to the Lords Supper, we should be branded with a witness, as pleaders
for Auricular confession. We only desire a profession of their faith before
receiving, which though weak, yet if true in the judgment of charity, we dare
not refuse such. And because we are sure there can be no faith without
knowledge, therefore as we our selves have been tried by others, and that
willingly, we think it our duty to try the faith and knowledge of all under our
charge: and if we find any grossly ignorant, as we dare not at present admit
them, so we are willing to take pains with them, by instruction to fit them for
the Sacrament in future. Whether this be more pleasing to God, or the admission
of all hand over head, I appeal to the Readers judgment, and to Mr. Humphrey
his conserence.

Whereas for further confirmation he adds, Adultis eadem est ratio utriusque
Sacramenti,

I mean Catechumeni.
I deny it, if taken in the latitude. For 1. Heathen may be admitted to
baptism, but not to the Lords Supper, by his own grant. 2. Taking this Maxim
for granted, what follows, but that as persons to be baptized must profess
faith and repentance, Mat. 3.6. Act. 8.37. so must they also before receiving;
which makes much for our purpose, and against Mr. Humphrey.

His last proof is drawn from Act. 10.28. upon which instance he concludes with
a rhetorical Doxology, page 11. I thank God I have learned this same lesson
with a satisfied conscience, to esteem no man unclean, but all (unless
excommunicated) free in the use of Gods Ordinances.

Peter to count no man unclean, taught Paul to count some men unclean, yea
persons within the Church and not excommunicated, Tit. 1.15, 16.

2. Let Mr. Humphrey show me the force of this consequence, Peter was commanded
to converse with a godly man, though levitically unclean (as not being
circumcised and a proselyte) which uncleanness after the death of Christ was
taken away; Ergo, Paul ought to converse with a profane Christian that is
morally unclean. How suitable this is to Scripture, see 1 Cor. 5.11. Further,
Peter is commanded to preach the Word to Heathen, that were comers on, and
ready to receive it; ergo, Paul may administer the Sacrament to all ignorant
and wicked Christians that reject Christ and his Word. I wish he would play the
Logician more, and the Rhetorician less, in matters of this nature, lest he be
found in the number of those, Romans 16.18. who by good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple.

3. Consider how he contradicts himself as well as the truth; page 3. he
excluded Infants and distracted persons, here his charity is so large as to
exclude none but excommunicated persons.

4. That by excluding excommunicated persons from the Word preached, he runs
into an uncharitable and dangerous error, has been formerly proved, which I
will not here repeat. Much more might be added, had I leisure to follow him in
his wild-goose-chace. I think he may well be accounted a Master of Arts at
wresting the Scripture; and whether he has writ more words or errors, seems
to me a disputable point.

For a further flourish, in the same Page he heaps up Texts of Scripture that
hold forth the offers of free grace to all, which make as much for free
admission to the seal of this Sacrament, as an offer of pardon to all rebels,
proves, that even those rebels must have their pardons sealed who stand out
against their Prince, as well as those that come in and submit upon pardon
offered. Let Mr. Humphrey and all the world know, that we desire to keep none
from the seal, who will please to make it out to us, that (but in the judgment
of charity) they have a right to the thing signified. Which may serve to take
away that wonder of his, How we can have the conscience to turn them away from
the signs and means of grace in this Ordinance, to whom the Gospel offers
Christ freely.



2. Not general offers of Christ, but our actual receiving of him visibly, is
the rule of admission to the Sacrament. But how many persons do visibly reject
Christ, at least by consequence, Tit. 1.16. and they who visibly reject the
thing signified, may justly be debarred the sign, till they manifest their
repentance. Thus much for his proofs from Scripture. Let us now proceed to his
reasons, and see whether he be better at argument then at quotation.

His first Argument is, The Sacraments are verbum visibile, a visible Gospel,
etc. therefore the same latitude must be granted to them both (meaning the Word
preached and the Sacrament) in their administration. And here he triumphs (poor
man) before the victory, in these words immediately following, Upon this
ground, me thinks, I stand as upon a rock, against which all objections, like
waves, do but dash themselves in pieces.

Humphrey his professed principles, as well as to the truth it self.

2. His consequence will not hold, unless he can prove that verbum visibile
converts as well as verbum audibile, and that it was instituted for that
purpose.

3. Though it should convert, it proves only that all should be present, not
that all should receive.

4. Granting his foundation, I retort it upon himself. As the Word preached is
applicable to all, so also the Sacraments; But the Word preached is not
immediately applicable to all; I mean as to that part of its gracious offer
which is particularly tendered and sealed in the Sacrament. For instance, there
are some righteous persons (in their own conceit) that Christ came not to call.
Mat. 9.13. many self-justitiaries and conceited Laodiceans, to whom in that
condition mercy is not immediately applicable; But to whom in statu quo, the
Covenant is not applicable, to them the seals of it are not applicable; and
where such may be discerned by their gross ignorance or scandal, they are
visibly as well as really unworthy, and should not be permitted to receive,
where there is a just Authority to exclude them.

2. To come a little closer to Mr. H. As the Word preached may be heard by all,
yet cannot be applied to all in diverse things, so the word visible (the Lords
Supper) may be seen by all, but ought not to be applied to all in diverse cases;
namely, when that which is sealed in the Sacrament is not immediately
applicable to them by the Word, for the Word and Sacrament must go hand in hand
together. Ergo, where the covenant of grace is not visibly applicable, there
the visible sign of that covenant is not applicable. But the covenant of grace
is visibly unapplicable to many persons in the bosom of the visible Church;
ergo. And thus Mr. H. his rock proves but a quicksand, and his visible Word
makes against himself.

His amplification from page 11. to the 15. is as impertinent as his Argument
is weak. We easily grant, the Lords Supper declares the covenant of grace as a
sign, and ratifies it as a seal; but that its therefore to be applied to all,
is a mere non sequitur. Indeed where grace is freely offered by an audible
word, all may, yea and should hear it; and where its offered by a visible word,
all have liberty to see it, and so may be present at the administration of the
Lords Supper, as well as at preaching and Baptism: But that all ought actually
to partake (be they in what state they will, unless incapable by age, dotage,
or excommunication) is a new light started by Mr. Humphrey, which like an ignis
fatuus will lead thousands into utter darkness. Had Mr. H. either read or
understood our meaning (as easily he might, had he pleased, by what is extant
in print in a first and second discourse by the Antiquaerist) he would not have
shot so wide at rovers as now he does. The hinge of the controversy turns not
upon this point, Whether all may be present when the covenant of grace is
signed, offered, and sealed in the Sacrament, but whether all present may
actually partake thereof; and in particular those who visibly reject the
covenant of grace that is signed, offered, and sealed by it. To keep to Mr. H.
his own similitude, page 14. A general pardon sent by a Prince, may be offered
to all Rebels within his Dominion, all of them may hear the pardon read, and if
need be, see it sealed; upon which some come in and submit really, others
professedly stand out against pardon offered; a third sort seemingly submit,
yet secretly carry about them daggers or poison to murder their Prince. The
King knows this, and his Ambassadors strongly suspect it. Now I ask Mr. H. 1.
Whether pardon shall be sealed particularly to them that openly stand it out?
2. Whether the Ambassadors ought not to try all that submit, that it may
appear who submit really and who treacherously; and the latter being found out,
is Mr. Humphrey of the mind that pardon should particularly be sealed to them,
as well as to those who submit really? If so, I think he is a better friend to
Traitors then to good Subjects or good Government. Apply this case to the Lords
Supper, and it will quickly put an end to this controversy, now again
unhappily raised by Mr. Humphrey, to the no small joy of profane and ignorant
persons, and grief of Gods people. Every Sacrament seals, 1. The truth of the
covenant of grace. 2. Its general offer. 3. By some of the Sacramental
actions it does instrumentally apply the Covenant to every worthy Receiver, and
to none else. Now (if Mr. H. and other dissenters will please to understand us
aright) all may see the truth of the Covenant of Grace, and its general offer
sealed, and so may be present at the whole administration, which is made up of
several Ordinances, the sight and hearing whereof may be very profitable for
all sorts. But that the Covenant of Grace should be instrumentally applied, per
sigilla, to all sorts, is in a manner as bad as if it should be applied to them
by word of mouth, and happily in some sense worse. Dares Mr. H. say to any person
visibly in the state of nature, Sir, be assured that Christ and all the
benefits of the Covenant of Grace are actually and for ever yours? And will he
dare to seal that which he dares not say? The language of every actual giving
is. Christ is thine in particular, and of every actual receiving is, Christ is
mine in particular. And shall any Minister dare solemnly to deceive any
self-deceiving person, and confirm him in presumption, to the ruin of his
soul, when he may regularly prevent that mischief? If this be not a
strengthening of the hands of the wicked, Ezekiel. 13.22. I beseech you what is?

To answer therefore briefly to his four Considerations, held forth by way of
conclusion, page 15.16. and 17. To the first I answer, Those whom we would not
baptize, bad they been to have been baptized at years of discretion, those we
cannot admit to the Lords Supper, though baptized in their infancy. And I ask
Mr. H. whether there be not many such in England, who yet are neither children,
nor fools, nor excommunicated? And here let Mr. H. remember his own rule, p.
10. Adultis cadem est ratio utriusque Sacramenti.

To the second. The question is not about the freeness of the offer, but about
the freeness of acceptance; and whether they who visibly reject grace freely
offered, ought to be admitted to the sign and seal of that grace. And here let
me ask Mr. H. again, whether his conscience did not check him for aspersing us
with that soul slander, page 16. That we admit none but such as are qualified
to our own mind. Does not Mr. H. know that we plead not only the Word of God
(which is abundantly enough) but also the Authority of Parliament, for what we
do in this point; by whose Ordinance, not repealed, we are civilly enabled to
do what we do; and have also from them (after mature deliberation with the
Assembly of Divines) a rule to walk by, against which if we transgress, we are
accountable to the civil Magistrate; and dares he notwithstanding charge us
with admittance of none but such as are qualified to our mind? Or, 2. That in
thus doing, we will not let people come without their price and money to this
Ordinance? Do godly Parents and Masters, by keeping their children and servants
from the Sacrament till they be sufficiently instructed in the main grounds of
Religion, do they, I say, in this pious act put them upon it, not to come to
the Lords Supper, till they can bring their price and money to this Ordinance?
and yet shall godly Ministers and Elders, who are spiritual parents, and also
specially enabled by the Magistrate, a civil Parent, to do the like, be judged
(by one scarce out of the shell, either in Learning or Divinity) as if they
were all the children of Simon Magus, and drove a bargain of Christ and the
Sacrament for money, because they are careful that persons visibly
unqualified, and who think to purchase Christ and grace for money, may not have
either him or it upon such base terms? 3. Is he not yet more ashamed, in the
same page to affirm, Why this is even as they conceive of Judas, who being
about to sell our Savior, went out to make his bargain at the Supper. It
seems, if Mr. H. may be judge, 1. We are a company of Judasses. 2. We betray
Christ, because we will not suffer others to murder him. 3. We drive a bargain
for the buying and selling of Christ, because we use a rod made by Christ and
public Authority, to whip the buyers and sellers out of Gods Temple. Thus in
the judgment of greater and wiser men then Mr. H. Christ was an enemy to
Caesar, Paul a seditious fellow, etc. The very mention of this slander is
enough to refute it. I say no more, but the Lord rebuke and forgive the Author
of it.

To his third Consideration I answer, 1. Its very dubitable, whether full
conviction be enough to conversion; yea, the stronger conviction is in the
understanding, the higher does the will and affections rise against it (if not
conquered and sanctified by grace, Romans 7.8, 9.) yea to the commission of the
sin against the holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

2. That by application of the seal, the message of reconciliation comes in its
full virtue, for the working this conviction and faith unto salvation, is both
a gross and implicated error, as has in part been formerly proved. For 1.
Conviction of the truth and general offer of the Covenant comes not by the
Sacrament, as sealing and applying to persons (which rather conduces to the
faith of particular evidence) but as signifying and offering Christ to all, who
therefore may with great profit be present at the Ordinance. 2. Conviction that
Christ is mine in particular, cannot be wrought by actual receiving in any but
the worthy receiver, and such is no ignorant person, or any that lives and lies
in a known sin, who therefore cannot receive but to his own prejudice, nor by
Church Officers be admitted to receive (if visibly so) without their prejudice
also, who suffer him to contract the guilt of Christ's body and blood, to eat
and drink judgment to himself, and to do an act that cannot either convert or
edify him in statu quo, but aggravate his sin and judgment; as hereafter (by
Gods assistance) shall more fully appear.

Before I pass to his fourth consideration, there lies in the way one objection
which is worth the answering, which seems to cross our former assertion.

Judas to partake of the Lords Supper as well as the rest, yet by that act
sealed not to him that Christ was his, and himself was in the state of grace,
etc. for then he must have sealed to a falsity, etc. Ergo, the act of giving
and receiving in the Sacrament is no seal of evidence to any, much less to all.

Cor. 11.29.

2. In its own nature and primary intention it seals Christ and mercy.

3. The Minister in his acting ex officio, applies mercy charitative to all the
Receivers who are visibly worthy.

4. When therefore the Minister sees any present who are visibly unworthy, if
he he enabled by judicial power, he must not permit him to receive: if not (as
it falls out where no Presbytery is settled) he must either persuade such a
person to forbear, or else in plain terms tell him the danger of his unworthy
receiving, and that he will prove a murderer of Christ, as our Savior did unto
Judas: by which forewarning, I humbly conceive where Church Government is not
settled, the Minister may clear his own soul, as having not power of himself to
admit or keep back without judicial process, wherein himself cannot be both
judge and witness, And thus both word and seal go together, and assure
particular mercy or judgment to Receivers, as they are worthy or unworthy; as
the Priests word went along with the bitter water, to do the honest woman good,
but the adultress hurt, Numb. 5.19, 22, 27, 29. Contra, though the Word make
most worse, yet it makes very many bad ones good: but the Sacrament makes only
good ones better.



by this means I conceive he may clear himself, but cannot keep back him that
is approved by the major vote of the Eldership: only afterward has power to
appeal to the Classis, in case he perceive the Eldership prevaricate and
conspire to admit unworthy ones out of by-respects; as they likewise may do of
the Minister. But all this does not countenance the admission of any who may be
regularly suspended, no more then of him who is to be excommunicated, but is
not, through corruption of the Eldership.

For his fourth Consideration, Page 26.
we grant the Gospel is the Gospel of peace, etc. yet its as true, that
wherever it comes it occasions war; not of its own nature, but by means of
humane corruption, Mat. 10.34, 35. and that by means of separation which it
makes wherever it comes. And is it any wonder then, that the seals of this
Gospel by making separation, make also division? Where the promises are not
applicable so much as visibly, there sure the seals of those promises are not
applicable; the denial whereof yet must needs vex hypocrites, who by this
means are pried into, and uncased, as a soul-searching Ministry does; and no
wonder then if the devil of contention be conjured up, and Gods Jeremies, who
separate the precious from the vile, be men of contention to the whole Earth.
Cain will be angry if Abel find better acceptance then himself; and
hypocrites, who care least for real goodness, yet are very ambitious of all
the privileges of piety, and proclaim war against such as deny them, though
never so justly, (as the Pharisees did against our Savior) but I pray who
deserve blame for this contention, Gods faithful Ministers or hypocrites
themselves, who by visible unworthiness deprive themselves of those
privileges, and yet malign Christ's Stewards, who dare not be so lavish and
prodigal of their Masters provisions as these persons would have them. What
therefore he adds by way of rhetorical amplification is frivolous as to his
purpose, since none are Saints but such sinners, and none to be approved for
Saints by the Church, but such as acknowledge themselves great sinners. But the
question is, Whether such as think themselves righteous, though easily
convinceable of gross ignorance or wickedness (as the Pharisees) are to be
admitted to this Sacrament amongst humbled and repenting sinners?

His provision inserred in his third Edition, page 17. will stand him in little
stead, since his very stating the question, overthrows his great Diana of free
Admission.

For 1. He will have free Admission, and yet himself rails about the Communion
Table from Infants, distracted persons, etc. He that cries out of Suspension,
yet takes upon himself to suspend a world of persons far more worthy then, or
not so unworthy as many he presumes to admit. Shall the Lords Supper be free
for blasphemers, murderers, etc. and not free for Infants, distracted persons?
etc.

2. If he can prove it is against Scriptureorder and decency, to admit to the
Lords Supper a person visibly worthy, though unbaptized, I will easily prove
its more against order and decency to admit to the Lords Supper a person
visibly unworthy, though baptized. Had Constantine the great and Julian the
Apostate been contemporary, I should rather have admitted the former to
receive, when unbaptized, then the latter, though baptized.

3. Whatever Mr. H. insinuates in the close of his Provision, we are as much
both for Order and for the Ordinances as himself; and could not the Ordinances
be had without disorder, we had rather dispense with Order, then part with the
Ordinances. The difference then between us is this, We plead for, and (blessed
be God) enjoy the Lords Supper with order and decency; Mr. H. pleads for it,
and injoyes it with disorder and confusion, whatever he pretends in his
Provision to the contrary.

His second Argument he draws from the nature of the visible Church; which he
defines or describes to be a number of such as make profession of Jesus Christ,
and so are Saints by calling, whatever they are in truth. The essential marks
whereof (whereby it subsists as visible) is the preaching of the Word, and
administration of the Sacraments. Now unless men will be so bold as to divest
our mixed Congregations ( and so consequently all England formerly) of the name
of the visible Church, they cannot take from us one of its essential notes, in
the free use of this Ordinance.

of such as combine for Church ends. The Church is a Corporation, and not
members as so, make a body, but as united either by virtuall or actual
consent, etc. and that either in their distinct Societies, which we call
Parishes or particular Congregations, or in their Representees and Officers
delegated for the public concernment of particular Churches, either in a
Classis, Province, Nation, diverse Nations, or the whole world, whence arise
Classical, Provincial, National, or Oecumenicall Assemblies, etc.

But supposing this to be his meaning, though not so clearly expressed,

2. I ask him in the next place, Whether all Professors or Saints by calling,
are eo nomine to be admitted to the Lords Supper; if so, then why does he shut
out children and distracted persons, who are as truly Saints by calling, and
professors as others. Its apparent then that outward profession is not the
ultimate reason of admission, unless accompanied with suitable knowledge and
conversation, at least visibly; and that gross ignorance appearing, or a
scandalous conversation, do so far contradict Mr. H. his outside profession, as
to make that person for present visibly unworthy.

3. Taking it for granted, that the Word and Sacraments are notes of a true
visible Church, how does it follow that ours are not true Churches, unless
every particular member may partake of the Lords Supper? How many children and
servants were in the days of the Prelates kept from the Lords Supper, till
they could give some tolerable account of their faith, and of the nature and
use of the Sacrament; yet never was such a mad inference as this drawn from it,
that therefore the Church of England was not a true visible Church. And
certainly, if the denial of some Church privilege (though unjustly) were
enough to un-Church a people, I scarce know where there is any one true visible
Church in all the world.

4. Therefore let all the world take notice of the too too gross fallacy of
this Argument, The Word and Sacraments are notes of a true visible Church;
Ergo, Without free admission we have no true visible Church. May not any
ordinary capacity easily discern there are four terms in this Syllogism.

The Syllogism should run thus: The Word and Sacraments are essential notes
of a true visible Church; Ergo, without the Word and Sacraments there is no
true visible Church. But that Mr. H. saw well enough would conclude nothing
against us, who (blessed be God) have both Word and Sacraments, and therefore
in stead thereof (against the known rules of Logic) he shuffles in free
Admission into the conclusion, which was not at all in the premises. A clear
evidence he is more skilled in Sophistry then in Logic, and can better deceive
then convince.

If on the other hand, he will make free admission to the Lords Supper an
essential mark of a true visible Church; let him see how he is confuted by the
practice of our Church under the Prelates, in which many were kept from the
Lords Supper, that were neither children, fools, nor excommunicated, and that
without any prejudice to the essence of our Churches, as was before instanced.
Yea, the very Rubric before the Communion in the Book of Common Prayer, shows
the fondness of this opinion; the Curate being there authorized to suspend
scandalous and malicious persons without (I hope) any prejudice to the true
being of our Churches. Yea, the very Exhortation in the Communion commands such
to bewail their sins, and not to come, lest after the taking of the Sacrament,
the Devil entered into them as he did into Judas. Now were it a duty for all to
come, then were it a sin to forbid any to come.

Object. If yet he will object, This practice of ours, if it be not against the
nature and essence, yet its against the wellbeing of a true visible Church,
when the members thereof, or any of them, are denied their just privileges.

Answ. 1. True, if the Lords Supper were a privilege due to all Members; but
this is the thing to be proved on Mr. Humphrey his part; and in the proof
whereof (though his great Diana) he falls so exceeding short.

2. The well being of a Church consists much in its Government and Discipline,
(of which not one word from Mr. H. in his notes of a true visible Church) Good
Government lies in the Geometrical (not Arithmeticall) administration of
privileges and Censures: the lowest of which last (Admonition) and highest
(Excommunication) we have clear enough in the Scripture: but because Suspension
and the like, are not in terms mentioned in Scripture, therefore Mr. H. will
have it wholly expunged; as if because a man will not be gained by words, there
were no other way but presently to knock him on the head. Certainly, he that
puts the extremes, cannot deny the middle from one extreme to another. And as
he who has power of life and death, has much more power to mulct, imprison,
etc. so the Church who has power to excommunicate, has much more power to
suspend, as being an inferior Censure, and but the way to that highest. Will
Mr. H. deny, that the wellbeing of a Church lies much in its purity, and this
in the knowledge and conversation of the Members? and whether our way or his
conduce more to this, let all the world judge. Let Mr. H. tell me ingenuously,
whether he would have all grossly ignorant persons excommunicated? I hope he is
more charitable, and thinks they rather need instruction. And is not this
previous trial before the Eldership used of purpose, that ignorant persons
might be put upon enquiry after knowledge. as ever they value the privilege of
Sacramental communion. Nor is the proper end of it exclusion from, but
preparation of all sorts for the Sacrament, for which in few months (by Gods
grace) we dare undertake to fit the meanest, if they will be ruled by us.
Contra, if Mr. H. his free Admission obtain universally without check, see if
in a few years a Chaos of darkness and ignorance do not overspread the face of
this glorious Church. But I see I must contract.

For his confirmation of this argument from the parable of the field, etc.
which he styles an invincible support, page 17. Alas poor man, how feeble must
he needs be, when his best strength is but weakness? If the Tares and Wheat
must be separated till the day of judgment, then I pray what will become of
Excommunication? Its apparent by the parable, 1. That the Tares were sown by
the carelessness of the Servants, or other Church members, Matthew. 13.25. 2. That
the prohibition to take them away, was not absolute, but only with a caution
or proviso, verse 29. And in truth, so tender is the Lord of the Wheat, that he
had rather many Tares should stand, then one ear of Corn should be plucked up.
Where therefore there is danger of wronging the wheat, better let the tares
stand; not so if we can separate them without prejudice to, yea with advantage
of the wheat: And therefore a bare suspicion is not enough to keep any from the
Sacrament, but by gross ignorance or scandal it must appear he is a tare, and
not wheat, before he can be suspended judicially. For as for negative
suspension before trial, that is not properly a Church Censure (no more then
the non-admitting of Infants or distracted persons) but only a prudentiall
forbearing to administer the Lords Supper to a person, till he have been
approved as visibly worthy, which yet may issue out into a formal Suspension,
if any shall wilfully obtrude without trial, or upon trial shall be found
visibly unworthy, and yet will not be persuaded to forbear till better prepared.

For his instance of Christ's converse with Publicanes and sinners; it makes
much for us, and against himself. Such Publicanes and sinners who are not
ashamed publicly to profess their repentance and high respects to Christ,
shall be very welcome to us as the worthiest receivers; but the question is,
Whether blind and scandalous Pharisees ought to be admitted with these
Publicanes and sinners?

For his grand instance of Judas, it has been already answered. Only I cannot
but stand amazed at his high flown confidence and censoriousness, page 19. The
evidence of which fact (he means of Christ's admitting Judas to receive the
Lords Supper) has ever appeared so fully to the Church, that this alone has
been ground sufficient to deduce their right of free admission; and what need
more indeed be urged, but that men when they are willing not to see, will let
their hand (put over their eyes) be enough to blind them.

Answ. 1. Sundry famous Lights in the Church believed this long before Mr. H.
either preached or wrote, and yet thought it not ground enough for free
admission. But happily Mr. H. is so charitable, as to judge not only the
reformed Churches, but also the whole Church of England (ever since the dawning
of Reformation after the Marian persecution to this day) to have wilfully put
their hands over their eyes, and knowingly to have sinned against their
consciences. We may well bear this sharp censure with the more comfort and
patience, considering we suffer with so good company.

2. See you not how the vizard of humility falls off, and both his breath and
pen savor rankly of pride in this unchristian censure? Were we as bad as Mr.
H. would make us, we had undoubtedly made a great progress in the high way to
the sin against the holy Ghost, and deserved our selves not only to be
suspended, but also to be excommunicated. In the mean time I must be bold to
tell Mr. H. that he who takes upon himself to be so free an admitter of others,
deserves, I fear, more then suspension for this his scandalous and wicked
censure of the generality of the most pious persons of all the reformed
Churches, and particularly his own Nation.

His third reason he takes from the nature of Christian communion and Church
fellowship, which ought to be in charity, in humility, without judging, every
one esteeming others better then themselves, etc. especially in the Minister,
who is to be gentle to all, suffering the evil ((...)) to win them by this free
way to repentance. And how impossible is this, if we must go to censuring of
men's worthiness and unworthiness, preferring our selves; rejecting others; the
ready way to nothing but heart burnings and divisions, as we have too sad
experience already in most Congregations.

Answ. 1. When men are out of the right way once, whither will they not ramble?
Rash judgment and private judgment cannot stand with charity and humility
(out of his own mouth I condemn the man, who may well be styled Master of Arts
at rash and private judging,) ergo, true and public judging cannot stand with
charity and humility. Does he not in this deal with the Church, as some
Anabaptists deal with the State, take away the Sword of Government, and so make
a fair bridge for universal Toleration.

2. If there must be no judging in the Church, where then are Church Censures
and Excommunication?

3. Ephesus is commended for trying and judging, Rev. 2.2. and that she could
not bear those that were evil, etc. and not therefore charged by Christ as
proud or uncharitable.

4. The Apostle 1 Cor. 5.12,13. commands them to judge Church Members, that is
(in Mr. H. his Language) to be proud and uncharitable.

5. Do we desire anymore of the meanest then we submit to our selves; yea, to a
far stricter trial then they are like to undergo? how then do we lift up our
selves above them, or esteem our selves better then they?

6. Does the gentleness required in a Minister, forbid him to try and instruct
his people? I thought gentleness there required, had been rather a
qualification then a prohibition of Ministerial trial.

7. Does (...) there signify a suffering the people in their sins, that
Ministers should be dumb dogs, and drowsy shepherds, suffering the sheep to
ramble as they please, and the swine to wallow as they please, etc, and admit
them to the same privileges with the best? Such a Minister may well be counted
a good fellow, but sure Christ will never reckon him for a good and faithful
shepherd. Does Mr. Humphrey think the way to bring to repentance, is to suffer
them in their sins? ot that there is no way to reduce them, but either
admonition or excommunication? May not persons be won by denial of some
privileges due to regular members, if they have not lost ail spiritual
ingenuity?

8. That hereby heart burnings and divisions are occasioned, blame not this
excellent course, which of its own nature is a means of love and unity by the
mutual communication of Pastor and Flock, Elders and People, in gifts and
graces: but the pride of most, and ignorance or prejudice of some well meaning
people, who will not submit to this easy yoke, Psalm. 2.1, 3. Matthew. 11.29. nor
do consider, that the ruling Elders are either elected or eligible, 1. By
themselves. 2. Out of themselves. 3. For their advantage, to allay the power of
Ministers, who if sole Judges of Sacramental worthiness, might at least be
under a temptation to wrong weaker Christians, and through passion or prejudice
to keep them away, whom Christ would have to be admitted.

9. If by trying and judging others, we prefer our selves before others, then
there must be no trying or judging of any in the Church; quite contrary to the
Scripture, and the power of the Keys given to Church Officers. Besides, let
the Reader further take notice of the uncharitableness of this man. 1. In
charging us to prefer our selves before others. True indeed, what the Apostle
says of blessing, Heb. 7.7. that may we of trial and judgment, The Trier and
Judge is in that act above him that is tried and judged: but did we prefer our
selves to this superiority? or were we called to it both by Civil and
Ecclesiastical Authority? Does not Mr. Humphrey try and judge others in the
exercise of his Ministry, does he therefore prefer himself above his people?
indeed if he ran before he was sent, well may he bear that charge. But we
challenge Mr. Humphrey and all the world, to name any among us who take upon
them to try or judge others, before they were called to that Office. Let him
take heed lest in this rash censure he be not like Corah and his company, Numb.
16.3.

3. To load us the more, he brands us in the close with the odious charge of
rejecting others, as if that were all the work of the Presbytery, to sit and
reject their brethren. He takes no notice how many are admitted, to the mutual
comfort and edification of themselves and those who are over them in the Lord,
who bless God for the care our Builders take in purging and repairing Gods
House and the new Jerusalem, however opposed and discouraged by Sanballat,
Tobiah, and other Samaritans: and I wish too many (I hope real Jews) did not
too much correspond with them, Neh. 6.17, 18, 19. I am sure Mr. Humphrey by
this unhappy book of his, has done Sanballat and Tobiah more service then
either Nehemiah or Ezra, the Lord forgive him.

For amplification of his third Argument, Page 20.
he presents the example of the Pharisee and Publicane; and insinuates that we
at least (...) act the Pharisee.

Answ. 1. How does it follow, that by trial of others we think better of our
selves then of others, as the Pharisee did here? His judgment was purely
private. 2. Without any trial: Ours is public, upon just and indifferent
trial, whereby often we are brought to think better of others, worse of our
selves, but never to think better of our selves then others, whom yet in some
cases we dare not admit, since its possible one really worthy may be suspended,
and another only visibly worthy may be admitted; since in this, as well as
other trials, the Eider-ship must proceed only secundum allegata and probata,
and he who is worthy personally, may be unworthy dispositively. And here again
he charge us with superstition and uncharitableness, because we will not
admit all freely; as if there were no Mean between profaness and superstition,
between charity and licentiousness.

His second instance for amplification, is from Luke 5.31, 32. (the quotation
is mistaken by his Printer, and the sense by himself) wherein Christ is
represented as a Physician only of the sick, and came to call, not the
righteous, but sinners.

Answ. 1. What is this against us who make it our design to admit none but such
sick ones and sinners as Christ did?

2. It makes much against himself, if he will urge it in order to the
Sacrament, since its evident Christ here makes a distinction and separation;
and 1. Would not have all admitted; and 2. In particular he rejects sound and
righteous ones, namely that were so in their own conceit, and such were most of
the Pharisees: and do we suspend any others then those who ate wiser in their
own eyes then seven men that can render a reason, and fitter for the Lords
Supper (if themselves may be judges) then the best of the approved or approvers?

Page 22. His third instance is John 8. from the woman taken in adultery,
accused by the Pharisees, but not condemned by our Savior.

Answ. 1. Does this man take the Scripture for a nose of wax, that he perverts
it so grossly, cither through ignorance, instability, or prejudice? (to say no
worse) what is this to our Sacramental trial? The Pharisees came to trap
Christ with a practical case and a civil case, John 8.5, 6. Had Christ bid
them stone her, he had been accused to the Romans as stirring the Jews up to
act the supreme power which was taken from them by the Romans; see John 18.31.
Had he forbid them to stone her, he had been slandered to the Jews, as an enemy
to, and contradictor of the Law of Moses. Our Savior at first waves answering
to so captious a question, ver. 6. But when that would not satisfy their
malicious importunity, he gives them so wise an answer, as 1. He avoided both
extremes; and 2. He caught them who came to catch him; And for the woman,
though he condemn not her person either to civil death, as being no civil
Judge, Luke 12.14. nor eternally, as not coming (in the state of humiliation)
to destroy, but to save, Luke 9.56. John 12.47. yet he condemns her sin, and
gives her good counsel, John 8.11. What is this to our keeping persons visibly
unworthy from the Sacrament, and that by just authority in a public and
judicial way? I wonder this man does not now condemn the civil Magistrate for
executing adulterers, incestuous persons, Sodomites, etc. which Christ and his
Apostles would not, 1 Cor. 5.1, 6, 9, 11. only they judged them spiritually,
showed them the danger of those sins, and Gods mercy in pardoning and purging
them. Are not many justly cut off both by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Sword,
whom yet Christ, as absolute Lord of life and death, may pardon? Shall not man
do justice, because Christ shows mercy? Had this woman been stoned to death,
had that been any bar to Christ's Pardon? The most righteous Judge in the
world is conscious of the seeds of incest, murder, etc. in himself, shall he
not therefore condemn such persons legally convicted before him? The most pious
Minister or Church Officer is conscious of the like, shall he not therefore
either suspend or excommunicate such persons, when legally converged and
convicted upon just trial? David himself was actually guilty both of murder
and adultery, was it ever after unlawful for him as a King and Judge, to
condemn such persons? Indeed the consciousness of our own weakness and guilt,
should make us put forth such acts with abundance of self-reflection and pity
to such offenders, but has not the leaft show of warrant to root up or make
void the power of trial and judgment, either in Church or State. Foolish
pity mars a City in this case, shall the woolf be spared to worry the sheep?
If such pity be not the greatest cruelty both to soul and body, I know not what
is.

Page 22. His fourth reason arises from the vanity, formality, and
impossibility of selecting people to this Ordinance. For put the case you will
have a gathered company, I pray whom do you account to be fit and worthy
receivers? if not all that make profession as we do mixtly, then those only
that have an interest in Christ, and are true Believers. Well, but how will you
be able to know them? The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can
know it? And if we can hardly discover our own hearts, how shall we ever
discern others? So that all will come but to those that have the fairest show,
those that seem such; and you cannot be secured but there may be and will be
some hypocrites; and so this true partaking, as all one body and one blood, in
such a mixed communion as you pretend, vanishes, and there can be no such
matter. But now if men here stand upon a formal purity, and will have the
outward purest Church they can, they go to separating again (as we have daily
testimony) till they are quite separated one from another; even as in the
peeling of an onyon, where you may peel and peel till you have brought all to
nothing, unless to a few tears perchance, with which the eyes of good men must
needs run over in the doing.

Answ. 1. Here Mr. Humphrey thinks he has us fast: But let me entreat him not
to boast before he put off his harness. And that both himself and others may
see how wide he roves from the mark, we shall deny both his Extremes, and tell
him that neither bate profession on the one hand, nor troth of grace on the
other hand, is the rule we walk by in admitting persons to the Sacrament, if
considered quatenus. Could not all the art Mr. Humphrey has, think of medium
participationis, between these two extremes, which will do very good service
for his conviction and our justification?

1. Therefore let him know, that we look at his rule of bare profession, as a
very loose principle, which will open a door not only for the wickedest
varlets, as murderers, etc. but also for children and fools, contrary to his
own principles, now in print. And indeed, if bare prosession were enough to
warrant admission to the Sacrament, how dares Mr. Humphrey excommunicate any
baptized person, though he be the wickedest villain that ever Tyburn groaned
for, since even the worst of them are professors, as well as the truest
Nathanael? Therefore say we, Profession, if joined with sufficiency of
knowledge in fundamentals, and suitable practice in conversation, at least
negatively, that there be no evidence against a person, as living after
conviction in a known sin; this is the rule we walk by in admission to the
Sacraments; though withal, we do not neglect inquiry after truth of grace, so
far as may stand with charity.

2. Let him and the world know, that truth of grace in the heart on the other
hand is not our rule of admitting to the Lords Supper. The reason is, because
we cannot admit diverse persons, though we should infallibly know they had truth
of grace; as 1. Children and fools, diverse of whom undoubtedly have truth of
grace in their hearts; and that because they cannot examine themselves, nor
discern the Lords body according to the rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28, 29.
Nor 2. Such, who though they have truth of grace, yet fall into some foul and
scandalous sin, for which they deserve excommunication it self, and much more
suspension, which is but an inferior degree of excommunication. As truth of
grace cannot excuse a man from death, if he be a murderer, etc. so neither can
it excuse him from Church Censures, if he be foully scandalous, especially if
wilful; which yet for a time may stand with truth of grace, witness Asa, 2
Chr. 16.10, 12. Does not Mr. Humphrey know that a person habitually worthy may
be actually unworthy? or that a person invisibly unworthy may be visibly
worthy; and contra? Did he never hear of the worthiness of person and the
worthiness of preparation, visible worthiness and real worthiness? Real and
complete worthiness (I mean as to its parts, when a person has grace, and in
some measure of truth labors to fit himself) is only known to God: outward or
visible worthiness may be known to man by due search and trial, accompanied
with charity and prudence, in which better to fail on the right hand then on
the left; and where we see competent knowledge and have nothing to object
against a man's conversation, the person professing his universal subjection to
Christ, and desire to receive for his further edification, the Eldership ought
to give such a one the right hand of fellowship. And should he afterward be
uncased, the same power of the Keys which admitted him, can either suspend or
excommunicate him, according to the demerit of his carriage.

And whereas he objects, That do what we can, hypocrites will creep in: That we
easily grant, but its nothing to his purpose, since not hypocrites simply, but
hypocrites as uncased, or godly men as grossly extravagant, are the object of
Church Censures. The best use therefore can be made of his peeled onyon, is to
draw tears from his own and others eyes for these extravagant discourses of
his, whereby he has (as much as in him lies) troubled the Church, hindered
Reformation, strengthened the hands of the wicked, and sadned the hearts of the
righteous, whom God has not made sad, Ezekiel. 13.22. Had we the peeling of his
onyon, we would take off only the skin, and make good use of the pulp, either
for food, sauce, or medicine. And so much good do him with his Onyon, whether
he feed upon it, or weep over it.

Page 23. His fifth reason he gathers from the uniformity of the service of
God. If all other Worship lies in common, it is an intrenchment upon the common
liberty, to put an enclosure upon the Sacrament.

Answ. 1. Let him answer himself; if all other worship lie in common (for this
I suppose he means by uniformity) for children and distracted persons (unless
they trouble the Congregation) why does Mr. H. enclose the Lords Supper from
them? Let him extricate himself, and then see if we come not out at the same
gap. Where has Christ in terminis forbid children and distracted persons to
receive? If Mr. H. can exclude them by consequence, the same or like
consequence will serve us to exclude diverse far more unfit to receive then
either of them.

2. Must all Divine Service be laid in common, because most parts of it are?
Why then not all time, because six parts of time are so? why not all places and
persons, because many are? Let us bless God so much of his Service lies in
common, and not quarrel that all lies not in common, since the best are
unworthy that any part of Gods Worship should lie in common.

3. There is no part of Gods Worship so enclosed, but all persons of age and
discretion may enjoy it, if the fault be not their own, and that upon very
honorable and equal, yea easy conditions.

4. As in every Ordinance some part is in common, some part enclosed, so is it
in the Sacrament. In every Ordinance a great part of the Letter is common to
all, the spirit of it is enclosed. In prayer I can bless God for truth of grace
wrought in some, but can I without lying praise him for true grace wrought in
all? In preaching the Minister ought to apply some commands universally, others
to such and such states, conditions, and sexes; threatenings to obstinate
sinners, promises to the penitent, etc. Is not here a plain enclosure? If all
parts of prayer or preaching be not applicable to all, shall all parts of the
Sacrament be applicable to all? We deny not but all may be present at the
exhortation, consecration, administration; but the question is, Whether all may
actually receive, and whether the seal may be applied to them whom the Covenant
of grace in statu quo is visibly inapplicable.

Hereby also will appear the weakness of what he adds by way of amplification,
Are all the commands of God universal? why not (Do this) also?

Answ. 1. Many commands of God are not universal, as was showed before; and
why then may not this be of that number?

2. If this command of actual receiving be universal, why does himself limit
it by excluding some persons?

3. Then it were a sin for the Minister or any other to persuade any to forbear
the Sacrament, though he came with his hands imbrewed in blood, or actually
drunk, or played the part of Zimri or Cosby in the face of the Congregation
immediately before the Sacrament: For neither can my wickedness, nor the
persuasion of any creature, loose the bands of an universal command. Were I
certain this were Mr. H. his judgment, as I have ground to suspect from what
he delivers page 7. happily I might say more to him, but till then shall forbear.

What further he objects is truth, That an unregenerate man sins in every
service and duty, yet must not* thereupon plead a quietus est from service: but
there is not par ratio in order to receiving. 1. Because its not every man's
duty to receive. 2, Because other duties, though sinfully by him performed
(instance particularly in hearing the Word preached) may be means of his
conversion, not so the Sacrament unworthily received; of which more hereafter.

In the same Page he throws his glove, first to the Independents, then to the
Presbyterians. To the former in these words:

Let our Independents answer, Why do you allow a Syntax in the whole Service of
God besides, and bring in a Quae genus of Anomalas and Heteroclites only at
this Ordinance?

Ans. 1. The Independents are much beholding to him for his favorable opinion
of them, as good Proficients in Christ's School. They are good Grammarians
indeed, if they have perfected the Christian Grammar so, as to leave in it but
one Anomalum or Heteroclite.

2. I think its rather optandum then credendum, that they allow a Syntaxis in
the whole Service of God besides.

3. Yet as to free admission in order unto presence at all Ordinances, I
believe they (as well as we) allow a syntax in the whole worship of God.

4. Heteroclites and Anomala's are no more absurd in Worship, then they are in
Grammar. As no rule in Grammar but bath its exception, so no part of Worship
but has its enclosure. Of which afterward.

And therefore though I cannot justify any of the Independents in separating
from our Congregations, yet if in excluding from the Lords Supper persons
visibly unworthy, they act upon the same principles with us; in so doing,
though they bring in a Quae genus of Anomalacs and Heteroclites at the Lords
Supper, yet they violate not the Syntax of Divine Worship. If they walk by
other rules or principles not warranted, let them plead for themselves, I am
not of their Counsel.

But for his challenge to the Presbyterians (or at least some of them) How we
can admit of children as Members of the visible Church (being born of Christian
Parents) unto Baptism, and yet turn away the Parents of those children from
the Sacrament? Those that have gone about to answer this, had better happily have
said nothing: for our free course of Baptism and a denial of this, is such a
seam-rent as will never be handsomely drawn up, though stitcht together.
Nevertheless in yielding the one, they have granted the other.

Answ. 1. How can Mr. H. admit the children themselves to Baptism, and yet
deny them the Lords Supper? If herein he act by faith, let him show a Divine
Precept by which he excludes them. If he bring a proof by consequence, let him
consider if that or a like consequence will not exclude others (as well as
children) for whom he keeps the door open.

2. How can himself admit children to Baptism, and yet excludes their parents
from the Lords Supper? If the parents of a child baptized be either distracted
or excommunicated, Mr. H. being Judge, they ought not to be admitted to the
Lords Supper; whereby its apparent, that even in Mr. H. his judgment, the
childs baptism is no necessary medium to prove the Parents must be admitted
to the Lords Supper; which yet he urges against us, but forgets how he wounds
himself with the same weapon.

3. To come closer to the Objection; two things by way of answer are very
considerable, 1. That we clear and justify the promiscuous baptizing of
children of Christian Parents, be the Parents themselves never so unworthy. 2.
That the promiscuous admission of children to Baptism, is no ground for the
promiscuous admission of their parents to the Lords Supper.

For the first of these: We admit children to Baptism, 1. By virtue of their
remote parents, who may be good though their immediate parents be bad, Acts
2.39. The promise is made to you and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, etc. To your children indefinitely, not to your next children only. Which
is yet more evident by comparing Levit. 26.45. and Micah 7.20. where the
Covenant of Ancestors and Parents extends to the children for many generations,
till the children themselves in person renounce the Covenant. This also is
hinted in the Text under the notion of them that are afar off, which is
extendable not only to remoteness of place or of state, but also to remoteness
of time; that is, as Beza notes, to your children in remote ages to come,
Omnibus long post futuris. Nor is it in the Original (...), but (...). The
Gentiles were (...), Ephesians. 2.17. and so opposed to (...); but future
generations are (...). In this particular, mercy triumphs over justice, in that
God who punishes the parents sin to the fourth generation, extends
Covenant-mercy to a thousand generations, Exodus 20. ver. 5, 6. Nor was Peter's
design here to foretell the calling of the Gentiles, but to encourage his
Auditors to faith and repentance; since (as Beza well notes upon the place) the
mystery of the Gentiles votation was not yet known to Peter himself, nor was
expedient to be revealed to these new Converts, had he known it never so well.
As the Covenant of Adam, so the Covenant of Abraham; as the Covenant of Works,
so the Covenant of Grace is extendible to many generations: and where the root
is holy, there not only the immediate, but also the most remote branches are
federally holy, Romans 11.16. and that whether the branches be natural or
ingrafted, ver. 17.

2. Children may be admitted by stipulation of others to see them educated in
the faith into which they are baptized, be the parents themselves never so
wicked, yea excommunicated, yea Papists, and thus bastards and foundlings may
be baptized. See Amesius his Cases, lib. 4. cap. 27. Nay upon this account
diverse learned men very probably conceive, that even Heathen children may be
baptized, if once taken into a Christian Family, where the Governor or
Governors undertake for their Christian education, and they are out of the
power of their Heathen parents; for by being members of a Christian Family,
they are made members of the visible Church, as civil, though not natural
children of Christians. I am sure this Doctrine is consonant to the Analogy of
Circumcision, Genes. 17.12. where not only the child born in the house, but
also bought with money, was to be circumcised, yea bought of strangers, and not
of the seed of Abraham, as is express and evident in the Text. Thus an Heathen
born in the house, or bought with money might eat of the holy things, Levit.
21.11.

3. These is something considerable in the immediate parents, which makes their
children capable of Baptism; and 1. Though they transgress, yet they do not
renounce the Covenant (as Turks do.) 2. They are Members of the visible Church
till excommunicated, and why may not the children be admitted to the same
privilege the parents yet enjoy? provided their tender age be capable of that
privilege; and children are as capable of Baptism as they were of
Circumcision, both being passive Ordinances.

The second thing to be cleared is, That the promiscuous admission of children
to Baptism, is no ground for the promiscuous admission of their parents to the
Lords Supper. This is evident, 1. Because more is required to make a person
capable of the Lords Supper, then an Infant capable of Baptism.

2. Personal unworthiness may easily appear in the parent, which cannot appear
in the Infant.

3. It is not simple membership gives an immediate right to the Lords Supper:
and therefore though the parents membership do regularly make the child
capable of Church membership (and so give it a right to Baptism) yet neither
his own nor his childs Church membership can make the parent capable of the
Lords Supper, a privilege not for every Church member, but for a visibly
worthy Church member. Suppose the same person ( Timothy for instance) baptized
regularly in his riper years, yea and admitted to the Lords Supper also, as
visibly worthy: afterward he walks scandalously; he is 1. Admonished. 2.
Suspended. 3. If persisting obstinate, dismembered. I beseech you what irregular
proceeding is here?

4. Therefore if the promiscuous admission of children to Baptism is no ground
for their own promiscuous admission to the Lords Supper, much less is the
promiscuous dimission of children to Baptism, any ground of their parents
promiscuous dimission to the Lords Supper. The parent gives to his child what
himself has, namely Church membership, but cannot thence claim what is the
privilege of a worthy Church member, namely Sacramental Communion. The son of
a Jew or Proselyte (being clean) might eat of the Passover, when at the same
time the father (in whose right the child was circumcised) being unclean,
might not partake of that Sacrament. A Priests son or daughter might in their
fathers right (being clean) eat of the holy things: when at the same time the
father himself (being unclean) was forbid to eat of them. Compare Levit. 10.14.
Numb. 18.11. and Levit. 22.4, 6. There is par ratio of moral pollutions. A
wicked parent who deserves the highest degree of excommunication, yet being a
Church member, his child shall be baptized in his right, and by Baptism be
solemnly admitted into the privilege of Church membership, which yet the
father injoyes; when at the same time the father shall be debarred the
privilege of a worthy Church member; namely, Sacramental communion at the
Lords Table. The parents foederall holiness shall benefit his child at the
very same time when his antifoederall wickedness shall prejudice himself.

There is then no seam rent in our practices or principles, unless it be in Mr.
H. his brain, which if we can neither draw nor stitch, well may it be our
sorrow, but we trust it shall never be our sin.

In his third Edition, page 25. he makes an addition to fortify his fifth
reason, by impeaching us, That by urging our form as necessary, we violate a
branch of Christian liberty, equalizing Ordinances of men, Col. 2.18, 20. with
Divine Ordinances; which humane Ordinances, though we might submit to as
prudentiall only, yet he dares not suffer them to creep into the seat of God,
namely conscience. Its ill putting Gods Worship upon stilts, lest by seeking to
advance it higher, we give it a fall into dangerous scruples and divisions.

Answ. 1. Let the Reader take notice that (in Mr. H. his judgment) the putting
of a bar to free admission is an humane, not a Divine Ordinance. Could we be
of his faith, we would be more against this bar then himself is. We bless God
that an humane Ordinance does civilly or ecclesiastically back a Divine
Ordinance, but like not the pressing of humane inventions upon conscience,
especially in Divine Worship.

2. We ask him, whether his excluding of Infants and distracted persons, be a
Divine Ordinance? If so, let us see his patent out of Scripture either in
terms or by consequence; and if the very same or a like Divine Patent do not
exclude all persons visibly unworthy, we shall be of Mr. H. his Religion, to
admit all pell mell.

3. Supposing the bar to free admission had been only a prudentiall humane
Ordinance, I say Mr. Humphrey had done God and the Church more service in
submitting to it, then in disputing against it; since 1. As a prudentiall it is
not against the rule of Scripture. 2. And therefore might by consequence be
deduced from Scripture, as a thing 1. Lawful. 2, Expedient. 3. Commanded by
lawful authority, Civil and Ecclesiastical, yea in the very times of the
Prelates. And if the lawful commands of Superiors (caeteris paribus) be not
obligatory to conscience, let Mr. H. raze out the fifth Commandment.

4. We put Gods Worship no more upon stilts then himself does, excluding only
persons that are visibly incapable of the Lords Supper; and if distracted
persons are incapable in his judgment, scandalous persons are more incapable
in our judgment. Therefore in his Rejoinder der let him either justify us, or
condemn himself.

His sixth and last Argument is drawn from his innocence in free admission, and
that upon a sixfold account: 1. Because therein he does but his duty.

Answ. This is but petitio principii, the main thing to be proved, especially
if he lay it down as a general rule for all Ministers.

2. Because he has no power to turn away any.

Answ. I take this for one of the truest passages in all his book, upon
supposition that he has no Presbytery settled in his Congregation. But little
does Mr. H. consider how this concession makes against himself, and subverts a
main argument of his, drawn from the example of Judas: For supposing him to
have been visibly unworthy, yet say we, Christ as a Minister had no juridicall
power to turn him or any other away, since he could not legally be both Judge
and Witness; and there being then no Presbytery constituted to try unworthy
Receivers by. Which also at this day is the case of most Parishes in England.
And for my own part, I much doubt whether a Minister by his own power can
exclude any Church member from the Sacrament.

3. Because he hopes the best of all.

Answ. 1. So did the Angel of Ephesus, who yet tried and uncased the false
Apostles, Rev. 2.2, 4. 2. So did the Apostle Paul, who yet commanded Christians
to mark and avoid unworthy Church members, Romans 16.17. and 1 Cor. 5.11. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15. 3. So must Magistrates, yet I hope they may and do condemn
Malefactors. 4. If this be a good argument, may not Mr. H. as well conclude, I
hope the best of all, therefore I will excommunicate none. Though charity hope
the best, yet it is not stark blind; and I think its no mean point of charity
to prevent the ruin of many poor souls, who rush on headlong to contract the
guilt of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

4. Because he knows God can turn even the worst at this Ordinance if he please.

Answ. 1. Suppose a scandalous Professor actually converted by the preceding
exercises at the Sacrament, this is not ground enough for the Church to permit
him at that time to receive, since the rule they walk by is visible worthiness.
2. The question is not what absolutely God can do, but what God does or has
undertaken to do. Let Mr. H. show one promise or president for so much as one
person coming to the Lords Supper in the state of nature, and converted by it
or at it. 3. Whatever any may be by the exhortation, etc. at the Sacrament, yet
the main question is, Whether any be converted by actual receiving the outward
Elements, who immediately before receiving was unconverted. A promise or
president in this kind will be much to the purpose; but till then, we must
crave pardon if we hold not free admission in order to participation, though we
shall not deny free admission in order to univerfall presence at the whole
Service. Prove actual receiving a converting Ordinance, and we shall be as
zealous for free admission as Mr. H. can be.

5. Because he endeavors his utmost de jure that all come prepared.

Answ. 1. So high a commendation were fitter to come out of any man's mouth then
Mr. H. Prove. 22.7. 2. Its a commendation too high for any mortal.

3. I shall be bold to tell him, that in this self Encomium he speaks falsely.
Did ever any mere man since the fall endeavor his utmost de jure that all his
Flock might be worthy receivers (such are all that come prepared.) Does he not
know that one worthy in Christ's account, must 1. Be converted. 2. Unblameable,
yea exemplary in his conversation. 3. Actually prepared, by exciting and acting
the Sacramental graces? And has Mr. H. endeavored his utmost de jure that
all his people should be such? nay, has he endeavored his utmost de jure that
himself may be such? Did he never since he was a Minister fail (through
carelessness, yea wilfulness sometimes) in praying for his people, in preaching,
in example, in private reproof, admonition, encouragement, trial? etc. Is he
without sins of weakness, carelessness, yea sometimes wilfulness as a Minister?
and dares he cry at Christ's Bar (as he boasts in his Book) That he has
endeavored his utmost de jure that all come prepared? If this smell not strong
of sublime Pharisaisme, Luke 18.11,12. I beseech you what does? You saw his
pride formerly in censuring others, and very many far his betters, mark now how
the bladder swells with self conceit and applause. The Lord help him to see the
beam in his own eye, who is so quicksighted to espy a moat in his Brothers eye.

Its well therefore that in his last and third Edition he begins in part to cry
peccavi, page 26. in these words: This I suppose, but woe is me if I justify my
self, who am a man of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips, eminent only in our failings.

Ans. 1. It seems then this proud and confident assertion proves at last (by
his own grant) but a supposition. 2. Suppositions, though false, may be grounds
of truth, but false suppositions asserted (as here) are many times dangerous
and pernicious untruths. 3. For any to assert he has endeavored his utmost de
jure in a course or series of actions, is a most dangerous falsehood both for
the Assertor and the receivers. 4. That his own conscience checked him for this
proud and false assertion, is apparent by those expressions, But woe is me if I
justify my self, etc. Yet what higher self justification can there be, then to
stand upon tiptoes with God, and say, I have endeavored my utmost de jure? A
godly man may in humility and sincerity use the words of the Pharisee, I thank
thee, O God, I am not like other men. But what godly man dares say to God, I
have endeavored my utmost de jure? The Lord give him grace fully and publicly
to retract, and not to minse or excuse his pride in this particular, lest God
one day show him to his cost the vanity of his former assertion and latter
supposition, and he be found in the number of those righteous ones, who need no
repentance of pardon, Matthew. 3.13. Luke 15.7.

6. He humbly confesses all their and his own sins ( as Hezekiah) desiring
true repentance, and a pardon for all his and their omissions.

Answ. 1. If here he speak really, and confess and beg pardon for his
Ministerial as well as personal omissions, I cannot but approve it as an act
of humility after his former vaunting. But then note how he contradicts his
former proud assertion (I wish his book and heart too were fuller of such
contradictions, both for his own and his peoples sake.) If he have done his
utmost de jure, what need he desire pardon for his omissions? If he be guilty
of too many omissions, how has he endeavored his utmost de jure?

2. Will confession of our own and others sins serve the turn, without
proportionable endeavor to reform our selves and others in our places? What is
this but to lie in the ditch and cry God help us? And if the unworthiest may
enjoy the privileges of the most penitent and humble Christians, is this like
to reform, or to harden them, as if they were as good as the best? Should a
Physician thus venture the issue upon God, and give physic that might kill as
well as cure, I think no wise man would judge it an act of faith, but of high
presumption. on Should any only give warning of danger, and not labor
actually what he could to prevent it, all his warning will not quit him of
murder before God. Is crying after a wandering sheep enough to save it out of
the pit? the Apostle Jude sure was of another mind, Jude verse. 23. pulling
them out of the fire.

3. What does he in his confession and prayer for pardon, more then we do, be
Communicants either really or visibly never so worthy in an Evangelicall sense?
only here we go beyond him in our actual care and endeavor to fit all sorts
for the Sacrament by personal and particular examination, counsel and prayer,
which he does not: yet he thinks he has endeavored his utmost de jure; we,
though we do far more then Mr. H. are assured we fall very short of doing or
endeavoring out utmost de jure, and believe that the best Minister under
heaven never yet endeavored his utmost de jure to fit his people for the Lords
Supper. Upon all which accounts well weighed, I believe Mr. H. has little
cause to boast of his innocence, or bring that for an argument to justify his
free admission, as he does page 25.

Two other considerations he is pleased to add ex abundanti: the first drawn
from the command and good of coming, p. 25.

For the Command, I ask, Where does Christ command all to receive? If it be
urged, He bid all the Apostles to receive,

An. Were there no other Church members but the Apostles? what thinks he of
Mark, Luke, Nathanael, and many other Disciples that received not?

I, but he bid all present to receive, yea Judas himself.

Ans. 1. Supposing Judas were present, he as well as the rest being an eminent
professor. 2. A very knowing person. 3. Not legally convinced of scandal, I
see not how he could have been denied the Sacrament.

I, but the Apostle bids all members of the Church of Corinth come and receive.

Ans. 1. Let him show that also if he can from the Text, 1 Cor. 11. 2. I am
sure he convinces and threatens all that come unworthily, but I see not where
he commands all to receive absolutely. 3. Why should Mr. H. or any put those
asunder which God has joined together; namely, examination and receiving. The
Apostle 1 Cor. 11.28. says, Let a man examine himself and so let him eat; Mr.
H. says, Let a man eat though he do not examine himself.

Object. Upon this account a natural man also should not attend the Word
preached, since he cannot hear it worthily before conversion.

Answ. Not so, the Word is the instrument of conversion, so not the Sacrament,
therefore natural men as well as others must hear that, but may not receive
this. And this leads me to answer the other branch of his first Argument drawn
from the good of coming, because its a means by which they who want grace may
receive it, etc.

Answ. 1. An Ordinance may be a means of grace in order either to conversion or
edification. In order to conversion we deny that actual receiving is a means
of grace: In order to edification, we acknowledge it to be a singular means of
grace to the worthy receiver; but what is this to Mr. H. his purpose?

If he say, The Word and Prayer in order to consecration may convert.

Answ. That we deny not, and therefore here permit a freer dimission then M. H.
namely, both for children, distracted and excommunicated persons to attend the
Sacrament; but not actually to receive till they be actually capable as persons
visibly worthy.

2. Want of grace is either graduall and sensible, or total and insensible.
The Sacrament (as before) is an especial means of grace for the former, but
not for the latter. But this will come hereafter to be disputed in its proper
place, which makes me here to pass it over only with a touch. By the way let
the Reader observe these words of Mr. H. page 26.

Though we may scruple how an unregenerate man can receive it as a pledge, yet
as it is a means whereby grace is conveyed, there is no difficulty.

Does not the former branch justify what has formerly been proved, that the
Lords Supper being a special pledge of grace, may not be applied to one
visibly unworthy? and where is Mr. H. then (himself being judge) if we prove
its no means of grace in order to conversion? But that work I shall suspend
till I come to clear the grand objection about the converting power of the
Sacrament.

His last supernumerary Argument is drawn from the evil of omission, ibid. This
he confirms from the parallel neglect of Circumcision and the Passover, of
which whosoever were guilty were in danger to be cut off.

An. There Is a wide difference between not receiving and neglecting of the
Sacrament; the latter is a great sin, so not the former. Nor does that man, who
being convinced of his present unfitness, forbeares receiving, sin as a
neglector, but rather shows his high respect of the Sacrament.

For his instance from Matthew. 22. it has been answered already. Only where now
he adds, That those which came not to the Feast were destroyed.

Answ. In that he goes beyond the Text, which says indeed, that they who
murdered his servants were destroyed; not so of the rest, but only that they
were excluded the Supper. And though it be a truth by consequence they were
destroyed, as being judicially deprived of Christ and of his grace, yet that
makes not for, but against Mr. Humphrey, and shows clearly that by that
Marriage Feast is not meant the lords Supper, there being many saved who never
taste of the Lords Supper, but none can be saved who taste not of the Marriage
Feast.

Whereas therefore he adds in the same Paragraph, They are most unworthy of all
who come not in to the Supper.

Answ. 1. It will not hold water on either hand, since 1. Those who murdered
the Servants that invited them were more unworthy. 2. If we may judge by the
penalty, he that came without the Wedding Garment was more unworthy, the
neglecters being for present only deprived of the Supper, but he bound hand
and foot and cast into utter darkness, Matthew 22.13. 2. Dare Master Humphrey
say they are unwornthy who come not always to the Lords Supper? May not some
scruple of conscience, yea sometimes worldly occasions, justly excuse a person
for not coming? But I am sure he that comes not to the Marriage Feast is
always unwornthy; another clear evidence that by the Marriage Feast is not
meant the Lords Supper.

To draw then to a close of our answer to his first part, In opposition to Mr.
H. his assertion, page 26, Its neither a certain duty on the Ministers part to
admit all, nor on the peoples part for all to receive, unless you understand it
mediately, as the getting of assurance is a duty lies upon all, yet not
immediately, but first they must get true grace, the ground of assurance. So
all must come to the Sacrament; true, but first they must be prepared. All must
be admitted to receive; true, but first they must be visibly worthy. We keep
not any away for fear of accident all scandal, or of committing an uncertain
sin, in the doing, as Mr. H. would make the world believe page 26. (I speak as
to the rule we walk by, for what particular men upon occasion may do through
weakness or otherwise, I am no Patron of that) but to prevent certain scandal
by the admission of persons visibly unworthy, as also the sin and ruin of
unworthy receivers, who being admitted, would murder Christ, and eat and drink
judgment to themselves; as also our own partaking with other men's sins, and
bring accessory to the ruin of their poor souls: from all which guilt I
beseech the Lord to free Mr. Humphrey, and others of his mind and practice,
who by this loose principle of free admission, etc. have laid the axe to the
root of reformation. And whereas he is pleased to charge us in a rhetorical
way, as doing evil (by suspending from the Sacrament) that good may come of it,
and that therefore our damnation is just, We shall make no other return but
this, to beseech God to forgive him, as we heartily do, this bitter spirit of
censoriousness.

Whatever therefore he may think of the child of his own begetting, as appears
by that expression in the foot of the same Page, I will not give you my reasons
by the heap, but by the weight, I leave it to the indifferent Readers
judgment, whether Mr. H. be not better at number then at weight. For my own
part, I conceive that one good argument (which makes no number) would have
weighed far more in the balance of the Sanctuary, and of solid reason, then all
his eight arguments heaped up together.

I like his caution in the close, That no man take occasion from hence to
presume; but I fear one single caution will not be able either to prevent or
redress the Tithe of that mischief which is in part already and every day will
be more and more wrought by his eight Arguments.

And here I should lay down my weapons, but that I perceive he is resolved upon
a skirmish after the pitched battle. Happily he may be better at (...) then he
has been at (...). Too many in our days are better at pulling down then at
building up; I shall make bold to try whether Mr. H. be of the number. Nor
shall I blame him if he pull down only rotten houses, provided he hurt not
himself or his neighbors by their downfall.

The second part answeered.
PAssing his premonitory Preface, I come directly to his Objections and
Answers. The Doctrine of free admission will take away the use of the keys,
excommunicate Excommunication, and leave us no Discipline in the Church.

H. might have spared, there being no great strength in it against free
admission, in his sense, which admits not excommunicated persons.

Yet withal I must tell him, that his satisfaction of the objection is
unsatisfactory, and not we, but himself will be found guilty of false surmises
about Excommunication and Suspension.

And here I value not what the Objection surmises, since Mr. H. may frame it as
he please, and so make it surmise what he will: but if thereby he intends to
insinuate, that we look at Church Discipline as lying solely in Suspension, I
must tell him, he acts not the part of a fair respondent. 1. Therefore for
negative Suspension (which is a bare non-admission) we account it no part of
Church Discipline, no more then himself does the non admission of Infants or
mad folk. 2. For positive Suspension (whereby 1. Persons upon trial found
unworthy by the Eldership. 2. Persons who obstinately refuse trial, yet will
obtrude themselves upon the Sacrament, are by vote of the Eldership denied
participation) this we say is an act of Church Discipline, and a lesser degree
of Excommunication, whereof I conceive there is a threefold degree, 1. From
private communion, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 2. Not only from private but also from
Sacramental Communion, 1. Cor. 5.11. Eating there being extended to
Sacramental eating as well as domestical eating; as is cleared by the
Antiquaerist in his Vindication or Answer to Suspension suspended, to which
therefore I refer. 3. From Church membership, Mat. 18.17, 18. and 1 Cor. 5.5.

Yet withal I add, this positive susspension is not issued out against any,
unless by their obstinacy they force the Eldership to it. For 1. if a person
upon trial be found ignorant, the Eldership does not presently proceed to
Suspension, but entreat him to forbear a Sacrament or two, till he have
attained to some competency of knowledge, in order whereunto they give him
direction, and offer him their assistance. If for all this he thrust himself
upon the Sacrament, they desire him to forbear, and tell him they dare not
admit him till more capable. And lastly, if all this will not serve, they are
forced to issue out a Vote of Suspension, which yet I believe is very rare,
since too many suspend themselves by keeping away because they will not be
tried. 2. If a person be found scandalous, they admonish him being before them,
if he profess repentance, and be willing to give satisfaction, they dare not
refuse him: otherwise they proceed with him as with the former after
conviction. And if the sin and scandal be great, and aggravated by obstinacy,
they proceed not only to Suspension, but also to dismembership. Having given
this account of out judgment and practice, let us weigh Mr. H. his judgment
about Church Censures.

Page 31. He says, They are punishments upon scandalous persons (after a
legal conviction) whereby they are debarred from Christian society in general.

Answ. 1. In this description he surmises amiss, by omitting one main end of
Church Censures, namely the amendment of the party censured, 1 Cor. 5.5.

2. In restrayning them only to scandalous persons as to practice, which are
extendible to any wilful sinner; and if persons wilfully ignorant be not
wilful sinners, I know not who are, 2 Pet. 3.5.

3. In debarring persons censured of all Christian society in general. And
here I challenge Master Humphrey and all the world to show me any one place in
Scripture, which requires that persons excommunicated should not be present at
any public Ordinance. I grant, that by Excommunication they are made as
Heathen and Publicanes, and are in status quo no Church members, Matthew. 18.17.
but I see no place that proves persons out of the Church may not be present at
any public Ordinance. I am sure 1 Corinthians. 14.24, favors the contrary. He is
therefore much mistaken about us, who neither shut the Church doors nor the
Chancell doors against any person censured, but admit them to be present at
all Ordinances; nor do we believe their presence will leaven any, since
spiritual defilement is not contracted by presence, but by connivance or
imitation, etc. And therefore if any gratify profane persons, it must be they
who exclude from all Ordinances, not we who admit them to be present at all
Ordinances, though we restrain them from actual receiving, and that upon very
weighty reasons, yet withal let me tell Mr. Humphrey that he is mistaken in
saying, page 32. That profane persons never care to come to the Sacrament. Did
he never hear of poor ignorant and profane creatures, that must needs come and
eat their Maker at Easter especially? or is he only a stranger in Israel, and
knows not these things? May not ignorant and profane ones desire the Sacrament
partly out of custom and fashion, partly because they apprehend its a disgrace
for them to be turned away, and for many such trivial grounds?

For his second snrmise, page 32. That Suspension is instituted only in
reference to the Ordinances, to keep them pure and holy, if the Sacrament
especially would he defied otherwise to the Receivers.

Answ. 1. We think the Ordinances are defiled only to those who use them
sinfully. 2. That persons are defiled not by presence with unworthy Receivers,
but by partaking in their sins. 3. That they partake in the sins of unworthy
Receivers, who do not their duty to reform them, or to keep them from receiving
in case they will not be reformed.

Its therefore false which he asserts, page 32. That Church Censures concern
not those who are admitted to the Ordinances, but are used in reference only
to offenders, etc.

For 1. It concerns all Church members in their places to look to it, that
Church Censures be duly executed. 2. Their very execution does much concern
Church members, by fear to keep then from those inordinate courses which bring
Church Censures upon others. And its considerable how he contradicts himself in
the close of this paragraph, when he makes (...) and (...) to be the ends of
Church Censures. And I appeal to all the world, whether admonition (which
better renders the sense of the first Greek word) satisfying the Congregation,
and warning or example, concern more of the Congregation but the parties
offending?

His third pretended surmise is, That we conceive there is a most near
essential relation between this Excommunication and the Communion, as if it
were a part of it, at least some necessary antecedent, as if the Sacrament
could not be administered without it.

Answ. 1. The Objection it self propounded page 30. and elevated to the height
of Mr. Humphrey his design, infers no such mad consequence. For granting it
were a truth, that free admission did takeaway the use of the Keys, etc. how
does it follow from thence, that there is an essential relation between
Excommunication and the Communion? or (which is more gross) that
Excommunication is a part of the Communion? Do not essentialiter relata put or
take away each other? but does the taking away of Excommunication take away the
Communion? what is this, but to conclude that the admitting of all sorts to the
Communion takes away the Communion? So belike there is a Communion which all
partake of, and yet there is no Communion because all partake of it. Is not
this excellent Logic? The Sun shines which all men see, and yet it does not
shine because all men see it. Its therefore both a false inference and an
absurd falsity in it self, that there is an essential relation between
Excommunication and the Coram union, since the Communion may be without
Excommunication, and Excommunication without the Communion. (I speak as to
matter of fact, not as to jus or fas, for I believe all Ordidinances should be
maintained in the Church, yet withal that the absence of one Ordinance does
not null another.) There is indeed a near relation between the Communion and
Excommunication in point of duty, since we must not separate those things which
God has joined (God having commanded all his Ordinances to be used) but not in
point of being or existence, since they depend not so one upon the other, that
all must needs be abolished if one be universally neglected.

The latter surmise framed by Mr. H. is far more absurd, as if either we or
the objection by him propounded made Excommunication a part of the Communion.
What is this but a contradiction in terminis, to make keeping from the
Sacrament a part of the Sacrament, or keeping from receiving a part of
receiving! From such receiving we shall suspend no unworthy person. We wish Mr.
Humphrey much good with such contradictions, but desire him not to pin them
upon our sleeve. 2. How follows it from the Objection that Excommunication is a
part of Communion? The Argument must stand thus, If free admission to the
Communion excommunicate Excommunication, then Excommunication is a part of the
Communion; but free admission does so. Ergo. Do not the Antecedent and the
Consequent here hang together like ropes of sand? Is it not rather true, that
if free admission to the Communion excommunicate Excommunication, then
Excommunication is no part of the Communion? Is it not against nature for one
part to excommunicate another?

His distinction between acts of Discipline and acts of Worship makes little
for his purpose. We grant them indeed to be distinct things; yet withal we
add, that acts of Discipline are no bars to acts of Worship, excepting only
actual receiving in the Sacrament; (If he please to call that an act of
Worship) I must therefore pass his following discourse page 33. and 34. as
wholly impertinent, and tell him, that the friends of Suspension are more both
for Discipline and Worship then he is. 1. Because we are for all the parts and
degrees of Discipline, he is only for some of them. 2. We exclude no
excommunicated person from any part of public Worship but only from actual
receiving; Contra, he excludes all excommunicate persons from all public acts
of Worship, page 31.

2 Object. The most of men are wholly unfit, and not capable of this Ordinance,
as wanting both the preparatory and executory part, etc. therefore no free
admission hither.

Answ. I commend Mr. H. who will be sure to choose Adversaries weak enough: He
may well say there is manifest weakness in this Argument. But he does ill to
right against our weakest Arguments, and then triumph as if we had no stronger.

We have showed formerly, That fitness or unfitness absolutely considered is no
rule for the Churches admission or suspension, but either of these as visible.
We say not, that all who are unfit must be kept from the Sacrament, but only
all who are visibly unfit. 2. That for the discerning of those who are visibly
unfit, the Church must proceed by a rule to find them out. 3. That trial by
examination of persons, and witness if need be, is a Scripture and approved
rule. 4. That all are bound to submit either to public or private trial, as
God offers occasion for either, when it may be for Gods glory and their own or
others edification, yea though it should tend to their outward prejudice, 1
Pet. 3.15. 5. That being discovered to be unfit, they ought to repent and study
to be fit, but not to thrust themselves against light and conviction upon the
Sacrament, When God says, Let a man so cat, 1 Cor. 11.28. how dares any man
say, Let him eat though not so? 6. If notwithstanding persons visibly unfit
will thrust themselves upon the Sacrament, its the Churches duty not to let
them eat and drink judgment to themselves, by murdering the Lord of glory,
unless Mr. H. be of Cains Religion, that Church Officers are not their
brethrens keepers, Genes. 4.9. Neither let him object, That then they may as
well keep him from hearing, etc. for in part it has, and (God willing) shall
be more fully showed, that there is a wide difference between hearing and
receiving.

Now let us hear what Mr. H. has to say against this Objection of his own
framing.

And first I thank him that page 35. he lays down, That the Church can but look
upon an outward capacity. He might have added (since contrariorum eadem est
ratio) That the Church may also look upon and judge of outward incapacity, but
see and judge of it they cannot without evidence and trial; therefore 3. They
may enquire after persons capable or incapable. 4. Since trial is in vain
without execution, therefore they ought to admit all persons outwardly capable,
and suspend all persons outwardly incapable; otherwise how shall they suspend
(negatively at least) Infants, distracted and excommunicated persons?

As to his three Answers, I answer briefly, 1. A natural man must hear, pray,
etc. though he cannot do them rightly, because these are converting Ordinances,
so is not the Lords Supper, I mean as to actual receiving; he may therefore
hear, etc. but not receive. I wonder a wise man should mistake a mountain for a
feather.

2. Its true, every man must do what he can: but many things are naturally
possible which are morally impossible; and thus I cannot do that which I may
not, that is impossible which is unlawful. Let him prove that actual
receiving is a debt on the part of a natural man, or that to admit a person
visibly unworthy is a debt on the Churches part, and we shall be far enough
from hindering any in the payment of their debts either to God or man.

3. In his last Answer, though he have borrowed a good distinction from Master
Pemble, yet he shuffles woefully in the application of it. In a legal sense no
man is either worthy, or receives worthily; in an Evangelicall sense no man
receives worthily, but he is a worthy Receiver, But I ask Mr. H. whether he
dares apply either branch of this distinction to all whom he admits so freely?
To come to his own words, Do all that he admits. 1. Labor their best to
prepare their hearts. 2. Judge and humble themselves really before God. 3. Come
to Christ heavy laden. 4. Look at themselves as dogs, and yet importune Christ
for the crumbs of mercy? I say then he has the worthiest Congregation in the
world. 2. All his Communicants are not only worthy, bun eminently godly. But
now to retort. How easy were it to evince the contrary against most whom he
would have admitted. For 1. How many ignorant ones are therein our
Congregations, that scarce know their right hands from their left in matters of
Religion. 2. How many profane ones, swearers, drunkards, etc. 3. How many
outwardly pious, who upon trial might easily be uncased, to live in some known
sin. Each of these fearing (and that not without cause) to be uncased before
the Eldership, no wonder they are so averse to trial, lest their sheeps
clothing should be pulled off, and themselves discovered to be ignorant,
profane, or hypocritical, critical, far enough from the forementioned graces
of humility, repentance, and faith. If he object that such persons should be
excommunicated, I answer, 1. Whoever deserve Excommunication, do much more
deserve Suspension; and it seems then, that the Presbyterians offend rather in
being too favorable then too rigid. 2. We deny not, but in case of obstinacy
or foul scandal, dismembring may follow Suspension, the greater
Excommunication the lesser. 3. I hope Mr. Humphrey is more charitable then to
profess that all ignorant persons should be excommunicated. I am sure we are so
charitable, as by Suspension to put them upon endeavors after knowledge, that
they may be fitted for, and so comfortably admitted to the Sacrament, Which his
free admission is not like to do; but rather to harden and flatter them in
their ignorance.

He notes well, page 37. That on the unworthy receivers part, the Ordinance is
taken in vain, against the third Commandment. But whereas he adds, not so on
the admitters part.

Ans. The admitters having regularly the power of the Keys, if they admit
persons visibly unworthy, are accessory to their guilt; as any one is an
accessory in Gods account, who prevents not the sin of his neighbor when he
has power to do it.

3 Object. Holy things to holy men.

An. I may say of this as of the former, There is little strength in it. Yet
withal, Mr. H. his Answer falls short, and is too too feeble likewise. For 1.
All outward holy things are not to be administered to all outwardly holy
persons, since Infants and distracted persons (if Christians) are outwardly
(yea diverse of them inwardly) holy, yet by Mr. H. his vote are not capable of
the Sacrament. 2. Some things outwardly holy may be administered to persons not
so much as outwardly holy by profession, Mat. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 14.24. 3. What
is bare profession if contradicted by profaness? That which cannot secure a man
from Excommunication, but rather makes him capable of it, much less can secure
him against Suspension, an inferior Censure. But such is bare profession if
accompanied with profaness. 4. Many persons excommunicated do still profess,
and so are outwardly holy, yet these Mr. H. will have excluded from all
Ordinances. From all which I conclude, 1. That M. H. his Answer may vye with
the Objection for weakness. 2. That M. H. here as well as other where
contradicts himself, in saying that the same person at the same time must be
admitted to all the Ordinances, and yet he must be admitted to none of the
Ordinances; to all the Ordinances as a professor, to none of the Ordinances as
excommunicated; a cruel assertion and a flat contradiction.

For the Reply page 38, and 39. Do we not hereby make our selves one with the
wicked with whom we join and so have communion with Belial? His answer is good,
That joining with a wicked man's person is not having communion with Belial, but
accompanying of him in his evil ways.

But our difference here with M. H. is not so much about joining with the
wicked, as accompanying of him in his evil ways: It being first his sin to
receive unworthily; Secondly, The peoples sin who know him to be unworthy and
do not inform the Church: Thirdly, The Churches fault if they study not the
discovery of persons unworthy, or admit them to the Sacrament when visibly
unworthy: Nor is presence with the wicked at Ordinances, but fostering of them
in their sins, communion with Belial, which I wish too many do not fall into by
this free admission, pleaded for with more strength of affection then power of
conviction.

We easily agree with him, That wicked persons in the Church, are in some sense
in Christ and sanctified by him: But if this be enough for admission to the
Lords Supper, then why does himself shut the Chancel door (as he other where
calls it) against Infants arid mad men, who are as much if not more in Christ,
and as much if not more sanctified then the former, and against whom himself
dares not shut the Church door. Therefore say I, if M. H. be really for free
admission, let him excluded none out of the Chancel that are within die Church.
For the places of Scripture that he quotes page 40. I am confident the Orthodox
interpretation of them, will never open the Chancel to grossly ignorant or
profane Church Members; the latter of which are so far from having right to be
admitted into the Chancel, that they deserve to be shut out of the Church.

To close up this third Objection: How gross is that assertion page 41. That
there is an historical visible faith, that gives an outward Church-right unto
the Elements.

For then first excommunicated persons have a right to the Elements, who though
cast out for their profaneness, have still an historical faith, since
excommunication does not deprive you of their historical faith, yet cuts them
off 1. from visible Church Membership, 2. from visible Christ-membership.

2. Saving faith it self does not always give a right to the Elements (it
being possible that a godly man for some foul scandal may be excommunicated)
much less then does visible historical faith, when contradicted especially by
customary profaneness.

3. As historical faith gives not a right to Christ (for that the devils have,
James 2.19.) but the faith of adhesion seated in the will not in the
understanding, so not visible historical faith, but visible faith of adhesion
gives a Church-right to Christ sacramental, and should any man profess
historical faith but protest against faith of adhesion, I appeal to M. H. his
conscience, whether he durst admit such a wretch to the Sacrament. For my own
part,, should any person profess, I believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God,
the only Savior and Mediator between God and man, but I will not rest upon him
for righteousness and salvation; let this man be never so pious outwardly, I
should sooner admit a common adulterer, etc. then him.

Objection 4. page 41. The Seal is set to a blank if be admitted.

An. 1. For understanding this Objection the better, we must know, that what
the Philosopher said in general, that Anima est rasa tabula, is too true of
all men since the fall in order unto saving grace. They are Tabulae, as capable
of the Spirits writing; they are rasae tabulae, which notes 1. They are
naturally destitute of this writing. 2. This writing was rased out by Adams
fall, and thus all men naturally are blanks, in order to the writing of the new
Covenant in their hearts: The similitude you have 2 Cor. 3.3. Heb. 8.10.

2. This Blank is either visible or invisible. To God all blanks are visible,
and he may use his liberty to set his seal where he pleases, by commanding to
baptize all Infants of believing parents, etc. and to admit to the Lords Supper
all visible Saints that are Church Members.

The Question is then, Whether man may apply the Seals to visible blanks. It Is
clear he may not; for then Heathen themselves before instruction and
profession, as also their Infants might be baptized. I assume, But there are
visible blanks in the Church as well as in the world, namely persons that are
as notoriously ignorant and profane as Heathen, and who if they had not been
baptized in their infancy, should not be now admitted to baptism, without
evidence first given of their knowledge and piety. Therefore say I, seeing
(according to M. H. his own rule) Adultis eadem est ratio utriusque Sacramenti,
they who at present would be incapable of baptism had they not been baptized,
are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper though baptized in their infancy.
The Objection thus stated we conceive to be good: Lets see now what M. H. has
to object against it. I shall at present pass his first distinction as waved
yet by himself.

Page 41, and 42. He conceive it is a general mistake, that people take the
Sacrament to be a Seal to their faith, and if there be m true faith, that it is
set (they think) to a blanks.

Answ. 1. Sacramental seals (as others) relate either to parties or to things.
1. To parties, namely the Covenanters on both parts, God and the creature in
Covenant; from God to the creature they seal the Covenant of grace, from the
creature to God they seal dutifulness and thankfulness. Here we say, the
Church cannot apply the seals of the Covenant to any who are visibly out of the
Covenant; but in our Congregations there are many grossly ignorant and profane
persons visibly out of the Covenant. You will say, they are visibly in the
Covenant as Churchmembers and professors though at large; True, but their
visible profession is not equivalent to their visible ignorance and
profaneness, no more then profession of honesty is to open cheating: as a
cheater uncased loses the repute and privileges of an honest man, so an
hypocrite uncased forfeits the privileges of his profession, and the Church
both may and ought to take the forfeiture, till the breach made upon his
profession be repaired by a new profession of his repentance and promise of
reformation, yea and visible reformation too, so far as it can be had: and
certainty, if such a person may be denied all public Ordinances (in M. H. his
judgment) much more may he be denied one Ordinance. He that deserves the
greater penalty, much more deserves the less.

Secondly, To come nearer to his Answer: Sacramental Seals relate to things as
well as to persons: And thus as Seals, 1. They confirm the Covenant. 2. They
confirm the faith of the worthy receiver. 3. They confirm judgment to the
unworthy receiver. To apply the distinction: 1. All sorts may be present to see
the Covenant sealed. 2. None but persons Evangelically worthy may partake,
these only having faith to be confirmed. 3. None visibly unworthy may by the
Church be admitted to partake, as being visibly without faith, either in the
habit or actings thereof; which last I note in reference to godly persons who
sometimes may be justly either suspended or excommunicated. 4. Supposing they
may be admitted on the Ministers part where the power of the Keys is
imperfect, yet to clear his own soul the Minister is to deal plainly with every
unworthy receiver, and let him know that he will but betray and murder Christ,
as our Savior did to Judas (supposing he did receive,) and that the Sacrament
which confirms other men's faith, will confirm his unbelief and seal judgment
unto him. To sum up all: That which confirms or ratifies is tropically a
Seal; but the Sacrament does confirm faith and ratify the Covenant to faith,
Ergo, Its both a seal of faith, and a seal to faith; and contra, where there is
no faith to confirm, as to that particular it must needs seal to a blank, as
sealing to a blank is a known expression to note the application of a seal to a
paper that has no writings, and where nothing is writ there nothing can be
confirmed.

2. That the Sacrament seals Christ's blood in particular for pardon to the
receivers by virtue of its primitive institution, is evident by comparing
Matthew. 26.28. with Luke 22.20. The latter place says, This cup is the new
Testament in my blood which is shed for you: the former place shows for what
end, namely for remission of sins. The language then of the Sacrament given to
every receiver is; the body and blood of Christ is thine for the remission of
thy sins, and how dares any Minister say or seal this to a person known to be
grossly ignorant or profane?

Page 42. God does not attest our faith, but the truth of his own promises, but
the Sacraments are Seals properly of the Covenant.

Answ. 1. I know none so simple as to assert that God does in terminis My
meaning is, the Sacrament does not say in expres terms thou Roger beleevest, no
more then the word does, but only by consequence.
attest our faith in the Sacrament, as M. H. seems to insinuate; the Sacrament
does not so attest but suppose and require faith, and then seals the Covenant
to faith. 2. In vain does it seal the Covenant, if to no persons: A Covenant
cannot be but with some body, and if it be sealed it must be sealed to those
with whom it is made: therefore the Covenant being sealed in the Sacrament, it
must be sealed to some body, and sealed regularly it cannot be to those who
visibly reject it: but grossly ignorant and profane persons uncased, do visibly
reject the Covenant of grace, Ergo, the Covenant of grace cannot regularly be
applied to them by the Seals. 3. If the Sacraments are seals properly of the
Covenant, why may not Infants and distracted persons partake of them, who have
a more visible right to it then grossly ignorant and profane persons have? 4.
As the Sacraments are seals of the Covenant, so they may be applied to the
Covenant before all, but the Covenant may not by them be applied or sealed to
any but to persons visibly worthy. Its well therefore in the same page he
corrects himself, and grants the Sacraments may be seals of our faith
consecutive, because they confirm and strengthen faith: But he shuffles in
saying, They are not formaliter, and in a true and proper sense seals unto any
thing but the Covenant. In a proper sense a seal is an artificial thing fit to
make a visible representation or impression and confirmation. This the
Sacrament is not properly but figuratively to the Covenant it self, namely as
it has the office of a seal, which is to represent and confirm, and this it
does to faith as well as to the Covenant: For 1. As it represents the Covenant,
it must needs represent faith as an especial branch promised in the Covenant.
2. As it confirms the Covenant, so it confirms faith gradually offered and
promised in it, and thereby also confirms faith inherent in the worthy
receiver, as a Bond sealed unto me confirms my belief that the particulars
sealed unto shall be performed, and if this be not to seal in a formal and
proper sense (theologically) I know not what is. And thus increase of faith and
all other graces are sealed by the Sacrament to the worthy receiver, but
neither the beginnings nor increase of faith are sealed to the unworthy
receiver.

Nor will his instance of Circumcision, page 43. help him as to the point in
hand, since Circumcision was applied to none but visible Saints, either by
Covenant, election, or by actual profession, not contradicted by living in
scandalous sins, or notorious ignorance of the Covenant of grace, which is the
rule we walk by in admission or non-admission.

And as little advantage will his cause gain by his illustration (here again
repeated) drawn from a Proclamation sealed and offered to rebels that refuse
it. True, the similitude holds in some particulars: 1. The Covenant of grace is
proclaimed by the Minister. 2. The truth of it is sealed by the Sacrament. 3.
The benefits of it offered to all, and therefore we deny not but all sorts may
be present at the Ordinance, as all rebels whether obstinate or submissive may
be present at the Proclamation and sealing of a Pardon. But what is offering a
sealed Pardon in general and conditionally, to the particular application and
sealing of the same Pardon to singular persons? Or how can a Commissioner
without breach of his trust, assure (either by word of mouth or seal.) pardon
to a Traitor that visibly stands out against his Prince? In like manner at the
Sacrament, not only the Elements do represent and seal the Covenant of grace as
to its truth in general, but some of the Sacramental actions (as giving and
receiving) do particularly apply it to every receiver: And how dares any
Minister, having regular power to deny it, by word and seal apply the Covenant
of grace to any person that visibly rejects it? To illustrate this by the
initiall Sacrament; Baptism when ever administered, seals the Covenant of grace
as well as the Lords Supper; but only to the person baptized does it make
particular application of the Covenant, and therefore cannot be applied to any
unbaptized person that is visibly out of the Covenant, be he born of Heathen or
of Christian Parents: But all who are visibly in the state of nature are
visibly out of the Covenant, and such are grossly ignorant, and scandalous
persons wilfully persisting in both. Since therefore both Sacraments seal one
and the same Covenant, he who should not be admitted to the first were he
unbaptized, must not pari ratione be admitted to the second though baptized.

Page. 44. Rep. by M. H. But is it not alsurd for a man to set his seal where
there has been no agreement and transactions before, etc. M. H. grants it is
absurd on the receivers part; but as for the Minister or Church who offer it as
a seal on Gods part, there is a true seal to a true copy, and nothing out of
order.

Answ. There Is nothing out of order if the Minister proceed not to delivery of
the writing and seal to those who visibly refuse the Covenant offered. But
should M. H. or any else deliver a purchase sealed to a person who refused the
bargain, let himself be Judge whether it were not an act both disorderly and
imprudent: And as disorderly is it to deliver unto any person bond and seal for
the promised Land who visibly prefers Egypt and Babylon before it. God will
not Ministers should deliver precious pearls to such swine.

What he adds Page 45. is also weak, in which respect he does well to cover
the nakedness of it with a blind and misty parenthesis. His words are these:
As they are Gods seals, for the same reason they cannot be seals of faith,
because God seals not imaginably to our part of the Covenant which is faith.

Answ. 1. Both the assertion it self and its reason are false. For

First, Are they not Gods seals, 1. As relating to Gods Covenant. 2. As
instituted by God himself to ratify his Covenant.

Secondly, Is not faith it self and every saving grace promised in the New
Covenant? unless M. H. will professedly turn Pelagian, and make faith only the
birth of man's free will.

Thirdly, If the Covenant be Gods, if the seal be Gods, and faith promised in
it be Gods also, is it not apparent that Gods seal must needs be faiths seal
also? Not a seal from faith authoritatively as from God, but a seal of faith as
a branch of the Covenant promised, and as a seal to faith actually laying hold
on the Covenant. If the Covenant of grace undertake not for our part of the
Covenant, we are in a worse condition now under the Covenant of grace then we
were under the Covenant of works, since then Adam had perfection of grace to
back free will; but in fallen man free will either has no grace inherent, or
but weak grace to act it, and impossible were it for any either to convert or
persevere, unless God under-took both for the infusion and supporting of grace.



ergo it cannot be sealed to all in the Sacrament. The offer of grace indeed is
sealed to all present whether they receive it or no; but the promise of grace
can be sealed to none but the Legatees of the new Covenant, and such are only
persons elected or effectually called, understand me here as to the spiritual
and saving branches of the Covenant: and that is done on Gods part every
Sacrament.

Secondly, As for the Church and the Minister, who cannot judge infallibly who
are elected and effectually called, they must proceed by the rule of
visibility, sealing the promises by the Sacrament, to them and them only who
upon just trial tempered with charity appear to be visible Legatees. And as
Christ himself respects not good words and outward profession when contradicted
by our carriage, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. no more must the Church when men's
carriage does visibly contradict their profession.

Thirdly, The Lords Supper being a Sacrament of nourishment, seals not properly
initiall, but progressive grace; nor can the Church apply it for conversion but
edification: and how are they capable of edification in grace who are destitute
of all grace, or of visible edification who are destitute of visible grace?

Fourthly, In the Lords Supper, not only sanctification but also the comforts
of the Covenant are sealed to the receivers, but how can the comforts of
holiness be sealed to unholy persons, or by the Minister applied to those who
are visibly unholy, Ezekiel. 13.19, 21.

Page 46. He speaks clearly and truly, That an unregenerate man cannot receive
the Sacrament as a seal of his faith. For how can faith be sealed to where it
is not? But what follows immediately, Yet the Church can give it as a seal of
the Covenant, is either ambiguous or false; Gal. 3.1.
ambiguous if he take giving for giving out or holding forth, for thus Christ
may be given to all, whether they receive or no; but this is nothing to his
purpose, and proves only that all may be present, but not that all may
receive. Its false if understood of the delivery of the Elements to all persons
who may be present. 1. In Mr. Humphrey his sense, who cannot Scripturally or
rationally exclude either Infants, distracted or excommunicated persons from
presence, yet will not admit them actually to receive. 2. Its false in our
sense, who can admit either ignorant or scandalous persons to be present, but
neither of them to receive.

His illustration ibid. drawn from the Word preached, makes against him if
rightly stated. True, there may be true preaching, though the hearers apply not
the Word by faith. But can there be true preaching, where the Minister applies
the Word wrong, binding where he should loose, and loosing where he should
bind with the Key of Doctrine? No more does that Minister do his duty, who in
the Lords Supper looses where he should bind, and seals comfort to him who is
not a visible Saint.

Whereas in the close of page 46. he would make us believe there is not one
tittle of Scripture to prove the Sacraments to he man's seals,

Answ. 1. He speaks darkly and ambiguously, as if he would make us believe they
were not man's seals because they are Gods seals; by which Logic he might as
well prove the Sabbath were not man's because it is Gods, and the Gospel were
not man's because it is Gods, yea that nothing were man's because all things were
Gods, as if humane propriety contradicted Divine Supremacy.

2. If he mean the Sacraments are not man's seals by institution, That is true,
but nothing to his purpose. The broad seal is not mine by institution, yet I
may truly say the broad seal is mine, when I have a patent or pardon sealed by
it.

3. Does not the final cause give as true propriety as the efficient, nay
usually more? A seal, a suit, an house, etc. is more his for whom it is made,
then his that makes it. God indeed has a double propriety in the Sacrament, as
made both by him and for him, namely to seal his Covenant, etc. but it being
made for man also, man has a true propriety in it, as he for whom either a
seal or a meal is made, has in both. Its ridiculous therefore he would seem at
least to assert, The Sacraments are not man's seals, and yet grant page 47. They
are man's seals in use. Does he not know that a Sacrament extra usum has no
being, and so is neither Gods seal nor man's seal? and that in use it is both
Gods seal and man's seal, a seal from God to man, and from man to God?

The Covenant indeed stands sealed by God to ail conditionally, but will that
acquit the Church in delivering the signs to all, as Mr. H. would have it page
47. Then why may not even Heathen or excommunicated persons receive, to whom
the Covenant is offered and sealed conditionally?

Again, That the tenor of the Gospel is sealed absolutely by the Sacrament,
but not our interest in it, as he notes in the same page, is true in the first
branch, but false in the second, since not only the tenor of the Covenant is
sealed absolutely to the worthy Receiver, but also his interest in it. 2. To
those who are visibly worthy, the Minister seals their visible interest; which
visible interest, because some in the Church have not, therefore the Minister
cannot seal it to them by giving them the Elements, but by consecration and
application of the Sacrament to others before their eyes, does seal even to the
standers by the tenor of the Gospel in the Lords Supper, as well as in
Baptism. In both Sacraments the offer of grace is sealed to all, yea even to
Heathen etc. but real interest is sealed only to real Saints and worthy
Receivers, as visible interest to visible Saints.

Grant the Word speaks not particularly of any man's single interest by name*
yet it does by signs, and whosoever finds those signs in himself, has as
true an interest in the Covenant, as if he were mentioned in it by name. The
Scripture faith not particularly of Mr. H. that he shall rise at the day of
judgment, yet I hope Mr. H. doubts not of his resurrection in particular: nor
does the Scripture say Mr. H. shall be saved, yet if Mr. H. have saving faith,
it does as particularly assure him of salvation, as if he were mentioned by
name, etc. Now the seals run parallel with the Covenant, and assure
conditional salvation to all, visible salvation to visible Saints, real
salvation to real Saints, to the first by the outward administration, to the
second by visible application, to the third by real and spiritual application.

Whereas therefore page 48. Mr. H. pleases himself with this Embryon of his
own brain, which being formerly conceived by a piercing and godly man converted
his opinion, as he says.

And, if I mistake not, this piercing godly man is far from Mr. H. his judgment
of free admission.
Ans. 1. I hope that godly person (if so) was converted before Mr. Humphrey his
Embryon was hatched. 2. I see little of conversion or piety in admitting all
pell mell to the Sacrament. 3. I wish his conversion by entertainment of this
opinion, be not like that of the Galatians. Its a common error in these loose
times, to mistake perversion for conversion: Such conversion calls for
repentance, which I wish to this godly man.

For further confirmation, page 48. he propounds the tenor of the Covenant in
a syllogism, thus, He that believes shall be saved; add, I believe, Ergo, I
shall be saved. Then he denies that the Sacrament seals either the minor or the
conclusion.

Answ. The Sacrament seals what the Covenant of grace promises, but the
Covenant of grace promises (and not only offers) salvation to particular
persons, Romans 10.9. That if thou shall confess, etc. thou shall be saved. This
is evident by the promise of salvation to believers in general, Mark. 16.16.
John 3.16. What is promised to a whole kind, is promised to every particular
of that kind. Let Mr. H. tell me how the Sacrament seals the offer of grace to
him in particular, and I will tell him how it may also seal the promise of
grace or salvation to him or any else in particular. Where is it said in
Scripture, I offer to thee John Humphrey Minister of Froome, etc. grace and
salvation by Jesus Christ; will Mr. H. yet deny the offer of grace is made as
particularly to him, as if he had been named in Scripture? Or where is it said,
Thou John Humphrey shall not commit adultery, etc. yet does not that command
reach him as particularly as if he were named? He that says, Omnis homo est
animal rationale, does he not as truly say that Mr. H. is Animal rationale, as
if he had mentioned him by name? In like manner, when the Scripture says, All
that believe shall be saved, does it not say, that Mr. H. believing shall be
saved? If therefore Mr. H. de facto do believe, it promises salvation as
particularly to him as if he were mentioned by name; or that I believing shall
be saved, as if my name were in the promise. Where the condition is performed,
there the promise is absolute; but when I believe, the condition is performed,
Ergo, the promise, That I shall be saved, is absolute. This premised, I resume,
What the Covenant promises, that the Sacrament seals. The Covenant promises
that I shall be saved in particular, Ergo, the Sacrament seals that I shall be
saved in particular: But this is the conclusion which Mr. H. denied to be
sealed by the Sacrament.

Next for the minor of his syllogism namely, That I believe, I shall prove
against him, that this is also sealed in the Sacrament, not to all Receivers,
but to all worthy Receivers, thus, as formerly, What the Covenant ensures, that
the Sacrament seals; the Covenant assures me that I believe; Ergo, the
Sacrament seals to me that I believe. The minor, which only is questionable, I
prove thus: That which gives to me clear evidence that I believe, that assures
me I believe. The Covenant gives me clear evidence that I believe; Ergo. The
minor is good, because the Covenant affords infallible signs and evidences of
faith in what heart soever it is; and so of faith in my heart particularly, or
in any other heart whatsoever. As therefore by the properties of a man, I may
know my self to be a man, so by the properties of faith held forth in the
Covenant, I may know my self to have faith. That Gospel which says, He who
receives Christ for righteousness, etc. believes, the same Gospel says, That I
receiving Christ for righteousness do believe, and so by consequence it faith
absolutely, that I believe. But what the Covenant affirms, that the Sacrament
seals or ratifies; namely, that I believe in particular. And this is the minor
which Mr. H. denies to be sealed by the Sacrament.

For clearer explication, consider that the minor or assumption of the
Syllogism of assurance depends partly upon faith, and partly upon sense or
experience; upon faith, that the evidence is right in actu signato, and not a
false evidence; upon sense or experience, in actu exercito, that this right
evidence is in me. For as a false evidence in me, so a right evidence without
me, are both equally null and invalid as to assurance. For example, Would I
know my faith is right, and thereby come to assurance that I am in the state of
grace? I must look into the Word by a direct act of my understanding for a true
and undoubted evidence of faith, and into mine own heart by a reflex act,
whether that true evidence of saving faith be indeed in me. As in the
Syllogism of assurance about my particular resurrection at the day of
judgment, the major, That all men shall rise, is in terms in Scripture: the
minor, That I John or Roger am a man, is not expressly in Scripture, but depends
partly upon faith, as to the essential notes of a man recorded in Scripture,
partly upon sense, I finding by a reflex act, that those essential signs of
humanity are in me; from both which the conclusion flows necessarily, that I in
particular shall rise at the day of judgment. And indeed, had not a conclusion
drawn partly from faith and partly from sense been firm, Christ's apparitions
had not been a solid argument to confirm the resurrection, which yet he proves
partly by Scripture out of Moses, the Prophets and Psalms; partly by sense and
experience, Luke 24 39, 46. and though it be possible in some cases sense may
be deceived, yet a man in his right wits may easily know that hic and nunc
sense is not deceived: And were not this true, no man could possibly be
convinced of his estate, or that he is a sinner, or that his life is frail and
short, or that faith and repentance is his duty, or any other Divine truth that
concerns himself in particular, since its no where said in Scripture, Thou
Roger art a sinner, thy life in particular is frail and short, faith and
repentance is thy duty; but all these in Scripture are expressed only in
general terms. Yet I hope its as true de fide that faith and repentance is my
duty, as if the Scripture should say, Thou Roger must believe and repent, etc.
The major then in the Syllogism of assurance is in terms de fide. The minor
also (as to the truth of the evidence) is expressly de fide, but as to the
inbeing of the evidence, it depends upon sense and experience; the conclusion
is de fide by necessary consequence, though not in express terms. Now
whatsoever is de fide, that is sealed in the Sacrament; so are all three
Propositions in the Syllogism (though the minor is partly of faith and partly
of sense) therefore all three Propositions of the Syllogism of assurance are
sealed by the Sacrament; contrary to Mr. H. his Assertion. And since the minor
in the Syllogism of assurance (namely, that I believe) is the conclusion in
the pros-Syllogisme, it follows necessarily, that this Proposition (I believe)
is de fide by consequence, though not de fide in terms.

Object. The Sacrament supposes assurance, and therefore does not work
assurance; It supposes I believe and repent (which therefore must be made out
by previous examination) does not evidence that I believe and repent, and
therefore does not seal the minor or assumption in the Syllogism of assurance.

Answ. 1. As the Sacrament works grace, so it works assurance of grace, and as
it is a means of grace, so it is a means of assurance. Now the Sacrament (as
received) is not a means of initiall but of progressive grace, does not beget
grace at first by regeneration, but increase and strengthen grace by
nourishment and confirmation, partly by acting grace, and partly by holding
forth, applying, and sealing the promises of the Covenant to every worthy
Receiver. What therefore the Word does audibly (in order to confirmation) that
the Sacrament does visibly; what the Word applies generally, that the Sacrament
applies particularly; what the Word applies by one sense, that the Sacrament
applies by all our senses, and therefore must needs be a more powerful means
of assurance then the Word. The Word indeed is the isntrumental cause of
initiall grace, and ordinarily of initiall assurance: but the Sacrament may be
sometimes the means of initiall assurance, and ordinarily is the means and
instrument of progressive assurance. My meaning is, that whosoever comes to the
Sacrament rightly prepared, having both truth of grace and the evidence of
grace, this man or woman shall go away from the Sacrament with more degrees of
grace, and clearer evidence of grace; and he or she that comes to the Lords
Supper with the worthiness of person, and of preparation, though happily he may
want evidence, yet may go away from the Sacrament triumphing in the assurance
of Gods love. He that comes to the Sacrament with the Prophets fear, I am
undone, etc. may go away from it with this assurance, Thine iniquity is taken
away, and thy sin purged, Isa. 6.5, 7. As I at the Sacrament assure God of my
obedience, so God at the Sacrament assures me of his love; and if I be real in
my assurance as to uprightness, God is as real in his assurance as to my
comfort, Psalm. 18.25. God in an especial manner in the Sacrament delights to
show himself upright with the upright; and then if ever leads his Spouse into
the wine cellar or banqueting house, and spreads his banner of love over her,
Cant. 2.4. When she is sick of love, then he stays her with flagons, and
comforts her with apples; His left hand is under her head, and his right hand
does embrace her. Then in an especial manner he kisseth her with the kisses of
his mouth, Cant. 1.1. and though Judas did, Jesus will never give a treacherous
kiss.

The major himself grants is sealed in the Sacrament, the minor and conclusion
we have proved to be sealed in the Sacrament. Whereby it appears that the whole
Syllogism of assurance is sealed by the Sacrament to the worthy Receiver, but
only the major Proposition to persons really unworthy. Withal, hereby it is
evident, that the Sacrament is not only Gods seal, but also the seal of faith
and of the believer, whatever Mr. H. pretends to the contrary. And so I pass to
the fifth Objection, page 49.

Object. 5. The Covenant belongs not to all, therefore the Seals neither.

Mr. H. answers, The Covenant belongs to all conditionally, according to the
tenor of the Gospel, that whosoever believes shall be saved.

Answ. So the Sacrament belongs to all conditionally, but only to worthy
Receivers absolutely. Page 50. he saves me a labor, and answers himself in
these words, If you will resolve to accept Christ as your Lord and Savior, to
forsake sin, etc. lo here is the seal of God on his part, etc. Here indeed he
shows, That as the Covenant, so the Sacrament belongs to all conditionally. But
what if most do not, will not accept of Christ, etc. (which is de facto the
case of grossly ignorant and profane persons) will Mr. H. invite these also to
receive the Seals together with the former?

Hear him in his own words, page 51. To speak sincerely, if we should propose
two men, one that is not in Covenant with Christ, and one that is, this
Sacrament does more ingenuously belong unto the first, etc. If this be not a
rare and new Light, I know not what is. Now you have the man painted by himself
in his own colors. Come ye drunkards, whoremasters, murderers, and all the
rabble of hell, here is sincere and comfortable Doctrine for you indeed, The
Sacrament does more ingenuously belong to you then to any that are in covenant
with Christ. I but Mr. H. means this, in case they now resolve to enter into
Covenant with Christ, ibid. Absurd, and a contradiction in adjecto, as if he
who in truth resolves to enter into Covenant with Christ, were not at that very
instant in covenant with Christ. He would say, if he could hit it, The
Sacrament belongs more properly to weak then to strong believers: but by an ill
gloss he corrupts the Text, and instead of a weak believer renders one out of
Covenant, and for a strong believer, one in Covenant. We grant, the duty of the
Covenant belongs to all, but not the promise of the Covenant till its duty be
performed. In like manner, preparation belongs to all, but not actual
receiving till that duty be performed. All are not bid to eat absolutely, but
so to eat, 1 Cor. 11.28.

In the same page by distinguishing the Covenant from its benefit, he seems to
make a distinction without a difference, as if the benefit of the Covenant were
not an essential part of the Covenant. Happily by Covenant he means the duty or
condition of the Covenant which indeed is of epidemical concernment: yet
because in the same place he speaks of a free tender and offer; that crosses
this construction, and seems to carry it, that by Covenant there, must be meant
the benefit of the Covenant which is tendered conditionally to all; but then
what sense can be made of his distinction, The benefit of the Covenant belongs
not to any out of Christ, but the Covenant it self belongs to all, that is, the
benefit of the Covenant (as his sense carries it) belongs to all? Is not here a
contradiction in terminis? The benefit of the Covenant belongs not to any out
of Christ, yet the benefit of the Covenant belongs to all. If it belongs to
all, how does it not belong to any out of Christ? contra, if it belongs to none
out of Christ, how does it belong to all? But no wonder he falls into
self-contradiction, who will venture to contradict the truth.

Rep. He would say Sacrament.
But what right does this give him to the Covenant? Page 52. M. H.
distinguishes of a right of Obligation and a right of Privilege; and as to
the former he there avouches an Universal right to every Ordinance, they being
duties of worship which is of universal command: for proof he quotes, Isa.
66.23.



Secondly, All Christians have a mediate, but only prepared Christians an
immediate right to the Sacrament, as all Israel had a mediate, but only
purified persons an immediate right to the Passover, Numb. 9.10.

Thirdly, All are obliged to every part of worship, but 1. Not at all times,
since affirmative precepts bind not ad semper. 2. Not in all cases, as an
unconverted person is not bound to praise God for his conversion, etc. which he
has not.

To apply the distinction: The time of every Sacrament is not a fit season for
every person, whether it be by his own default, or by divine providence. 2. In
case of present incapacity, receiving, though an act of worship, is not
sinfully omitted unless that omission be joined with contempt of the
Ordinance. His quotation is rather a prediction then a command; and supposing
it be both, yet it must be understood with the forementioned limitations.

Fourthly, In a strict sense, Actual receiving is not an act of worship, no
more then preaching, consecrating and distributing the Elements is. And if it
be not properly an act of worship, then his argument falls of it self: or if it
be in a large sense (as the other acts forementioned) yet by them its apparent
that all persons are not obliged to all acts of worship, since only Ministers
may preach, baptize, consecrate and give the Elements, which yet in some
respect are acts of worship.

What he adds in the same Paragraph about a poor souls doubting of his right to
the Sacrament, yet resolved to give up himself to Christ, makes little for his
purpose: the Question is, Whether any not resolving to give up himself to
Christ, ought to receive; and whether upon his visible refusal to give up
himself to Christ, the Minister is bound to give unto him the symbol of Christ?

Ergo.

H. his battery.

Now for overthrow of this Argument, he pretends that our Divines look at
Baptism as converting, the Lords Supper as edifying, page 53. The former he
willingly assents to, etc.

The Question is not what some Divines hold, but what they should hold. For our
parts, we believe no Sacrament, understand it as received, is a means of
Regeneration, but only of confirmation and edification: and supposing Baptism
be called the Laver of Regeneration, Titus 3.5. which yet the place proves not;
its only so by way of signification and obsignation, not by way of causality.
In regeneration and conversion the Word is writ in our hearts, but can any man
either Scripturally or rationally, make the seal the cause of the writing? Is
it not evident that Baptism does not cause but presuppose conversion? Acts
2.42. yea and profession too in adult is, Acts 8.37. and is called by Divines
the Seal of Initiation, not as it initiates us into a state of saving grace,
but into the body of the visible Church, and as it may seal the truth and
benefit of Regeneration to persons converted, but not work Regeneration where
it is wanting. Passing therefore his flourish of denomination a part
eminentiori, let us see how he proves the Sacrament to be converting.

His main Argument is, Page 55.
Because the Sacrament is a visible word holding forth Christ and the Covenant
to the sight, as the Gospel does to the hearing. And page 56. The Sacrament
shows forth Christ's death, 1 Cor. 11.20. Therefore as it does so, it is
undoubtedly converting.

H. know, that at the Sacrament there is a mixture of several Ordinances, as
prayer, preaching or opening the words of institution, amp;c. And that those
may be effectual means of conversion we deny not; upon which account we judge
it fitting, that whoever will may be present at the Lords Supper as well as at
Baptism. But the great Question is, Whether actual receiving be a converting
Ordinance? And here we challenge the challenger, to give any one instance of a
person converted by receiving the Lords Supper; or to make proof that the act
of receiving does convert. The Sacrament indeed is food to nourish, but where
is it called an immortal seed to beget any to Christ?

For his gloss page 56. There is in the Sacrament a Take for conversion, and
an Eat for nourishment, It is gratis dictum, and would make against the
conversion of the Apostles who were commanded to take as well as to eat, yet I
hope they were not in an unconverted condition. 2. Taking and eating do both
imply and call for acts of faith, but the act of faith must needs presuppose
the habit of faith, and so conversion; He that says, Take, eat, supposes a man
has an hand to receive and a mouth to feed on, which no uncoverted person has.

of Conversion, as well as the same command is in the word preached, Acts 16.31?

taking in the Sacrament, as we have of blessing the word preached, in order to
conversion. The Word is both seed and food, not so the Sacrament, which indeed
may be food or physic, but not a seed of regeneration, nor is any where so
called in Scripture: And to attribute that to an Ordinance which God has not
put in it, or to expect that from an Ordinance which God has not promised to
it, is will worship, an humane invention, and a breach of the second
Commandment.

I dare appeal to M. Humphry his conscience upon this account. Suppose an
unconverted person comes to the Sacrament in his pride and presumption, stouts
it still against Christ laid before him as crucified in and before the
consecration of the Elements by the Ministers explication and exhortation, what
evidence does the Scripture give that this man shall be converted by that one
word Take, uttered by the Minister at the delivery of the Elements? I doubt not
of Gods power, but we must look to his revealed will. The Papists say, Hoc est
corpus meum converts the Elements; M. H. says Accipite converts the receiver:
we desire a clear proof of both before we can give credit to either. But
suppose the word Take as a short and virtual Sermon might convert, yet what
thinks he of that person who stands out against that word also, can he be
converted by actual receiving? Then that rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.29.
cannot be universally true, He that cats unworthily eats judgment to himself,
etc. for he that is converted by actual receiving does not eat judgment but
mercy. 2. Suppose a man should be converted by that short exhortation, take,
since that may be done by presence at the Sacrament without actual receiving,
how will it follow that all must receive because some may be converted by the
exhortation to receive; any more then that all must be assured of their
salvation, because some are comforted by the exhortation to assurance, which is
not immediately the duty, nor at all the privilege of unconverted persons in
statu quo.

Page 66. For further proof, He supposes a moral unregenerate man does his
best to prepare himself: thence he infers, Do we think now, to such a man the
Ordinance is necessarily fruitless, etc. then God help us. Shall not his
examination, prayers, etc. conduce more to convert him then the bare preaching
of a Sermon, especially considering the Word does but precede and is a part of
the Sacrament, Accedit verbum ad Elementum, etc.

Answ. 1. No natural man ever does his best to prepare himself. 2.
Notwithstanding all his preparatory acts he has still the unworthiness of
person, he coming (as is supposed) unconverted to the Sacrament. 3. Therefore
he comes to the feast without the wedding garment, and whether conversion or
confusion be the portion of such a guest let the text judge, supposing (as M.
H. would have it) the marriage feast be the Lords Supper. We believe no
Ordinance is the feast, but rather the dish wherein the feast is served. 4. I
wonder M. H. should attribute more to a few dead acts of a natural man, then
to the Word preached which is the great Ordinance set apart for the conversion
of souls, Acts 26.16, 18. Romans 10.14, 17. as if he designed to advance nature
and freewill above grace. 5. Because he adds, I but the word accompanies the
Sacrament, what follows thence but that any one may be present to hear and
see, but only worthy communicants are to receive? and unless he can make out
that actual receiving of the Elements is a converting Ordinance, Actual
receiving is neither a word, nor an act of God, but merely an act of the
creature, and an outward act too, and therefore has not a co^verting power in
it.
all he pleads from the antecedaneous acts will not conclude his free
admission, since the fruit of the visible and audible word, or of Christ's death
declared may be attained by presence at the Sacrament though a person do not
actually receive. I would not here be mistaken as if I pleaded for a Sacrament
without receivers, which is a contradiction in adjecto, but I see no warrant in
the word why the whole Congregation should not stay at the administration of
the Lords Supper (and that with much profit) as well as at the administration
of Baptism, though all do not partake: nor can I look at their ancient Ite,
missa est, as a divine precept, but as an humane tradition.

For his instance page 57. Of a poor humbled soul hoping to meet Christ at the
Sacrament, etc.

I answer: 1. If his humiliation and hope be right, he is a worthy receiver and
already converted, and so not a fit instance or medium to prove M. H. his
conclusion. If his hope and humiliation be not right, then he is in the
condition of the former, and by his hypocrisy draws further guilt upon
himself.

2. This poor soul if rightly humbled, hungers after Christ, rouls upon him and
adheres to him, which are proper acts of saving and justifying faith, though he
cannot rise up to faith of evidence; nor can any man avoid despair unless he
lean upon Christ or somewhat else. All which clearly prove this person to be
converted, and that therefore the Sacrament is to him only a means of
edification and comfort.

His third instance page 58. of the Disciples of Emaus, is to as little purpose
as the two former; unless he can prove 1. That then they were in the state of
nature. 2. That that breaking of bread was the Sacrament, Luke 24.30. 3. That
they were converted by that breaking of bread: Dictates so absurd, that the
very naming of them may be a sufficient confutation.

Although a man may be converted at, Rep. Page 58.
it is not by the Sacrament, it is occasionally, but not intentionally a
converting Ordinance.

Here (before I proceed any further) I must tell M. H. he frames an Objection
for us very unhandsomely. A converting Ordinance occasionally, not
intentionally, little better then a contradiction, the very notion of an
Ordinance implying divine ordination or appointment of any thing by his
revealed will as a means of conversion, edification, comfort and benefit to the
creature; and how this can be properly called a not intentionally converting
Ordinance, is to me a paradox. Let him prove actual receiving to be a
converting Ordinance, and we shall not doubt but it is so intentionally.

To the Reply M. H. answers, That it being granted, the matter is upon the
point yielded, partly because none are expressly forbidden to come, and partly
because all occasions must be taken for our salvation.

Answ. 1. The cause is not yielded unless it be proved, that actual receiving
is a converting Ordinance, since the end of conversion may be attained by
presence at the Sacrament without receiving, but the danger of eating and
drinking unworthily cannot be incurred without receiving, 1. Cor. 11.27, 29.
which yet has no influence in order to conversion. By presence much benefit
may be gained without danger of unworthy receiving, by receiving much guilt may
be contracted without hopes of benefit to the unconverted.

Secondly, If receiving be a converting Ordinance, how dares M. H. exclude
either Children, distracted or excommunicated persons from it, especially since
these have most need of it, and those are best taught by sense who have not so
free an exercise of reason? Yea why should Heathen be denied the Lords Supper
more then the word preached, if it be a converting Ordinance? Are not they also
bound to use all means and take all occasions of conversion, to use M. H. his
own words?

But if all has been said will not take with us, M. H. at last has found out
a way, wholly to root out this subtilty which he thinks the spirit of error
has insinuated into the hearts of many godly men, by three things he has more
to say, etc.

Answ. By the way observe this man's presumption and censoriousnesse; 1. In
charging so many godly persons to be acted with a spirit of error in this
particular. 2. In his confident undertaking wholly to root it out by what he
has to say, which though mountains in his own conceit, yet when they come to
be scanned, we hope by Gods assistance to make appear they scarce deserve the
name of molehills; and with a sling and stone of Gods making, fear not to
encounter with this great and vaunting Goliath, who by big words bids defiance
to the whole host of Gods Israel.

His first grand Argument page 59. is this, That the Sacraments and all
Ordinances are primarily and properly means of grace; and but in a remote sense
means of conversion or confirmation: for this grace we receive in the use of
them, converts some and strengthens others: and this grace received in the
Sacrament, works in the unregenerate for their conversion.

Answ. Is not here prime stuff worthy of a Doctor in Cathedra? but to answer
distinctly. I must first premise that here he speaks not of relative but
absolute, not of external but internal or inherent grace, for otherwise the
Ordinances are means of justification and adoption as well as of holiness, of
which last yet he must be understood. This premised, I answer, 1. That if the
Ordinances be primarily means of grace, they must needs be primarily means of
conversion and confirmation, since primary conversion is nothing else but grace
at first infused, and primary confirmation is degrees of the same grace
superadded.

For further clearing whereof, and that all the world may see how M. H. instead
of informing would blind and baffle the incautelous or injudicious Reader, we
must understand there is a twofold conversion; one primary, when God converts
and changes the heart by creating grace therein, and so making it a new and
soft heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. turning the Wolf into a Lamb, etc. The other
secondary, when by virtue of grace inherent, assisted by grace external, we
turn our selves from sin to God, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Now since there is no
inherent grace, but its formally, and not only efficiently converting or
confirming, its impossible initiall grace should be wrought but conversion
(which is a change of principles) must needs be wrought immediately also: and
its as impossible degrees of grace should be superadded, but thereby formally
confirmation must be wrought. Is not the change from death to life greater then
from a principle of life to an act of life? Now the first infusion of grace is
a change from death to life, and is solely Gods act wherein the creature is
merely passive, 2 Cor. 4.6. as the dark Chaos was to the light, Genesis 1.2, 3.
And this is Gods converting of us, or habitual conversion. Our converting of
our selves (which is M. Humphry his sole conversion) is nothing but a
reflecting of the beam upon the Son of righteousness, and in a manner
nothing to the former work of divine conversion; this we call actual
conversion; as habitual sanctification is called (...), actual sanctification
(...). His assertion then is false, That the Ordinances are remotely means of
conversion, for if the Ordinances be primarily means of converting grace, they
must needs be primarily means of conversion, since grace infused is primary
conversion, but grace acting is secondary conversion. The same I might say of
confirmation also in proportion.

Secondly, It cannot be proved, that actual receiving is either primarily or
secondarily a means of converting grace; and therefore will certainly
prejudice, but cannot benefit an unconverted person.

Thirdly, How absurd is the last clause? This grace received in the Sacrament,
works in the unregenerate for their conversion. For 1. How is he unregenerate
who has received grace which formally regenerates him? 2. How can a man be
regenerate, and yet at the same instant unconverted? yet if Mr. Humphrey his
Doctrine be true, this will follow, since a man is regenerated by the habits of
grace infused, which not only in order of nature, but also in order of time,
may precede the acts of grace (it being not necessary, that grace present
should act immediately or at all times.) Now since Mr. H. his conversion is
nothing but the acting of grace, and the habit of grace infused may in time
precede the act, and there is no conversion before the act of grace, does it
not hence necessarily follow; that a man may be regenerated, and yet at the
same instant of time unconverted, that is at the same time in a state of
nature, as unconverted, and yet in a state of grace as regenerated? But how
absurd and dissonant is this to true Divinity?

His second grand Argument is drawn from a distinction of conversion, which he
makes double, 1. Outward from Heathenism to the profession of Christianity; He
will not say the Sacrament is such a converting Ordinance. 2. An effectual
conversion from profession to the truth of grace; and thus the Sacrament as a
visible Word does convert instrumentally as well as the Word preached, the
Spirit being the principal cause of conversion in both Ordinances, etc. And in
the close of page 60. he appeals to experience for the converting power of the
Sacrament. This is the substance of that Paragraph.

Answ. Its sooner said then proved, that the Sacrament has converted any, 2.
Though it should be granted, that some parts of it did convert, what is M. H.
his cause the better, unless he prove that actual receiving does convert? 3.
That the Sacrament should convert only to truth of grace, and yet not convert
to outward profession, is as absurd, as that the Word preached should convert
only to outward profession, and not to truth of grace. Let Mr. H. show me one
Scripture, 1. Why Heathen may not be present at the Sacrament as well as at the
Word preached. 2. Why the visible Word may not convert to the form, as well as
to the power of godliness, why it should do the greater and not the lesser. We
expect not dictates but proof and Argument to convince us of this new Light.

In the third place he descants, though to little purpose, about the Sacraments
converting not intentionally, but occasionally, etc. To which we briefly
answer, That whatever other parts of the Sacrament may do, yet actual
receiving converts neither occasionally nor intentionally, and therefore
unconverted persons ought not to receive, because this Sacramental action
cannot benefit but prejudice them.

Rep. Unregenerate men are dead in sin, and bread must not be given to dead
men, etc.

This Mr. H. makes to he a fancy. 2. Opposes, that if any bread could recover
life, that bread might be given to a dead man, and such is the bread in the
Sacrament, etc. 3. That if we may give Aqua vitae to dying men, then we may
give Calix vitae to dead Christians, etc.

Answ. 1. Its no wonder if strong fancies metamorphize what they please into a
fancy.

2. Sacramental receiving in the Lords Supper notes a vital act, which a dead
man cannot put forth; and be the bread never so quickening (upon Mr. H. his
supposition) if a dead man cannot receive it, it will not quicken him; as the
best Physic will not cure, if a living man will not, or cannot receive it.
Taking and eating in the Sacrament note (not a passive, but) an active
receiving, and therefore do not beget, but presuppose life; which life, grant
it may be wrought by other Sacramental actions, proves only, that presence,
not participation is requisite.

3. His Simile is very lame; nor does it follow, that because we may give Aqua
vitae to a dying man, therefore we may give Calix vitae to a dead man, since a
dying man has life to be preserved, not so a dead man.

In the close of his Reply, in his third Edition he adds three pages by way of
explication, page 69. which I must take a little pains to scan and sift.

And 1. He makes confirmation of the Covenant a primary end, confirmation of
our faith a secuodary end of the Lords Supper.

Answ. I wish Mr. H. did not show himself as little skilled in Morality as in
Logic. Let him tell me seriously (for no doubt, being Master of Arts, he has
spent some time at the University in Ethics as well as in Logic) Is not the
principal or last End the primary End? and subordinate Ends are not they
secondary Ends? If so, then the next question will be, Whether the confirmation
of the Covenant be not subordinate to the confirmation of our faith? In plain
terms, Whether Gods end in confirming the Covenant by the Sacrament as a Seal,
be not to confirm the faith of the worthy Receiver? If so, then the
confirmation of the Covenant has the notion of a means in order to the
confirmation of faith as an End. Now let Mr. H. himself judge whether
confirmation of faith be not a primary End, and confirmation of the Covenant a
secondary End, quite contrary to his former Assertion?

In his following words he would very fain (by compliance and some concessions)
court us into his own opinion, that the Sacrament is a converting Ordinance
though but eventually; Which, says he, page.71. Will serve to blunt the
strength of the Objection.

Answ. He must pardon us if we cannot grant him that, till he can bring us
better ground from Scripture and reason then yet we can see. 2. Grant the
previous actions of prayer, explication, and exhortation, may be converting
(upon which we yield an universal presence at the whole Ordinance) yet unless
Mr. H. can prove, that actual receiving does convert, our Argument (drawn from
the non-converting power of the Sacrament) is not blunted.

2, Whereas in the same Page he adds, When I say its a means of converting
some, I take it in its full administration, requiring duties before, in, and
after receiving.

An. Then belike conversion depends more upon our preparation, celebration, and
after carriages, then upon the Sacrament as an Instrument. Here is a plain
faulter; for a converting Ordinance (when God pleases) will convert, come the
subject never so unprepared, yea with never so malicious an heart: And though
preparation be necessary for all, necessitate praecepti, yet it is not
necessary for conversion to any, necessitate medii, witness diverse who when
they came maliciously to catch the Minister, have themselves been caught and
converted.

Its more absurd which he adds, That the Sacrament is a means of conversion, by
the help of after duty. For besides that, hence its apparent, this Receiver was
not converted at the Sacrament, and so did but eat and drink judgment to
himself. Will it not by this rule follow, that even unworthy receiving it self,
is a means of conversion, since by after duty a man may be brought to a sight
of his great sin, and thereby may be humbled and converted? May not any sin by
this Doctrine be a means of conversion, or (in Mr. H. his phrase) a converting
Ordinance, since by after carriage a man may be brought to a sight and sense of
his sin, and so converted? We say, unworthy receiving, and so other sins may be
occasions, but net means of conversion. God can make an antidote of poison, but
he is mad who upon that account will venture to drink poison.

In the same Page he adds, Then I hold that we who are baptized into the
Church, and are bred up to a general faith (such as it is) not without its
fruits; and so have a right unto the Ordinance, coming as preparedly as we can,
and bewayling our unpreparedness, may find grace in the sight of God, even to
the bestowing of a special justifying faith for our inward effectual
conversion in the use of it. The main harvest in this field of Boaz belongs to
his own reapers, yet I would afford some gleanings for poor Ruth the Moabitess,
and suffer many a doubtful, penitently inclined, yet unregenerate soul, to
come up even to the sheaves, hoping my fellow laborers will not grudge at it,
though I have let fall some handfulls too on purpose for them.

Answ. Its a novell expression to say we are baptized into the Church; we read
of baptizing into Christ, but not in Scripture of baptizing into the Church; is
it not as absurd, Baptizari in Ecclesiam, as Credere in Ecclesiam?

2. How many are not so much as bred up to a general faith, but are as
ignorant as the very Indians, that never heard of Christ?

3. What fruits have many bred up to a general faith, unless it be open
profaness, scoffing at Religion and Duties both public and private: Shall not
these (against his general Assertion) be excluded by Mr. Humphrey his own
present verdict?

4. What natural man ever did his utmost to come preparedly? and therefore by
Mr. H. his own principle held forth to this Paragraph, 1. Ought not to receive.
And 2. Cannot be converted by receiving. 3. His allusion to the case of Ruth,
is 1. Absurd. 2. Impertinent. Absurd, in that he says, The main harvest in
this field of Boaz belongs to his own reapers. This in the Letter is false,
since the harvest belonged not to the reapers, but to Boaz himself; it belonged
no more to the reapers, then to the oxen or asses that carried it away to Boaz
his barn, nay happily not so much. 2. Its impertinent, as misapplied, he
comparing unregenerate persons to Ruth the Moabitess, and yet forgetting
himself, he tells us, these unregenerate persons are penitently inclined. His
meaning seems to be, They are Heathen as unregenerate, and yet Christians as
Professors and penitently inclined.

Ans. Such Ruths we shall not grudge if he let some handfuls fall unto them. We
undertake not to judge of men's hearts whether they be regenerate or not, but
proceed by the rule of visibility, and shall willingly admit persons penitently
inclined; but are withal satisfied, that persons grossly ignorant or scandalous
are not in statu quo penitently inclined, and therefore by Mr. H. his own
principles, are not to be admitted as receivers of the Lords Supper, though
they may be present, and that with great advantage, at the whole Ordinance.

Object. 7. Judas received not the Lords Supper, etc.

To evade the force of this Objection, Mr. H. in two leaves takes some pains,
though to small purpose, to prove that Judas received. His ground is, Because
Judas was present at the Lords Supper, and Christ bid all present to receive.
Compare Luke 22.21. Matthew. 27.27. and Mark 14.23. where its said, They all
drank of the Sacramental Cup.

Answ. 1. Its the judgment of diverse learned, that Judas did not receive. 2.
Grant him present at the Sacrament, it follows not thence, that he did receive.
3. Christ bidding all to receive must be limited only to those all for whom he
shed his blood for remission of sins, as is evident in the words that accompany
the tender of the Cup. Compare Mat. 26.28. and Luke 22.20. But Christ's blood
was nor shed for Judas for the remission of sins, ergo, the Sacrament was not
tendered to him* 4. It seems probable that Christ excluded Judas in particular
in those words Luke 22.21. But behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is
with me on the table. As if he should have said, What have thou (who art a
Traitor) to do to receive among my faithful Disciples? 5. Supposing be did
receive, 1. Christ acted (in admitting him) as a particular Minister, who alone
cannot exclude any. 2. Before and at receiving he told him home his sin and
danger, which I believe Mr. H. does not to every Judas that receives at his
Sacrament. Judas his instance then will not favor Mr. H. his free Admission.

Object. 8. Unworthy Receivers are guilty of Christ blood, and eat their own
damnation; therefore we must not allow free admission.

To this Mr. H. answers, That it cannot concern the admitters and joyners, etc.

Answ. It concerns the admitters, if any partake who are visibly unworthy, and
the joyners if they know them to be unworthy, and do not complain; the rule
being, that a man must receive (...), but not absolutely, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Whereas p. 68. he adds, Every one is to examine himself, if he do not, he
receives his own damnation, not ours, who do our duty, etc. (...), 1 Corinthians.
11.29. (not (...).)

Answ. 1. Every main is to examine himself, and so to eat; but where is it said
absolutely, Let every man eat? We must mind him of (...), ver. 28. as well as
he minds us of (...), ver. 29.

2. The Apostles words are not to be understood restrictively and exclusively,
as if self examination excluded Church examination, or as if self prejudice
excluded prejudice to my neighbor; as is evident by comparing Romans 14.12.
where giving an account to God, excludes not giving an account to man, for then
children and servants might refuse to give any account to their parents or
masters.

3. Though it be happily an improper expression to say, I eat judgment to
another, yet undoubtedly another man's unworthy receiving may be charged upon
me, when I have power to prevent it and do not. I think (as perfect as Mr. H.
is) both himself and the best of Gods people had need pray every day, Lord
forgive me my other men's sins; especially State and Church Officers.

4. Its as absurd in reason and Divinity, by an affirmative to exclude a
negative, as it is by a negative to exclude an affirmative: to say, I must
examine my self, therefore another must not examine me; or to say, Another must
examine me, therefore I must not examine my self: or to say, I eat judgment to
my self, therefore not to another, as to say, I eat judgment to another,
therefore not to my self. Most sins and duties are reciprocal; and as guilt,
so duty is usually relative as well as personal.

Rep. But you will say, If a man drink poison, shall not I be guilty of his
blood, unless I hinder him etc.

To this Mr. H. answers, 1. Not, unless I have a quum possum. 2. He wonders any
should compare the Sacrament to a cup of poison, seeing it is in its own nature
a cup of blessing. 3. That it is more then we can know or ought to judge, that
it proves death to any. 4. That as the Word may be preached to all (though
often it prove the savor of death) so the Sacrament may be administered unto
all, leaving the issue to God, etc. This for the admitters part, page 68.70.

Answ. 1. His quum possit must be understood either of a natural or a moral
ability. I believe that whoever has a natural, has at the same time a moral
ability to hinder his brother from murdering himself by poison. In plain
English, whoever can, ought to hinder his brother from drinking of poison.
Cains Religion may be indeed, Am I my brothers keeper? but Christ's Religion is,
He that saves not life, destroys it. I must preserve my neighbors life by all
lawful means; but undoubtedly its a lawful means by violence to hinder my
neighbor from self murder.

2. His wonder deserves to be wondered at. If one man's corporal food be
another man's poison (though in it self wholesome, as Cheese, etc.) why may not
one man's spiritual food be another man's poison? Nay, the same food is at one
time good nourishment, at another time poison to the same man, namely flesh,
etc. in a strong fever. The same Word is a favor of life and a savor of
death, and why not the same Sacrament, and what is a deadly savor but poison?
Christ is a precious corner stone to some, a stone of stumbling to others; and
if Christ personal be so, why not Christ Sacramental?

3. If I may know and judge when the Word is poison to any, why not as well,
yea better, when the Sacrament is poison? I may know the Word is so by its
effects or consequents: I may know the Sacrament is so, both by its causes and
effects; as if a grossly ignorant or profane person come to receive, and if
after receiving I see a man as bad or worse then formerly.

4. As the Word may be preached before all, so the Sacrament may be administered
before all, but as the Word is not applied by all, nor diverse parts of it
applicable to all, so neither ought the Sacrament to be applied to all by
actual receiving. If any man will give his neighbor poison, and leave the
issue to God, the Magistrate may more justly give him an halter, and leave the
issue to God.

Next Mr. H. proceeds to the Receivers part, and tells us, page 70. That a
double duty is required of him, 1. A principal, Do this. 2. An accessory, Let
a man examine himself. We are bound to come. and to come worthily. If a man
fails in the one, and is not sufficiently prepared, I dare not say that he must
keep (I am sure it will not excuse him) from the other, etc.

Answ. 1. Let the Reader note how absurdly Mr. H. makes receiving to be the
principal duty, and actual worthiness but accessory. What carnal Divinity is
this, to make the matter and carcass of a duty the principal, and the spirit
of a duty accessory; the form of godliness the principal and the power of
godliness the accessory? Is not this principal Divinity, and very pleasing to
some of Mr. H. his principal Receivers?

2. His doubtful, expression about coming, though unprepared, evidences his
hesitancy about that particular, and not without just cause. True, he that is
bound to come, is bound to come worthily; but not, contra, he that is bound to
come worthily, is bound to come absolutely, no more then he that was bound to
come circumcised and pure to the Passover, was bound to come absolutesy. Every
Jew was bound to be circumcised, pure, and so to come to the Passover; but had
he neglected Circumcision and Purification, he was not to eat the Passover at
that time. In like manner, every Christian is bound to be, 1. Habitually
worthy. 2. Actually worthy. 3. And so to receive, 1 Cor. 11.28. yet is not
bound to receive, but rather to abstain if he want either of the former. The
Apostle does not say, Let a man eat absolutely; but so let him eat.

3. Sinful unpreparedness will not excuse a man from guilt, but unpreparedness
either sinful or lawful, will excuse him from receiving. A negative
unpreparedness will excuse children and those who have urgent and just
occasions that hinder them from receiving; not so privative unpreparedness. He
that traveled of purpose to avoid the Passover, sinned; not so he who had
just and necessary occasions to travel, Numb. 9.10, 13. But be unpreparedness
negative or privative, that man at present ought not to receive, though he sin
in bringing a sinful necessity of abstinence upon himself. None are threatened
simply for not receiving, but all are threatened in case they receive unworthily.

For further explication and confirmation, Mr. H. propounds three Quaeries.

Qu. Whether the very eating and drinking of an unworthy Receiver be damnation?
He means, Whether it deserve damnation? He answers, by distinguishing between
the act of receiving, which is good, and the unworthiness, which makes the sin
only; and concludes, That his abstinence from, is a greater sin then his
unworthy receiving of the Sacrament, etc. page 71.

Answ. 1. Receiving is always a sin in him that is unworthy, 1. Because he
cannot but receive unworthily, but that act which cannot be abstracted from
sinful pravity in dominion, is necessarily sin. 2. Because he is threatened,
but God threatens for nothing but sin. Eating is not in it self a sin, yet for
a common person to eat the sin-offering, was a sin: So receiving simply is no
sin, but an unworthy person cannot receive without sin. There is no sinful act
in the world, but notionally you may abstract sinfulness from it, but really
you cannot when it comes to be acted; no more can you from an unworthy persons
receiving, which is sinful, 1. In the manner. 2. As prohibited to such a
person in statu quo. He is bound indeed to get worthiness, and then to receive:
but he is not bound to receive till he be Evangelically worthy. As a natural
man ought first to get grace and then assurance, but not to study assurance
without grace.

2. Abstinence from the Sacrament arises out of contempt, or from a grounded
evidence and consciousness of Evangelicall unworthiness. The former is more
sinful then bare receiving; the latter is warrantable, yea commendable, 1. If
it humble the man, though but legally. 2. If it put him upon care and diligence
to prepare for the next Sacrament.

2. Qu. page 72. His second Quaere is, Whether receiving the Sacrament
unworthily is otherwise damnable then praying and hearing unworthily?

Answ. It is, and that 1. Because praying and hearing are universal duties, I
mean for all sorts, be they children, distracted, or excommunicated, or
otherwise unworthy, so is not receiving in Mr. H. his own judgment. 2. Because
praying and hearing are means of conversion, so is not actual receiving. His
superstructure upon the coutrary supposition I omit, since that will tumble
down of it self, the foundation failing.

3 Qu. His third Quaere, page.74. is, Whether an unregenerate man conceiving
himself not worthy, must never come to the Sacrament for fear of eating his
damnation? The sum of his Answer is, That upon the same ground he must also
abstain from hearing, since he cannot but hear sinfully, and so provoke God,
etc.

Answ. 1. Not so, unless it can be proved the Sacrament is a converting
Ordinance.

2. Grant some parts or acts at the Sacrament may convert, this proves only
that all may and ought to be present, to see and hear Christ crucified; but it
makes nothing for actual receiving, which ever makes an unworthy person eat
damnation, and therefore does not convert him. He that hears unworthily may be
converted, not so he that receives unworthily, at that time.

3. In the close of this Quaere, He can put no medium between receiving
unworthily, and an open refusing to receive. I shall therefore help him at a
dead lift, and entreat so much charity of him, as to believe that all
abstainers are not open refusers and tramplers upon the blood of Christ, no
more then he who forbore the Passover being in a journey, or unclean was. Yea
some godly persons, but out of fear of unworthiness, dare not sometimes come;
will he say these trample upon Christ's blood? Why may not legal conviction
fright a natural man, as well as a godly man from receiving? Sense of
unworthiness may prevail upon a Demas as well as upon a Nathanael, and make him
afraid of the signs as well as of the thing signified, yet neither of them at
that time like swine trample upon the blood of the Covenant, but think it
insinitely too good for them.

In his new Edition, page 85. he inserts three pages more for amplification of
the eighth Objection. He takes upon him to answer a question of his own
propounding. His Question is misty, and his Answer is in part false. The sum
of his Answer is, The alteration is made only in us, the seal is the same, and
what is sealed is the same.

Answ. Is not here an apparent falsity, as to the latter branch of the Answer,
unless he will make salvation and damnation to be one and the same thing? If
salvation be sealed to the worthy, damnation to the unworthy Receivers, then
surely though the seal be the same, yet what is sealed is not the same thing.
As (to use his own similitude) though the Sun be the same, yet the sunshine and
the shadow, or light and darkness are not the same, but privative contraries.
But no wonder if loose principles produce such loose conclusions.

Rep. But suppose a poor soul doubts of his faith, does this bring any relief
to him uncertain of the Condition?

Answ. Methinks it does; the condition of the Covenant may be considered as in
esse, already wrought in us, or in fieri, as to be done or performed of us. The
Receiver seals not necessarily to the condition in esse, but in fieri obliging
himself for the future to believe and obey, etc.

Answ. 1. True, the Sacrament may bring relief to a doubting soul, who has
indeed truth of grace, but doubts of it. But what relief can it bring to one
that doubts groundedly, and has no grace at all? 1. It cannot convert him
(understand me still of actual receiving) as has been formerly showed. 2. It
cannot confirm him, unless it be in sin, by sealing judgment to him. For can
he be confirmed in grace who has no grace at all?

2. Where he says, The Receiver seals not necessarily to the condition in
esse, but in fieri, I answer, He seals as necessarily (in point of duty) to the
condition in esse or de praesenti, as in fieri or de futuro, and that man who
ingages not to believe at present, plays the hypocrite in engaging to believe
hereafter. It is not with elicit as with imperate acts; in the former, he that
truly wills them, does in part perform them, whence Divines make a true desire
of faith one degree of faith, and he that in truth desires and resolves to
believe hereafter, may as well act that resolution now, since faith it self as
well as the resolution of faith is an act of the will. And this M. H. would
speak in those words, Page 86. If he resolve now for the time to come without
procrastination to walk according to the Covenant. Is not faith the first step
of this walk? He that resolves in truth to believe, cannot but desire to
believe, and the true desire of faith, is both Scripturally and by the consent
of Divines one degree of faith.

Thirdly, By the very act of receiving, he seals to faith in esse or de
praesenti in point of profession; the very language of his receiving the
Elements is, I receive Christ signified and offered to me in particular by
them; and therefore he that receives the Elements and does not act faith at the
same instant, he plays the hypocrite woefully, mocks God and Christ, and as the
mockers of Christ were guilty of his death, so is every unworthy receiver.

Page 86. He proceeds. The faith therefore that is absolutely requisite to a
believer is not assurance, but consists, I take it, of these two things only,
1. An historical assent to the Gospel, etc. 2. A resolution to submit to the
Government of Christ, etc. Let a man then but believe his Creed, and resolve to
go on in no known sin, that is the main, etc. page 87.

Answ. 1. I easily grant assurance is not absolutely requisite as a means, but
only in point of duty (namely that every one is bound to labor after it,) and
in order unto our been esse or comfort. 2. Against every Sacrament a Christian
is bound in an especial manner by soul-searching examination, to make out his
evidence; and if he have truth of grace and take pains to search, he will by
Gods grace find so much truth in himself, as may bring him to some assent
about his good estate, though usually this assent be much assaulted and weakened
with doubting, for removing whereof the Sacrament is an especial help. But 3.
Whereas M. H. professes to know no other kinds or ingredients of saving or
justifying faith, but only an historical assent and a good purpose or
resolution. 1. I must tell him he is very defective on the one hand as omitting
the special act of justifying faith, namely adherence or leaning upon Christ
for justifycation and salvation, which is an act of the will, not of the
understanding; nor will his historical faith for kind go beyond the faith of
hypocrites, yea of devils, Iam. 2.19. and will aggravate a man's damnation if
the faith of adherence follow not upon it. 2. I must also tell him he is as
excessive on the other in mistaking a good resolution for a constitutive part
of faith, which is either an antecedent or a consequent and effect of faith,
antecedent if it be a Legal, consequent if an evangelicall resolution. I wish
M. H. would study fundamentalls better, before he come to be so critical about
superstructures.

By his following discourse page 89. its apparent he speaks very confusedly
about the spiritual estate of a Christian. For 1. He supposes a man has not
saving grace, and yet that at the same time he is willing to accept of Christ,
to leave sin and yield to Christ's terms, all which are most precious saving
graces. Afterward he compares these graces to a little gold mixed with much
dross in a lump of Ore, yet at last concludes God can make grace of these
least beginnings, as if at present they were not grace till God does as it were
transubstantiate them and turn our water into wine. By all which its apparent
the man does not sibi constare, and no wonder then if he bring his Reader into
a labyrinth.

Page 76.
The sum of his Answer is, That the Ordinance is defiled only to the unworthy
receiver, not to the admitters or joyners.

Lev. 19.17. 1 Timothy 5.22.

His application of Mark. 7.15. and of Peter's vision to the Sacrament, is
ridiculous, page 77. For do we hold that any either person or meat is
Levitically unclean? Contra, dares he deny that any person, yea any meat may be
morally unclean, namely as defiled with sin or occasions of sin, Tit. 1.15.
That which enters into the mouth defiles not a man Levitically, but morally it
may defile him, and that either by his intemperance or irreligious receiving of
it, as eating the forbidden fruit defiled our first parents; and he who when he
may hinders not these sins, is himself defiled by sinful tolleration.

We believe, as well as himself, page 79. That the unworthiness of another
should not make the true believer separate from the Sacrament. Yet if I know
another grossly ignorant or profane, and do not either endeavor to reform or
discover him, his unworthy receiving shall be set upon my score alone without
any prejudice to the other communicants.

If it be a privilege of the Gospel to have free Ordinances, and to account no
man unclean in the use of them, ib.

How dares M. H. set a spiritual rayl (as he calls it) about the communion
Table, and thereby refine and spiritualize old superstition (to use his own
terms,) by keeping from the Sacrament Children and distracted persons, who
have a better right to it then many profane ones that his charity can admit,
and yet in one breath accuse and condemn us for doing the like to that he
allows in himself? Shall persons negatively unworthy be suspended, and persons
privatively, yea positively unworthy be admitted? Let him take heed there be
not something of the Pharisee and hypocrite in his own heart (to apply his own
counsel to himself,) 1. In censuring his brethren, 2. In doing the same thing
for which he censures them.

Page 79. But are we not faulty and partake of other men's sins, if we do not
our best to have the leven purged out? and therefore we may not say, Am I my
brothers keeper? Look they to it.

To this M. H. answers, 1. By way of concession, and that we must tell the
Church too, supposing it is in a capacity to hear us. 2. By way of refutation
in the same page: But I hope it will not follow that in the mean time we must
not receive the Sacrament, etc. It is a plain fallacy (a dicto simpliciter ad
dictum secundum quid) to think our coming to the Sacrament with a wicked man is
sin it self, or makes it the sin, or us more guilty of the sin, because we
ought to have admonished them* and labored their excommunication. Shall
omission of one duty excuse from another? Because the leaven is not purged out,
must there be no lump. This was, I may humbly say, a too overly surprise of
godly M. Buroughs.

Answ. 1. Would one think that M. H. at the same instant would be guilty of
that fallacy wherewith he charges us, and with the cutpurse cry stop thief,
that himself might the better escape in the crowd? Do either our principles or
profession cry down the Sacrament absolutely because we are against mixed
Sacraments? Or are we against all mixed Sacraments, because we are against the
mixed receiving of persons visibly unworthy with persons visibly worthy? Or do
we teach that its simply a sin in one visibly worthy to receive with one or
diverse persons visibly unworthy?

Wherein then do we and M. H. differ?

Answ. 1. In that he thinks its the duty of all Church Members to receive, be
they in what state they will, never so ignorant, wicked and abominable, yea and
that visibly too, excepting only Children, distracted and excommunicated
persons. 2. In that he thinks it the Churches duty to admit all the
forementioned persons, waving only the exception.

Contra, We hold that no person really unworthy ought to receive. 2. That no
person visibly unworthy ought to be admitted, where there is a juridicall power
in the Church to suspend them; which power is de facto in the Presbyterian
Churches, but lies not in any one Minister, or in the Congregation it self, but
in the Presbytery of each Congregation, and that either solitary or combined.
The Eldership then sins not in admitting persons really unworthy, provided they
have evidence of their visible worthiness: Particular persons sin not in
communicating with persons visibly unworthy, but only in conniving at their
visible unworthiness, by neglecting either to admonish and reprove you, and
(if that will not do in order to their reformation) by neglecting to complain
to the Eldership of them, that by the Churches dealing with them they may
either be reformed or suspended, and (in case that will not do, and need so
require) excommunicated. Let the Reader then take notice how guilty M. H. is of
his own fallacy, in making the Reader believe we are against all Sacraments, or
against all mixed Sacraments, because we judge that persons really unworthy
ought not in statu quo to receive, and persons visibly unworthy should not by
the Church be admitted to receive.

Secondly, Though omission of one duty do not properly excuse, yet it may make
one incapable of another, as a person impure neglecting to purify himself, was
at present incapable of the Passover, and by proportion a person either unable
or neglecting to prepare himself, is incapable at present of the Lords Supper.
As for M. Buroughs surprise about this particular, I dare not undertake either
to charge or vindicate him, till M. H. produce him speaking for himself. Qui
statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus
fuerit.



M. H. in his Answer questions the terms of Dogs and swine as too harsh in
the general, and thinks unfitness is not a just ground of exclusion, and that
men are not to be dealt withal as Dogs till juridically censure. That
scandalous persons are first to be admonished duly, and then (if obstinate)
excommunicated, and that not merely from the Sacrament, but from Christian
communion in general: yet withal he seems doubtful about the degrees of
excommunication, and leaves much to the Churches wifdom, etc. p. 8o, to 82.

Answ. 1. Wading the harsh expressions of Dogs and Swine, though warrantable
enough by Scripture; its then enough for us that ignorant and scandalous
persons are unfit for the Sacrament, and if M. H. exclude Children, amp;c.
because unfit, why may not we exclude both ignorant and scandalous persons upon
the same account, since the one cannot, the other will not examine themselves;
or if after a sort they examine, yet cannot approve themselves, which is both
the sense of the word and the end of examination; (...)
but upon due search will find the quite contrary, both being under the power
of unbelief, or wanting the worthiness of preparation, though the last may
possibly have the worthiness of person.

Secondly, Neither ignorant nor scandalous persons are juridically suspended
before admonition and evidence given of their obstinacy.

Thirdly, While he pleads for excommunication, he cannot be against suspendsion
which is an inferior degree thereof.

Fourthly, That excommunication excludes from all Ordinances, is gratis dictum
as has been before noted.

page 82.

Here M. M. grants we must separate from wicked men in their sins and in regard
of common familiarity: but denies that any Scripture commands are separation
from them in the Sacrament, unless in case of excommunication, etc.

Answ. 1. Suspension being a part of excommunication, in granting separation in
case of excommunication, he yields the cause.

Secondly, That Scripture which forbids us to eat with wicked persons, forbids
us to receive with them, 1 Cor. 5.11. unless the Sacrament can be received
without eating: nor is it enough to say that place speaks only of civil and
private eating, since eating of the Sacrament is a sign of familiarity as well
as eating at our own Tables; and where I can without sin avoid it, I may no
more eat Sacramentally then civilly with a scandalous person. This Church
Governors may prevent by discipline, and private Christians by information, by
which if they cannot keep away scandalous sinners, these last may comfort
themselves in that they have discharged their duty, but ought hot to run away
from Christ and his Ordinance because of the presence or partaking of wicked
men which they cannot hinder. His instance of conjugall society will not help
him, there being an express commandment for that in Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.13,
14. not so for mixed communion at the Sacrament with persons visibly unworthy,
if it lie in my power to prevent it: And though I sin not simply in receiving
with them to which private Christians may sometimes be necessitated; yet I sin
if I do not my endeavor to prevent their receiving who or visibly unworthy and
will not be reformed by admonition.

And this may serve by way of answer to his Reply, page 85. whereby he
amplifies the Objection: And whereas he adds, Now it is one thing to eat at
home (an indifferent action) where I am left to my own arbitration; and another
to eat at the Sacrament, which 1 am bound unto as a piece of Gods service.

Lanswer. 1. That as eating at the Sacrament is a duty, so natural eating is a
duty, which cannot be neglected without guilt of self-murder. 2. As when I can
I ought to avoid eating at my own house with a scandalous person, so when I can
(without sin) I ought to avoid eating at the Sacrament with a scandalous
person. 3. As I ought not to avoid eating with a scandalous person to endanger
my life or health, so I ought not with the hazard of my spiritual life and
health to avoid Sacramental eating with a scandalous person. 4. As when a
scandalous person will obtrude himself to my table, I ought by all lawful
means to exclude him, so when the same person will obtrude himself upon Gods
table, I ought by the use of all lawful means to keep him off, by which if I
cannot prevail, I may without guilt eat with him both at my owntable and at the
Lords table; and the fault shall lie upon upon him who had power to exclued him
but would not.

That an excommunicated person is to be excluded in general from all Christian
communion, as M. H. would have it, page 85. is 1. False doctrine, 2. Bloody and
cruel doctrine, there being nothing in Scripture to warrant it, and much in the
rule of charity against it: grant an excommunicated person is dismembered and
cast out of the Church, and that he is to be as an Heathen and a Publican, you
cannot deny him the liberties of one without, or of an Heathen and a Publican;
but a Publican might come to the Temple to pray, Luke 18.10. and an Heathen
might come to the Church to hear, 1 Cor. 14.24. Further, since excommunication
it self is medicicinall, why should it not be backed with public and private
exhortations, 1 Cor. 5.5. and 2 Cor. 2.6. and 2 These. 3.6, 14, 15. Can it be
imagined that his banishment from, will do him more good then his presence at
public Ordinances? And this is the more strong against M. M. who page 16.
applies 2 These. 3.6, 14. to the case of excommunication; and if persons
excommunicated must be admonished as Brethren, why should they be debarred of
presence at the Word preached, one great part whereof is admonition, especially
of the unruly, 1 These. 5.14. Acts 20.31. Col. 1.28. And certainly if admonition
in general be an Ordinance, yet applicable to persons excommunicated, is it
not then as clear as the Sun, that excommunication does not bar a person
from all communion or from all Ordinances? the contrary to which
notwithstanding is one of M. H. his new Lights, p. 85.

But why should I shun an excommunicated person more in civil then in sacred
society? Compare 1 Cor. 5.11. and 2 These. 3.13, 14.

Answ. 1. Because in most parts of sacred society there is not that mutual
familiarity which is so great a testimony of personal respect; nay persons may
often meet at Ordinances, and yet not so much as know one the other. 2. There
is far more necessity of sacred then of civil society, whether in way of
duty or of means. Excommunicetion excuses not from duty, though it make a
person incapable of some privileges; nor can another excommunication
excommunicate me either from duty or privilege. Gods children must present
themselves before God though Satan himself come in among them, Job 1.6. and 2.1.

As for those places, Ier. 15.19. and 1 Timothy 5.22. Though they reach not the
case of the Sacrament immediately and in terms, yet they come home to it in a
direct and natural consequence, since it concerns Ministers to separate the
precious from the vile practically as well as doctrinally, in the Sacrament as
well as in other Ordinances: And certainly, they who have power to
excommunicate from all Ordinances (as Mr. H. teaches) have much more power to
excommunicate from some: and if partial or graduall Excommunication be an
offense, sure its an error on the right hand; better offend in too much lenity
then severity. They who have power to deprive of all privileges, have power to
deprive of some, and he that may cast a person out of the Church, may turn him
out of the Chancell, as Mr. Humphrey elsewhere phrases it.

From arguing he falls to wishing, p. 86. Let us see whether he be better
skilled in in the Optative then in the Indicative Mood.

1. His first wish is for a Government established in the Church, the nearest
in Christian prudence to the Word God.

An. Sir, Your desire is granted in some parts of the Nation; and had it not
been in a great measure for the negligence of too many Ministers, and
refractoriness of most people, the Government you wish for, might long ere this
have been fettled all the Nation over.

2. His second wish is, That the duty of fraternall correption, inspection, and
admonition, were better known and practiced amongst us.

Answ. I can heartily say Amen to this wish also: and hope he will not be
troubled that this wish is in part granted also; and in particular, that
himself is in this discourse made an object of fraternall correption. He that
values admonition, is in a fair way to be mended by admonition.

3. His third wish is, That men would look more into their own consciences, and
leave the judging of others spirits, hearts, and reins, alone to the judgment
seat of Christ.

Ans. An excellent wish; and had it been as well practiced as wished by Mr. H.
he would not have been so harsh a censurer of his brethren, as this Plea for
free admission proves him.

4. His fourth wish is, That though there may be some judging by the fruits,
That wise and religious men would be more cautious of countenancing these
separations in the visible Church; seeing upon the same ground that you go to
gather a Church out of his mixed Congregation, another will gather a separation
out of your Church, and so in infinitum, etc.

Answ. I see a good heart is better then a wise head. Could we wish better, and
dispute less, how soon should we close in a good agreement? How happy had it
been for England, if godly persons had not countenanced separation? But whether
Mr. H. his Doctrine or our practice have occasioned it, let the world judge.
Had not sinful mixtures brought us to a Chaos, this spirit of separation had
not probably been hatched in the hearts of Gods Nazarites. A prudent and pious
separation had prevented these foolish and sinful separation. The more Mr. H.
and others turn Church-levellers, and lay all common, the more careful had we
need be of our propriety and enclosures. Weeds may be tolerated in a Wilderness
or Common, but are intolerable in Christ's enclosed Garden, Cant. 4.12. at least
weeds in this Garden cannot expect all the privileges of good herbs. How
justly may he at last be looked at as a weed by our great Husbandman, who
contrary to rule and office will cherish weeds in Paradise, where he is set by
God to till it, and to keep it.

I have done with Mr. Humphrey, But must endeavor to satisfy one scruple
before I shake hands with my Reader.

Object. Do you think all are ignorant or scandalous, who refuse trial hefore
the Eldership? If not, how can you deny them the Sacrament?

Answ. God forbid. Yet first, obstinate Refusers give too much occasion of
suspicion in one of the former kinds.

2. Whatever any may pretend against the Government, what is that to the giving
an account of their faith or hope to any shall ask it, 1 Pet. 3.15. especially
upon just grounds.

3. Do not they suspend themselves, who will keep from the Sacrament rather
then submit to a duty so easy, righteous, edifying, and honorable?

4. Whatever may be done by way of extraordinary dispensation (where there is
very good evidence of sufficient knowledge and true piety) yet such consider
not what a gap they open to shake, if not break, the whole frame of Government.
Who will not pretend conscience to escape trial when such ill presidents shall
stand upon record for rules? And whether some few truly godly persons or the
whole Church should surfer, I leave it to their judgment who understand how
much the whole is to be preferred before diverse parts. Let us not study to
please our selves, but seek those things which tend to peace and edifying. Yet
if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16.

Deo gloria, Ecclesiae pax and Reformatio.

FINIS.

