The Captives Return OR The Testimonys of JOHN DANKS, of Colchester, and
ELIZABETH DANKS, his wife, to the mercy and goodness of God, in calling them
back to his Everlasting truth, after their out-runnings and separation from the
same.

Also Being warnings to those that still Continue in Enmity and separation from
the precious truth and from the people of God, that they may Return while the
Lord Calls and while the day of their visitation continues.

With a short testimony to the truth by way of Preface written by JOHN FURLY,
Junior.

Printed in the Year. 1680.

The PRAEFACE To the READER.
Friendly READER,
SInce the dawning and breaking forth of Gods glorious day, and revelation of
his blessed truth, after a long night of darkness, many have been the devices
of the enemy of mankind, through his subtle and diverse workings, to hinder the
knowledge of the glory of it from the Sons of men; and the adversaries of it
have been of diverse sorts: But it being against the Truth, they have been
confounded in their work; so that we have seen it fulfilled, that no weapon
formed against the truth has prospered. And tho some from among us (by going
from the power of truth which once reached to them) have come to suffer loss,
and, in that lost estate, have accused us of falling away from what we first
were, and, in the Spirit of enmity, have rose up and wrote against us; yet the
Lord sometimes bath reached to such again; and made them bear testimony to the
truth, and against their own out-runnings, that where they have been an
occasion of stumbling, by any thing acted or brought forth by them in that
state of separation from God and his people, they might, as much as in them
lies, remove the same by bearing witness against the fruits of that Spirit
which then acted them while they stood up pretendedly for the truth in a Spirit
that was out of it. Now this having been the state of this person John Dankes,
he found it as a necessity upon him to bear testimony against that book of his,
published under the name of Christodulus Ecclestone (long since answered by VV.
G.) that if it has or may come to the hands of any who may thereby have let
in, or may be strengthened in prejudice against the truth and the friends or it
that have abode faithful to it, the prejudice may, as far as in him lies, be
removed, and this his testimony be as publik as his aforesaid book, which is
the reason of the printing of it, and also that it might be a warning to others
that either have or hereafter may run into the same Spirit of prejudice and
enmity against the truth and those that live in it, not to appear so openly,
and so rashly to accuse us of apostasy, while themselves are the apostates: For
let such know assuredly, that tho their pretenses may be specious in their own
eyes (as his were) they must come to judgment, and it will one day prove as a
load too heavy for them to bear.

And now thou to whom this may come, who have had, or still may have desires
to be satisfied in our principles and do incline to the path in when we walk,
its worthy thy consideration (tender Reader) how many ways truths and our
adversaries have appeared and that not only through open, but private enemies;
and how their Charges against us have been directly contrary one to the other.
One sort of them upbraiding us with holding doctrines not consistant with the
Scriptures of truth; while other of them, being better informed of our
principles, say they are good, but that we are not now the same in principle as
at the beginning (where as that is only their ignorance of our principles
then.) Others, that have rose up against us from amongst us bearing testimony
to our being the same in principle, allege that we are not so in life and
conversation. Thus I say, it is worthy the honest readers serious consideration,
how our opposers accusations have been diverse, as also, how that those latter
that have gone out from us, being, as the apostle said, not truly of us, do
yet generally bear testimony to the truth of our principles, in particular to
that divine Spirit, Grace or Light of Christ Jesus that discovers sin and
iniquity and the sufficiency of it so salvation to all that obey it. And
therefore, my advice, in these few lines, to those that are inquiring after the
Lord, is, Let not these Contradictions and aspersions, that we have met with
all, either from without, or from such as for a season have walked among us
(but through not keeping judgment to the Line, have started a side like a
broken bow) deter thee in thy sincere desires after the Lord; but incline thy
mind to the divine principle of life in thy self, which will cleanse thee from
that which has made thee destitute of Gods presence, as thou keeps to it, and
removing that which has hindered good things from thy soul, will give thee a
sense of the divine being, and keep thee a clean and holy habitation for
himself through thy pilgrimage in this Earthly tabernacle, until thou finish
thy course, and thy race here be run, and thou enter into thy rest and haven of
Everlasting blessedness, not heeding the occasions which, through the wiles of
the enemy either in thy self or from others without, may be offered thee to
return, nor regarding those that may fall on the right hand or on the left, for
offenses will come, but woe to them by whom they come, but blessed are they
(says Christ Jesus) who are not offended in me: that this may be the portion
of all whom the Lord has or may yet visit by his power (that is now going
forth for the visiting of the nations) is my souls desire, who, tho I have
here reprehended that spirit that watches for advantages, and therefrom takes
occasion to Cast stumbling blocks in the way of the simple, am far from
justifying those that give the occasion of stumbling, but do advise all to walk
as becomes the Gospel professed by them.

JOHN FURLY. Junior.
Colchester this 6th Month. 1680.
The TESTIMONY OF ELIZABETH DANKS. etc.
A True and faithful warning to all those who have had a Convincement of Gods
truth upon their hearts, and have received of his blessed refreshings to their
souls, in often meeting together with the people of the Lord. But the way that
leads to the kingdom of heaven, being a strait and narrow way, Oh! there be
many that cannot enter through it: it is too straight and too narrow for them
that rather choose the broad way, that leads to everlasting destruction, for a
little mirth, merryment and vain glory, which will stand them in no stead when
death seises upon them, but will rise up in judgment against them for their
disobedience unto the Lord. Therefore all ye who have backslidden from Gods
Eternal truth, which once ye were made partakers of, in some measure, Oh! be
awakened, be awakened unto righteousness, Oh! have, have, with true repentance,
to meet the Lord, before his wrath be kindled against you, for your
disobedience unto him, whom ye have pierced time after time and day after day.
Oh! all ye who are still turning your backs upon the truth, and returning as a
dog to the vomit again: Oh! be forewarned what ye are going about to do. If
ye forsake the Lord and his truth woe and misery will be your portion, no
peace will ye have, wheresoever ye flee the judgments of the righteous God
will pursue you. These things can I declare unto them to be true, for this was
my Condition once, after I for sooke the Lord and cast Truth behind my back as
a thing of naught. Oh! then I could have no peace, no true rest could I have
wheresoever I became: The Lord pursued me night and day, which even brake my
heart, and there was an earnest cry entered my heart The spirit of the Lord
will not always strive with man and woman: Oh! then I began to Consider how
often the Lord, in his everlasting loving kindness, had strove with me, and I
said in my heart surely this is the last striving the Lord will have with me:
Therefore if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, but incline your
ear, hearken dilligently and be truly obedient to the Lord and your souls
shall live and not dye: Oh righteous God! Thy loving kindness has been large
unto me, thy tender bowels of Love and Compassion were toward and over me, in
that long night of darkness, where I wandered long as one weary and heavy laden,
and where to get rest I knew not, until the Lord God in his own due time
visited me with a sore visitation of sickness, in which he brought me even to
the brink of the grave, and, to the Eye of reason, not like to live. Oh when
death was set in order before me, and my slighting of Gods truth, which I once
witnessed and lived in, came over me, Oh! then was my heart broken unto the
Lord, and these were my Cries unto him. Oh righteous God! if it be thy will,
mix thy judgments with mercy, and spare me, if it be thy will, that I may live
to thy glory and praise forever and evermore; that this my so re visitation may
work my everlasting salvation and tend to thy glory and everlasting praises
forever and evermore.

Oh thou righteous god! who in thy everlasting loving kindness have plucked me
as a brand out of the fire, and have set my face Sion wards again, Oh! living
praises be unto thee thou righteous one. O^ thy Love and tenderness there is no
end. I have great cause to declare it amongst you, for I have received it in a
large measure. He has brough^ me unto a dying daily unto enmity, and a living
unto righteousness where I find a quiet habitation through true obedience unto
the Lord in whatsoever he makes known unto me, and herein have I peace with
the Lord. Oh! all ye that are backslidden from Gods Eternal truth consider
what ye are doing. If ye go on in rebellion and cast reproof behind your
backs, woe and misery will be your end, i^ ye repent not with speed, Remember,
the spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man and woman, therefore if
ye love and render the good of your own souls, and your everlasting welfare
with the Lord return, return unto him, whom ye have forsaken, with your heart
continually bowed before him.

Friends, these things opened unto me in the time of my affliction that (if he
raised me again,) I should be faithful in what he had made known unto me, and
now the Lord has laid it upon me to have it forth that all may be fore warned
of their backsliding from the L^^d, before the day of their Everlasting
destruction overtake them, for then it will be too late.

ELIZABETH DANKS.
Written in the 6 Month. 1680.
The Testimony of JOHN DANKS.
Here is a weary wanderer in the wilderness, who, by hearing the voice of him
that Cries behind, this is the way walk in it, is returned home into his tent;
where, by still and quiet waiting upon his God, the Lord has shown, and set in
order before him the bypath and mis-steps, which he has trodden ever since the
day he returned his Captivity, and brought him out of the house of bondage, and
set his face toward the Land of rest.

OH my friends! I am constrained to declare of the great loving kindness and
long-sufferance, of the forbearance and patience of my God toward me, ever
since the day that I was convinced of the Eternal truth of God, which he has
manifested in this our age and generation, who, by his faithful servant and
messenger James Parnell, turned my mind from darkness to Light; which Light
discoverd unto me the woeful state and condition that I was in, as to
God-wards: which when I saw it, I was filld with horror and anguish, and the
righteous God set up his just judgments in me, which took such sure hold, that
I could neither drink, nor eat, nor talk, nor sleep, nor walk in quiet: but all
was for judgment, that ever I did. Sorrow compast me round, in sorrow I laid
down at night and in the morning I rose up in sorrow; and this never ceased
until it had broke my will to pieces, and subdued and brought under my evil
affections: and so brought me to wayt upon God in the measure of Light made
manifest in me, in the true silence of my spirit. And thus the Lord, by his
judgments, wrought a good reformation in me, and redeemed me from my vain
conversation, and then a secret hope of Eternal life was begotten in me, and a
love toward the Lord and his people sprang up in my heart, with a great pity
toward those which were without, which were strangers in their minds to God:
And when any of the servants of the Lord declared the truth of God, Oh! what
earnest desires would arise in me, that some such might be reached, and be
brought to a sense of their Conditions, and it was my joy to see the prosperity
of the truth both within and without; and thus the Lord by his judgments
brought me near to himself, tho once afar off; and here my afflicted soul
found some joy and comfort, and here was some reconciliation with God. Oh happy
and blessed day! Oh Lord, let the remembrance thereof never more depart from me
till the day of my death. But through disobedience I soon lost my condition;
For my evil inclinations sprang up again, and, I being careless and from off
my watch, my will broke out, and my old adversary the devil soon catched hold
on me, and led me into bypath and into dark holes and Corners of the earth,
and upon the hills and mountains of imagination until I was bewildred, and I
went I knew not whither stumbling and falling, sometimes on the right hand and
sometimes on the left, and sometimes, as it were, going quite back again into
the bondage of Corruptions, to wit the open pollutions of the world, out of
which the Lord had redeemed me; yet in all my backslidings the Lord would not
leave me, but followed me with his judgments and often filled my soul with
terror and anguish: but my will, being got out into liberty, would not be
bridled, but hardened my heart, and went on in stifneckedness and rebellion
against the Lord, and would have none of his reproofs: where upon in process of
time the people of the Lord, with whom I had walked and had union and comunion
with, disowned me, and publicly declared against me: which was such a heavy
stroke, that it struck me almost to death: for several days and nights
together I was as once benumbed in his senses or as one past feeling: for I was
neither sensible of joy nor Sorrow. But when I recovered my self, I considred
their proceedings against me, and, judging them to be unjust, I gatherd up all
the strong proofs and arguments that I could get against them, and away I went
to the men's meetings to Vindicate my self, and to prove them transgressors, and
so to acquit my self: thus I went time after time from one meeting to another;
and from one particular friend to another, and spoke and wrote, but all would
not do; no satisfaction could I have; which increast my trouble and filled my
heart with a multitude of thoughts; and how to get ease I knew not. In this
turmoile of spirit I fell to writing and wrote that book signed Christodulus
Eccleston, which book I now disown and testify against; and the spirit that
gave it forth, Let the matter contained in it be what it will, as given forth
by that Spirit that is out of the faith, which works by love, which is the
bond of peace; and therefore, in the faith which works by Love, it is judged
and condemned to be good for nothing, but for to stir up envy and discord, and
to beget prejudice, and to nourish and strengthen the same. And therefore I
desire all friends and people, who have any of them in their Custody, or
afterward shall come into their hands to make them null and void. And when this
book was made public still I had no satisfaction, but remained in great
trouble, and was tumbled and tossed up and down, and sometimes ran into
extravagancy amongst extravagant company, and then judgment and terror would
lay hold on me, and shame would cover my face, in so much that once above all
the rest the terror and wrath of the almighty was so heavy upon me, that I knew
not what to do, nor where to wind my self, for no quietness, nor rest I could
have night nor day, and death was often presented before me, and what a woeful
portion I should have, if the Lord should take me off the earth, in that
Condition; which made me Cry within my self, Lord what shall I do? And this
was the answer. Do no evil, Commit no sin; And at that time, I made a promise
to God, that I would take heed to my ways, and walk more Circumspectly before
him, so that this begat an awe in me, so that I durst not run into such
customs, but was more watchful over my ways; and here I had some peace and
quietness of mind; but still sorrow pursued me, and I walked with a bowed down
Spirit, so that I was made very sensible of my great loss; for I felt no such
living refreshments and comforts issuing into my soul, as formerly I had, and
I was also made sensible, that this my loss came through my disobedience, and
my being separated from the Lords people, and my neglect in waiting upon God:
Then there arose longing desires in me, that I might once more enjoy the
privelidg that I once had, to wit Union with the Lords people, and to wayt upon
God; But then friends public declaration against me, appeared such a great
block in my way, that I could not step over it, but I made a promise to God,
that, if ever he would give me another opportunity to make up the breach
between us, I would in no case obstruct or hinder it, and a belief was begotten
in me that God would work out my way for me: so I waited in my longing desires
and hope to see the fulfilling of my belief and in Gods due time he did give me
another opportunity. For according to his good pleasure George Fox came to
town, who, like a tender and loving father who amongst his Children is willing
to accept the least submission from a wilful Child, took the stumbling block
out of my way, and made my way plain, so that I might go and set down with
the Lords people and wait upon God: in which state I now am, waiting upon God
for the resurrection of my first Love; Everlasting praises and thanks be unto
his name forever, who has once more plucked my feet out of the mire, and set me
in the right way, wherein I should walk.

And now in the sense of the springings up of the love of God in my soul, do I
call unto all you males and females, who have been convinced, and have believed
the truth as it is in Jesus, and have been put to flight, either in the winter
season, or on the sabbath day, and have erred and gone astray from the way of
the Lord, and are wandering in the dark holes and corners, and bypath of
strife and envy, amongst the hills and mountains of Imaginations, crying out
the glory and power of God is lost, but that he will reveal and make it
manifest in ages and generations to come: The man Moses is lost, and gone out
of your sight, and you have made you Gods of gold and of silver to go before
you, which can neither save nor deliver you, but you are Lost up and down by
the will of your old adversary the devil. Come, cast away your Idols of gold
and of silver, to the moules and to the batts, for of a truth the glory and
power of God is risen, but, in the dark holes and corners and bypath of
strife and discord, you cannot see it: therefore is my call unto you, that you
would stand still and be quiet, and incline your hearts dilligently, and see if
you cannot hear the voice of him that Cries behind, this is the way; and if you
hear it, tho it be never so small and low, turn your faces toward it and
follow it, of a certain it will lead you home to your tents where you may set
down in quietness and stilness and ceas from your toil and travel, which you
have while you are among the hills and mountains of your Imaginations, where
there is nothing but barrenness and leanness of soul: and so keeping at home
in quietness and stilness, you will feel and see the glorious powerful arm of
the Lord God reaching forth toward the judging, and subduing your enemies
under your feet, and to strengthen and renew a right Spirit in you, and so you
will come to live in the sense of the Love of God springing again up in your
souls, and so your souls will come to be fed and nourished with bread from
heaven, Therefore come away be no longer straglers and lingrers behind but
follow him who is the good shepherd who tho he has hundreds of sheep and
looses but one, he will go into the mountains to seek him, and if he find him
he will lay him on his shoulders and bring him home and fold him among his
lambs, but if you will run on and will not stand still to hear his voice, and
follow him then will you dye and perish forever in your gain sayings, Therefore
as you tender the good and welfare of your Immortal souls be quiet, and stand
still, and let the power of the Lord God work its effects in you, and bring you
home to himself that you may enjoy everlasting rest and peace with him, which
is the desire of my soul, who am your friend

JOHN DANKS.
Written in the 4 Month. 1680.
FINIS.

