The DRAGONS Forces totally Routed by the ROYAL SHEPHERD Wherein is laid open,
a horrid and bloody Plot, as it was contrived, fomented and acted against the
harmless Lambs, with the cruel proceedings of the DRAGON and his wicked
Council, viz. General Ram, Col. Bear, Col. Ass, Col. Wolf, Col. Fox, Col.
Buck, Col. Bore, Col. Cock, Col. Goat, and Col. Catt Secr. against their lawful
Sovereign King LEONIS. Also the manner how they drew in all other Beasts of
Prey to the destruction of many thousands of the poor Lambkins; and afterward
how these Rebels were subdued by the young LION, and the Lambs restored to
their Ancient Liberties, etc.
allegorical depiction of a plot against the king I peep to spy the Dragons
treachery


depiction of a human figure observing the dragon

The subtle old Dragon Saint-like does appear
To all other Creatures that you do see here,
and tells them if they will enjoy freedom they may
for the Lion's a tyrant that ore them bears sway
Col. COCK.
depiction of a cock

Col. BEAR
depiction of a bear

Col. BUCK
depiction of a buck

Col. GOAT
depiction of a goat

Genesis RAM.
depiction of a ram

Col. WOLF.
depiction of a wolf

The Old subtle Dragon.
depiction of a dragon

Col. BORE.
depiction of a boar

Col. FOX.
depiction of a fox

depiction of a map of the world(?)

Col. Silly ASS.
depiction of a jackass

Secr. CAT
depiction of a cat



THe Dragon thus designed this horrid Plot,
Quoth he, you all are slaves and know it not;
I was the first of Beasts that e're ^^s k^^wn,
Then why should not each subject (...) ^^s own?
Shall cruel Leo that sad Beast of prey
Longer remain, or over us bear sway?
No, no, Dear friends, we better things may merit,
Be ruled by me, each shall his right inherit;
Freedom's your due, dear Brethren, then why
Will you be bound that may have Liberty?
At which the Fox cried out with might and main,
It Is thou that art our lawful Sovereign.
Then said the Bear, I am content withal
That you have said, may I be General.
And I the next (cries out the noble Ram)
One of your ever loving Subjects am,
Then said the Buck, what need I to despair
Who one of your most Royal Counsel are,
The Boar did grunt, for fear he came too late
To sit amongst the rest in pomp and State.
Next did the Cat only desire to be
Chief Scribe, unto the Dragon's Majesty.
The silly Ass his simple Vote soon past
None but the Dragon should be King; at last
The Cock turned Crier, and aloud did call
Unto the rest of Beasts, at which came all;
But none did speak, except the Wolf, and he
Was with the Goat content and did agree
That they would in the Dragons Counsel sit,
And justify all Murder he would commit.
The rest to give this cursed Council content
Were silent, 'cause they knew it gave consent.
Then straight they raised an Army, and did call
The cruel Ram, to be their General;
Who soon set forward with a mighty force,
Both Wagons, Guns, great store of foot and horse,
At which came in all Beasts both near and far,
With Bowls, Rings, Bodkins to maintain the War,
Except the harmless Lambkius, who did creep
To the Lion, who might in safety keep
Them from the Wolf, and all those Rebels who
Did seek to kill them and their Sovereign too.
He told them that their lives he would defend
Against their foes, though he his blood did spend.
At last these Rebels placed in battle Ray,
Did from the Lion win that fatal day
Wherein he fled, the Lambs they followed after,
And many thousands there was left to slaughter.
Thus did the Lion from these Rebels fly,
Who would have spilt the blood of's Majesty.
Supposing that to friends he safe had past,
But they proved foes, and sold him at the last
For cursed Gold, ('it was that their King betrayed,
Which after they unto the Dragon paid
Again) to those who vowed his Glory more
Should be, than ever it was known before.
But mark their mercy when they had him bought,
'Twas nothing but his precious blood they sought,
Who without Law, by Will was only tried,
And (though a Lion) like a Lamb he died.
The Lyoness and Lions young, all fled
For fear, because the Dragon banished
His Royal Issue; where they in exile
Did live in grief and sorrow for a while,
Till that Old Dagon's Image down did fall,
Whose Tyranny did make his Subjects all
Lament the Lions loss, at which they sent
Out Orders for the Lions Parliament,
Who by a faithful General, did bring
The Lion home again to be their King,
He soon did set the pretty Lambkins free,
Both from the slaughter, and the Tyrany
Of that cursed Council, who once did deny all
The Noble Council, King, and Issue Royal.
Then all the subtle Dragons cursed crew,
For shelter into every corner flew,
Some got away, some taken were and tried,
For Treason, and as Traitors, so they died.
Since which the Lion young does Reign, God send
Him long to Live in Peace, and so I END.

