C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



Astraea Redux. A POEM On the Happy Restoration and Return Of His Sacred
Majesty Charles the Second. By JOHN DRIDEN.

Jam Redit and Virgo, Redeunt Saturnia Regna. Virgil. LONDON, Printed by J. M.
for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Blew- Anchor, in
the lower Walk of the New-Exchange, 1660.

Astraea Redux. A POEM On the Happy Restoration and Return of His Sacred
MAJESTY Charles the Second.
NOw with a general Peace the World was blessed,
While Ours, a World divided from the rest,
A dreadful Quiet felt, and worser far
Then Arms, a sullen Intervall of War:
Thus when black Clouds draw down the laboring Skies,
Ere yet abroad the winged Thunder flies
An horrid Stillness first invades the ear,
And in that silence We the Tempest fear.
The Ambitious Swede like restless Billows tossed,
On this hand gaining what on that he lost,
Though in his life he Blood and Ruin breathed
To his now guideless Kingdom Peace bequeathed.
And Heaven that seemed regardless of our Fate,
For France and Spain did Miracles create,
Such mortal Quarrels to compose in Peace
As Nature bred and Interest did increase.
We sighed to hear the fair Iberian Bride
Must grow a Lilie to the Lilies side,
While Our cross Stars denied us Charles his Bed
Whom Our first Flames and Virgin Love did wed.
For his long absence Church and State did groan;
Madness the Pulpit, Faction seized the Throne:
Experienced Age in deep despair was lost
To see the Rebel thrive, the Loyal crossed:
Youth that with Joys had unacquainted been
Envied gray hairs that once good days had seen:
We thought our Sires, not with their own content,
Had ere we came to age our Portion spent.
Nor could our Nobles hope their bold Attempt
Who ruined Crowns would Coronets exempt:
For when by their designing Leaders taught
To strike at Power which for themselves they sought,
The Vulgar gulled into Rebellion, armed,
Their blood to action by the Prize was warmed.
The Sacred Purple then and Scarlet Gown
Like sanguine Dye to Elephants was shown.
Thus when the bold Typhoeus scaled the Sky,
And forced great Jove from his own Heaven to fly,
(What King, what Crown from Treasons reach is free,
If Jove and Heaven can violated be?)
The lesser Gods that shared his prosperous State
All suffered in the Exiled Thund'rers Fate.
The Rabble now such Freedom did enjoy,
As Winds at Sea that use it to destroy:
Blind as the Cyclops, and as wild as he,
They owned a lawless salvage Liberty,
Like that our painted Ancestors so prized
Ere Empires Arts their Breasts had Civilized.
How Great were then Our Charles his Woes, who thus
Was forced to suffer for Himself and us!
He tossed by Fate, and hurried up and down,
Heir to his Fathers Sorrows, with his Crown,
Could taste no sweets of youths desired Age,
But found his life too true a Pilgrimage.
Unconquered yet in that forlorn Estate
His Manly Courage overcame his Fate.
His wounds he took like Romans on his breast,
Which by his Virtue were with Lawrells dressed.
As Souls reach Heaven while yet in Bodies pent,
So did he live above his Banishment.
That Sun which we beheld with cous'ned eyes
Within the water, moved along the skies.
How easy it is when Destiny proves kind
With full spread Sails to run before the wind,
But those that against stiff gales laveering go
Must be at once resolved and skillful too.
He would not like soft Otho hope prevent
But stayed and suffered Fortune to repent.
These Virtues Galba in a stranger sought;
And Piso to Adopted Empire brought.
How shall I then my doubtful thoughts express
That must his sufferings both regret and bless!
For when his early Valor Heaven had crossed,
And all at Worc'ster but the honor lost,
Forced into exile from his rightful Throne
He made all Countries where he came his own.
And viewing Monarchs secret Arts of sway
A Royal Factor for their Kingdoms lay.
Thus banished David spent abroad his time.
When to be Gods Anointed was his Crime
And when restored made his proud Neighbors rue
Those choice Remarques he from his Travels drew,
Nor is he only by afflictions shown
To conquer others Realms but rule his own:
Recov'ring hardly what he lost before
His right indears it much, his purchase more.
Inured to suffer ere he came to reign
No rash procedure will his actions stain.
To business ripened by digestive thought
His future rule is into Method brought:
As they who first Proportion understand
With easy Practice reach a Masters hand.
Well might the Ancient Poets then confer
On Night the honored name of Counselor,
Since struck with rays of prosperous fortune blind
We light alone in dark afflictions find.
In such adversities to Scepters trained
The name of Great his famous Grandsire gained:
Who yet a King alone in Name and Right,
With hunger, cold and angry Jove did fight;
Shocked by a Covenanting Leagues vast Powers
As holy and as Catholic as ours:
Till Fortunes fruitless spite had made it known
Her blows not shook but riveted his Throne.
Some lazy Ages lost in sleep and ease
No action leave to busy Chronicles;
Such whose supine felicity but makes
In story Chasmes, in Epoche's mistakes;
Over whom Time gently shakes his wings of Down
Till with his silent sickle they are mown:
Such is not Charles his too too active age,
Which governed by the wild distempered rage
Of some black Star infecting all the Skies,
Made him at his own cost like Adam wise.
Tremble ye Nations who secure before
Laughed at those Arms that against our selves we bore;
Roused by the lash of his own stubborn tail
Our Lion now will foreign Foes assail.
With Alga who the sacred altar strowes?
To all the Sea-Gods Charles an Offering owes:
A Bull to thee Portunus shall be slain
A Lamb to you the Tempests of the Main:
For those loud storms that did against him rore
Have cast his shipwrack'd Vessel on the shore.
Yet as wise Artists mix their colors so
That by degrees they from each other go,
Black steals unheeded from the neighboring white
Without offending the well cous'ned sight:
So on us stole our blessed change; while we
The effect did feel but scarce the manner see.
Frosts that constrain the ground, and birth deny
To flowers, that in its womb expecting lie,
Do seldom their usurping Power withdraw,
But raging floods pursue their hasty thaw:
Our thaw was mild, the cold not chased away
But lost in kindly heat of lengthned day.
Heaven would no bargain for its blessings drive
But what we could not pay for, freely give.
The Prince of Peace would like himself confer
A gift unhop'd without the price of war.
Yet as he knew his blessings worth, took care
That we should know it by repeated prayer;
Which stormed the skies and ravished Charles from thence
As Heaven it self is took by violence.
Booth's forward Valor only served to show
He durst that duty pay we all did owe:
The Attempt was fair; but Heavens prefixed hour
Not come; so like the watchful travellour
That by the Moons mistaken light did rise,
Lay down again, and closed his weary eyes.
'Twas MONCK whom Providence designed to loose
Those real bonds false freedom did impose.
The blessed Saints that watched this turning Scene
Did from their Stars with joyful wonder lean,
To see small clues draw vastest weights along,
Not in their bulk but in their order strong.
Thus Pencils can by one slight touch restore
Smiles to that changed face that wept before.
With ease such fond Chymaera's we pursue
As fancy frames for fancy to subdue,
But when our selves to action we betake
It shuns the Mint like gold that Chemists make:
How hard was then his task, at once to be
What in the body natural we see
Man's Architect distinctly did ordain
The charge of Muscles, Nerves, and of the Brain;
Through viewless Conduits Spirits to dispense,
The Springs of Motion from the Seat of Sense.
'Twas not the hasty product of a day,
But the well ripened fruit of wise delay.
He like a patient Angler, er'e he struck
Would let them play a while upon the hook.
Our healthful food the Stomach labors thus
At first embracing what it strait does crush.
Wise Leeches will not vain Receipts obtrude,
While growing pains pronounce the humors crude;
Deaf to complaints they wait upon the ill
Till some safe Crisis authorize their skill.
Nor could his Acts too close a vizard wear
To escape their eyes whom guilt had taught to fear,
And guard with caution that polluted nest
Whence Legion twice before was dispossessed.
Once sacred house which when they entered in
They thought the place could sanctify a sin;
Like those that vainly hoped kind Heaven would wink
While to excess on Martyrs tombs they drink.
And as devouter Turks first warn their souls
To part, before they taste forbidden bowls,
So these when their black crimes they went about
First timely charmed their useless conscience out.
Religions name against it self was made;
The shadow served the substance to invade:
Like Zealous Missions they did care pretend
Of souls in show, but made the Gold their end.
The incensed Powr's beheld with scorn from high
An Heaven so far distant from the sky,
Which durst with horses hoofs that beat the ground
And Martial brass belly the thunders sound.
'Twas hence at length just Vengeance thought it fit
To speed their ruin by their impious wit.
Thus Sforza cursed with a too fertile brain
Lost by his wiles the Power his wit did gain.
Henceforth their Fogue must spend at lesser rate
Then in its flames to wrap a Nations Fate.
Suffered to live, they are like Helots set
A virtuous shame within us to beget.
For by example most we sinned before,
And glass-like clearness mixed with frailty bore.
But since reformed by what we did amiss,
We by our sufferings learn to prize our bliss.
Like early Lovers whose unpracticed hearts
Were long the May Game of malicious arts,
When once they find their Jealousies were vain
With double heat renew their fires again.
'Twas this produced the joy that hurried over
Such swarms of English to the Neighboring shore,
To fetch that prize, by which Batavia made
So rich amends for our impoverished Trade.
Oh had you seen from Schevelines barren shore
(Crowded with troops, and barren now no more,)
Afflicted Holland to his farewell bring
True Sorrow, Holland to regret a King;
While waiting him his Royal Fleet did ride
And willing winds to their low'rd sails denied.
The wavering Streamers, Flags, and Standart out
The merry Seamens rude but cheerful shout,
And last the Cannons voice that shook the skies
And, as it fares in sudden Ecstasies
At once bereft us both of ears and eyes.
The Naseby now no longer Englands shame
But better to be lost in Charles his name
(Like some unequal Bride in nobler sheets)
Receives her Lord: the joyful London meets
The Princely York, himself alone a freight;
The Swift-sure groans beneath Great Gloc'sters weight.
Secure as when the Halcyon breeds, with these
He that was born to drown might cross the Seas.
Heaven could not own a Providence and take
The wealth three Nations ventured at a stake.
The same indulgence Charles his Voyage blessed
Which in his right had Miracles confessed.
The winds that never Moderation knew
Afraid to blow too much, too faintly blew;
Or out of breath with joy could not enlarge
Their straightned lungs, or conscious of their Charge.
The British Amphitryte smooth and clear
In richer Azure never did appear;
Proud her returning Prince to entertain
With the submitted Fasces of the Main.
ANd welcome now ( Great Monarch) to your own;
Behold the approaching cliffes of Albion;
It is no longer Motion cheats your view,
As you meet it, the Land approaches you.
The Land returns, and in the white it wears
The marks of penitence and sorrow bears.
But you, whose goodness your descent does show,
Your Heavenly Parentage and earthly too;
By that same mildness which your Fathers Crown
Before did ravish, shall secure your own.
Not tied to rules of Policy, you find
Revenge less sweet then a forgiving mind.
Thus when the Almighty would to Moses give
A sight of all he could behold and live;
A voice before his entry did proclaim
Long-Suff'ring, Goodness, Mercy in his Name.
Your Power to Justice does submit your Cause,
Your Goodness only is above the Laws;
Whose rigid letter while pronounced by you
Is softer made. So winds that tempests brew
When through Arabian Groves they take their flight
Made wanton with rich Odours, lose their spite.
And as those Lees that trouble it, refine
The agitated Soul of Generous Wine,
So tears of joy for your returning spilt,
Work out and expiate our former guilt.
Methinks I see those Crowds on Dovers Strand
Who in their have to welcome you to Land
Choked up the Beach with their still growing store,
And made a wilder Torrent on the shore.
While spurred with eager thoughts of past delight
Those who had seen you, court a second sight;
Preventing still your steps, and making have
To meet you often where so e're you past.
How shall I speak of that triumphant Day
When you renewed the expiring Pomp of May!
(A Month that owns an Intrest in your Name:
You and the Flowers are its peculiar Claim.)
That Star that at your Birth shone out so bright
It stained the duller Suns Meridian light,
Did once again its potent Fires renew
Guiding our eyes to find and worship you.
And now times whiter Series is begun
Which in soft Centuries shall smoothly run;
Those Clouds that overcast your Morn shall fly
Dispelled to farthest corners of the sky.
Our Nation with united Interest blessed
Not now content to poize, shall sway the rest.
Abroad your Empire shall no Limits know,
But like the Sea in boundless Circles flow.
Your much loved Fleet shall with a wide Command
Besiege the petty Monarchs of the Land:
And as Old Time his Offspring swallowed down
Our Ocean in its depths all Seas shall drown.
Their wealthy Trade from Pirates Rapine free
Our Merchants shall no more Advent'rers be:
Nor in the farthest East those Dangers fear
Which humble Holland must dissemble here.
Spain to your Gift alone her Indies owes;
For what the Powerful takes not he bestows.
And France that did an Exiles presence fear
May justly apprehend you still too near.
At home the hateful names of Parties cease
And factious Souls are wearied into peace.
The discontented now are only they
Whose Crimes before did your Just Cause betray:
Of those your Edicts some reclaim from sins,
But most your Life and Blessed Example wins.
Oh happy Prince whom Heaven has taught the way
By paying Vows, to have more Vows to pay!
Oh Happy Age! Oh times like those alone
By Fate reserved for Great Augustus Throne!
When the joint growth of Arms and Arts foreshew
The World a Monarch, and that Monarch You.

