THE CHANGE: OR, The Blind Eye Opened. A double Discourse on Ephesians. 5.8. Ye
were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye Light in the LORD: Showing the great
Alteration that is wrought in a man Regenerate from what he was in his
Unregeneracy.

Presented, first to the Ear, now to the public Eye, By the Author THOMAS
DVGARD, Mr. of Arts, CAMBR.

Quantum mutatus!
(...).
Isaeus. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified,
1 Cor. 6.11. LONDON, Printed by G M. for George Edwards dwelling in
Greene-Arbour at the sign of the Angel, 1641.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, his much honored Uncle, M. RICHARD DVGARD, Bachelor of
Divinity, and President of Sidney-Sussex College in Cambridge.
Sir,
A Course of Literature (as the most Dulces ante omnia Musae. Virgil Georg. l.
2.
Sweet and Pro. 8.11
Satisfactory) I ever affected: and have now for more then two decads of
years, according to Ability and Opportunities prosecuted. As for Oportunities,
none may recount them with more rejoicing then my Self: Having had the
happiness of Grammatical Foundations from so Famous a M Henry Bright late
Master of the most flourishing Kings School in the City of Worcester.
Master, and of Academicall Superstructions from as Famous a Tutor. Great were
my Engagements to Him; but Unspeakable to You. Under whom, so Fatherly in
Affection, so Painful in Precepts, and so Rare an Example of Learning and
Piety, my Seven years service for the Liberal Sciences was as delightfully
spent, as Genesis 29.20.
Jacob's for his beloved Rachel. And although I have now been absent from the
Fountain as many years as I enjoyed it, and wanted the Breast as long as I
sucked it: (as Pharaohs Genesis 41.30.
seven years of Plenty were sueceeded with as many of Famine;) yet has there
not been a Cessation of Your Deserts, but a continual Obligation of me to
further Duty. I have not drunk at the Fountain; but Your inexhausted Goodness
has streamed upon me with ink-influence. I have not sucked the Breast; but
you have fed me with the Quill. Those Precious Letters I mean; so full of
Affection to me, and of happy Discord within themselves, whether their Gravity
of Counsel, or Elegancie of Latin style should obtain the Pre-eminence.
These as often as I read, (and there is none of them but I have read it as
often as they Literae Principum sunt ter legende.
say the Letters of Princes are to be read,) me thinks I hear your old
(...): and see you hanging again on the Ears of your Flock those Precious
Jewels; Labor to keep your Consciences Tender: Study to approove your hearts
to God: Secretum Domini Timentibus eum: Ministerium onus est Angelicis humeris
formidandum: (...): Surgunt indocti, and coelum rapiunt, and nos cum Doctrinis
nostris sine Cord, ecce ubi volutamur! And a Thousand such, All which,
inculcated to us in Common, together with those wherewith you have been pleased
to enrich Me in particular, should I, according to their Desert, desire to
commend to public intelligence, I must not think of a little Epistle, but a
large Panegyricke.

For the greatest part of Thirty years you have been exercised in that
Pupillary Employment. In which space, what a Pillar you have been to the
House, what an Ornament to the University, and how greatly Isntrumental to the
Church and Commonwealth, as I know you desire not to hear, so all know I need
not to speak. With You it has not been as with Some; who either have not
taken more Pupils then One; (like the Markan.
Turkey-henne, which if she see but one of her chickens following her,
regards not what becomes of the rest;) or if they have taken many, have
refused to take just pains with them. And therefore (as I have been credibly
informed) when their consciences have been wakened by their last sickness, have
complained of their Remisnes in that kind, as of one of their most pressing
Grievances. Your Number has been Great, almost Fifty have I known in the
College together under Your Name; (and above Thirty of them Under-graduates)
Some (like the fruit in Alcinous his (...). Hom. Odyss l 7.
Orchard) ripening; Others fully ripe, and fit to be set forth for public
service. And for your Singular Care of them, that (as Socrates told Habebo
curae ut te metiorem tibi redda^ quam accepi. Senec. de Benef. l. 1. c. 8.
Eschines) you might restore them bette^ then you received them; your Constan^
and earnest endeavors of joining the Muses and Graces, of making them both
Learned and Good, as you cannot want abundant Comfort within Your Self, so may
you worthily be a President to Others.

It is Your great Honor, (as Cornelia that Noble Matrone accounted her
Offspring her greatest Haec Ornamenta mea sunt. Val^ Maxmus l. 4. c. 4 exemp 1.
Ornaments) that out of your Nursery has proceeded so Great a Number; that you
have been so Literally Fruitful as to spread your Branches in abundance over
the face of the Land: Some, Pleaders at the Bar; some, Preservers of frail
nature; Many, Instructors of Cereus in vitium flecti, etc. Horat.
untutord youth; bu^ Most, and some o^ them of all Degrees (and others very
eminent) Interpreters o^ Sacred Oracles. Al^ which, with the Sons of Nobles,
and the Gentry, were they put together, and a Royal Head set on the top of
them, would make the Better part of a little Kingdom. And none of which, I
assure my self, but esteems it his great Happiness, that his fresh vessel
has been Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem Testa diu. Horat.
seasoned with your Principles.

But such Passages, ^ fear give you Offense. Yet I am sure I do you no wrong,
not ^respasse upon the Truth. And if you take it for my Fault, others will
account it my Duty. Give me leave, I beseech you, to rejoice that I am of so
near Relation to such Exemplary Virtue; (especially since the very (...)
Plutarch. in vita Acati.
mention thereof i^ an Incentive to imitation;) and to acquain^ the world what
you^ Goodness has been to Him, who earnestly N hill mihi fuit optatius, quam
ut primum abs te ipso, deinde a caeteris omnibus quam gratissimus erga te esse
cognoscerer. Cicero ad Dentulu^ Ep. fam l 1 ep. 5.
Desires to approve himself Thankful, bu^ cannot reach to any higher
Expression their this slender ^iscourse*

The Issue it is o^ not many days study, and altogethe^ Ita a nobis editur ut
voluntati quoru^ dam amicorum obsecuri magis quam judicium nostrum secuti
fuerimus. Casaub in calce Nor in N.T.
unworthy, if not of Light, yet of your Acceptance. However, as you formerly
did the Parent, who now therefore adventureth his Head to show you his
Excutienda damus Praecordia: quantaque nostrae Pars tua sit -- animae, tibi --
Ostendisse juvat pulsa, dignoscere cautus
Quid solidum crepet, and pictae tectoria linguae
Et quod sequitur apud Pers. Sat 5 ad Corn.

Heart, vouchsafe it, I humbly pray you, your Tuition, and so further oblige

Your most devoted Nephew THOMAS DVGARD.

To the Reader.
I Shall not need to make a long Apology for the practice of such public
spirits, as desire by setting forth divine Tractates in their native language
to edify the Church of God. Thou too well know what a multitude of profane
Pamphlets fly abroad in the world: which serve to no other use then to corrupt
men's hearts and lives. If there were not some counter-poyson to prevent the
infection which such Discourses cause, I cannot see how almost any should be
free from the plague sores of pestilent impieties. Shall Physicians be esteemed
for finding out, and making common, Preservatives for the Body, and shall
Ministers be condemned of folly, an^ rewarded with reproach for compounding and
communicating Antidotes for the Soul? Certainly, it is either ignorance, or
envy, that has opened the mouths of some men, (who yet would seem something
for Learning and Religion,) to calumniate this pious course; which by
experience is found to have done so much good in the Church. For how many by
reading holy Treatises have been converted from the Jam. 5.20.
er^or of their way? Others ^ave been confirmed in ^e truth, and gained much
^gmentation to their ^races and Comforts.

Object. 1. They have Moses, and the Pro^hets, the Holy Scrip^^res in a known
tongue. ^et them read them: ^bey are all-sufficient.

Answ. 1. The greatest part of men are ignorant, and cannot understa^^ what
they read without a Guide, and all men ha^^ not a Guide at hand to c^rect
them. 2. All Guide have not the same gift some have more dexter^tie in opening
and a^plying Scripture th^^ others. Now all Go^^ people have interest^^ the
gifts of all his s^^vants, and therefore w^ should they be robbed their right?

Object. 2. There English Books enough ^ready and therefore to ^^d more is
superfluous. An. 1. There be too ma^^ of a worse nature; and ^is there a daily
additi^^ 2. The Church's Trea^^e consists mainely in ^^d Books, the more they
multiplied, the richer Church grows, and ^^l the Church be ^ught too rich?

^b. 3. Many, and wor^^ are the labors of o^s, already extant, upon this
Argument.

An. 1. Thou knowes^ what is ordinarily answered. In the mouth of man^
witnesses Truths are more confirmed, and men left more inexcusable. 2. Those
Truths cannot be too often taught, that ar^ never sufficiently learned. 3. Thou
shall find in reading This Treatise many things which thou never mettest
withal: specially some Scriptures sweetly explicated; and above the rest, that
in the 1 of Ioh 3.9. which Bellarmine Variae sunt ^ujus loci, qui omnium est
difficillimus, expositiones Bellarm: de Iustif. l. 3. c. 15.
says is the hardest in all the Scripture, that is urged for per^^verance in
grace. Thou ^^alt also find, either that ^he Author had never ^ead any others
that writ of this Subject; or if thou find, for Substance, some of the same
things, (as who can travail in such a way without trea^ding sometimes in the
steps of former passengers,

(...) (...)


