Gospel-Glory PROCLAIMED BEFORE THE SONS OF MEN, In the Visible and Invisible
Worship of GOD.

WHEREIN THE MYSTERY of God in Christ, and his royal, spiritual Government
over the souls and bodies of his Saints, is clearly discovered, plainly
asserted, and faithfully vindicated, against the Deceiver and his Servants, who
endeavor the Cessation thereof, upon what pretense soever.

By EDWARD DRAPES, an unworthy Servant in the Gospel of Christ.

I am he that lives and was dead, behold I am alive for evermore, Amen: and
have the keys of hell and death, Rev. 1. 18.

Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief,
in departing from the Living God.

But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 12, 13.

London, Printed for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at the three
Daggers, nigh the Inner Temple Gate, Fleetstreet. 1649.

TO THE CHVRCHES OF CHRIST in London, and in all other places, who worship the
Lord in Spirit and Truth, according to the Commandments of the everlasting
God; especially to that particular Society of whom I am a Member, Grace, mercy,
truth and peace be multiplied from the Lord Jesus.
Precious and dearly beloved Brethren,
IN these perilous times, when ungodliness ranges from place to place, and
blasphemy against the God of Truth and Children of righteousness, spreads it
self, like an overflowing stream, or contagious disease, whereby Truth seems
to be fallen in the street; and many who formerly esteemed it their glory to be
professors thereof (According to the prophesyes which went before of them) have
departed from it, and abandoned the profession of it; my spirit was exceedingly
moved within me to publish this Discourse, as to the consideration of these,
who have already shook of Christ's easy yo ache from their shoulders, that they
may see From whence they are fallen, repent and do their first works; So
especially to your view, who through grace Have followed the Lamb in all his
righteous paths, that You may continue to the end, that no man may take your
Crown from you.

My own infirmities, and many sinister Considerations, did strongly importune
my silence; yet notwithstanding them all, and those lying prophesies which some
ignorantly divulged, of my renouncing or disclaiming this work, before it came
to light, through the sufficiency of the Lord Jesus, I have now made it
public, being well assured, The gates of hell shall never prevail against the
truth herein contained.

I do profess, had I seen the Lord carrying forth any of my brethren (whose
abilities in judgment and clearness of expression, far exceed mine) to have
undertaken a work of this nature, I should have rejoiced in my own silence.
But hitherto have I not known any to stand up in this cause; and surely if all
should be silent, The Stones would speak.

The daily objections and loud outcries against the truth of Jesus, (which God
directs us to walk in) as if a complete victory was gained against the commands
of the Lord; extraordinarily moved my spirit, To cast my mite into the
Treasury; To expose my talent for your service, which I have, according to the
measure given me, performed; Not with entising words of man's wisdom, to
please itching ears, but with plainness and simplicity of spirit and words, to
the understanding of the meanest capacities.

And wherever you find any words you understand not, which I am persuaded will
not be many; necessity, not my own desire, enforced their use; lest any
seeming material objections that I have yet heard of, should pass unanswered.
What through pretense to God, Spirit, Mystery, power, light, revelations and
perfection, and the crying down of the plain, simple and righteous commands of
a crucified, and yet exalted Jesus, as legal, beggarly, fleshly, formal,
traditionall and carnal: The power of godliness is trampled under foot,
Delusions, notions and impostures being lifted up, to the subversion of many
souls, who forsake Christ's easy yoke, light burden, and strait paths; for
Antichrists dangerous licentiousness, carnal security, and broad destructive
roads, who, like the man that was possessed with a Legion of Devils, that dwelt
among the tombs, whom no bands nor fetters could hold; but he brake them all,
and was driven of the Devil into the wilderness, will not endure Christ's laws,
but break them all; neither Scriptures nor Ordinances can hold them, who often
times cry out with him, What have we to do with thee, O Jesus? A wilderness
of unconstancy, barrenness and unprofitable shrubs will be their portion, the
Tombs, the painted outsides of things will be their habitation, till Jesus the
true Son of God command this unclean spirit to depart from them: And then shall
we again see them who before in truth were naked, to be clothed, and in their
right minds.

Let not men's boastings or shoutings, Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ,
subvert you; for know assuredly, those who now say in their hearts, They will
ascend into heaven, and exalt their Throne above the Stars of God, and will sit
upon the mount of the Congregation, and ascend above the heights of the Clouds,
and be like the Most High: Yet, they shall be brought down to hell, to the sides
of the pit, and be cast forth as an abominable branch: And you precious ones,
Who by patient continuance, in well doing, seek for glory, honor and
immortality, shall be crowned with eternal life; their mountains shall be
abased, and your valleys exalted.

Behold in this ensuing Treatise, Power, Light, Mystery, God, Christ and
Perfection, unveiled and advanced; Ordinances, duties, and visible worship, in
their proper places, and spheres also established: Christ is here represented
to you, as your King, Priest and Prophet, purchasing your happiness, commanding
your obedience, discovering your duty, rewarding your faithfulness to death,
with a crown of life.

I did intend in this Treatise to have presented to you a discovery of the
wiles, snares, stratagems and devices of the man of sin; whereby he subtly
attaines to to a high degree of Lordlinesse over his poor Captives, whom he
takes alive at his pleasure, and wherewith he invades the Tents and Tabernacles
of the Saints of the most High God: and likewise to have laid open the several
officers and offices in the true Church of Christ, with their nature, use and
end; but fearing the Reader through its tediousnes should be wearied, or by the
greatness of its price (the world abounding with so many Books already) be
discouraged, I purposely deferred that work till the Lord shall vouchsafe me
another opportunity.

Whoever shall peruse this Book, and find in the words or sense,
mis-pointing, or other faults escaped in the printing, I desire they would in
love amend them; the most material being already corrected to their hands at
the end of the Book; and that they would seriously read what is contained in
it before they censure, and then Let them judge righteous judgment.

To you my brethren, and fellow companions in the Gospel of Christ, do I
recommend this Treatise; beseeching you in the bowels of the loves of the Lord
Jesus, That you stand fast, quit your selves like men, contending for the faith
(not with carnal, but with spiritual weapons) once delivered to the Saints,
and forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some
is, who draw back (without mercy snatch them as brands out of the fire) to
perdition.

Let me beg your prayers, that God would make these poor, weak endeavors of
mine, strong and successful; and that the Lord would give me wisdom and
knowledge, that I may receive the truth in the love thereof, and may be
transformed into the glory of it: Which glory, that all you and I, may enjoy,
as our eternal portion, is uncessantly desired by,

Your poor unworthy Brother, Companion and Servant in the Gospel, for Christ's
sake. Edward Drapes.

To all scattered Saints, who through Satan's subtilty are become sick of their
former faith and love to the Lord Jesus.
POOR Brethren, You are in the following Treatise invited to return to your
Fathers family: You are bought with a price, be no longer the servants of men:
You are redeemed by the Lamb, oh let not Satan ensnare you at his pleasure: It
has ever been the policy of that subtle deceiver, to husband his devices for
the best advantage: His snares are always fuited to the constitutions of the
subjects be seeks after. If Eve be found in an innocent posture, he must
over-candy her apple with the sugared glory of being like unto God, etc. Genesis 3.
5. Since her miscarriage, lower allurements have been sufficient to beguile
her depraved offspring. This present world, his silver hook, (haited with a,
Haec tibi dabo, Math. 4. 9.) does draw in more by thousands, then do the
Drag-nets of the Disciples, unto the Lord Jesus. If men begin to hearken after
an everlasting inheritance, and present themselves in worship, before the
presence of the Almighty; behold, Satan comes likewise, Job 1. 6. If the world
blind not wholly to subvert, be sure he will endeavor to sophisticate their
worship. If Baptism, singing of Psalms, Church Fellowship, etc. may not be
wholly abolished, but every capacity would discover an intervall: he begets a
blind obedience, to Babish sprinkling, and confused shouting in Babilonish
societies; and so obtaines double advantage, both by disobedience to the true,
and conformity to an Antichristian worship. And yet further, as the day of our
redemption draws nigh, and that the Dragon must also draw down the third part
of the stars from heaven after him: not less then the similitude of an Angel
of light, can serve again to effect his enterprise: For innocence again begins
to invade him; and whilst the righteous expect him only in open appearances,
behold he ensnares them secretly in the form of innocence, in the similitude
of that, their poor souls thirst after: And now no less then Holy, Holy is
the language of the East likewise. Perfection, charity, spirit, power, mystery,
and above the Scriptures, Christ and his Ordinances, is the common lure of this
liar and his followers, 1 John 2. 4. And from this Pinnacle be flings many a
poor soul into the bottomless gulf of fleshly fancy, and strong imagination,
embracing for perfection all manner of impiety; carnal carelessness instead of
Christian charity; the power of the Air ruling in a mystery of gross
darkness and emptynesse, baptizing every lying divination with glorious Titles
Of the Tree of Life, or The Leaves thereof: The Lord says it, the Lord says it
is now the Serpents, and every false Prophets Language, whilst promising others
liberty, themselves are become the servants of bondage: and whilst the great
mystery of God manifested in the flesh, hid from Ages, but now revealed as the
alone Redeemer of all that look for salvation in Israel, allowed of God, and
precious, is rejected by these builders, as too low, and his blood accounted an
unholy thing.

But you precious souls who have been a long time wildernized in these wanton
ways of calling Common and Unclean, what God has sanctified, allowed and
called precious: You who have scornfully said of your Redeemer, Is not this the
Carpenters Son? And like Naaman, in your wrath proudly rejected against your
selves, the counsel of the Most High, as too carnal, 2 Kings 5. 11. Who being
vainly pufft up in your own carnal minds, hold not the head Christ Jesus; but
have been sick of, weak in, and at last dead to his Ordinances, because you
discerned not his body in them: Awake now thou that sleep, arise from the
dead; he whom thou contemnest can only give thee life: call no more his
commandments carnal; his pleasure alone is that which makes any thing to thee
spiritual: Yea, confounded be the language of those who are lifted up above
him in their own conceits, esteeming themselves Gods, and above all that are
called God: But they that trust in the Lord Jesus, shall never be ashamed nor
confounded.

Truly Friends, when I behold the blasphemies that abound in these days, and
the fleshlinesse of many, having a form of Godliness, talking much of the
spirit, but having not the power thereof, ruling in them to obedience,
adjudging the true Christ and his Commandments low and carnal, their own
carnal conformities, to every thing their own hearts devises to be height,
mystery, and spiritual liberty. When I saw how the Serpent had here deceived
thousands, and bitten the heel of the very elect also: And when, through
grace, by the strong hand of my God, I had escaped this snare, being once
miserably entangled therein, and beholding many simple ones turning aside from
their steadfastness, I bewailed greatly, and sorrowed within me, because I saw
no Reproover: I was desirous to speak, but my insufficiency overswayed me: But
having met with, and read over the ensuing Treatise with rejoicing for, and
consent to the same; I accounted it my part and privilege to annex this
visible testimony to the truth and seasonablenesse thereof. And though many
expressions therein may be perverted by those, who also pervert the more
perfect Scriptures to their own destruction; yet it shall be mighty, through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and
every high thought, to the obedience of Christ, in those who have pleasure in
his second appearance, unto imortality and glory; which that it may be a means
to accomplish, I trust is the Authors chief end: And that it may instruct the
sons of Sion, that are led aside through the wiles of Satan, to come out of
the wilderness, leaning upon their beloved the true Christ, and eternal life;
keeping themselves from Idols, 1 John 5. 21. and doing whatsoever he commands
them, is the great desire of him who would greatly delight to see every
scattered Saint established in the perfect peace, which the blood of Jesus
alone speaks, and walking in the path wherever the Lamb leads, wherein he
desires to be kept unto the end, and be improved,

A faithful Servant to the weakest Member of our Lord Jesus. John Vernon.

The Contents of the several matters contained in this Book.
Chapter 1. p. 3. OF the several significations of the word, Worship; and what the
true worship of God is. page 3.

Chapter 2. p. 5. Of Light and Love, the principles of the worship of God; which
light discovers what may be known of God, viz. that God is, but cannot be
defined, p. 6. That he is incomprehensible, immutable, eternal; wherein is
showed what time is, and that God is Invisible, p. 7. Of the sovereignty,
wisdom, justice and mercy of the Lord, p. 9. Of the relation God has to his
Creatures, who is all in all, yet but one God, everliving, and present in all
places, p. 10, 11.

Chapter 3. p. 11. Of the manifestation of God in the Creation, which shows the
Godhead, p. 12. That there is but one God, p. 13. That he is Almighty, p. 14,
15. That he cannot be comprehended by the natural or spiritual man, p. 15,
16, 17. It declares his wisdom and love; wherein is showed what it is to be
created in Gods Image, p. 17, 18.

Chapter 4. p. 19. Of God in Christ, who is the anointed of the Lord; wherein is
showed, that the Father anointed him, p. 19. That the humane nature, with a
description what it is, is the subject anointed; and that the Spirit is the
Ointment. p. 20. With a brief description of what Father, Son and Spirit are,
and whether three persons, p. 21, 22.

Chapter 5. p. 22. Of the manifestation of God in Christ as a Priest; wherein is
shown, what the Priesthood of Christ is, and that the Lord Jesus is the Saints
High Priest consecrated with an oath, p. 23. And, by the pouring on of oil, p.
24. Where also, is showed the ability he has of mannaging the Priesthood,
being the first begotten, the eldest brother, being related to God and man,
having a great interest in them both, all things concurring in him to the work,
he being without spot and blemish, p. 25, 26.

Chapter 7. p. 26. Of the sacrifice of Christ expressed by five particulars. 1. By
Christ himself, p. 26. 2ly. By his blood; and what that blood is; with an
answer to an objection concerning it, p. 27. 3ly. By the offering up of his
body. 4ly. By making his soul an offering for sin. 5ly. By laying down his
life, p. 28.

Chapter 8. p. 28. Shows, 1. How often Christ suffered, and whether he may now be
said to dye in us, p. 29. 2ly. The place where Christ died, which is at
Jerusalem, and what that Jerusalem is. 3ly. The time when he suffered, p. 29.
And how Christ is said to be a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, p.
30.

Chapter 9. p. 31. Of the manner how Christ offered up himself, viz. by the
spirit, and in the body of his flesh, p. 31. Of the true nature of Christ's
sacrifice; wherein is shown, that it is a pure sacrifice, p. 32. A free,
perfect, spiritual and acceptable sacrifice, p. 25. 43.

Chapter 10. p. 34. Of the true subjects of Christ's sacrifice, who are only his
sheep and children, beloved with an everlasting love, who shall be saved, p.
34, 35. Wherein is handled universal redemption; with an answ. to 13. Object.
brought to stablish it: wherein is showed what Gospel it is that is to be
preached to the world, p. 37. That it is a dangerous thing to fall from
profession of true Religion, p. 39. Wherein likewise is declared, what the fall
of man, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, the tree of life, and the
serpent, are, p. 43. With 2. Arg. against universal redemption, p. 43, 44.
That this sacrifice was offered to an angry God, and what anger and fury in God
is, p. 44.

Chapter 11. p. 44. Of the virtue of this sacrifice, interposing, mediating
between God and man, satisfying the Father, p. 44, 45. Wherein is showed what
it is for God not to see nor remember sin in his children. p. 46.

Chapter 12. p. 47. Of the pardon of sin, and justification by the blood of Christ,
by faith, and by works, with their unity, p. 47, 48. Wherein is an answer to
these 2. Quest. 1. Whether all sins to a believer are pardoned, past, present,
and to come, p. 48, 49, 50, 51. 2ly. Whether a believer, having received the
spirit, may fear again, p. 51, 52. With 3. Arg. to prove all sins to a
believer are pardoned at once, p. 52.

Chapter 13. p. 53. Of believers freedom from the law, p. 53. Wherein is handled
the law written in Adams heart, the Covenant of works, the law of Moses and of
Christ, p. 53, 54, 55. Showing several dispensations thereof, p. 55, 56. With
an answer to 2. Quest. 1. Whether the law be a rule of life to a believer. 2ly.
Whether God punishes his people for sin, wherein appears the difference
between punishing and chastising, p. 56, 57.

Chapter 14. p. 58. Of the breaking down the partition wall, fulfilling all types
and shadows, and obtaining of all happiness for the Saints by Christ's death,
p. 58, 59.

Chapter 15. p. 59. Of the dignity Christ has attained to by dying; of his
resurrection, ascension, sitting at the right hand of God, and making
intercession for us, p. 59, 60, 61.

Chapter 16. Of the Prophetical office of Christ; wherein is shown, 1. The matter
he reveals, which is man's sinfulness, man's happiness, all things to be
believed, and obedience to all his commands, p. 61, 62, 63. 2ly. The light
discovering, which is the spirit; and what it is to be taught by God, by
Christ, and by the spirit. 3ly. The rule of discovery, wherein of the truth and
authority of the Scriptures, p. 64, 65, 66. 4ly. The manner of discovery, which
is plainly, p. 66. (wherein is shown what we may judge of those who delight to
speak in a language above the capacity of those to whom they speak)
infallibly. 5. The subsects to whom truth is discovered are either, such as
receive the truth in the love of it, or to those that receive it only in the
notion as Balaam and Judas. p. 67. 68.

Chap. 17. p. 68. Of the Kingly Office of Christ, who is King, by his
inheritance, by appointment of the Father by conquest, excellently qualified,
of his Kingdom, over the world of grace, p. 69. of glory, p. 70. Of Christ's
Laws; civil and spiritual. p. 70. Of his officers, wherein is the true
Power, and bounds of the Magistracy, and whither he be a Church Officer. p. 71.
Of the resigning up the Kingdom to the Father. p. 72. Whether it be yet. p.
73. Of Christ's enemies, Satan, sin and wicked men. p. 73, 74. Of Christ's
victories over our understandings, wills and affections. p. 74, 75. Of the
Doctrine of free will. p. 75. Three reasons why all Christ's enemies are not yet
punished. p. 76. Of Christ's Soldiers which are Angels, Saints, the World, the
whole creation. p. 77. Of his weapons, viz. his death, his Word, his Spirit. p.
77, 78. Of his rewards, wherein of the resurrection of the body, with an answer
to some object. against it. p. 79, 80. Of perfection. p. 81. Whether it may be
attained in this lise. p. 81, 82, 83. Of Christ's Judgment; the Law by which he
judges; the Subjects whom he judges; the sentence that is pronounced: p. 83,
84. wherein is showed what Hell is. p. 84. Whether the day of judgment be yet.
p. 85.

Chap. 18. p. 86. Of Faith, Prayer, Fear and reverence, Love and Praise of
God. p. 86, 87. Of the true power and manner of worshipping God in the Spirit.
p. 87, 88.

Of the Visible Worship of God.
Chap. 1. p. 83. OF the Gospel that is to be preached to the World. p. 89, 90.
Of the Ministers of this Gospel. p. 91. That there are true Ministers of the
Gospel in our days. p. 92. marks to know them. p. 93. with an answer to
several objections against a visible Ministry in our days; wherein is handled
the doctrine of Miracles. p. 94, 95, 96, 97. Of the manner how the Gospel must
be Preached, viz. infallibly, in the name of God, plainly and fully. p. 97, 98.
The Subjects of which ministry of the Gospel are sinners as sinners. p. 98.

Chap 2. p. 98. Of Baptism of water; of the Holy Ghost and fire; of
afflictions. p. 98, 99, 100, 101. Chap 2. p. 98.
That Christ commanded baptism of water to be preached and practiced and was
performed. p. 102. 105, 106. That the command of Christ, Go teach and Baptize,
is meant of water baptism. p. 102, 103, 104.

Chap. 3. p. 106 Chap. 4. p. 112 That Christ is the Author or Instituter of
water Baptism. p. 106, 107. Of the unity and difference of John's and Christ's
Baptism of water. p. 107, 108, 109. Of the excellent nature, end and use of
the Baptism of water. p. 109, 110, 111. Of the Administrator of Baptism, with
an answer to several obj. against it. p. 112, 113 114. Of the true subjects of
Baptism. p. 114. Whether it be lawful to Baptize infants. p. 115. With an
answer to the principal arguments for it. p. 117, 118, 119, 120.

Chap. 5. Of the true manner of performing this Ordinance, which is by dipping.
p. 120. proved, 1. From the signification of the word. 2. From the nature of
the Ordinance. p. 120, 121. with an answer to some obj. against it. p. 121.
122. Of the true principle leading forth to baptize. p. 122, 123. Of the true
power enabling to conform to it, and whether a Saint may be said to be ever
without power to do his duty. p. 123, 124, 125.

Chap. 6. p. 118. Of the continuance of water Baptism, which is till Christ
comes again, visibly to good and bad, proved from several Scriptures. p. 118,
119, 120, 129.

Chap. 7. Contains several answers to twenty obj. against the practice of
the Baptism of water in our days, wherein those Scriptures which many
pretend, do speak the downfall of this doctrine, are explained and men's
mistakes made manifest. p. 142.

Chap. 8. That believers being baptized ought to be added to some particular
congregation. p. 143, 144. What the visible Church of Christ is. p. 144, 145.
with an answer to this Qu. viz. Whither there may not now be a true visible
Church without Baptism of water. p. 147, 148.

Chap. 9. Of the nature of a true church. p. 148. It Is the city of God, Christ's
body, the Lords mountain, Gods vineyard, Christ's garden, etc. p. 149, 150. Of
the power of this church in receiving of members. p. 151. Of admonishing of
members. p. 152. what a private, and what a public offense is. p. 152. the
difference between admonishing, reprooving, and rebuking what. p. 153. few
directions to be observed in reprooving. p. 135. Of the power of the church in
determining controversies about civil and indifferent things. p. 153, 154. Of
their power in casting out of members, and what it is to be delivered to
Satan. p. 154. and for what causes, 155. what a heretic is, ibid. the church
may receive members, when cast out upon repentance. p. 155, 156.

Chap. 10. p. 156. Of the duty of members toward the church. p. 156. Of
members to the church and of the Church toward its members. p. 157. Of the
gifts of the Church, a word of wisdom, of knowledge, discerning of Spirits and
prophesies. p. 158. Of the true power of prophecy, and who may prophecy. p.
158, 159. whither women may speak in the church. p. 159, 160. how women should
improve their gifts. 160. the gifts of helps and Government, what. 161.

Chap. 11. 162. Of the Ordinances of the Church, viz. Prayer, Praise. p. 162.
Of singing Psalms, Fasting and charity. 163. Whether all Saints are to have
all things common. p. 164. Of breaking bread, of the subjects, nature, and
duration of it. p. 164, 165. Of the order of the church. 165, 166. Of the
ministry of this church. p. 166. Of the churches communion with the Father. ib.
with each other, with other churches in advice in supplying each others wants.
p. 167.

An Alphabeticall Table of the chief heads contained in this Book.
A.
ADministrator of Baptism, who. page 106. etc. Affections of man Christ's
enemies. 75 All, the word explained. 36 Anger of God, what. 44 Angels are
Christ's soldiers. 77 Apostles, their office. 91 Ascension of Christ, what, and
its virtue. 60
B
BAlaams knowledge, what. 67 Baptism of afflictions, what. 101 Of the Holy
Ghost and fire, what. 100 Of Water, 98, etc. Its nature. 109, 110. Its
subjects, 114. The manner how to be performed, 120. Its continuance, 126, to
130. Of the difference and unity of John's and Christ's Baptism. 107, 108, 109,
etc. Blood of Christ, what. 27 It justifies. 46 Breaking bread. Vide, in Lords
Supper.
C
CHrist what he is, anointed of God, 19, 20, 23, etc. 61, 68, 69, etc.
Chastisement for sin what, its virtue. 57, 58 Charity, what it is. 163 Church
of the Gospel, what. 143, 144 Its subjects, 144, to 147. Its nature, 149, 150.
Its power, 151. Its order, and what it is, 165, 166. It may be without officers
in it, Ibid. Of its communion, 166, 167 Circumcision ended in Christ's death, 58
Is no ground for Infant Baptism, 117, 118, 119 Civil differences to be ended
by the Church. 153, 154 Common, Whether all things ought to be common. 164
Common salvation, what. 41 Communion of Churches, what and wherein. 167
Consecration of Christ, what, and how performed. 23, 24 Covenant, no proof of
Infant Baptism. 116 Creation shows the Godhead. 12, to 18 Curse of the law,
what, and how freed from it. 53, to 57
D
DAy of judgment what, and when. 84, 85 Death of Christ our sacrifice. 26, 27,
28 Deyill conquered by Christ's death. 59 Discerning of spirits, a gift; what.
158
E
ENemies of Christ, what. 73, 74 Evangelists their office. 91
F
FAther, what he is. 21, 22 Faith, what, 86. We are justified by it. 47, 48
Fall of Adam what, and how accomplished. 43 Fasting, what. 163 Fear of God,
what. 86 Flesh, Christ died in the body of flesh. 31, 32 Not to know Christ
after the flesh, what. 133, etc.
G
GOd is. 6 Almighty. 14 Eternal. 7 Everliving. 11 Invisible. 7, 8 Immutable,
Incomprehensible. 7, 15, 16, 17. Gospel, what it is. 37, 90 How to be
preached. 97 Government, a gift in the Church, what. 161
H
Happiness of man discovered by Christ. 62 Hell, what. 84 Helps, a gift in the
Church, what. 161 Heretic, what. 161 Humane nature, what. 20 It is anointed.
ibid.
I
Jerusalem, Christ died there: What it is, and Where it is. 29 Image of God,
wherein man was created, What. 17, 18 Indifferent things to be determined by
the Church. 154 Infants, Whether subjects of Baptism. 115. to 120 Intercession
of Christ, What: and its virtue. 61 Judgment of Christ, What. 83 Justice of
God, What. 9 Justification, What: its several kinds. 47, 48, 49
K
KIng, the Lord Christ is King. 68, 69 Kingly office of Christ, What. 68
Kingdom, Christ, has a Kingdom over the World. 69 Of Grace. ibid. Kingdom
of Glory, What. 70 Kingdom to be resigned up to the Father, how, and when. 72,
74
L
LAw: how we are freed from it, and how yet under it. 53, 54, 55 Whether it be
a rule of life. 56 Laws of Christ, What. 70 Lamb: Christ a Lamb slain before
the foundation of the world. 30, 31 Leaving the principles of the doctrine of
Christ, what meant by it. 132, 133 Light and Love: the principles of true
worship of God. 5, 6 Love to God, What. 87 Lords supper, its nature, use and
continuance. 164, 165
M
MAgistracy, its nature, place and power. 71, 72 Manifestation of God in
Christ, how. 4 Mediator between God and-man is Christ. 45 Members of Churches
how to be received in, 151. To be admonished, 150 Reproved, 143. Rebuked, 153.
And for sin may be cast out, 154. Of their duty to the Church. 156, 157.
Ministers of the Gospel, who. 91, 92, 93 How to know them. 93, etc. Miracles,
their proper end and use. 94, 95, 96
O
OBedience taught by Christ. 63 Object against Baptism answered. 30, etc.
Object against Scripture, answered. 65 Offenses private, What. 15. 2 Offenses
public, What. ib. Ointment poured on Christ, What. 20 Once Christ was
offered, but once. 28, 29 Ordinances to be used in the Church, what. 162
P
PArdon of sin, Vide in Justification. Partition Wall broken down. 58
Perfection, Whether to be enjoyed in this life. 81, 82 Perish: What meant by
it. 40 Person, whether three in God. 21, 22 Place where Christ was offered. 29
Power, in things of God. 87, 123, to 127 Praise, What. 87, 162 Prayer, What.
ibid. Priesthood of Christ, What. 23 Priest: Christ is the Saints High Priest.
23, to 26 Principles essential to divine Worship, and what they are, 5, 6
Prophesy, its nature, use and end. 158, 159, etc. Prophetical office of
Christ, What. 61 Propher, Christ is the Saints Prophet. ib. Psalms singing, a
gift, what it is. 163 Punishment for sin, What: Whether Gods people be punished
for sin. 57
R
REconciliation of God and man in Christ. 46 Reject the Gospel, What. 39
Relation God is related to the Creature. 10, 11 Remember sin no more, how to be
understood. 45, 46 Resurrection of Christ, and its virtue. 60 Resurrection of
the body. 79, 80 Rewards of Christ, What. 78, etc. Right hand of God what;
Christ fits there, and the virtue thereof to us. 59, 60, 61
S
SAcrifice; Christ is the Saints sacrifice. 26, 27, 28 The true nature of this
sacrifice, 32, 33. For whom it was offered, 33, 34 To whom it was offered, 44.
The virtue of it. 44, etc. Saints cannot comprehend God. 16 Ought to be joined
to a particular Church. 151 Satan; What it is to be delivered to Satan. 151
Scriptures, their true glory and divine authority. 64, 64, 66 Separation;
Christ's Church is a separated people. 145, etc. Serpent, What. 43 Sin laid on
Christ. 45 Sin, how God sees it not. 45, 46 Sinfulness of man discovered by
Christ. 62 Sinners as sinners the subjects of the Gospel. 98 Speaking, Christ
speaks language easy to be understood. 66, 67 Son of God how to be understood.
22 Spirit of God, What: Ib. It is the true light. 63
T
Taught of God, Christ or spirit, what 63 Time, What it is. 7 Time when Christ
was offered. 29 Tree of life, what; and why Adam might not eat thereof. 43
Types under the law fulfilled in Christ. 58, 59
V
Victory of Christ, What. 74 visible Worship, What. 89 Unbelief the
condemnation, What it is. 41, 42
W
WEapons of Christ, What. 77 Weeping of Christ over Jerusalem, how to be
understood. 40 Wicked men, why so long unpunished. 76 Will; Of free will. 75.
Will of man Christ's enemy. 74 Women; Whether they may speak in the Church. 159,
160. Their duty. ib. Word of God, What. 758 Word of Wisdom a gift in the
Church, What. 158 Word of Knowledge a gift in the Church, What. 158 Works,
Saints are justified by Works, how. 48 Worship; What the word signifies. 3
What the true Worship of God is. ib. The Invisible Worship, What. 45, etc The
Visible Worship, What. 89
THE INVISIBLE WORSHIP OF GOD.
The Introduction.
That all Nations in all ages have acknowledged a God, and that he is to be
worshipped; but have not known nor worshipped him aright:
IT is worthy our consideration in the entrance into this following discourse,
to consider how all people in all ages (enjoying but their senses) do from the
principles of nature acknowledge a God. The very Heathens were ashamed to deny
this. Ransacke all ages, and wherever you find men inhabiting either in East,
West, North or South, and you shall find them agree in this, that there is a
God, and this God is to be worshipped. The Athenians built an Altar with this
Inscription, To the unknown God. Acts 17. 23.


All people have a kind of Religion, and serving of God with prayers,
sacrifices, and the like; therefore the Heathens chose their Priests and
others, to have a care of their Gods, and the service of their Gods. Men of
Learning, and Fools acknowledge this. The Schools of the Academicks, Stoics
and Peripateticks, rung of this doctrine. The barbarous Indies gainsay it not.

But notwithstanding the harmony in this (via:) that there is a God, and that
this God is to be worshipped, is so great and wonderful; yet the discord
concerning this God what he is, and what is his true worship is as great and
strange.

The Athenians acknowledged him to be, but knew him not. Man being unable to
comprehend the incomprehensible being, has from time to time, according to his
vain imagination, fancyed a God or Gods to himself.

The Romans had as many Gods as Towns: what they received any good from, they
reverenced as their God. Hence it came that they worshipped the Sun, Moon,
Stars, and Fire, yea even Dogs and Birds for their Gods.

The people of Lycaonia perceiving a miracle to be wrought by the Apostles,
presently lift up their voices, saying, The Gods are come Acts 14.
down to us: calling Paul, Jupiter: and Barnabas, Mercurius: the names of
their heathen Gods. And the Apostles could scarcely restrain the Priests from
sacrificing to them.

From this blind conceit arises as blind a sacrifice; sometimes men, women,
children, beasts and birds, have been offered by them as well-pleasing
sacrifices to their Gods.

From this ignorance of the true GOD, and his worship, has sprung that Ataxy
Confusion and disorder that is in the world; hence comes murders, rebellions,
treasons, witchcrafts, sorceries, uneleanesse, contentions, persecutions,
self-exaltation, and all abominations in the world.

This deluge of darkness has not only drowned some families, Towns, Cities,
Countries, Kingdoms and generations, but has overwhelmed the whole world in
all ages. Man no sooner steps into the world, but darkness is his dwelling
place. Nature once was adorned with this glory of knowing GOD the Creator in
the true light of the first Creation; but now through transgression are all
shut up and concluded under sin, wrath and darkness: That it might be made
manifest, that salvation is only in that Arc that swims above all these
waters, (viz:) in the free grace, mercy and goodness of the Lord in Jesus
Christ, by revealing himself to the sons of men, and giving them a righteous
law to worship him by: that so they might not ignorantly forge a God in and by
their own understandings to themselves, and fall down and worship their own
Creature instead of the Creator of Heaven and Earth, but might see GOD in his
own light. For in thy light O GOD do thy Saints see light, even the true
light the Lord Jesus. As that light has discovered him to me, and the only
acceptable service and worship of him, this ensuing Treatise declares.

Chap. I.
Explaineth the word Worship: showing its several acceptations in the
Scriptures, and what the true Worship of God is.
THE word Worship in the Scripture signifies to bow down, fall What the word
Worship signifies. Psalm. 92. 6. 1 Samuel 1. 3. Luke 4. 7, 8. Humane worship what
it is Romans 1. 22, 23. Coloss. 2. 23. Matthew. 15. 9. Devilish worship what it is
1 Cor. 10. 20. Deuteronomy. 32. 17. Rev. 9. 20. Civil worship what it is. Matthew. 20.
20. Divine spiritual worship what it is.
down before, Sacrifice, to serve, reverence, respect, fear, honor, or be
subject to one; of which worship or service we may mind these four sorts.

1. Humane Worship, which is a service of man's own invention, that has a form
of the true worship of God, but is will worship, vain worship not commanded by
the Lord.

2. Devilish Worship, that is, When Devils or dumb Idols are worshipped:
these two kinds being altogether vain, carnal and antichristian: I shall
have no occasion to speak of them, except in a way of reproof, as
unprofitable works of darkness.

3. Civil Worship, Which is an outward expression of reverence and respect to
men of Authority or eminency, * this being in its own sphere lawful, being
bounded by the law of God. I shall have little occasion to speak of it.

4. Divine or Spiritual Worship, that is, When the true God is worshipped
after a true manner; which worship we may fitly describe to be, The subjection
of the whole man unto God, in every thing commanded by God, from a true
understanding of God, by the power of God, with singular spirituality, faith,
reverence, fear, and love, in obedience unto God in Christ.

In this description there are several things to be minded, as necessarily
required in all true worshippers of God; As

1. A Spiritual principle, whereby we come to a true understanding:

First, of God, the object of divine worship; The inscription of the Saints
Altar is not to an unknown God, but to him whom they understand.

Secondly, wherein the worship of God does consist; Every worship will not
serve the Lord; blind obedience is the sacrifice of fools; but that which God
approves, his own light reveals; which discovers it to consist in subjection
unto God: where there is true worship there must be pre-eminence; where there
is inferiority there is superiority, from whence springs subjection.

2. A Spiritual power, it is not every strength that is able to build this
house; that which Gods light reveals his power produces and effects.

3. The manner how the worship of God is to be performed, must be regarded:
every way of offering the Lord accepts not, but he will be worshipped.

First, with singular spirituality, as the object, principle and power are all
spiritual, so must the heart be, offering up Sacrifices in a spiritual
manner; it is the spirit in all performances that makes them truly lovely.

Secondly, in faith; a soul that worships God must believe God and give credit
to the words of God,

Thirdly, in fear and reverence; the Majesty of God commands reverence in all
that come before his Throne; That infiniteness and unspeakablenesse of glory
that is in the Lord, causes a soul to fall down before him even at his feet,
adoring him, crying out with Isaiah, I am undone.

Fourthly, in love; no service without love is acceptable; if the distance was
only minded, it would strike such amazement and terror, that none would dare
to come to God. Therefore the Lord sends from the brightness of his Majesty
comfortable beams and rays of love, to gather up the soul to himself;
through the power of which, the soul is fired with love, and flaming in this
chariot, mounts up to God; accounting the hardest enterprise he can atcheive
for God, to be his greatest honor.

Lastly, Divine Worship in all its going forth to God, makes its addresses in
the Lord Jesus: Spiritual and Gospell-Worshippers receive all from God in
Christ, return all to God in him; who is that way in which God and the Soul
meet embracing each other; who is that Ladder on which God descends to him, and
he ascends to God; he loves, fears, serves and lives to God in Christ, and in
him alone.

This true worship of God appears in a twofold consideration.

1. Invisibly; which is only in the inward man, in the spirit which no man
sees or knows, but he in whom it dwells.

2. Visibly; which others may take notice of, whereby an invisible enjoyment
and filial affections are clearly demonstrated.

I shall handle the first of these in the first part of this discourse, namely
the invisible worship of God; and the last, viz: the visible in the last part.

Chap. II.
Shows what the Spiritual principle in true worshipping is, whereby we come
to know God; and what of God may be known to the Saints.
PRinciples are so requisite to all manner of actions, that nothing can be done
regularly or honorably without them. A true principle is that which crowns
every act; if a man be unsound in his principles, all his building will prove
but rotten.

By this spiritual principle, I mean a sure ground, or original, What the
spiritual principle is.
seated in the heart by the Lord, whereby the Soul ascends to the true worship
of God. And this is twofold.

1. Light. Till the Sun of righteousness shines into the Soul, to It is light.
discover the mind and will of God, the duty and privilege of his creature,
the Soul is a dark dungeon, a sleepy dead confused habitation; but when God
comes in the appearance of Himself, the Soul is enlightened. Which light is
Light comes from God.


1. Sent forth from the Lord, it is a spiritual, divine, supernatural light.
In thy light (says the Psalmist) shall we see light; It Is not in the light of
the World, or of the first Creation, but a new light to him, that he had not
knew not, nor enjoyed before.

2. It is sent into the Soul, as the light of the Sun is conveyed to the
natural eye, whereby that discernes natural objects: so is Light dwells in the
soul.
the heavenly light darted into the spirit of a man, whereby that man being in
this light, sees it, and nothing spiritually without it.

2. Love, love unto God, and the truth and light of God, though a man may know
much even by the true light; yet if love be not It is love.
one with the light, that is to say, if love and light walk not hand in hand,
the Soul worships not God aright; therefore as we hear the Saints breathing
out their desires to the Lord that he would send forth his light and his truth,
to lead them to compass his Altar, that is to say, to worship God. So
likewise we hear of receiving truth in the love of it. If I know any thing,
and yet love it not, I cannot chearefully entertain or embrace it. Love, love
I say unto the Lord, produced by the light and love of God, both implanted in
the heart become that spiritual principle that carries forth the Soul
certainly unto God.

We are to consider this spiritual principle with its object: light God is the
true object of the Saints light and love
and love are vain, empty, a mere fancy without a suitable object. The object
of true light and spiritual love is, that God which is to be worshipped: God
over all, God in all, God above all, which light discovers what of God is to be
known by the Saints, and wherein the appearances of God are.

The Light of God reveals this to the Soul, that God is. Hearken what the
eternal Spirit says in the Scriptures: He that comes to That God is.
God must first believe that God is.

When the Lord sent Moses to deliver the Children of Israel from Egyptian
bondage: he bids Moses Go and say, I am has has sent you, whereby he
signifies to them his being, that he is, distinguishing himself from
heathenish vanities, he is in himself and of himself. Therefore God
frequently styles himself by the name of Jehovah, whereby he points out to us
his being in a most excellent manner: Gods being is himself from eternity, the
same without diminution, addition, or substraction. Though the fool says in
his heart there is no God; and the voluptuous man makes: his belly and pleasure
his God: and although the world makes Satan the Prince of the world their God:
Yet God only is, viz: that unspeakable substance who lives of himself, what
all creatures are, they are by God, and have their dependence upon God; but God
himself is only truly Independent.

If any shall demand, of me what God is.

I answer; if any seek the definition of God from the workmanship

But may some be ready to object many Scriptures, that speak of knowing i^
God, yea, it is eternal life to know him the only true God.

To answer this, we must consider to know God is.

First, To know that there is a God, or that this God is; and so if we know him
not, we cannot speak of him nor live to him.

Secondly, To know God, is to know him after a sort or manner, viz. As he has
revealed himself to the Sons of men; for the incomprehensible being: and
invisible Beer, has made himself visible after a sort, so that our obedience
may not be without knowledge, nor our eyes without an object; and so if thou
art made partaker of the Spirit, and so dwell in the light of God, thou
may see him,

To be incomprehensible; if man, poor silly man, nay, wise, understanding man
was able to comprehend the infinite One, he would God is incomprehensible.
then be God himself or greater then he; for it is only the greater that is able
to comprehend the lesser: as soon may the smallest point in the Circumference,
comprehend the whole, as the Creature his Creator: Therefore wisely did
Empedocles answer one that demanded of him what God was, That he was a Sphere
whose center was every where and circumference no where; whereby is most
excellently shadowed the incomprehensiblenesse of God.

Secondly, That he is Immutable; the World is possessed with God is immutable.
changes, But in him there is no shadow of Change: The World grows old as does
a garment: But he is the same yesterday and to day, and for ever; this is the
record he gives of himself saying, I the Lord, I change not.

Mutability proceeds from corruption or imbecility: but GODS being is most
simple and pure, there is no composition in him; neither is he subjected to
time in which all changes are.

Thirdly, He is Eternal; GOD is before time; time is made by God is eternal.
God, and shall be done away by God, according to that in the Revelations, Time
shall be no more.

Time is that space in which actions are successively brought about, What time
is
having beginning and ending: but God is not included here; for it is
impossible that he which made it should be comprehended in it: he is from
Everlasting, and shall remain to everlasting: this is matter of admiration:
Arithmetique is nonplussed here, enforced to confess Eternity transcends his
skill.

Fourthly, God is invisible; No man has ever seen him or can see him: God is
invisible.
therefore the Saints acknowledge him to be the invisible God. Col. 1. 15.

But say some, Moses talked with God face to face, and Christ says, blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; therefore he is not invisitle.

To which I answer, that God is to be considered either as in his own being, or
in his operations; as he is in himself we see him not,

Thou see some glorious and costly building, yet see not the spirit of that
man in whose mind this building was, before erected to thy view; but seeing
it, thou concludest well in saying, surely the wisdom of man appears in it
eminently: and thou know the mind of any man surpasses the matter in his
mind.

Thou see a poor creature acting diverse rare feats, and excellent arts; but
yet see not the soul or spirit of that man, from whence they flow. In all
natural bodies there is a spirit; from which natural actions flow, and yet
see not this spirit; but art made able to know there is a spirit; and from
its operations can speak alittle, though stammeringly of it. Exodus 33.


Moses saw the face of God, and yet says God to Moses, my face cannot be seen.
The face of God is a phrase God uses, descending to the capacity of Gods
creatures whereby the Lord holds forth some glory of himself. Moses seeing Gods
face, was his seeing the full est manifestation of Gods beauty and mind that
was then for him to see; (for the face demonstrates the beauty and mind of a
man) and yet he saw not his being. The face of God does there hold forth no
more the being of God, then the face of a man his being: a man's beauty is not
his being; for a man is a man, though he be not beautiful.

And when as Christ says, be shall see God, his meaning is he shall see what
of God may be seen; for he that is in himself invisible, makes himself visible
after a sort: viz by the appearance of his love and glory in his Son: therefore
says Christ, No man has seen the Father at any time, but the only begotten
Son has declared him. We hear many declarations of God, which is the fight of
of God the creature has: which declarations define not his being, but describe
his operations: thus is it said, God came down in the sight of the children of
Israel, when they only saw some terrible appearances of his majesty and
authority.

Fifthly, The Almightines of God may be seen by the Creature; that he is over
all and above all, and can do what he will, is very evident: all power centers
in him as its true original: this omnipotency of God is immutable, boundless
and infinite: Who shall say to him, this is too hard for thee?

This power, even this Almighty power, which the servants of the Lord feel and
know, through its irresistible operations enforces them to serve him with
fear, and rejoice before him with trembling.

6. Gods sovereignty and supremacy is likewise through the Gods sovereignty may
be known.
light of God clearly made manifest; that is to say, that God is above all;
the principal, chief and worthiest of all; and under this consideration may
be known to the Sons of men; he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. This is
that which begets obedience; children obey and honor their parents as them
that are over them; servants their masters; subjects their Kings and rulers, as
them that are their superiors; and so Creatures the Creator, as being more
worthy then all: his power and sovereignty are inseparable companions; his
power fills him with majesty and authority.

7. The wisdom of God may be known, that is to say, that he is The light of
God discovers the wisdom of God.
wise, understanding, knowing all things; by wisdom he governes all things;
by wisdom he made and garnished the heavens; power, authority, and all
without wisdom, act confusedly. Therefore is he called, the everlasting
light, and the Father of light, the God of knowledge, he is wise
supereminently, and therefore called the only wise God, Romans 16. 27.

8. God is a just God, and his Saints know him to be so: Gods justice Gods
Justice may be known, and what it is.
is his righteous dispensation of love or wrath, according to his own law made
after his own will; and thus he is just or righteous to the Creature, and he
is also just and righteous in himself: a God of more pure eyes then to behold
iniquity, and of more justice then to suffer it to pass unpunished. This makes
a poor soul bow his knees and tremble before Gods dreadful Majesty: who can
approach Gods presence without fear? and for this cause is he called a God of
vengeance, a Consuming fire, the Judge of all the earth, a Judge, most just,
Job 37. 17. He is most faithful, he cannot lie, he is a true God, a God of
truth.

9. That God is merciful, gracious, full of loving kindness, flow to anger,
whose mercies are above all his works; his mercy God is merciful.
and his justice kiss each other. This consideration begets liberty, freedom
and boldness in the spirit, to serve, fear, honor and obey the Lord. In this
sense is he called, a father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. This is discovered to a
Soul as the argument for a Souls obedience to God: If ye love me, keep my
commands: For we love him because he first loved us.

10. God is nearly related to the creature. Though God be never God is known to
be related to the creature.
so glorious and excellent, yet if he had no relation to the creature, it would
contribute nothing toward spiritual worship: which relation is made manifest
in several particulars.

First, He is a Creator; and all things are his creatures, they are all his
workmanship, Isaiah 40. 28. In the beginning God made the world, and all things
in the world.

Secondly, He is a Father; All things are begotten by him, In him we live, and
move, and have our being.

Thirdly, He is a Husband; that espouses Souls to Himself, Isaiah 54. 5.

Fourthly, A King, and we his Subjects; He rules over all the earth, and the
sea is his dominion.

I might here show at large, how the several terms God gives to himself,
hold forth his relation to the sons of men: but I shall not now insist upon
them. God is all in all.


11. God is revealed to be all in all, that is to say, in his operations or
works; There are diversities (says the Spirit) of operations, but it is the
same God that works all in all, 1 Cor. 12. 6 All that's good or excellent,
beautiful or glorious in all or any Creature, proceeds from God; and this
shows the creatures dependency upon him; therefore is he said to fill all in
all, Ephesians. 1. 23. That is to say, All fullness in any creature is from the Lord;
who is above all, ruling over us through all, manifesting his power and
wisdom in us all, dwelling in us, abiding and delighting in us, Ephesians. 4. 6.
God is one.


12. This God is one infinite being: There are Gods many, and Lords many, but
to us there is but one God. Many men are called Gods: It is written, I have
said ye are Gods: but there is one original being, who is our God in the Lord
Jesus; there are not many first beings, but one original, who is the first and
the last, the beginning and the ending: that is to say, the first in himself
before all, subsisting by himself, giving a beginning to all, and the last,
continuing in himself for ever, putting an end to corruptible things by
himself, for he is without beginning or end of days.

13. God is a living God, he is not a dumb or deaf Idol, but one that lives
for ever: Time moulders all Idols in the dust; but God is a living God.
God is not subject to time: this infinite being cannot dye, that is to say, be
subject to dissolution or corruption.

14. Lastly, God is present every where, he cannot be circumscribed, God is
present in all places.
for he is an infinite one: thou can not say, God is not here, for he is
every where, knowing all thoughts, searching all hearts; if thou can tell me
where God ceases to be, there will I prove to thee God is bounded, limited and
finite; which in no sense can be said of the infinite being: his spirit and
presence are every where: where ever God is, there he imprints an appearance of
himself to be there; if thou go into heaven, that is to say, into the
highest place of glory, the Psalmist will tell thee, God is there: Yea if thou
make thy bed in hell, God is there: There exercising his wrath, justice and
indignation: If thou think to hide thy self in darkness, the darkness is
as light to the Lord: the darkness and the light are alike unto God, that is
to say, his power, knowledge and wisdom cannot be separated from any place,
or from the understanding of any thing. There is such darkness in us that we
cannot see, but there is no darkness in God, that sees our darkness by his
own light; Psalm 139.

Thus having according to my measure brought forth my understanding of what of
God may be known, viz. his power, wisdom, light, love, justice, presence,
and the like; all which terms the Lord uses to express what he is to us in a
way of relation to his creatures, in terms that his servants are after some
small measure capable to understand. I shall proceed in the next place to show
wherein this excellency of the Lord Jehovab our God does appear.

Chap. III.
Shows wherein that which may be known of God to us is made manifest, viz.
in the Creation, and in the Lord Jesus; and how it appears in the Creation.
THat God is, and that he is immutable, incomprehensible merciful, wise, etc.
he has given us a very lively testimony to seal the truth of it: God being
unwilling to hide himself and his great glory decreed to bring it forth: which
we shall see clearly,

1. In the Creation.

2. In the Lord Jesus.

Both these are made manifest in the Scriptures.

These are the Golden pipes which empty forth the Golden uncorruptible Oil of
joy, gladness and righteousness amongst the Candlesticks into the Lamps of
the Sanctuary, even into the hearts and spirits of the Church of the first
borne, whose names are written in the Lambs book of life.

These are the two great Ordinances which are displayed by the eternal word of
God, according to the Scriptures, which are those Conduite-pipes which carry in
them all that may be seen, known, understood or enjoyed of God by the Sons of
men. I shall speak of The Creation holds forth God.
both, but in the first place of the Creation; which is a glorious book, in
which he that runs may read and understand the excellency of the Lord; which
is, which was, and which is to come. The meanest, most natural capacity may
read God in every line of the Creation, which shows;

First, That there is a God; The invisible things of him from the Creation The
Creation shows the Godhead.
of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead: Romans 1. 20. That is to say, though God is
invisible, yet that which may be known of him is clearly seen; that is
understood by things that are visible. Now the thing that may be known is this,
viz. his Power and Godhead. That there is a Divine, Eternal God, is apparent,
if we consider that there is not the least little thing in the whole creation,
or great thing, which leads us not Step by Step into a GODHEAD.

In this World there are four degrees of things, viz which have being, which
have life, which have sense, and which have reason; some things have all four;
some again only one; yet every one preach forth this God. The Earth, Sea and
Air are very spacious, bearing and sustaining all things that have life, sense
and reason, and yet are themselves void of life, sense, or reason; they are the
nearest to not-being, to annihilation. The Plants besides being, have life and
draw nourishment and refreshment from the earth and air. The Beasts have
being, life and sense, and seek their food from the earth and plants. Man has
all, being, life, sense and reason; he enjoys the Elements, feeds on beasts
and plants, and commands other creatures, and discourses of all things above
and below. Lo here, this wonderful order! One thing serving another; nothing
is for it self. From whence comes this distribution, one thing serving
another? Who distributes things in this order? From whence had they all their
Original? Whether had they it from themselves or from another? If from them
selves, either they had it always, or in time? Always they had it not; for we
know, we our selves that now are, once were not: and if we had our original in
time, How come we to have it, since there was a time when we were not at all?
Surely we must conclude, the author, original, distributer, and proportioner of
all these things in such an order and degree, is one that was before us, is
above us; which can be no other then God Himself.

Let us descend into particulars, and consider the Elements of which things are
compounded, as fire, earth, air and water. Fire and water are contary, and so
is the dry to the moist: the nature of contraries is to destroy one another:
none of these two can be coupled without a higher power. Surely this leads us
to consider that great judge and wise disposer, that orders things after such a
strange manner.

We see very beautiful buildings, stately palaces, and our minds presently
without pausing upon it says, surely here has bin some gallant workman.

Thou see a watch and presently viewest the balance, then the wheels, and so
at the last come to the spring and see that moving the watch, but yet thou
ask presently who made this spring, and so come to the watch-maker, and
beholdest motion in the watch while he that made it moves not at all; thou
see the Sun move, and must needs conclude it has a first mover, and that is
none but God: a begining-lesse and end-lesse Beer, which must needs be the very
Godhead.

2. So likewise, as the world shows there is a God, it shows there is but one
God; for all things in the world point at unity. Earth, The Creation shows that
there is but one God.
water, air, fire, are all for to make up on body; all agree in one, though
diverse in them selves; all Arts and Sciences move toward unity and congruity:
Arithmetique proceeds from unity: Geometry from a point, and tends to society
and happiness and sollace of man: all Government in Families or Kingdoms
respect unity: All that ever man does or can do leads to a unity, to the high
advancement of one God, and his wisdom and power: surely all these unities
here below, are but so many resemblances in a fort of the true unity it self.

The mind of man is one, though It conceives in it an infinite number of
things; and the more things are in unity, the more noble they are; then
certainly God must needs be unity it self, who is truly noble and only one. I
might trade far in nature here. But I must mind other things likewise, so that
I will not dwell here.

3. The Creation shows the almightines of God in these two considerations.

First. In Creating the World of nothing. Amongst Philosophers its The creation
shows God to be almighty.
a received Axiom, Ex nibilo nihil fit, of nothing nothing is made; so far as
this concerns men its true; which proves the Almighty power of God: for if man
cannot produce the least matter, without some pre-existent or foregoing matter
to work upon; then surely he that can produce the Heavens and the Earth of
nothing, must needs be very powerful, yea Almighty.

In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, as says the Scripture:
or these Heavens and this Earth, wherein Moses proves the things that now
appear, in the beginning had no appearance at all; but were created of nothing;
for the Hebrew word Reshith which is Englished, the beginning; does not
signify any substance. Neither does the word Bara, to Create, signify any
other way to create then of nothing; and thereby it is distinguished from the
word Jatzar, to form, and Gnasha, to make; does not this hold forth the
eteruall power of God?

The World it self speaks forth this mighty power of God in that it had its
beginning from God. If we consider the several motions, and mutations that are
in the World, we must conclude a beginning: Look to the Rivers, they flow from
the Sea; the Tide of the Sea, arises from the influence of the Moon; and the
Moon borrowes light from the Sun. Sometimes Streams grow dry; the Moon is
ecclipsed. And the Sun continually moves, which argues its beginning.

Nay, but say some, The Heavens have continued along time and we see no change,
therefore they were from eternity.

Vain man, because thou see no change, therefore will there act their parts
in it as well as thee, and when all are come in, then shall it be destroyed.

This will appear more plainly, if thou considerest thy own body: surely that
had a beginning; it was once in the lowest parts of the Earth, as the Psalmist
says; and thou wast brought forth an infant of days, and grewest stronger in
body, and yet for all this returns to the dust. Nay, look into thy mind, the
most Glorious resemblance of God, and thou will find it had a beginning, for
it is subject to joy and sorrow, to learn more and more; which holds forth a
beginning, and one that made it, and without it.

The beginning is the first point of time and ending the last. In the midst of
these two points runs the line of Time, which is a little space borrowed from
Eternity; where God displaies his power in his visible Creation. That Eternity
should create Time is a wonde; and that Time should again be swallowed up of
Eternity is matter of admiration.

Secondly, In upholding the World to this moment; the World would soon be
dissolved, if that boundless power supported it not. When the Earth was
without form, and void, and darkness was upon the face of the waters, then
the Spirit of God moved and brooded on them, which did support that matter, and
brought it forth into so glorious a fabric as we now behold this day. And if
that Spirit or power, moved not still in this fabric to support it, it would
soon return into its first nothing. Therefore says the Scripture, All things
consist in him.

Nature it self preaches this; the veriest Athiest or Epicure that is, that
when he is well has no leisure to think of God, or that he may sin the more
greedily, denies there is a God; when he is never solittle sick, or ready to
dye, his conscience flies in his face and he is forced to acknowledge a God,
and that he cannot subsist without him. I have already shown the Heavens and
Earth are subject to mutability, and so capable of dissolution; and certainly
did not God keep them by his right hand, they would come to nothing.

4. The Creation cries aloud God is incomprehensible. I might here The creation
shows the incomprehensiblenesse of God.
fill volume after volume, by descending into thousands of particulars and show
thee every one, every little, yea, the least thing thou can speak of leads
thee there by the hand to acknowledge it.

All that any man, the purest natural man or spiritual man is, is but the
work of Gods hand; now the workman is greater and more worthy then his work.
Thou see a curious piece of work made by a skillful artist, and praisest it:
but being led from the work to the artist, thu admirest the ingenuity and
dexterity of the mind of that man from whence the work proceeds.

Yet a little further, let us view the works of God, viz. the Sun, Moon,
Stars, the Herbs of the Field, the Beasts of the Forest, the Fishes in the
Sea: Can thou tell me what the substances of them be? Philosophers have
traded so far and confusedly herein, that in truth all that they have said of
them, or can say, is but vanity and confusion. This puts the wisest of them all
to a nonplus; hence is it they differ so much about them; The wisest must
confess his knowledge herein to be but ignorance. Philosophers say, things are
compounded of the four Elements. viz. Fire, Earth, Air and Water, which as to
their substances are invisible. And that the virtue of many things proceed from
the four first qualities, of heat, moisture, drines and cold: but yet are shey
forced to confess many things operate from a hidden or occult quality, which
they can render no reason of. Ask them why the Loadstone draws Iron to it
self, they say, There is a hidden virtue in it, a specific quality, or a
similitude of substance; but from whence it proceeds they cannot tell. Nay, ask
any man in things seemingly more ordinary, as why the fire should burn, rather
then the water? They say it is its proper nature so to do: But where it had
this nature, or how it came by it, they are forced to be silent, or to
acknowledge it from GOD himself. Surely if we cannot comprehend the least
things, as a fly, or the grass of the field, muchlesse the infinite one. They
tell us Rubarb purges Choler etc. from a hidden quality; which hidden quality
indeed is nothing else then the very instinct of the Creator in it.

But some that would be thought very wise, cunning, and spiritual say; Though
man, that is to say, the natural man cannot comprehend God, yet a Saint may.

Alas vain man! thou say thou know not what: if a Saint can comprehend
God it must be in his Spirit or understanding have no light but what thou have
of God, and that light discovers only the works of his hands. But if thou
shall say thou art God, as some blasphemously affirm, let me ask thee whether
thy soul or body is God? If thou say thy body, then how comes it to pass
thou can not be in all places at one time? How comes it to pass thou art
subject to death and corruption? If thou say thy soul is God, how comes it
to pass thou art so ignorant of what thy soul is? God must needs know
himself and all other things; know thou what shall befall thee? How thou
wast made when this soul was given thee? why do thou so often complain? Why
art thou subject to changes? God is unchangable. But if thou shall say, God in
thee is God that knows all things, I answer thee, then it is not thy self
that comprehends him, God in thee is not thee, no more then God in the earth,
or beasts of the field, is the earth, or the beasts thereof. Therefore poor
silly wretch leave off to talk so dotingly of comprehending him, when thou
know not how to comprehend thy self.

Some are ready to say, this is carnal reason, because we make use of earthly
things to speak of God by.

Vain man! God made the earth to preach forth himself, and The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the earth his handy works. And again, says our
Apostle, The invisible things of him are seen by the things that are made.
They all preach thy folly, madness and vanity, and be-speak thee to be but an
Atheist for all thou boastest to be a Saint.

5. The Creation lively points out to us the wisdom of God. If The Creation
shows Gods wisdom.
thou see the picture of a man, thou presently ask who made it, and
admirest his skill and cunning; if thou casts but a glimpse of thy eyes on
the world, and ask who made it, thou will see it is God, and wilt admire his
wisdom.

Gods wisdom appears in that glorious and harmonious order that is in the
world, that unity should be produced from contrariety. Oh what a wonder is it!
I have told thee before, fire and water be contrary, so dryness and moisture,
yet thy one body cannot live without them all, being composed of them all; nay
let me tell thee, it is God keeps them from encroaching one upon the other;
there is not one thing in the Creation but be-speakes God to be a wise God.
Thou know of beasts, some are for thy food, and some again would devour
thee; those that are for thy use, God has placed nigh thee in flocks and
herds; those that would devour thee live in desert places, in the wilderness,
in caves and dens. From whence came this disposal of them? did thy own
wisdom procure it? No certainly; it is no other thing then the wisdom of God.

6. The love and relation God has to the Sons of men appears The Creation
shows the love of God.
in the Creation. It may be thou art a Father of Children, thou providest for
them food and raiment, and why? Because thou love them. God created all for
man. God first made the World, and brought man into it as into a large Palace,
ready furnished with all things fit for delight, pleasure and food, that man
became Lord of the Creatures; all things were made for man, and man for God, in
whom he took delight; As for man he created him in his own Image, wherein
appears his great love: to be created in his Image, was to be made such a
Creature, that in an especial manner, did most resemble What it is to be
created in Gods Image.
his Maker in a created pure natural light and understanding, power and
authority, whereby he was the Image or likeness of God. I might further show
that the Creation holds forth the immutability of God; for he that made all
changes must needs be unchangable; and the Soveraignity of GOD; for he that
made all must needs be Lord of all; and the Eternity of GOD: for he that made
time must needs be before time; and the life of God, for he that made all
creatures live, must needs live himself; the justice of God, that ordaines it
to be observed in his creatures, must needs be just in himself; yea of the
invisibility of God; for if thou can not see into the substances of things
made by him, thou can not see him that made them. I might show you that God
is all in all in the creation, that is to say, there is nothing without him,
and all things that it is it is by him: but because I shall further have
occasion to hold forth the excellency of the Lord to the Creature in the second
particular, viz: as he appears in the Lord Jesus. I pass from the first
Creation, the habitation of the first man, the first Adam and his posterity,
which is earthly, unto the last Adam, the second man, the Lord from heaven and
his generation, the children of the second and new Creation; concluding this
Chapter with this, that what I have already said of God is not to define what
he is, but to tell us what he is not, that we may not deceive our selves by our
proud and vain apprehensions, in forming a God to our selves; either with the
ignorant, thinking him to be a huge body, or massy substance; or with other
that seem to be wise, dream of comprehending him; but rather say at first, he
is that he is, but what I know not; but with the Psalmist, desire to learn in
silence, and rejoice in those appearances of himself whereby he gives out
himself to be known after a sort, for my eternal happiness, and the
happiness of all his people.

Chap. IV.
Shows what we are to understand by God in Christ, and what Christ is; and
what the Father, Son, and Spirit are.
GOD is in the Creation, but dwells in the Lord Jesus; Christ is God dwells in
the Lord Christ.
Gods habitation; for in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; the
fullness of Grace and Truth. In the Creation he is a God over us, in Christ a
loving Father to us. But seeing this is the great Mystery of Godliness, (viz:)
God manifest in the flesh, justified 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, and received up into glory. Which mystery is hid from the eyes of the
world, and man's vain imagination fancyes such vain understanding of it. I
shall endeavor to speak more plainly and particularly of it. and shall
observe this order:

1. To show what we are to understand by God in Christ.

2. How God in Christ unvailes himself to the sons of men.

That we may know what we are to understand by God in Christ, these three
things are to be considered, and that from the word Christ, which signifies one
Anointed; wherein consider,

1. The Anointer.

2. The Anointed.

3. The Ointment it self wherewith he his anointed. Of these in order.

1. The Anointer, giver, dispenser or pourer forth of the ointment, who is the
Anointer; it is the Father.
is the Father; God in all, over all, and above all, for whom are all things,
and by whom are all things; it is that infinite, that incomprehensible majesty,
that eternal substance which I have already proved to be incomprehensible. The
Scriptures abound in this doctrine. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me
(says Christ) he Isa. 61. 1.
has anointed me. God proclaims it from heaven, saying, I have found my
servant David, (which is the Lord Christ) with my holy oil I have anointed
him. Again sings the sweet Psalmist of Israel in the Song that his heart
endited or bubled or boiled forth concerning the King; God thy God has
anointed thee; This was prefigured, shadowed, pointed at, and typed forth in
the Law, by Moses anointing Aaron. This is the Fathers work.

Secondly, The subject Anointed is the humane nature in which The subject
Anointed is the humane nature.
God was manifested; for he was manifested in the flesh: It was that particular
body of Christ, that the word dwelt in; which was made flesh, and dwelt amongst
us: and therefore says the Scripture, he has Anointed his holy child Jesus,
even Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Mary; of Acts 4. 27.
a Virgin: the Son of David, the Son of Abraham, the Son of Man; who is called,
The man Christ Jesus: It was that particular person who was the subject of this
anointing.

Now the humane nature is nothing else but a fleshly body, and humane soul
united in one; which humanity is proper to all men, yet so that every man has
the whole humane nature in himself: and so was this person, this man Christ,
this humane nature consisting of body and spirit in one person, was the Subject
of the Anointing.

Thirdly, The Ointment it self remains to be declared, which is Theointment is
the Spirit.
that holy Oil with which our Jesus is Anointed; which Ointment has several
names in Scripture to declare its worth and nature. It is the Spirit of God,
therefore says Christ, The Spirit of the Lord is upon Psalm. 98. 20.
me, he has anointed me. With my holy Oil, says the Lord, I have anointed
him; which is the Oil of joy and gladness, the holy Ghost and power: Which
Oil is sweetly tipified forth to us by the holy Oil mentioned by Moses, whose
composition consists of principal spices, Ex. 30. 25. 30.
as pure Mirrbe, sweet Calamus, sweet Cynnamon, Cassia and Oil olive; wherein,
though misteriously, yet very excellently is deciphered the very nature of the
Sprtit of the Lord Jesus: for the nature of that composition is such, that it
is of singular virtue, being sovereign for the brain, comfortable for the
heart, and wholesome for the liver, the three natural fountains and springs of
the natural bodies life, purging from evil humors, mollifying and softning the
body, enabling the body to perform its natural, vital and animal faculties:
Which is abundantly, yea, superlatively true of the Spirit, that gives to a
Saint being, wisdom, understanding, light, life, power, love and increase to a
Saint; softning the hardest heart, moistening and relenting the most flinty
spirit; purging and scouring away effectually all drossy, choleric,
passionate, idle, melancholy, earthly and evil humors of sin and corruption;
fitting and enabling the soul, to run the ways of Gods commands; preserving
the soul from sins venom and poison; keeping it from corruption or
putrefaction. And whereas none was permitted to make any after the likeness of
that composition, It declares and proclaims aloud the contrariety of the true
Spirit to all pretenses of it, or counterfeitings of it, which are the powers,
signs and lying wonders of the man of sin, which Christ, through the
brightness of his coming, will destroy.

Thus briefly have I handled the three essential things to be considered in the
true knowledge of God in Christ. Now know this, That neither of these three,
abstracted from the other, is the Lords Christ; it is the composition or
conjunction of these three in one person, that makes this Christ; therefore is
it said, The word was with GOD, and was GOD; and yet was made flesh: which
leads us to the consideration of the various manifestations of God, as they are
one in Christ Jesus.

There are three that bear Record in heaven, the Father, Son and holy Ghost
or Spirit, and these three are one; viz One God and one in the man Jesus Christ.

These three are not three Gods, but one. God is made manifest What the Father,
Son and Spirit are.
after three manner of ways, that is to say, God the Father conceived his word
in his own mind, which is his son, eternally brought up with him; his
wisdom, daily his delight; it is his light whereby he knows himself, and
brings forth every thing by himself. For by his word, that is to say, himself
in a way of activity, or doing, or wisdom, made the worlds: the word was in
himself producing every thing below himself, and the spirit is the mutual
kindness each of other, which is actively eternal. The spirit is sometimes
taken for the power of God, susteining all things, producing all things:
sometimes for the influence of the Fathers love shed abroad in the heart: and
this is the Spirit of God, the Comforter in the Gospel; so that all these are
one, agree in one; and what may be attributed to the one, does agree to the
other; So that these three are not three distinct substances or persons in the
common and most known acceptance of the word, viz: a particular and
individual substance or being, distinct from another. In this sense I say,
there are not three persons in God, for this is to make three Gods; but because
the Scriptures no where says there are three persons, I hope the word
(invented by man's wisdom) shall not be imposed on any as a snare: let us more
look to things then words. I say according to the Scriptures, there are three
that bear Record in Heaven: the Father, viz: the infinite being, the begetter
of the Son: and the Son, viz: the express image of God, the reflection or
likeness of himself, which is the word begotten of the Father; and the spirit
the mutual kindness, love, and communication of the Father and the Son; for
God is love: all agree in one, in one man Christ Jesus, the Father is in him,
the Word is in him, for it was made flesh, and dwelt among us; and the Spirit
is in him, viz: the eternal love of the Father, the sweet and heavenly
influences thereof; it is given to him without measure, So that God manifested
in the flesh in a way of union is Christ; for all that may be known, or
understood, or enjoyed of God, is in the Lord Jesus. Nay further; what ever God
is to a Saint, he is it in Christ Jesus, for the fullness of the Godhead dwelt
in him bodily, that is to say, God in his highest manifestation of himself in
power, grace and truth, etc. For he was full of grace and truth.

The sum of what I have said or can say in this particular (which
notwithstanding I must confess comes infinitely short of the height of its
glory) is that the conjunction of Father, Son and Spirit, after a spiritual and
wonderful manner, in the man Jesus Christ, is the Lords Christ. So that God in
Christ, is God the Father dwelling in, and uniting the humane nature after a
wonderful and unspeakable manner to himself; and therefore is Christ called
God and Man: and because of this union, Christ sometimes speaks as he is man,
and so dies; sometimes as the Word, which is God in him, and so he raises
himself from the dead, sometimes in a way of union, and so he is the Mediator
between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

Chap. V.
Shows how God in Christ unvailes himself to the sons of men; wherein is
shown that Christ is our Priest, and the manner of his Consecration and
fitness for his Office.
HAving showed what we are to understand by God in Christ, and what the Lords
Christ is; I am come now to show, that Christ was not anointed for himself
only, but that he might communicate of his fullness to others: which appears
in these two considerations.

First in that Christ was designed by the Father, or set apart, or ^^secrated
to a glorious work.

Secondly, in that Christ is made fit, capable and able effectually to perform
whatever work was imposed on him, which his being anointed holds forth to us:
Of these in order.

In Christ's designation to a work, there are two things to be observed:

1. What the work is that Christ is consecrated to.

2. The manner of his consecration.

Concerning the work it self, it is a threefold office or ministry, viz: a
Priestly, Prophetical, and Kingly office, wherein all the appearance of the
love, wisdom or power of God, are clearly made manifest. I shall speak of
these in order.

Now the Priesthood of Christ is that order or office that Christ What the
Priesthood of Christ is.
has from his Father, in a way of relation to God and Man offering up
sacrifices to the Lord.

Wherein are two things considerable:

First, The Priest.

Secondly, The Sacrifice be offers: For he is not a Priest, but in reference to
his offering of Sacrifice.

The Priest is Jesus Christ, even the man Christ, whom I have already Christ is
the Saints highest Priest.
discovered to be the anointed of the Father; even this man that that an
unchangable Priesthood, who is the Son of God according to the divine nature,
and humane nature; it is he that is our Heb. 9. 11.
High Priest.

But now seeing no man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called The
manner of Christ's consecration. Heb. 5. 5.
of God as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High
Priest; but he did it that said unto him, Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee. The Father anointed him, as I have shown more at large before,
and now shall show you the manner of his consecration. Which was

1. With an oath (says the Psalmist) The Lord has sworn, and will not Christ
consecrated by an Oath.
repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck: needs must
we conclude, the matter is of great concernment that is managed with so much
solemnity.

That God should with an oath confirm it, it has much weight in it: An oath
amongst men puts an end of strife, and seals up the matter in question.

Men in all ages, as I have said before, being convicted in their consciences
that God is displeased, and must be pacified, have had their Priests to
accomplish that service; Nay the Lord appointed many Priests to offer Sacrifice
to himself: But now that he might make it appear; that none of these were his
eternal Priests, that he might put all out of doubt, and clearly reveal his own
mind, and the immutability of his counsel, swears by himself (there being
none greater then himself to swear by) that he had made, established and
consecrated the Lord Christ to be the everlasting Priest, upon whom he had
conferred his everlasting Priesthood.

The Priests of old were made without an oath; but Christ with an oath, by him
that said unto him, Thou art a Priest for ever: As if God should have said,
Son, its true, there have been many Priests that I have made, but they are
dying Priests, and their Priesthood is but a shadow or type of thine which I
commit to thee; for thou art my well-beloved, and shall not dye, of thy
Priesthood there shall be no end; for I have said, yea I have sworn it, and
cannot lie.

The Priests of old were consecrated by the pouring Oil on their heads, and
the putting on of the holy garments: so our High Priest Christ consecarted by
the pouring on of oil.
was set a part for this office by that holy Ointment, even the power and
Spirit of the most high, by the voice from the most excellent glory, that gave
this Record of him, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. The
Lord Christ ministers in the Sanctuary with the oil of joy, gladness, and
acceptance powered on him, with the garments of righteousness and salvation.

Aaron and his Sons had garments, yea holy garments for glory and for beauty;
which garments were most exquisitely made for workmanship; Exodus 28. 2. 3.
wise-hearted men filled with wisdom by the Lord, being only appointed to
make them. Whose composition was of the most beautiful, glorious and rich
materials, gold, purple, scarlet and fine linen; which excellently type forth
the glory of our High Priest who stands before God in rich, pure, spotless,
bright, shining, and incorruptible garments, being filled, covered and clothed
with the glory of God, and being adorned with the beauty of the most High; for
he was, and is the express image of his Fathers beauty. Aaron was appointed to
bear the names of the Children of Israel upon the Ephod upon his Shoulder, and
upon the Breastplate of judgment, upon his heart, engraven in precious stones;
which shows that our High Priest the Lord Jesus, administers before the Lord,
with all his Saints engraven upon his heart, in beauty and glory. Thus briefly
having taken a view of the manner of our Jesus his consecration to his office,
let us by divine assistance consider,

The ability to manage that office; the work being of such an infinite
extent, requires a person of answerable abilities: which we shall easily find
to be in the Lord Jesus, if we consider,

First, The dignity of his person.

Secondly, The excellency of his endowments.

1. For the first, it will appear, if we consider that he is the Son of God,
one begotten of the Father, yea, the delight of the Lord; he is the first borne
among many brethren. Priests of old were of the first borne among the family;
so is our Jesus the beginning of the Creation of God; the first borne from the
dead; the only begotten Son, that is to say, the Chief; none begotten to be a
Savior, an everlasting Deliverer of his brethren, besides himself; he is
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, begotten in his Fathers likeness; the
express image of his Fathers person; White and ruddy (as says the Spouse) the
chiefest among ten thousand, or thousand thousands.

2. For the excellency of his qualifications, consider,

First, His relation to God; he was the Son of God; and to man, he was made
flesh; he was of such a nature, that he stood related so to God and man, as he
knew how to preserve both the glory of God, and the happiness of the creature,
that so divine justice might be completely satisfied, and mercy admirably
advanced in the creatures salvation.

Secondly, His interest in God and man; he was not only related to them, but
had a deep interest in them both: To God he was a Companion, therefore God
calls him, the man his fellow. Moses of old was prevalent with God, but our
Jesus much more. Moses as a servant, Jesus as a son and heir; to Man as a
faithful brother, friend, yea companion, and fellow sufferer; he was tempted,
that he might be able to succor us being tempted. Likewise he is the Fathers
beloved, whom God can deny nothing; to the Saints advocate that will lose
nothing for want of asking.

Thirdly, His will, power, love, wisdom and delight, concurred Christ's will,
power and love concur in it.
in fitting him to be such a Priest; his love sets all on work, both power and
wisdom; he is the power of God and the wisdom of God.

Fourthly, He is without spot or blemish; the Priests of old He is without spot
or blemish. Heb. 4. 15.
were forced to offer for their own sins daily, but our Jesus had no sin
to offer for: He was like to us in all things, sin only excepted. There was
no guile found in his mouth. Yea, such an High Priest became Heb. 7. 26. 25.
us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher then
the heavens, able to save to the uttermost.

Lastly, Our High Priest was a High Priest of an Incorruptible nature, Christ
is of an incorruptible nature.
one that continues for ever. The High Priests under the Law by reason of
death continued not; but Jesus is a High Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck: that is to say, without Father or Mother; he was not of the
offspring of the Priests, but of Judah; without beginning or end of days, who
ever lives to intercede for us. Thus much briefly to the first, viz:
concerning the Priest himself.

Chap. VII.
Shows what the Sacrifice is Christ offered.

THE Sacrifice it self that is offered is next to be spoken of; Christ
offers Sacrifice. Heb. 8. 3.
for every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: Wherefore it
is of necessity that this man (viz: Jesus) have somewhat to offer. The
Scriptures are exceeding full in declaring this Sacrifice.

That I may a little describe this Sacrifice in the excellency of it, I will
observe this order.

1. To show you what the Sacrifice is, Christ offers. 2. How often it was
offered. 3. The place where it was offered. 4. The time when it was offered. 5.
The true nature of that Sacrifice. 6. How our Priest offered up this Sacrifice.
7. For whom it was offered. 8. To whom it was offered. 9. The virtue, effects
and end of this Sacrifice. Of these in order. What the Sacrifice is. It is
Christ himself. Galat. 1. 4. 2 Chapter 20. 1. Ephesians. 5. 2. 25. Tit. 2. 14. Heb. 7.
27. 9. 24. 27.

First, The Sacrifice it self is the Lord Jesus Christ. When burnt offerings
and sacrifices God would not, Christ came to do his will. This is held forth to
us in the Scriptures by several expressions; all centring in one thing,
namely, In this sacrifice, as first, by giving himself; as says our Apostle,
Who gave himself for our sins. Again says Paul, Who has loved us, and
given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God. The Priests of old
offered goats and lambs, and the like, but our High Priest a better sacrifice,
even himself:

Secondly, By pouring out his blood, all things almost under the It Is Christ's
blood.
Law were sprinkled and purified with blood, for without blood there was no
remission; the patterns of things in the heavens were purged with the blood of
bulls and goats, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices,
namely, with the blood of Christ himself. The blood of beasts sprinkled upon
the unclean, sanctified to Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. 20. Joh. 19. 34. Heb. 9. 7.
Heb. 12. 14. Hebr. 10: 19. Hebr. 12. 24. Hebr. 13. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Acts 20.
28. 1 John 5. 6. Rev. 5. 9. Rev. 19. 13. Zach. 9. 11. Heb. 10. 29. 13. 20.
the purifying of the flesh; but Christ's blood was the Sacrifice for the
purifying of the heavenly things, viz: the Saints bodies and spirits. To this
the Scripture gives a large Record; In whom we have redemption through his
blood (as Paul says) even the blood of the cross, that blood that issued
forth frow the side of our Jesus, whom one of the Soldiers peirced. The High
Priest under the Law went into the second Tabernacle once every year, not
without blood, which he offered for himself and the errors of the people: but
our Christ entered into the most holy place by his own blood, which is called
the blood of sprinkling, which Christ poured forth when he suffered without the
gate, even his own precious blood, which is the blood of God. This is he that
came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ. This was part of that new Song the
24 Elders sang, when they fell down before the Lamb, saying, Thou wast slain
and have redeemed us by thy blood: even his blood whose vesture was dipped in
blood. Therefore Christ's blood is called, the blood of the Covenant: of the
everlasting Covenant.

But peradventure some will be ready to say, who seem to be very That, that
blood that washes us, is not the blood poured forth upon the Cross; for that
was spilt upon the ground, but it is a spiritual blood; and therefore says
Christ, He that eats my body, and drinks my blood shall never dye: which
seems to imply some other blood. To which I answer,

1. By the blood of Christ we are to understand, not only the

2. By this word Blood, we must know the death of Christ to be concluded, and
his body included. All Christ's suffering center in one word, namely, his Blood,
which holds forth all his sufferings upon the Cross: And therefore in the next
place the Scripture declares this sacrifice.

3. To be the offering up of his body, Christ gave up his body to death, to
suffer all the wrath of man, and to become an offering for sin: therefore It
is his body Heb. 10. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Col. 1. 22. Isa. 33. 10. John 10. 15.
Acts 8. 53. 1 John 13. 16. Matthew. 20. 28.
it is called the offering of the body of Christ. So says Peter, he bare our
sins in his own body, even in the body of his flesh. By which body we are to
understand himself, his blood: for every one of these words are wound
interchangably each in other. Thus Christ gives his body to be eaten, that is
to say, the fruit of the offering up his body; he gives his body for us that
the fruit of that body might redound to us.

4. It is said, He made his soul an offering for sin. The Lord Christ It is
his soul offered up.
offered up the whole man, body and spirit; he loved not his life, but poured
forth his soul, and underwent the whole curse, wrath and vengeance of the most
High in body and spirit.

5. Christ says, he lays down his life for us, yea, he gave his life a It is
the laying down his life. Romans 5. 10. Col. 1. 22. Heb. 2. 9. 14. Heb. 9. 15. 1
Pet. 13. 18. 18.
ransom for many. In this word all the other are contained.

Therefore it is so often said in the Scriptures, we are saved by his death,
and by his sufferings. So that all these terms of Christ giving himself,
pouring forth his blood, giving his own body, making his soul an offering for
sin, laying down his life, dying and suffering for us, are all one sacrifice;
one is diffused into all, and all center in every one.

Chap. VIII.
Shows how often this Sacrifice was offered; the place where, and the time
when it was offered.
THUS through the power and virtue of this sacrifice; having declared what it
is, we come now to consider,

1. How often this sacrifice was offered. The Priests under the Law How often
this Sacrifice was offered. Heb. 9. 26. 28. Heb. 10. 10. 12. 14. 18.
went into the holy place every year, they offered sacrifice continually; But
our Jesus by one sacrifice has done away sin. The multiplicity of the legal
sacrifices argued their imperfection; for those Priests daily ministering,
offered sometimes the same sacrifice which could never take away sin; but
this Man, says the Spirit, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for
ever sat down on the right hand of God, holding forth the work was done that
Christ might sit still, needing no more offering; And whereas it is said, He
sat down on Gods right hand, it declares he had done his work, and the Father
accepted it; or else he should never have been placed in the throne of
victory, at his Fathers right hand. Christ was once, (and but once) offered to
bear the sins of many. Many talk of Christ's dying still in us, and the
like, but indeed instead of exalting Christ (as they pretend to do) they rank
him only in the Leviticall Priesthood, and instead of holding forth his
perfection, they render him imperfect, and quite contradict the aforenamed
Scriptures.

3. The place where Christ was offered deserves our consideration; for it is
not said in vain, that he suffered without the gate upon the The place where
this sacrifice was offered. Heb. 13. 12.
Cross, and that between two thieves, it shows the descension of our Savior
into the lowest, vilest, contemptiblest estate and condition that could be.
Christ died at Jerusalem, a City, not in the heart: but in Judea in the world.
I mind this the rather, because some think the death of Christ at Jerusalem not
at all to concern them, but they look for Christ's death within them, whereas
in the Scriptures nothing is more clear then this, that Christ's death at
Jerusalem is the offering for sin, not Christ's death in any ones heart; The
Scriptures warrant no such kind of language; I confess I know thus much, that
though Christ died at Jerusalem, if the power, virtue and efficacy of this
death be not seated, revealed and enjoyed in the heart, a poor soul can take
no comfort in it, notwithstanding this is as certain, he that enjoyes not
Christ in him as a fruit of that one offering at Jerusalem, enjoyes him not at
all. The Scriptures often speak of our being dead with Christ, that is to say,
being implanted into the likeness of his death, by being dead to sin and to
iniquity: but no where speak of Christ being dead in us, as the sacrifice by
which we are saved. If Christ be in us, the body is dead (not Christ) because
of sin: and the spirit is alive because of righteousness. Christ's death has a
virtue in us, namely, destroying sin, and becoming a quickening spirit.

4. Concerning the time of this sacrifice being offered; In the fullness of
time (says the Lord) God sent forth his Son; it was in the last The time when
this sacrifice was offered.
days, so called in respect of dispensation, for now all under Moses and the
Prophets vanished, that Christ might come in and continue, God who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, who once in the
end of the world appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself: that is
to say, in these last days Christ appeared, and offered up himself, to put an
end to all other offerings, and to put away sin. This Christ did in the days
of Pontius Pilate, and Caiaphas the Highpriest, which was many years since.

But I know some are ready to object and say, How can this be? For he was a
Lamb slain before the foundation of the World; which if true, how is it that
he was slain in time, at Jerusalem; except he was often slain?

I Answer, It is very true that Christ was slain but once, according in the end
of the world: and yet as true, if truly understood, that he was slain before
the foundation of the World: Which I shall demonstrate clearly from the
Scriptures.

To see the truth clearly, We must consider Christ Jesus in his 1 Pet. 1 20.
death.

1. In the decree of God; and so he was foreordained before the Christ slain
by the decree of God.
foundation of the World: And all things were present before the Lord before
they had being in reference to us, they were in the decree, council and purpose
of the Lord; so was the Lord Christ in Gods decree and council before the
World. He calls things that are not, as though they were. What are only
actually alone with us in time, were truly present with him before all time,
who is not included in any time.

2. In the virtue of his death; and so he was slain before the foundation The
virtue of Christ's death was before the foundation of the World.
of the world: Christ's death had an influence into the times past, as well as
times to come; therefore called, The blood of the Covenant; Now we must know,
that there was a Covenant made between God and Christ; wherein it was agreed
that Christ should die in time; and the virtue of that death, which was from
eternity in the Eye of the Father, should speak for all his generation in all
ages: therefore the Fathers of old believed, not in a Christ already then come,
but to come, even in the flesh: and therefore God led them by the hand to look
to a Christ to come, through many Types and Sacrifices; which when Christ came
all ceased. Christ's death was that price that was laid down for all his
generation in all ages: and this is Christ, the same yesterday and to day and
for ever.

3. We are to consider Christ's actual death, which was accomplished Christ
actually died in time.
by the Jews; therefore says the Apostle, The same Jesus whom ye have
crucified, has GOD Raised up; and thus was Christ manifest in the last times.
Jerusalem was not actually always; Pilate not always; for we know that State,
City, and those persons, had a beginning and ending: no more did Christ die
actually before the World was; that he might dye, he took upon him flesh, and
was made like to us, which is only done in time: for we first are in the Womb,
then brought forth, increase and dye; so did he: yet notwithstanding, the
virtue of Christ's death, through the will of God, is as great as if he had
actually suffered before the World was; which he did not, but only once in the
end of the World: And yet is Christ a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedeck: Christ died once, and dyed no more; yet the benefit remains for
ever. So that as the Sacrifice is fully accepted by the Father, who views it
since it was offered; so it was accepted by him that saw it before it was
offered; for all things that God does before us in time (which time the
Scriptures tells abondantly, himself has made, ordered and disposed; which
time is that space wherein things are done successively) he saw, liked,
ordered and decreed should be, before time was.

Chap. IX.
Wherein is shown how Christ offered up himself, and the true nature of that
Offering.
5 I am now to proceed, and show you how Christ offered up himself How Christ
offered up himself.
unto GOD: which I shall demonstrate these two ways,

First, By the power of the eternal Spirit; This Sacrifice was no Christ
offered up himself by the Spirit.
ordinary one, it was his own body; therefore the power must be suitable, which
was the Spirit of God that did sustain him, enable him to dye, and raised him
from the dead; therefore says Christ, I 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again; therefore is he said
to be justified in the Spirit, and quickened by the spirit: That Eternal Spirit
that dwelt in him, suffered him not to lie in the grave; For it was impossible
he should be held of death that was filled with the fullness of GOD, in whom
the Eternal Spirit was.

Secondly, Christ died in the body of his flesh: It was impossible the Christ
died in
simple Word of God die, therefore the word was made flesh; For as the body of
his flesh.
much as the Children were pertakers of flesh and blood, Christ himself took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death; so he in the flesh abolished the enmity: therefore it is said, God was
manifest in the flesh in reference to his death; and justified in the Spirit in
reference to his resurrection: Therefore says Peter, Christ Ephesians. 2. 16. Col.
1. 22. 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 4. 1.
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust; being put to death in the flesh. A
fleshly body was prepared by God for Christ to suffer in; and so he gives them
his flesh, a sacrifice for sin.

6. Thus, through the guidance of God, I am now come to speak of the nature of
this Sacrifice; which I have discovered to be the Lord Jesus his flesh, body
and blood offered upon the Cross at Jerusalem, in the end of the world, by the
eternal Spirit for sin. The excellency of its nature by a six fold
demonstration.

First, From the purity of it: Under the Law their offerings A pure Sacrifice.
Levit. 1. 3. 10. Mal. 1. 7, 8, 9.
must be without blemish; therefore the Lord reproves the People, for that they
brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; saying thus Ye
brought an offering, should I accept this of your hands says the Lord? which
is as much as if he should have said, I the Lord delight not in, but abhor
lame, blind, imperfect offerings; I must have one without blemish. But now
seeing all these unblemishable Lambs etc. under the Law, could not take away
sin, either a Sacrifice without spot and blemish must be found, who is
sufficient to take 10. Joh. 1. 29. 36. Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
away sin, or else sin must remain; therefore the Lord Christ steps in.
Wherefore when he comes into the World, he says, Sacrifice and Offerings thou
would not; Then said I, Lo I come to do thy Will O GOD. Christ is the
Lamb, of God that takes away the sins of the World: Who offered up Heb. 7.
28. 11. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 22.
himself to God without spot; for he is that true Lamb without blemish, and
without spot. Herein our Jesus was a Priest transcending the Priests under the
Law, which had infirmity; and the Sacrifices under the Law that were imperfect:
For the Lord Jesus was pure and spot-lesse; yea, perfectly pure: in whose mouth
was found no guile: who knew no sin.

There was a great necessity he should be such an offering without spot,
because God was, and is, a God of pure Eyes, that cannot behold Iniquity; that
is to say, tolerate it, suffer it to go unpunished: Now had Christ been a
sinner, he could not have taken away sin. This was the reason of the
imperfection of the Priests of old; which had they been perfect, we had had no
need of another Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck.

Secondly, It is a free Sacrifice; Free Will offerings under the Christ's death
a free sacrifice
Law were very acceptable with God. Our Jesus offered up his own body freely;
no man says he takes my life from me; I lay it down. Lo I Heb. 10. 9.
come to do thy will O God.

Thirdly, It was, as pure and free, so a Perfect Sacrifice. The Sacrifices
Christ's death A perfect Sacrifice.
under the Law were without blemish, but not perfect; therefore Jesus puts an
end to them, and offers up himself. The offerings in the Law were to be perfect
without blemish as touching their bodies, they must not be blind, broken, nor
maimed or the like; but this was a perfection shaddowing out the true
perfection of the Lord Jesus; who wanted nothing, who had nothing superfluous,
but was a perfect Sacrifice; there needed no other to complete it.

Fourthly, It was an Eternal Sacrifice. It was offered in time, Christ's death
an eternal Sacrifice.
but ordained before time; and the influences of it reached Eternity; a virtue
sprang from it to al his generation that fell asleep before it was actually
offered; and now being offered, it remains in as full virtue as ever; for by
one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And so he was
a Lamb slain before the foundation of the Heb. 10. 14.
World; being the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; even the same
Jesus, the same Savior and deliverer; the same High Priest that saved Paul,
saved Abraham, and shall save all that shall be saved.

Fifthly, It was a spiritual Sacrifice. In the time of the Law, the Christ's
death a spiritual Sacrifice.
Priests went always into the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of
God; but into the second, the High Priest only, once every year, not without
blood, which he offered for his errors and the sins of the people: Which
Tabernacle was a figure in that time; Now the Sacrifices and Gifts that were
offered in that Tabernacle, stood only in meats, and drinks, and diverse
washings and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation:
Heb. 9. 10.
but our High Priest enters into the holiest of holies, and there accomplisheth
the service of God: not with Meats, and Drinks, and carnal Ordinances, or
Jewish observations; but with his blood, offering a spiritual Sacrifice.
Christ came with reformation, doing away that which was carnal; that is to
say; of a fleshly, legal (not sinful) administration, by his spiritual
Sacrifice; Even the offering up of himself, in body and spirit, The Just for
the Unjust.

Sixthly and lastly, let us view its nature with its accepataion: The Christ's
death an acceptable Sacrifice.
Sacrifice was offered up to a just and righteous God, for an unjust and
unrighteous people; and the Lord accepted it; so that the shadow is of the
heavenly thing: Even the burnt offerings under the Law was a sweet favor unto
God, holding forth the excellency of the savor that our better Sacrifice, our
substantial offering, was to God: therefore it is said, Christ gave himself for
us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor: He is that
sweet perfume that ascends up to GOD; in whom the Father is only wel-pleased,
who has Isa. 53. 11.
seen the travel of his Sons soul, and is satisfied: This is a most
acceptable sacrifice.

Chap. X.
Manifests the true subjects for whom this Sacrifice was offered.
7. HAving thus in mercy made manifest the nature of this Sacrifice, and for as
much as every sacrifice that is offered is for some body, let us now enquire of
the Persons who are the subjects of this Sacrifice; which Christ declares to be
his sheep, I lay down my life for my Sheep. Those Sheep are the Elect of God,
whom the Lord Joh. 10. 15.
has appointed a place for, at his Right hand in the last day; therefore says
Christ, Other Sheep have I which are not of this fold, them also I Ver. 16.
must bring in, and they shall hear my voice. Again says he, I know my Sheep.
Christ makes it his work to Redeem a company of poor silly sheep, from the
wooles.

These sheep are those who are given by God to Christ: Thine they were, says
Christ, that is to say, thine by thy choce, knowledge, decree and purpose: Thou
gave them me: that is, they being in the World a company of poor, despised,
sinful creatures, thou committed'st John 17. 6.
them to my charge, to rescue them from the paw of the Lion and mouth of the
Bear, and to keep them in thy name, that they may never depart from thee.
These are they Christ prayed for, these only, and not for the World; that is to
say, those that were not given to him, to bring over by the power of his own
Septer, to the obedience of the Gospel, to the salvation of their souls: and
therefore you shall find Christ's prayer is not limited to the small number of
his faithful Apostles, but he likewise prays for all that should believe in
him: for their sakes, he sanctified himself; that is to say, he set himself
apart, and made it his work to offer sacrifice, and become a Redeemer: So much
the word sanctify clearly imports. These were a certain number that Christ
knew, and the Father loved, as he loved Christ; which in another place are
called children, as testifies the Spirit, saying, Forasmuch as the children
were partakers of flesh and blood, he likewise took part of the same, that he
might deliver his children: Which children are those that are his peculiar Heb.
2. 14.
generation. Behold (says Christ) I, and the children which thou have given
me: which children he calls his brethren, saying, I will declare thy name unto
my brethren. For this cause is the Lord Jesus called, The Captain of the
salvation of many sons: Because he sanctifieth-himselfe for them; for he is a
perfect Captain through sufferings, to bring those many sons unto glory;
which sons are called, his family, his house, household, spouse, his city, his
soldiers, his purchased ones, which he governes, orders, disposes, rescues and
trains up to eternal life; for Christ is faithful as a son over all his
house.

As they are his Children given to him, so we are to consider them in a present
condition of enmity to him; for he reconciles them: And therefore it is said,
Christ died for the ungodly, for sinners, Romans ^.
even for rebels, enemies and traitors to himself. Such who bid defiance to
the God of heaven, for these Christ died, as I shall show more in the virtue
and effect of this sacrifice; which I should now speak of, but that I must
first remove an objection that lies in the way.

The Scripture tells us, that Christ by the grace of God died for every man,
Heb. 2. 9. 1 John 2. 2.
and that he is the Savior of the whole world, and the propitiation for the
sins of the world; how is it then that you say, he offered up a sacrifice only
for some chosen ones.

In answer to this Question; I shall first show you how the Scriptures Adam, as
the objectors conceive.

1. Concerning the Scriptures upon which this objection is bottomed; I shall
only instance the principal: As first, that in the Hebrews, Who by the grace
of God tasted death for every Heb. 9.
man. From whence they infer every particular person in the world to find
the truth of this Scripture. Let us see the truth of it by comparing it with
what follows; this every man, in the next verse is declared to be many sons,
yea, brethren and children. The word in the Original is, for all; which we
must take with some limitation: It is said, All Judea came out to be baptized
of John in Jordan: Now I suppose no one will imagine he means every
particular person, every infant, but a great number: so here by all we may
understand a great number.

Or if you read the word, every one, we likewise read, that Jesus Christ
commanded the Apostles to preach the Gospel to every Creature: By every
Creature I suppose we take not in the beasts of the earth, fishes of the sea,
and fowls of heaven; if without all limitation we take the word, we cannot
except them, except we deny them to be creatures, which I hope we are all
better informed. So that Christ's dying for every man must be restrained to
those only Christ intended it, namely, those many sons whom God appointed unto
Glory.

The next Scripture is that in John, which says, He is the propitiation for
our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world. From whence
many infer, that Christ is a propitiation for the 1 John 2. 2.
sins of every individual person in the world: strengthening their opinion
from those Scriptures that affirm Christ is the Savior of the world: And God
so loved the world, and would have all men to be saved.

In answer to these, we must necessarily be able to distinguish concerning this
word world: For I affirm it is not always taken for every particular one;
Therefore it is said, And the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent
called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the world. Which world is only
meant of the wicked, or of many in the world. Therefore it is said in the
Verses before, that there was war in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon and his, and there was a remnant in the world, a woman in
the wilderness that was not deceived. So that by the whole world is only
meant those that were deceived in the world. So it is said, all the whole world
wondered after the beast; which is not meant of every particular person,
therefore is it interpreted afterward, to be all those that dwell on the earth,
whose names are not written in the Lambs book of Life. In another place it is
said, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
sins. Now we know the Lord does impute sin to some, therefore is it not of
every one that he speaks.

So it is said, God is the Savior of the world; and yet in another place, the
world shall be damned: So that it is very evident where he says, he is the
propitiation for ours, and the whole world; he means them that did believe,
and hereafter should believe, all them he writes to, and all in all ages that
shall be saved; and so the rest of the Scriptures must be understood. The world
is sometimes taken for every individual, sometimes for many, for some of all
sorts for the Gentiles, before it was said, salvation is of the Jews: But now
of the whole world, that is to say, of Jews and Gentiles. Therefore it is
said, God so loved the world that whosoever believed should not perish: He so
loved it, that is to say, after such a manner as those, that is, Whosoever
shall believe should not perish. So that his love is clearly restrained to
them that should believe. Therefore the Scriptures so often speak, that God
has chosen a people out of world, the poor of the world; he has redeemed us
out of every nation, kindred and tongue, some of all nations; So that as there
are two worlds spoken of, this world, and that world, namely, the world to
come, so there are subjects of both worlds, which subjects are called the
world; and they are either the world of the ungodly, that cannot receive the
truth, or the world that shall be saved, and is reconciled unto God.

The Gospel is declared to be glad tidings to all, Luke 2. 10.

What I have said before is a sufficient answer to this; for all is It is the
savor of life unto some, and of death unto others, 2 Cor. 2. 16.

The Gospel is to be preached to every Creature, which could not be if Christ
died not for all, Math. 28. 19.

To which I answer; True it is the Gospel is to be preached to act of shining
is a like to him that is blind, and him that sees, but the virtue of it is
only to some particulars: A man that is blind has not the benefit of the
light; this appears more plain, if we consider what the Gospel is that is to
be preached. What the Gospel is that is to be preached to the World.
It is that there is life and salvation freely in Christ for sinners, which is
to be told, preached and declared to all men, yea, every man: but now the
application of it is only to him that beleiveth this, and trusts in it;
which is the work of the Spirit to accomplish. We are not to preach Christ
died for you Thomas, or you John, but for sinners. And thus the Apostles
preached; and if any one asked what they should do to be saved, their answer
was, Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, whether thou be Jew
or Gentile, Acts 16. 31.

But all are commanded to believe the Gospel.

If I should without a further answer grant it, yet it follows not that Christ
offered up a sacrifice or died for them, for that is not That there is life in
Christ Jesus for whosoever believes. Now I say, he that believes not this
Record which God has given of his Son, does as much as he can to make God a
liar; he gives God the lie (as we use to say.) But I shall say this more, that
the Scripture no where holds forth any command from God to every man to believe
Christ died for them.

Those that believe not, are threatened with damnation, because they believe not
on the Son of God. John 3. 1.

To that I briefly answer,

1. That unbelief is the very condemnation of every soul; it is in which every
man is plunged, John 3. 19.

For when Adam had sinned by transgressing the Law, that cursed and seized on
him and all his posterity in him; but yet Christ was immediately promised: So
that notwithstanding his sin, all that looked to, or believed on that Brazen
Serpent should be healed, those that did not should perish in their sins; this
state of unbelief seized on the Creature; Which is,

2. The cause why he trusts not in Christ, nor comes to him; which is to be
understood in this sense, in that it has taken such hold on man, that he
cannot come forth of it; for if he could but believe he should certainly be
saved, but he cannot, therefore he is condemned: though this is not the
original or first cause of his destruction: for his sin that he fell into,
was that; that put him into an incapacity of believing according to the purpose
of God; which indeed is the original cause why they cannot believe: for if God
had purposed they should believe, neither themselves, nor men, nor sin, nor
devils, could have hindered it; for who has resisted the will of God? For as
many as were ordained to eternal life believed: You believe not, says Christ,
because you are are not my sheep: That Romans 9. Acts 13. 48. John 10. 26.
is, Because you are not given to me, neither have I undertaken for you, for if
I had, you would come unto me, for my sheep know my voice. The whole
Scriptures proclaim death and damnation to unbelievers; and so the light
reproves their darkness, adjudges it and condemns it. Therefore it is said,
He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed: or as
the word will bear it, in that he has not believed; which is thus explained a
little after, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, and
men love darkness; it is the condemnation it self.

But those to whom the Gospel is preached, and refuse it, are declared to Acts
13. 46. Heb. 2. 3.
adjudge themselves unworthy of eternal life, and to neglect salvation; which
if Christ had not dyed for them, they could not do.

To this I thus briefly Answer, Man is truly said to refuse the Acts eminently
declared them selves to be so; Here we may take notice how the Gospel is to be
preached to All, not for All; for when he knew who was unworthy, he turns away
from them, but he was sent to preach to all, not knowing who was made worthy to
recieve it by the Lamb: that Gods own might be called in, he preached it to,
or among, or in the hearing of all; and this was lawful for him so to do; but
he applied it to none but upon believing.

But peradventure some are yet ready to say, The Apostle says, Which they
could not do, if it was not for them, Heb. 2. 3.

To this I say thus much, All that can be inferred rationally or

But may some say, If Christ died for them, they shall be saved (as you And if
so, what need the Apostle mind them not to neglect, for if it be for them you
say they Shall have it? Therefore his exhortation is vain.

To which I Answer, That although the Saints Eternal happiness Jesus Christ;
for with the heart man believes, but with Romans 10. 10.
the mouth he confesses to salvation: the Apostle judging according to It is a
dangerous thing to fall from profeession of religion.
their profession, thus speaks. For though a man cannot fall from the Fathers
love, yet he may from his profession; which when he does, it is (though not an
infalilble) yet a sad simptome he is in a sad condition; nigh to burning;
having neither part, nor lot, in the thing professed, as says the Apostle. Now
because some did profess to be bought by Christ, to have received the Lord
Jesus, to be sactified by the blood of the Covenant; and yet by their works
denied Him, whom they said, and Saints so judged (judging by their former
profession) had bought them, and sanctified them; and made shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience, that is to say, the profession of them; the Apostle not
knowing by revelation who should stand, nor having any rule to judge men should
attain to the glory of the end, without continuing to the end; knowing likewise
that the Father has as well ordained the means to attain the end, as well as
the end it self, thus speaks: therefore says the Apostle, We are persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus
speak: and desire you to continue to the end. Heb. 6. 9.

The Scripture says, some may perish for whom Christ died, 1. Cor. 8. 11.
Therefore all he died for, shall not be saved; which proves de died for all, as
well them that perish, as them that shall be saved.

To which I Answer, by perish is not meant eternal death or word perish many
times signifies to wound, defile, or corrupt: and so it is there used; therefore
the Apostle in the next ver. interprets the meaning of perishing, to be the
wounding the weak conscience, or stumbling, or offending their weak Brethren.

The Lord Christ wept over Jerusalem, and would have gathered it, as a hen her
chickens, But Jerusalem would uot; which is an argument that he loved it, and
died for it,

That Christ wept over it, and would have gathered it, is true but yet, that he
did not lay down his life a Sacrifice for them that he did not gather, is as
true: Christ's weeping over them shows him to be a man subject to like passions
with us (sin only excepted) he laments their deplorable, miserable, undone and
lost state: And whereas he says How often would I have gathered them, etc. He
there speaks as a visible minister of the Gospel, that holds forth the truth to
men, not knowing their eternal state; for if you consider him otherways, he
could not weep over them, for it is said, he knew all men, and would not
commit himself to a people that did profess him: he knew (as he was the
wisdom of the Father) well enough who should not believe, but dye in their
sins; therefore this he did as a man having natural affections: and so it is
said, when Jesus heard Lazarus was dead, he wept; which showed, not that
Lazarus might have lived longer, but his love, his natural love to him. In this
sense Paul wished himself accursed for his brethrens sake according to the
flesh: In this sense I say, This and all such other places must be under stood.

But yet John says, Christ came unto his own, and his own received And
Object the Parable wherein All are invited, etc.

To both these one Answer may suffice, The Jews were Christ's own Countrymen,
the then only visible visible Church of GOD, he came of that Stock: and for the
invitation, I say, it was to Jews and Gentiles, wherein we may say, All are
invited by the outward, visible, ministry of the Gospel; For many are called,
but few are chosen: Now not the Called, but the Chosen are the subjects for
whom Christ dyed.

The Scripture tells us of a Common Salvation: And GOD

The Salvation is called Common, because now it is extended to Jews and
Gentiles: therefore Peter being bidden to go to the Gentiles, he accounted them
a Common People; Salvation he thought must be only of the Jews, but Gods
thoughts were otherwise, and the wall is broken down.

And to the other, I say, God is the Savior of all men, for in him, all live,
and move, and have their being; but especially, that is to say, Eternally, and
Spiritually, by Jesus Christ, he is the Savior of them that believe, Eternal
life is only their portion.

But it is said, Christ dyed to redeem from the sins of the first Testament. so
that there is no condemnation for them: but condemnation is for not believing
Christ dyed for them.

The Sripture objected proves not thet Christ dyed for all, neither Christ to
the Jews, Ye shall die in your sins; that is, in all your sins: therefore
says he again, The wrath of God abides on them: Ghrist took not away wrath
for the first, and brought it again for the second.

But say they, They are condemned for unbelief: Well, let us reason out the
case. I demand of thee whether unbelief be sin or no? If thou say it is, I
ask thee whether Christ dyed for that or no? If he did not, then his dying for
all other sins, was of no moment nor concernment; if a man should do never
so much to redeem a man from prison and not perform the chiefest part required,
do you think the prisoner would be delivered? furely no; what avails it for
Christ to dye for all my sins, if not for my unbelief, seeing that, without any
more (I speak in thy language) may condemn me; but it may be thou will say, he
dyed for the unbelief of some, and the other sins of others. Vain man, thou
say thou know not what; thou pleadest Christ dying for them for some
sins, and yet he has left the chief not dyed for, for what purpose is then
his death? What benefit have they by it? They are but pulled from the water,
and hurled into the fire.

But if thou say Christ dyed for unbelief: How then can it condemn? For
all that Christ conquered, he triumphed over in his cross: how comes it to
return upon him again? Thou would be wise; but indeed thou instead of
exalting Christ as a free Savior, makes him but half a Savior: if he be not
able To save to the utmost, woe and alas. We were all unbelievers before we
believed: if Christ make us not to believe, what shall we do? The Priests
under the Law were as great as he: if thy doctrine be true: but surely I hope
thou by this time see thy vanity.

How can this stand with the justice of God to punish men, if not for not
believing Christ dyed for them.

To answer this, I tell thee, I now see where thou art gravelled, Nay, but O
Man, Who art thou that reply against God? Shall the Vessel say to the
Potter, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay, of
the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another to dishonor? And
has not GOD the same power over thee, as the potter has over his Vessel? May
he not do what he please with his own? Who shall set him a Rule to walk by?

But yet a little to speak to thee, that thou may understand the way of his
justice, and how he brings forth his pleasure, I bid thee sit down a while,
enter into thy conscience, take a view of thy pride, coveteousnesse, lust,
murmurings, worldlines, etc. And what will thou say then?

Man was made upright, but he sought out many inventions. God made man, planted
him in a Garden in the midst of all worldly pleasures, for bad him nothing
but one Tree in the middle of the Garden, told him if he did eat thereof he
should dye; this Law was given to him, the Devil taking advantage of the
Creatures mutability (for God did not, neither was he bound to make the
creature immutable) spoke to the woman by a Serpent, even a natural Beast of
the earth, that eats dust, and creeps on her belly; Eve would be wise, believed
the Devil, ate of the Tree, brake the Law, and so came to know good and evil;
she knew not good and evil before, but now, she felt the evil, and died; that
is, the evil of fear, and shame (the fruit of sin) seized upon them. This Tree
was a Tree of trial to them of their obedience: now sin came, and death by
sin; Adam was turned out of the Garden; sorrow encompassed them; the Tree of
life, a visible Tree pointing out Christ, denied them; because God would show
the riches of his grace, and the glory of his justice: had Adam eaten of that
Tree of life, he and all his posterity had lived for ever; but God would not
suffer it, but would advance justice in the condemnation of some; and so keeps
him out with a staming Sword; that is to say, his Law or mighty power. Thus do
we continually the thing forbidden to us; we are not contented with our sphere;
surely this consideration renders God just in our ruin, and it is only mercy
that saves any of us.

Thus man was plunged in this darkness, yet Christ came as a light shining in
darkness, but the darkness, the dark sinful heart of man, comprehended it not,
but opposed it: Christ says he is the true light, the Messia, the Son of God,
that life eternal is in him, the Jews neglected, rejected, scorned and abused
him; so do many now; by which they add iniquity to iniquity, and are justly
Condemned for their sins.

But that I may the more clearly demonstrate the falsity of this assertion,
consider these following Arguments.

Those that Christ died for, he offered a Sacrifice for; for his death was a
Sacrifice for sin, as I have at large proved before. Arg. to prove Christ
died nor for all men.


But Christ offered not a sacrifice for all men, therefore he died not for all.

This second proposition is clearly proved, if you consider this,

That all those for whom this Sacrifice was offered, are sanctified and
perfected by it, having through it Remission of sins; which is evident, for
by one Offering has he perfected for ever, them that are sanctified: and
again, We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Christ, once for
all: he bore the sins of many, and by that Sacrifice he carried them away,
that God remembers them in a way of judgment no more. This will be more
manifested if you consider what I shall say in the virtue of Christ's death.

But there are a people that shall never be made perfect, nor have sins done
away: this is so evident by it self, that it needs no demonstration: consult
with the 25. Mat. and you may there (if you doubt) sinde a resolution.

Having thus handled the Subjects for whom this Sacrifice was To whom this
sacrifice was offered.
offered, I am now come to show you, to whom it was offered; namely, to GOD, to
an offended, displeased and angry Majesty, That could not endure Sin, and
which threatened death to Sinners.

GOD says, Fury is not in me, How then say you, GOD is an angry God.

The same GOD that says, fury is not in me, says also, They are full of the
fury of the Lord. So that we must know, fury, wrath, anger, is in God by a Law,
which is the righteous dispensatinn of justice and judgment, by his own Law,
against the breakers of it: And yet fury is not in God, that is, God in Christ
has so taken away the Cup of trembling, and the dregs of his fury, that fury
is not in him to his Children; for GOD in Christ is love, full of love: GOD in
the Law is a recompencer of tribulation, and anguish, to all that obey not the
Gospel of Christ.

Chap. XI.
Shows the excellent virtue of this Sacrifice, appearing by its sweet and
comfortable effects; and that in four considerations.
THis Sacrifice is better then all other sacrifices, transcends all under the
Law, comprehends all manner of excellency in it self: and the virtue whereof
appears,

First, In that the Lord Jesus by this one Sacrifice, interposed between Christ
inter-1 posed between God and man.
God and poor, silly, sorry man; between Gods wrath, vengeance and fury, and
sinful rebellious man: Gods hand of justice was up, man's neck upon the block,
ready for his fatal, and final destruction: Even as Abraham's hand was up
ready to slay his Son; But as then the Angel stepped in and laid his hand on
Abraham's Sword, so the Angel of our new Govenant, immediately interposed
himself and became that Ram in the bush that was ready to dye in our stead, and
be offered for us that we might be spared; so Christ held Gods hand, and staved
off his wrath, (as I may so say) and now sets forward, not only to respite
man's misery for a short time; But

Secondly, He mediates between God and man for a reconciliation; Christ
mediates between God and man.
man was the offender, sentence was given against him to condemnation; nothing
was wanting to complete his misery, but a full execution, and eternity to
lock him up fast in wrath and torment. Now the Lord Jesus interposes himself
to make up the breach; and therefore is he called, The Mediator between God
and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant; He it is, not
duties, not prayers, not fasts, not the performances of the Creature, that
makes reconciliation and atonement for the sins of the people.

Thirdly, By this sacrifice he has given full satisfaction to God Christ has
given satisfaction to God the Father.
the Father, for whatever he could lay to our charge. Man, as I said before,
was condemned to dye, wrath was threatened, he became a debtor to the Law: Now
the Lord Christ undertakes the payment of his debt, he would answer the Law,
and pay whatever the Law could demand, even to the utmost farthing; he became
the end of the Law for righteousness sake; he died and became a curse, (for it
is written, Cursed be every one that hangs on a tree) that we might be
blessed and live for ever.

Yea further, The Lord Jesus that he might be a perfect Savior, bore our
sins in his own body on the Cross, and the Father laid on him, The
iniquities of us all, and he was numbered among, and judged as the
transgressors: Which holds forth to me the Father Isaiah 53. 12.
speaking (if I may so say) after this manner to his Son: Son, will thou
undertake for this man, this sinful man; his sins are as searlet, his
offense is great, the punishment is as great: thou must take all his sins and
faults upon thy self, and stand in his stead, and suffer whatever I have
threatened upon him, thou must be made sin for him, that is to say, an offering
for his sin, and a sufferer as a sinner. Well, says Christ, Father thy will
be done, I will rather bear his sins in my own body; I will rather suffer
the extremity of thy wrath, then those whom I love shall dye; and so indeed the
Father accepted him; the Covenant and contract was made, and now Christ who is
our escape goat, carries all our sins in his own body into the land of
forgetfulness, that God says, I will remember their sins no more: that is
to say, as unsatisfied for, or in judgment against them; and I now can see no
sin in my children, that is to say, no sin which I have not received
satisfaction Heb. 10. 17. What it is for God not to see nor remember sin in
his children. Romans 8. 33, 34.
for: (for otherwise he does see and remember them) See both these, namely,
Christ's sacrifice, and Gods satisfaction, in Paul's triumph: Who shall lay any
thing to my charge, it is God that justifies me. I, but might some say, God
will not justify the wicked not the unrighteous; What then? Who shall condemn
me? It is Christ that died for me, though I am unrighteous; justice is
satisfied that I cannot be condemned, for Christ has taken away the curse, and
stopped the Laws mouth; for he is the true sinne-offering and
trespasseoffering typified in the Law.

Fourthly, Christ has opened the way for the soul to come to God, from whom
before (trembling) he ran away and hid himself, covering his nakedness with
fig leaves, not daring to approach the presence of the Lord. The soul, till
Christ died, stood aloof off, had no sight of God but in shadows, types and
figures; but now the Lord Jesus by his death made way for the soul to come to
God, the Veil of the Temple is rent in twain: which is interpreted in the
Hebrews to be the opening of the way into the most holy place; into which under
the Law none but the High Priest might enter, and that but under a shadow once
a year; but Christ by his own blood has opened the way that we may with
boldness have access to God: Christ, the Lords Anointed, has so ordered the
matter, being partaker of both natures, that God and man should meet in him: in
him God appears in love, mercy and grace: in him the Saints meet the Lord, in
righteousness, salvation and praise; so that he that hid himself before, has
now no durable joy nor true content, but when in the sight of God in the Lord
Jesus. Oh what a matchless mercy is here two at such a distance, and enmity
should be reconciled and meet in one, joying, rejoicing, praising and
delighting each in other. Oh here I am forced to stay a while in admiration of
that boundless love, and unfathomable wisdom of our dear Jesus; our
well-beloved Bridegroom, that stripped himself of his robes, and clothed
himself with our sins, that knew no sin, for to bring us into an intimate
familiarity and acquaintance with our Maker. Oh my soul, for this bless the
Lord, yea, let all that is within me praise his holy name; yea, let all that
love the salvation of the Lord say, Let the Lord be magnified.

Chap. XII.
Shows what justification and the pardon of sin is: which are the effects of
Christ's death or sacrifice.
WE are justified, and our sins are pardoned through the Our sins pardoned
and we justified by the death of Christ.
sacrifice of the Lord Jesus. That we may come to a more clear understanding
of this, I desire you would mind, that to justify signifies either to make one
just who before was unjust, or to declare one to be just. And again, a man is
said to be made just, when of a sinner he is washed and cleansed, as of a
drunkard he is become sober, and the like; or when he is acquitted of his
fault: So that though many sins remain, they shall not condemn him. In this
last sense is a man said, according to the Scriptures, to be justified, or have
his sins pardoned, or be acquitted. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not his sin, that is, whose sin is forgiven, bid or Psalm. 32. 2.
covered.

So likewise the declaration of a man to be a just man, or justified, is
twofold; either to his own soul, or to others: Now according to the
Scriptures, it is the acquitall from sins, that is, properly called
justification. Therefore says the Apostle, As condemnation came upon all, so
justification upon many: justification is there taken for the contrary to
condemnation, which is the freedom from it: Therefore says the Scripture, We
are justified by his blood, and by the Spirit.

The Scriptures, say we, are justified by faith; how then say you it is by the
blood of Christ, Romans 5. 1.

In answer to this, there are these two things to be minded.

1. That when men sinned there was something threatened, (viz:) eternal wrath
and misery, which was not then inflicted.

2. Man's conscience became guilty, and so wrath, fear, terror and torment
seized on him: Now we must consider, that the blood of Christ frees us from
both these: from the first, while we in our own minds, through wicked works,
were enemies. From the second; viz. That guilt we had contracted through sin,
the blood of Christ saves us through faith; therefore is it truly said, being
justified by faith we have peace with God; faith receives what Christ has done
for us, and so justifies us in our consciences, that we have no more conscience
of sin; that is to say, guilt for sin; which will appear the more plainly
by this similitude: A man has committed an offense against the Law, suppose
felony or treason; Now the Law says, He that so offends shall dye the death:
The conscience of his fault presently strikes horror to his Spirit; the man is
apprehended and imprisoned for it, and shut up till the dismal day of
execution: Now while the poor man can expect nothing but death, some friend of
his, unknown to him, sues for his pardon, satisfies the Law, and obtaines it,
by which, his friend has made sure of his life; Now is the man truly justified
or acquitted from his fault though he knows it not; Well, what then? His
friend coures to him and says, Be of good cheer, thy offense is forgiven
thee, and so gives him his pardon, which he gladly accepts; and having received
it, he is now delivered from his bondage, the prison opened, and the Goalor
commanded to set him at liberty, and he is as surely freed from the offense as
if he had not sinned at all. Even so it is with a poor soul; for when man
sinned, wrath, even eternal misery was threatened, and his spirit filled with
horror. Now the Lord Christ, when the soul was a stranger to him, obtained
his pardon, purchased it with his own blood, and then the man's eternal
happiness was made sure of; and when the Lord Christ tells him what he has
done for him, saying to him, Thy sins are pardoned, my Son, fear not: then
wrath, horror, guilt and terror fly away, and the man is by faith, that is to
say, by believing what Christ has done, at peace in his soul.

Faith, I say, is not the man's justification, or righteousness, but receives
it, for it is a free gift of God.

It is said, we are justified by works, how then by the blood and grace of
James 2. 24.
Christ.

To that I answer; We may be truly said to be justified by works, viz: before
God, in our conscience, and before others, or in some particular act are all at
unity, being the effect of Christ's death, which was the sacrifice for sin.

But yet methinkes I hear some ready to question,

Whether all sins to a believer are pardoned, past, present, and to come?

If thou seriously considerest what I have already said, it might Sol. All sins
pardoned to a believe, past, present, and to come.
be a sufficient answer to thy demand; but, if possible, I shall desire to
answer thee more fully. We are to consider, that before we were actually,
Christ Jesus died, and when he died he bore our sins in his own body, the
punishment that we deserved, Christ suffered, he is and was our trusty Advocate
that pleaded our cause and satisfied the Law, against which the sin was; so
that condemnation is by a Law; take away the Law the condemnation ceases. Now
Jesus triumphed over our sins and the Law (as I shall show more fully anon)
on the Cross, and made a show of them openly: So that they could never be able
to return upon us to condemn us; and under this consideration I affirm all
sins past, present, and to come, were then pardoned by the blood of the
Cross: For as Christ at once died for all sins, past, present, and to come,
so were they pardoned. Which pardon was given to Christ, for him to communicate
to us; Which leads us to the second consideration, namely, our guilt, fear,
horror and terror, and Christ's love to us then; for he having obtained our
pardon, as he obtained it he gives it to the soul a full, complete, perfect
pardon, saying after this friendly manner, Thou that hidest thy self in the
stairs, and in the clifts of the rock, in a desolate and forlorn condition,
that waterest thy bed with tears, and expectest nothing but wrath, fear not,
though thy sins be as scarlet I have made them as white as snow: And so
commands Satan their Goalor to fly, the Iron gates of their own guilt to
open, and takes him by the hand and leads him into the Paradise of God by
faith, into his Fathers Kingdom: which act of Christ upon man's spirit is man's
Justification; according to that in the Acts, We preach remission of sins by
Jesus Christ, for every one that believes is justified from all things: (mark
the word,) from all things, from which he could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. And in another place, You has he quickened, who were dead in sins,
having forgiven you all trespasses. Mind it, the work is done, the Law cannot
charge him; so that if a Saint sins now (as in truth we do, For be that
says he has no sin, is a liar, and deceives himself) he may look to his
Advocate, pleading satisfaction already given; triumphantly singing, There is
now no condemnation or damnation to him that is in Christ with a sure
confidence; None can now legally (thoug many may unjustly) lay any thing to his
charge, for God justifies him; he that was offended is satisfied. Neither can
any condemn him, for it is Christ that died for him: now in this sense likewise
it is very sure all sins past, present, and to come, are pardoned; for this
second is only the declaration of the first.

Against what I have here written, I know many object, That the Servants of God
in the Old Testament, as David, Daniel, etc. prayed for pardon of sin, and
that Christ commanded his Disciples to pray for the pardon Matthew. 6. 12. 1 John
1. 9.
of their sins, and that we are required to confess our sins one to
another, and pray one for another; and God himself says, If we do confess
our sins, he is faithful to forgive them; therefore, they are not all
pardoned at once, if they were, what need we pray for them.

As to the examples or precepts concerning praying for pardon

As to that precept of Christ to his Disciples, we are to mind, that Christ
intended not always to confine his Disciples to that manner of praying, but
that form was agreeable to that dispensation; for the Kingdom of Heaven was
not then come, It was but at hand; but now it is come, and we may boldly go to
God.

As concerning the other Scriptures that say, Confess your sins one to
another, and If we confess our sins he is faithful to forgive us: If you
consider what I have said before, it might be sufficient. These expressions
only speak of a forgiveness and acquittall in a man's Conscience: So though a
soul may be in some doubt, these are an encouragement for him not to hide his
face, and run away in fear, but boldly to acknowledge them upon the head of
the Escape Goat the Lord Jesus; and God is just and faithful to forgive them,
that is to say, to manifest the forgiveness of them to thee; for sin is
either chargeable before God, or in the Conscience; before God it is not;
therefore in Conscience only; and as it is chargeable, such is the
forgiveness; it many times fares with a Saint, as with a man arrested with a
Bond formerly cancelled; the man hereupon is filled with fear, beginning to
call in question whether his surety has cancelled it or no, and so calls upon
his surety for the producing his Bond, that he may be assured he is freed from
it by the Law, though unjustly vexed for it: Even so, I say, fares it many
times with a Saint; Jesus Christ has told him, the Law is satisfied, his debt
paid, the bond cancelled; the Devil assalts him, sets his sins, his debts in
order before his eyes, and charges the Law upon him; whereby the soul begins to
fear again, and is ready to qestion whether Christ has told him so as he did
before believe; and now he cries out for his pardon, that the bond may be taken
out of his way, that he may be set at liberty through the manifestation of
Christ's love: yea, I say farther, A man that has obtained a pardon from his
Prience, may be attached for the same offense, and now may desire, in
confidence that his surety, in whose hands the pardon is, to give it him, that
so he may be set at liberty: let me tell you, Satan many times assaults the
soul and troubles it, and then many a soul in faith asks his pardon, or the
benefit of his pardon, that so he may be freed from Satan's buffetings: and thus
in the Scripture it is frequent to ask the thing produceing a benifit for the
effects sake; as for instance, we may desire to eat the flesh of Christ, when
we mean the benefit that redounds to us from it; so that the sum and
substance of what I have said is,

First, That sin is fully satisfied for by Christ's death in the sight of God,
and shall never be charged upon a Saint which pardon is in the hands of Christ
for him.

Secondly, that sin lies in the conscience til believing, and when the soul
believes, is forgiveness given to him: that is to say, published, made
manifest and declared.

Thirdly, That though he may be freed, yet be in trouble or fear again (for
according to the measure of his faith, such is his assurance and consolation)
and then he may pray for the pardon of sin: that is to say, the fuller
assurance of it; and may ask for pardon of sin, as it includes his right to
be freed from trouble or wrath for them any more. So that I say, all sins are
pardoned in the sense I have already declared, past, present and to come.

You say that a Saint after believing may fear again, which if it be true, why
does the Apostle say, we have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear?

In Answer to this, We must know, Paul is not there going about Jesus, but the
Spirit of adoption, whereby they could cry Abba Father; and therefore the same
Apostles demanded of the Galathians whether they received the Spirit by the
preaching of the Law, or by the hearing of faith; commanding them to hold fast
their liberty, and not to be entangled with the yoke of bondage, which is the
spirit of fear in the Law, which the Galathians were subject to, not through
the preaching of Christ, but through the subtilty of deceivers preaching the
Law: And the truth is, so far as we be subject to be in bondage to fear, so
far we run to the Law; there is no such thing produced by the Spirit of
Christ Jesus.

To conclude this Chapter, I shall lay down three prevailing arguments; or
Scripture reasons, to prove that all sins past, present, and to come, in the
sense before explained, are pardoned.

1. If all a believers sins be not pardoned at once, he may be

But I say, believers are not at all truly in the state of wrath or
condemnation;

Therefore all their sins are pardoned, etc.

The first proposition is manifest, if you do but consider what it is not to
have sin pardoned, it is to be in the state of wrath or condemnation; for he is
blessed whose sins are Covered, or Pardoned.

The word of the Apostle proves the second, saying, There is no Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus.

If all sins be not pardoned at once, then some are not Covered: Blessed is
the man whose iniquities are covered: If sin be always covered, it is buried;
and so incapable of rising up against us: and so, if not pardoned, it is not
covered.

But all their sins are always Covered; Which appears in that when Christ
died, he carried them away in his own body, in to a Land of Oblivion, that God
says, I will remember their sins no more: Christ is our propitiation, all our
sins are blotted out, rased, covered, buried, nailed to the Cross that they
cannot hurt us.

If all the sins of a believer be not pardoned at once by the Lord,

But none can be laid to their charge: therefore says Paul, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Nothing can charge a believer except it be
the Law: I mean, nothing can justly charge him. Now the Law cannot do it, as
I will show you in the next Chapter.

Therefore I conclude, All sins are pardoned at once, in the sense before
named.

Chap. XIII.
Shows the Virtue of Christ's death, freeing us from the Law.
FOr the fuller clearing of this, I shall endeavor to make it appear,

First, from what Law we are freed.

Secondly, In what manner, or under what consideration we are freed.

1. The Law we are freed from, is the Law given to Adam, or the Law given on
Mount Sinai. It is needful for us to know those two dispensations, the one by
God to Adam and all the World; the other to Moses and the Children of Israel,
to be one and the same substantial Law; which we may perceive in the Epistle
to the Romans, where it is written, For when the Gentiles which have not the
Law; viz. as it was given to Israel by Moses, in that dispensation or
ministration; do by nature, that is to say, by that original instinct or
principle that is in all their hearts by creation; the things contained in the
Law, viz. of Moses; these having not the Law, viz. given them by Moses are a
Law unto themselves, that is to say, they have it in their hearts; Which show
the work of the Law written in their hearts.

This appears yet more evident if we consider, the punishment threatened by
both was the same; therefore is it said verse 15. Their conscience bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one another;
their own hearts accusing them is a manifest proof of wrath to be the fruit
of sin, and condemnation the portion of sinners; therefore says the Apostle,
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, this death is explained
to be judgment to condemnation.

If the Law and punishment be the same, that of Adam and that of Moses, to what
purpose serves the Law by Moses, is it not needless?

I Answer, No verily; though the substance was the same, yet the The Law of
Moses was added because of transgressions, the Law entered, that the offense
might abound, that the exceeding sinfulness of sin might be disovered, that so
it might discover the dead sinful estate they were in, that thought themselves
alive: For by the Law, is the knowledge of sin. The offense was before, but
abounded not; Man I say, was even dead in sin, stupid and careless, till the
Law was given on Sinai: Then thundered out curses, that is to say; now God was
resolved to make appear the wickedness of sin: but this was only to Israel, a
chosen people, other Nations had not this privilege: for this Law we must
understand was not given alone to them; for the service of God and the promises
were annexed to it; they had many types to hold forth their Savior the Lord
Jesus to do that for them that might answer for what they themselves could not
do; and by this were the Gentiles (for so the Jews called the rest of the
Nations) hedged forth; this was a partition wall: Now Paul was once alive
without the Law, viz. in his own conceit, but when the Command came, sin
revived; for the Law was given that the offense might abound; and Paul died,
viz. saw his dead condition; so that the Commandment which was appointed to
life, that is to say, to drive men to Jesus; for the Law was a Schoolmaster to
Christ; even the Law of Commands, whippings and lashings, as well as the Law of
Ceremonies, shadowing forth Christ to us, Who is the end of the Law for
righteousness. He found was to death to him, that is to say, through the
deceitfulnes of sin slew him, as being the executioner against him: so that
this Law was but the fuller discovery of the other Law: for the curse was all
one.

But because the Law is to be considered several ways, I shall show Under what
consideration we are freed from the law.
you in what senses we may look upon the Law, and in which sense we are freed
from it. Now we may look upon the Law four manner of ways,

First, As a covenant of works, Do this and live, do it not, and thou shall
dye.

Secondly, As given by Moses on Mount Sinai.

Thirdly, As written in the heart in the first Creation.

Fourthly, As written in our hearts in the second Creation by Christ Jesus.

The two first ways are as two legal coppies, the one appearing more plainly
to be read then the other; this Covenant of Works to Adam, If thou do this,
thou shall dye, was written in great Letters (as I may so say) to Israel.

the wrighting of the Law, of loving God, and our Neighbor, in the heart, in
the first creation, is fair written by Jesus, by the finger of Gods spirit in
our heart in the new Creation, Jeremiah 31. I will write my Law in your heart,
says the Lord.

Now if you consider the Law, as given by Moses written in Tables of Stone, it
was to the Jews the ministration of death, or a Covenant of works, to which
appertained ceremonies and sacrifices: In which sense we Gentiles neither have,
nor ever had any thing to do with it; it was only so given to the Jews:
Therefore it is said, We are not come to Mount Sinai, that might not be
touched; but to Mount Sion, the grace of God in the Gospel.

Now if you consider the Law as a Covenant of works to Adam, though we were
under it we are freed from it; for what curses the Jews were subject to by the
Law, as written in Tables of Stone: we were, as the Law at first was written in
our hearts, likewise subject to: For Abraham had two sons, the one by a
Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman; the one from Sinai engendring to bondage,
the other from Mount Sion; one of works, the other of grace: We are now freed
from the curse of the Law, and there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus.

As by the first Adam sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so by
one man, Jesus Christ, The free gift came of many (ye all) offenses, of them
he died for to justification of life; it is not now said to us to do this and
live, but because you live, therefore do this; it is not now said, If thou
eatest (I mean to the Fathers chosen ones) thou shall dye: but being dead thou
shall live by Jesus Christ; if thou sinnest thou have an Advocate Jesus Christ
the righteous, who covers all thy sins, so that the Gospel brings good
news: and hence is it that we hear so much of life eternal, and freedom
from the curse; which makes me desire thee to look a little back to the
variety of Gods dispensations till Christ.

Adam sinned, in dying he died, Christ was immediately promised; we hear not
much (though something) of the wickedness of sin, or the greatness of
punishment, nor much of a Redeemer: And yet was Adam saved by faith in Christ
as well as we; and the same way did condemnation seize on the unbelievers then
as well as now.

A little after we have more of Christ in a promise to Abraham, and a good land
must type forth salvation, and Circumcision was given in token that Christ
should come of the seed of Abraham: and then we hear more of cutting of from
the people. A while after this the Law was given by Moses, then Lightning and
thunder streamed from the Mount, fire flashed in their faces, blackness of
darkness, tempest, and the sound of a trumpet terrified them; yea, then they
heard the voice of words, which they were not able to bear, therefore they
entreated that they might not be spoken to them any more, for they could not
endure that which was commanded, yea, it made Moses himself exceedingly fear
and shake. Now it was, that which was threatened before, roused up it self in
more terrible appearances: Now likewise appears more of Christ's sacrifice:
Priests and Divine Service were all instituted to hold forth Christ, little yet
of eternal wrath or life was manifested but in shadows: Cursed be thou in thy
basket and store: Blessed shall thou be, and eat the fat of the good land: Of
this nature the cursings and blessings seemed to be then, yet the same way of
salvation and damnation then as now.

But the same God that spoke before sundry times, and diverse manners, has in
these last days spoken by his Son; now life and immortality is brought to
light by the Gospel, now the Veil is rent in twain, now are Jews and
Gentiles both in one estate, and now sounds the noise of hell fire, eternal
wrath, the second death, and destruction; now are we delivered from our
enemies, that no curse can come nigh all our dwelling places.

The Law was holy, just and good, how comes it to be done away?

I answer; God ordained sacrifices, they were holy, just and good, and yet were
to give way to that substance: the dispensation of God was righteous, and yet
to give place to the last ministration by Christ from heaven.

Is not the Law a rule of life to us, how then can it be done away?

If you consider what I have said, you may easily be satisfied.

If you mean by the Law the substance commanded in the Law, I say it is, and
always was for the substantial matter in the Law written in the heart in the
Creation; in Tables of stone to the Jews, and in the heart by the spirit in
the Gospel; which is, Love God and thy Neighbor, is one and the same: But if
you mean the Law as given to Moses the Mediator of the Old Covenant; to which
appertained the wordly Sanctuary, etc. it neither is, nor never was to the
Gentiles.

How can it he said, We be free from the Curse of the Law where we are yet
subject to sorrow, labor, sickness and death, which are Curses of the Law?

I answer; That Saints are subject to death and sickness, etc. It Is true, but
not upon the same account as others, is as true. The nature of all these things
are changed, the sickness of the body redounds to the souls health: The
labor of the body serves to mind us that our rest is not here: Death in the
flesh serves to pass us to our rest and blessedness; for Blessed are the dead
that dye in the Lord, for they shall rest from all their labors, and their
works follow them. Hence Paul wisely Desired to be dissolved that he might be
with Christ. Hence he glories in tribulation, which if curses to him he could
not have done. True it is, these are curses and poison to the world, but to a
Saint they are blessings and medicines well prepared by the skillful art of our
great and charitable Physician, the Lord Jesus.

But God punishes his people for sin, how then can they say, Curses are all
done away.

If by punishment you mean an execution of justice upon an offender

But some say, God himself says, You of all Nations have I known, therefore
will I punish you for your iniquities.

To that I answer; That is a threatening suitable to the dispensation We have an
Advocate.

But God in the Gospel says, Whom I love I rebuke and chasten; therefore he
punishes his beloved for their sins.

I answer to this, First, Affirmatively; That God does afflict his

Secondly, I say Afflictions are to them no curse at all, but a loving
correction of a loving Father: not to satisfy his wrath (for he has seen the
travel of his Son, and is already satisfied) but to manifest his mercy, it
being for his childrens healing, safety and prosperity; they rather publish his
love then his wrath: For whom he loves he chasteneth, and whom be receives he
scourges. Therefore says the spirit to the Saints, If you endure chastening
you are dealt withal as Sons; If you are not chastised, you are bastards and
not sons. Affliction is for their profit, as necessary for them as their
meat and drink. Before we be afflicted we go astray. Afflictions are a fruit
of the Fathers love in Christ's death, therefore called, the dyings or marks of
Christ Jesus; they are sent to crucify the sins in us that crucified him;
they are as fire, to purify, not destroy, the gold; they yield the peaceable
fruits of righteousness (though for the present they are not joyous) to them
that are exercised therein; If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him. And yet we must note, that afflictions (though many times they be) yet are
not always sent as a chastisement for some particular sin, but for the
showing forth the power of God; as Christ speaks in the case of the blind
man. To conclude this of the Law, I say we are freed from it as it was a
Covenant of works, which was a dispensation of God to the Creature, by which he
never intended life to the Creature, but to advance the glory of his his Son,
in showing them their weakness and sinfulness. But as for the substance of
the matter contained in the commands, it is I say again, a standing rule to
all generations; and he or they that walk not according to it, it is because
they have no light in them: To love God and our Neighbor, the substance of the
Law is our duty as well as any others.

Chap. XIV.
Shows some other effects of the virtue of Christ's death.
7. BY the death of Christ the wall of partition between Jews The partition
wall is broken down by the death of Christ.
and Gentiles is broken down, and all the writings of Ordinances taken out of
the way: Before it was said, In Jerusalem shall they worship; but now, Neither
in this Mountain, nor in Jerusalem; That is to say, the Father makes no more
difference of places; there is now neither Jew nor Gentile, Barbarian nor
Scythian, bond nor free, Master nor Servant, but all are one in Christ Jesus;
Now neither Circumcision nor Un-Circumcision avails any thing, but a new
Creature.

8. All types, shadows and figures are now fulfilled. Here I Types and
shadows fulfilled by Christ's death.
might be large, but I shall only name some few particulars; As

First, Circumcision held forth Christ to come in the flesh, of Abraham, of the
seed of Israel, and obliged to the keeping of the Law; now is Christ come, and
the Circumcision is of the heart, and Christ has fulfilled the Law.

Secondly, All sacrifices, peace offerings, sin offerings, trespass offerings,
are all ended in the body of Christ; He is the Altar; The propitiation; The
true living Temple; The habitation of God and the Saints; He is the true Manna;
The true Joshua or Jesus, that conducts us into the true Land of Canaan; He is
the Sampson, that by his death destroys his enemies; He is the true David,
that sits on the Throne for ever; He is the true Arc of our salvation; He is
the true Lamb; The Stape Goat; The First borne; The true Priest, Prophet, and
King; He is the the true Rock, out of whcih flow living waters; He is the true
rest; He is the Deliverer of his people; He is the true Joseph, that was sold
into a strange land to provide for us against a day of spiritual famine; He is
the true watchman and shepherd of his people: But of these I must say with our
Apostle, I cannot now stand to speak particularly.

9. He has by this death purchased for us all the happiness we Christ by
death has purchased all our happiness.
are spiritually borne to: As,

First, Our union with GOD; But more of this in the Kingly office.

Secondly, He has purchased for us the redemption of our bodies from the
grave; But more of this in the Kingly office.

Lastly, He has purchased for us life eternal, even perfection; Of which more
particularly in his Kingly office.

10. By his death he has conquered all our enemies; Of which likewise in his
Kingly office.

Chap. XV.
Shows the dignity Christ has attained through his death; and that in four
particulars.
THAT we may see the excellency of the death of Christ, let us consider it
under these considerations.

1. That by death he has conquered death and the devil; for By death Christ
has conqueted death and the Devil.
it was impossible that he should be held of death: Therefore is it said, He
should see Corruption. The gallant Conquerors of the Kingdoms of the world
when they dye they cease to conquer any more; but our Jesus in dying slew
death, and him that had the power of death; that is to say, the Devil.

2. He by death rose from the dead: For he, the selfsame that By death he
rose from the dead.
ascended first, descended into the lowest part of the earth, for he rose from
the dead: Which resurrection of his has many glorious effects; I shall only
instance in two.

First, It was the manifestation that he was none other but the The virtue of
Christ's resurrection.
the true Messiah, the Son of God. This made the Rulers acknowledge of a truth
that he was the Son of God.

Secondly, It was the assurance to the Saints that he had finished his work;
and therefore is it said, He was raised justification: Had he died, and not
risen from the dead, our faith, preaching, writing (and the like) all had been
in vain; had he not rose from the dead, death had conquered him: Now the true
ground of our believing, is his death that could not be held of death: by his
rising he evidently declared himself to be the Lords Christ; Even the same
body that died rose from the dead; who said, Behold my hands and my feet.

3. By death he ascended into heaven; For he descended that he Christ's
ascension into heaven, and the virtue thereof.
might ascend: He ascended from the state of infamy, shame and contempt, far
above all heavens, into the state of glory of the highest glory of God. The
fruits of whose ascension are,

First, The leading Captivity Captive; the triumphing over all our enemies;
Even as a General that has conquered his enemies should carry them openly at
his Chariot wheels; so does our Jesus carry all his and our enemies in open
triumph.

Secondly, When he ascended up on high, He gave gifts unto men, that he might
fill all things; that is to say, that all his might be filled with himself;
with the new Wine of his spirit. Time would fail me to enlarge my self herein.

4. By death he sits at the right hand of God. By the right hand Christ sits at
the right hand of God, and the benefit we enjoy thereby.
of God we are not to understand, as the ignorant sort do, that God has a
right and left hand as we have, but by his right hand is meant Gods greatest
glory, power and dignity. Sit thou on my right hand, says the Lord, till I
make thine enemies thy footstool. The effects of which are,

First, The ruling over the world and all in it; of which in his Kingly office.

Secondly, The rest of himself having done his work; for he having finished
his work is entered into his rest.

Thirdly, The assurance that we shall enter into ours; for as he has conquered
and is set down, so shall we be.

5. Lastly, By death he makes intercession for us.

The intercession of Christ is his pleading or continually for us to his
Father; which pleading we may not by any means Christ makes intercession for
us: what is the virtue thereof.
dream, is a speaking vocally as we do one to another, but a voice in his
blood; For his blood speaks better things then the blood of Abel. Now the
blood of Abel, we know, cried to heaven for vengeance: But that we may briefly
see the excellency of Christ's intercession, let us mind,

First, That his blood is always present before the Lord, speaking for us as
Gods remembrancer: it is our Advocate that is always pleading our cause.

Secondly, It pleades satisfaction to be given to the Judge of all; by which we
live in continual security: So that the sum of the dignity Christ in dying
arises to, is his Prophetical and Kingly office, which he executes with much
love and fidelity. That he has obtained all this by death, I will only give
you this demonstration of it.

That all this is but the perfection of our Jesus. Now he was made perfect
through sufferings; for the suffering of death he was crowned with glory, Heb.
2. Phil. 2.
and honor; And because he humbled himself, therefore has God exalted him,
and given him a name above every name; that at, or in his name or power, every
knce should bow.

Chap. XVI.
Shows what the Prophetical Office of Christ is, and the excellency thereof.
HAving thus finished (through divine assistance) the first part of the
threefold office of Christ, viz: his Priestly office; I am now come to speak
of his Prophetical office; which I shall finish with much brevity: There being
two things for the explication of this office to be minded.

1. The Prophet himself. 2. The office or work of this Prophet.
First, Concerning the Prophet; It is the Lord Jesus that was anointed to
become the Teacher of his people. The Prophets under the Law were anointed with
oil; Our great Prophet, the Lord Jesus with the Spirit, he was made full of
grace and truth, and God the Father raised him up, as it was foretold by Moses,
and furnished him with sufficient abilities to discharge his trust: For the
fullness of wisdom was in him; therefore is he called, the Councellor; the
same man that was anointed to be a Priest, was anointed to be a Prophet; who
was a Priestly Prophet, and a Prophetical Priest.

Secondly, The office of the Prophet is next to be spoken to; which is an
office given to him of the Father, for the revelation or discovering of the
great mysteries of the Fathers Kingdom: in which office there are five things
to be known.

1. The matter discovered.

2. The light discovering.

3. The rule of discovery.

4. The manner of discovery or teaching.

5. The persons taught.

The matter discovered by this Prophet in general is this; Whatever The matter
discovered is.
may be known or enjoyed of God by the Creature, and whatever the Creature is
and shall be in relation unto God. Christ by his sacrifice has obtained for us
all that is to be desired; and as a Prophet, he comes to tell us what he has
done for us; what we shall enjoy by him; what we have done against him, and
what we ought to return to him. I shall draw forth this to thy view in
several particulars: As

First, Christ is a Prophet discovering to us our sinfulness and Man's
sinfulness.
misery by nature, our nakedness and emptiness, our blindness and vanity,
for it is he that convinces of sin. Alas! We see not our wretched estate by
sin till Christ comes to us and shows us the danger of it.

Secondly, Christ discovers to his people their happiness by Man's happiness.
grace; that though their sins are great, the Fathers love is greater: Poor
man, lies in a dark dungeon till Christ come with his light; in a comfortless
estate, till his eternal state in love be ascertained him; he it is that
reveals to the soul the Gospel or good news of salvation; he comes to the
soul and tells him his sins are forgiven him: By the sight of this love the
soul is taught the greatness of his sin, and the infiniteness of his
offense; the riches of Gods grace is made to shine more clearly; for he
convinces the world of righteousness.

Thirdly, This Prophet teaches the souls all things to be believed, All things
to be believed.
even the resurrection of the body, and everlasting life: yea the Fathers love
to him from eternity; yea, this teaches him what God is, and what Christ is,
and to believe what he reveals, and what shall be hereafter; for he convinces
the world of judgment.

Lastly, Because I must hasten, He teaches the soul obedience to Obedience to
all the commands of God.
observe all the commands of Christ, the least as well as the greatest, visible
as well as invisible, things to be done in earth, as well as to be enjoyed in
heaven: he teaches how to behave our selves while strangers here, as well as
what we shall enjoy when we attain to the City which we now seek; which
obedience consists in two things.

1. Love to God; Love to God is that which Christ preaches to every soul whom
he loves; and in teaching him to love God, he teaches him to love God above
all, and in all, and all things for his sake, and to deny all things, and
account them as loss and dung in comparison of his God.

2. Love to his Neighbor; Love is the fulfilling of the whole Law; but more of
this as God gives further opportunity.

I proceed now to speak of the light discovering, which is the The light
discovering is the Spirit.
spirit of God in Christ; Therefore says the Lord Jesus, When I go away, viz:
in the flesh: I will send you the Spirit, and be shall take of mine, and show
it to you; he will guide you into all truth. Therefore says the Psalmist, Oh
that thou would send forth thy light and thy truth, let them lead me: this
Spirit is the Spirit the Comforter.

Christ says, I am the light, and I will teach you: And it is said, That he
reveals the mysteries of the Father; how then say you it is the Spirit?

In answer to this, I desire you would consider these three

1. That we are taught by God; and therefore says the Scripture, Ye shall be
all taught of God.

2. That we are all taught by Christ; therefore Christ says, I am the true
light.

3. We are taught by the Spirit; therefore is it said, Ye have an unction that
teaches you all things.

Now these three are not three several distinct lights, but one true light,
which Christ's own words sweetly hold forth, saying, All that the Father has
is mine; and the Spirit shall take of mine, and show it unto you. Which holds
forth this truth that the Father teaches by his Son, For the fullness of the
Father dwells in him; and the Son now teaches only by his Spirit; therefore
the Spirit takes of Christ, to give to them that are his children; So that it
remains clear, there is but one true light, namely, the light of the Father
and the Son made manifest by the Spirit.

The third thing I propounded is the rule of discovery; and that The rule of
discovery the Scriptures
is the truth of God revealed in the Scriptures; The Scriptures do declare all
that was, that is, and that shall be practiced or enjoyed by any. To the Law
and to the Testimony was a sure guide or rule of old; insomuch that if any
spoke not according to them, it was because there was no light in them So
likewise is it a sure rule now, even the Law and Testimony given by the Lord
Jesus, the Son of God, who has spoken in the last days his will to us.

Now the will of God which is our rule to walk by, is the command of God, the
Law of God: Where there is no Law there is nothing but disorder; Christ has
given us a standing Law to walk by, which is the Scriptures of truth: The holy
Scriptures, which the Apostle affirms, Are able to make the man of God perfect
unto salvation, through faith in Jesus. Many men now adays are grown so
wanton, that they may sin without control, deny the Scriptures to be the
words or Law of God: But to such souls let me say, the Heathens will convince
them of Atheism; for when they once come to deny that, they deny likewise the
work of God written in the heart by the Creation.

But how can you prove the Scriptures to be the words of the Lord.

Besides the Testimony they bear of themselves, (which some, though carnally
and sensually judge to be false) I shall propound these few considerations to
you.

First, Whatever is written in the heart by nature, is found plainly and fully
described in the Scriptures. By nature man knows there is a God; that this God
is to be worshipped; and that he ought to live righteously; and his conscience
flies in his face, being convicted of his sin against God; whereupon he is
put upon a way of thinking how he may please God; these things, through his
ignorance, are but confusedly in him; but look to the Scriptures, all these
things are handled plainly and distinctly; which is an undeniable argument
(except to them that are so scared, that they can also deny there is a God)
that the Scriptures are the very words of God, that thy heart in nature minds
thee, God in his word plainly unfolds to thee.

Nay further, I will appeal to any man, and challenge the wisest, subtilest,
most ingenuous man in the world to tell me what is good or excellent to be
followed or avoided, which may not be clearly demonstrated from the Scripture.

Another reason which may serve to silence thy vain thoughts, is this, that
all men that write of God, or the worship of God, are forced to make recourse
to these Scriptures, to decide the controversies among them. Do not the
greatest Heretics seem to father their blasphemies upon the Scripture; which
is a good Argument of their Authority. If the Scriptures were not to be
believed above their words, why do they seek to prove their matter from them?
Nay, which seems a wonder to me, these very bruits (for I can give them no
fitter name) that deny the Scriptures, do often times bring Scripture to prove
their denial of them: Sometimes they object to us the seeming Contradictions
that are in them; telling us the Word of God cannot contradict it self: and
for this they allege the Scriptures that say, God cannot lie, and the like:
by which do they not set to their seals, that God is true, and the Scriptures
his word. Yet a little further; let them set aside the Scriptures, and bid them
reason of any thing, and what will they then say? How will they prove what they
say? Will they prove their assertions from some undeniable principles? From
whence I pray you fetch they their principles? It is either from nature, or
from grace: If from nature, that is corrupted; Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean thing? Nature teaches not the true Worship of God: If from
grace, Where is this grace made manifest? And if it be not manifest, who will
believe them? For the proving of doubtful things is always by things more
known, If it be made manifest, surely then it is in the Scriptures.

Well, To conclude this; Consider that heavenly style, faithfulness in
reproving as well great and small; that sweet unity that is there; that majesty
and authority that is to be found there, and in no writing else; that almost
all men that have ever seen them, stand in admiration of them; which are an
evident demonstration of the excellency of them.

But there are many things in the Scripture that seem incredible; as Sampsons
staying so many with the Jaw Bone of an Ass; and Christ's being borne of a
Virgin; and Noah's Arc; and many more.

To whom do these seem incredible? Do thou believe there are so, why shall
we not believe them? But it may be though may say, there are many things that
seem to contradict each other: What then? Are they not true, because thy
narrow, foolish and shallow heart cannot comprehend it? There are many things
in nature which thou can give no reason of; Why quarrellest thou not with
them also, and with that God that made them? If thou understandingly did but
read them, I dare say thou would say there is not one thing in the whole
Scriptures needless, nor any Contradictions: Some things in them are figures;
some histories; some laws, which all hold forth the majesty, sovereignty and
excellency of the Lord. I shall for the present say no more of the rule of
discovery, but this, That he that shall deny the Scriptures to be the Word of
God, is a bruit beast without any bounds; yea, he is but an Atheist; that
cannot choose but deny God himself.

The fourth thing is, the manner of discovery. The light of God The manner of
discovery.
reveals the mysteries of God: And this is,

1. Ministerially; God discovers himself by his Ministers: but Ministerially.
more of this hereafter.

2. Plainly; The Lord Jesus delights to speak after a familiar Plainly.
manner to the soul; teaching it by words easy to be understood.

Christ spoke in Parables, how say you then he speaks plainly?

To that I answer; It is true, there was a time when Christ spoke in Parables;
but yet it is worth our observing, that he used such parables that the very
Jews that heard him, knew whom and what he meant by his Parables. But further,
I say likewise, that Christ spoke afterward to his Disciples plainly, and not
in parables; which the Disciples acknowledged, saying, So now thou speak
plainly.

If you look to the manner of Christ's speaking, it is most plain making use of
the plainest similitudes that could be. Thus did the Apostles preach; not with
entising words of man's wisdom, but with plainness of speech in demonstration
of the spirit and power: Which when I consider, I cannot but wonder at the
imposters, deceivers and deceived of this generation, who come with high
swelling words, and uncouth language, that in truth their words are harder to
be understood then their matter; who speak as if they desired rather to have
their persons, wit, eloquence and elocution advanced, then the Gospel of
Jesus; He is not now among many wanton Christians, thought worthy of hearing,
that has not an art of copying some new expressions to paint, and indeed
adulterate and counterfeit the truth. Well: I am sure Paul was of another
mind, that said, He had rather speak five words which he understood, then ten
thousand in an unknown tongue. These men to my understanding do, as if a man
minding to show forth the excellent proportion of a beautiful man, should
build a fair and beautiful Turret or Scaffold very high, and sets the man
upon it, which indeed Eclipses the beauty of a man, and fixes their eyes on the
beautiful structure he stands upon. They pretend to hold forth Christ, but in
truth it is their own words, not Christ, that is so much doted or admired by
these Disciples, of whom, through their fair words, they have made merchandise
for Satan.

Lastly, Christ teaches the soul infallibly there is no guile in his mouth;
his words are not yea and nay, but the truth of God; the unquestionable truths
of God; he speaks not at peradventure.

I think this is true, I suppose it to be true, and the like doubtful
phrases; but says, This is the voice of the God, of the Lord, of him that
cannot lie: Oh blessed are all that are thus taught of Jesus Christ; his words
are the sure words of prophecy, whereto we do well to give heed.

Lastly, A word or two to the subjects to whom this light reveals The subjects
to whom this light is discovered.
the matter. I have before shown to be the substance revealed, and they are
two fold, according to the diversity of the matter revealed.

Now the matter revealed is, either the mysteries of the Fathers love to a
poor soul, which is hidden from the wise men of the world; and this the true
light discovers only to the children of the Kingdom: Or else,

2. The matter revealed is, the truth of God barely and nakedly, as it is in it
self without the souls interest in it, to whom it is revealed. And in this
sense Saul was among the Prophets; and the Spirit of God was upon Balaam,
whereby he knew Israel to be blessed, though himself partook not of that
blessing: In this sense the spirit gives gifts to the rebellious; this is a
receiving truth, but not in the love of it; from which a man may utterly fall
away.

Though a man has all knowledge, yet if he be not a chosen vessel of the
Father, and have not the understanding of the Fathers love, he may, as Judas,
fall away from his profession, and go forth and hang himself, as he did; yea
he may be a Castaway for all that; it is not man's knowledge, but Gods love, that
saves a soul.

Christ many times makes use of men for his own glory; whose names are not
written in the Lambs book of life. But it is the portion of the chosen,
called, and faithful ones of God, to be taught savingly, knowingly and
powerfully; through which teaching the wisdom of the world in them; and the
mystery of iniquity that before had taken the soul captive, are now put to
silence and to flight: To these, his words are as a fire going out of his mouth
to the consumption of that dross that remains in them, whereby they become a
pure and refined people.

Chap. XVII.
Shows what the Kingly office of Christ is, and the excellency thereof in ten
particulars.
I Have already showed you, that whatever the Father has appointed for us to
enjoy, he sent his Son by death to obtain it; and whatever he by death
procured, as he is a Prophet, he makes it manifest, according to his manifold
wisdom: And now I am come to declare, that whatever he, as a Prophet,
foretells or reveals for us, as a King he powerfully effects, for his word
returns not in vain. Which Kingly office is committed to him of the Father,
What the Kingly office of Christ is;
for the ruling, governing and ordering his Kingdom after a just and glorious
manner: in which office these several things are considerable.

1. The King himself. 2. His Kingdom. 3. His Laws. 4. His Officers by which
he rules. 5. His Enemies. 6. His Victories. 7. His Soldiers. 8. His Weapons.
9. His Rewards. 10. His Judgments.
1. The King is the Lord Jesus Christ, Emanuel, the Prince of Peace, Christ is
King
the Captain of the Lords hoasts; who enjoys his Kingdom,

1. By inheritance, it is his birthright; He is the firstborn, the By
inheritance.
heir of all things; it is he that was borne King of the Jews; he is the eldest
Son, the first begotten Son, the express image of the Father.

2. By designation or appointment of the Father; the Kings of the Jews were
anointed by the Lord: But all the majesty, sovereignty By appointment of the
Father.
and authority that was in them, was but the shadow or figure of the excellency
of our King, the anointed of him that said unto him, Son, thy throne is for
ever and ever: He is the Lords anointed, whom God has made Lord of all.

3. By conquest; This Jesus that was borne to all, must fight for it before he
has it; and so he does: for by death he show all his By conquest.
enemies, and obtaines a glorious Kingdom: Whose fitness for the managing of
his Kingdom appears,

1. In that he was the firstborn of God; the express image of his Fathers
person; A Son begotten in his Fathers likeness. Saul the King of the Jews
was taller by the head and shoulders then any of the people: I am sure this
King is fairer then the children of men, who in all things has the
pre-eminence for beauty and personal excellency, Men and Angels fall down
before him, he surpasses them all.

2. In that all Kingly virtues center in him; the confluence of all the
excellency of heaven and earth dwell in him; his wisdom is matchless, his
power boundless, his riches inestimable, his love unparalled, his justice
unquestionable, his innocence admirable: some Kings have only a name, but he
has power too, and a more excellent name then they all: Some have power, but
want wisdom or love, but all things desirable and virtuous are to be found in
him, and in him alone.

2. His Kingdom bespeaks him altogether worthy; and this Christ has a
Kingdom which is over this world.
is threefold.

First, over this world, a civil Kingdom; therefore is it said, He is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and only Ruler of Princes; in this Kingdom is his
dominion, from one end of the earth to the other; the subjects whereof are all
men as men, for whose use are all the Creatures given; that they have a right
to them, a propriety in them, and may not by any be defrauded of them; which
Kingdom is his, for He made all things in heaven and earth, and in him they
consist, Coloss. 1.

Secondly, Of Grace, Christ has a Kingdom in the world, which Of Grace.
is not of the world; which is called, the Kingdom of heaven, or the Kingdom
of God: Now this is a Kingdom, or dominion, or rule that Christ has, and
exercises in the heart of a Saint: therefore is it said, The Kingdom of God
is within you; and this consists in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost: the Children of which Kingdom Romans 14. 17.
be the Saints, bodies and spirits, who are called the Kingdom of heaven: For
the word, Kingdom, sometimes signifies the Subjects ruled, or the rule a King
has in his Subjects.

Thirdly, Of Glory; which is called the Kingdom of God, into Of Glory.
which only an entrance is ministered to us here; this we believe by faith, and
seek by faith, and shall receive at the last day, when Christ shall say, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: It was
prepared for them before, but not actually enjoyed by them till the
resurrection of their bodies. This is the Kingdom in which God is all in all;
which is only the portion or inheritance of those that are written in the
Lambs book of life.

3. Christ's laws are very excellent; his yoke is easy and his Christ's laws
what.
burden is light: Oh how hard a matter was it, yea impossible, to fulfill Moses
his Law, but Christ communicates of his fullness, that we may fulfill the
royal law of love; which laws are either

First, Civil laws, moral laws, laws of justice and equity between man and
man, whereby every one enjoyes his right without oppression; this is a distinct
law, a distinct region, wherein the Lord Jesus the Lord of all, administers in
a distinct manner, as being peculiar to his first Kingdom, which is over the
bodies of men as men.

Secondly, Spiritual laws, laws of obedience of life, of joy, peace and
righteousness; which are laws that the first Kingdom are ignorant of; it is
of a more high, divine and excellent nature; whose subjects are not every
particular man and woman in the world, as are the subjects of the earthly
Kingdom, but they are a chosen people out of the world, whose laws are of
another nature, to be performed by another principle, after another manner,
which the other Kingdom can take no cognizance of, being laws to the
thoughts, to the soul, to the body, to the whole man.

And Lastly, is the law of love, (if I may so call it) which endures for ever
in the Kingdom of glory, wherein Saints enflamed with the fire of divine love,
praising and singing Hallelujahs to the Lord. I might hereto add the law of
faith, but it is included in the other.

4. Chief officers or Ministers proclaim his Excellency, and they are
twofold.

1. Civil, and these are Magistrates, whose work is to rule by the principle
of justice and equity, doing to others as they would have done to themselves,
and not by their own lusts or wills: this is tyranny, oppression, cruelty and
injustice, whereby men look liker to the subjects of the God of this world the
Devil, then like the Magistrates of the Lord. This their power is created of
God, to which all men, even Saints, considered as men, are to be subject, not
for wrath, but conscience sake. As for the title of these Officers, its not
essential to the office, whether it be of Kings, Lords, Commons, Judges,
Emperors, or the like: The work I say is justice in things civil. Now the
Lord will not have these Officers go forth of their own sphere to meddle with
the affairs of his other Kingdom, for these reasons amongst many others.

First, Because the Laws of this Kingdom, and of the other, viz:

Secondly, Because the punishment of the offenses of both are

And whereas, I say, the first Kingdom is to be subject to the second, my
meaning is, that Magistracy is inferior to the spiritual government of Christ
in his Church; and though a man be a Magistrate, he is never the nearer heaven
for that; but if he will be ruled as one of Christ's visible Church or Kingdom,
he must become a Member thereof; for a Magistrate is no Church Officer.

Thirdly, Because God has furnished them both with a sufficiency England would
take it as an high affront, if any should tell them they are not able to
govern the the Kingdom without the help of Spain or Italy; I assure you it
is a greater affront to Jesus Christ, to say his Church may not be well ruled
without civil Magistrates; for this is certain, that there is a greater
disproportion between the government of the Magistrate, and the Church, then
between the government of England, and Italy or Spain. For the subjects of
all earthly governments are men as men, and the laws ought to be all one
substantially, minding the well-being of the natural man; for whatever tends
to the violation of the outward peace and quiet between men and men, let the
Magistrate look to that, for that is the adequate object of his office. But
now the subjects of the Church are men called out from men; they are Saints by
profession, whose whole administrations are far different from the other.

But Christian Magistrates may be Church Officers, though others may not.

That a Magistrate may be a Christian, it is true (And Oh that Nero was
commanded by Paul, who surely was not a Christian Magistrate: The term of a
Christian Magistrate, I fear, deceives many simple souls: I am to yield
obedience as well to a Heathen, as a Christian Magistrate; for we are commaded
to give to Caesar the things that are Cesars, and to Christ the things that are
his.

As for the Kingdom of Glory, in it there be no Officers, for God is all in
all there; there is no Temple there; nothing but love; the Saints being once
glorified Jesus, are resigned up to the Father, and Christ himself becomes
subject, That God may be all in all.

What is it for the Kingdom to be resigned up by Christ to the Father?

I answer; The Kingdom is all the Saints of God that ever were or shall be:
the resigning them up to God, is Christ's giving up all the Saints and his
Saints and his rule and authority into the hands of the Father, from whom he
received them: as if he should say, Father, thou have given me people to rule
over, to overcome their enemies, and to glorify them; Lo I have now done all my
work, I have no more to do, here is my Kingdom, my children and brethren, I
resign up all into thy hands. And now the Son is subject also, that is to
say, the man Christ, the Mediator between God and man, puts off all his robes
of power and government, and they are all swallowed up in the Godhead; that now
there is no more dispensation or ministration by Jesus the Mediator: but God
the Father, that eternal being, is all in all, that is to say, no Ruler
appears but he: the Kingdom of Christ is an everlasting Kingdom, now abiding
for ever with the Father, where Christ for ever remains as an elder brother,
with this honor, that it is he alone that has brought us to this dignity.

When shall this Kingdom be resigned up to the Father? Qu. Sol.


It is at the end of all things, when all rule, and all authority, and power,
are under him; which shall not be till the resurrection of the body: Therefore
says the Scripture, It Is when all things shall be subdued unto him, for he must
reign till all his enemies are put under him. So that if any man shall say,
the Kingdom is now resigned to the Father, he must needs affirm Christ ceases
to reign, for then must the Son be subject.

But say some, though Christ may reign in some, yet he may resign up others
unto the Father.

Poor man! Why labourest thou so much to shake off Christ's easy and
delightful yoke? Why strivest thou to be out of Christ's

If the Kingdom be resigned up to the Father, then are all Christ's enemies
subdued under his feet, and Christ ceases to reign any more; but surely all
his enemies are not yet subdued to him: Have thou never an evil thought in
thee, no sin at all? If thou shall say thou have not, thou deceivest thy
self: but yet if it should be true, Have thou no imperfection left? Is thy
body dead, and raised from the dead? Surely no: But was it true that Christ
has never an enemy left in thee, has he none no where else? What means the
opposition of the world to the Saints? What means all sicknesses and
sorrows, tears and troubles? Now these enemies must first subdued: Christ
resignes not up his Kingdom bypeice-meals; but when all his work is done, then
comes the end.

Secondly, Spiritual Officers; as there is a Civil Kingdon e in which are
Civil Officers; so has Christ a Spiritual Kingdom, which is his Church; in
which are Spiritual Officers: of which in the second part of this Discourse.

5. We are in the next place to consider Christ's enemies, which hold Christ's
enemies.
forth a necessity for Christ to reign; and they are several: yet all
conspire in one, the ruin of the Lord Christ; which enemies heads I shall
reduce to these.

1. Satan, the grand enemy of the Lord Jesus; there is a seed of enmity sown
between Christ and his generation, Michael and Satan. Luke. 8. 30.
his Angels, and the Devil and his Angels. This is that wicked one whose name
is Legion, (because there are many Devils) that assaulted Christ in the earth,
and all that are Christ's, while on the earth: this is he that compasses all
the world, to dethrone Christ from his dignity, who is against Christ.

2. Sin; If it were not for sin, Satan could do us no harm, Sin.
sin is that which causes man to mourn all the day long; which sin is
either open or secret, errors in doctrine or practice.

3. Wicked men; the wicked Kings and Rulers of the earth; Wicked men.
the men of this world, whose eyes are blinded: and such are we by nature,
being dead in sins and trespasses. We in our own minds are enemies to him.
Herod and Pilate, though at difference, could agree together to crucify Jesus:
Yea, whatever stands in opposition to Christ, is his enemy: which leads us to
consider,

6. His Victories; these, I say, proclaim him King; he has Christ's victories.
overcome all his enemies: his Victories may admit of a threefold consideration.

First, as they are atcheived against the enemies of his own person; and so
has he conquered the Devil, for he destroyed Satan and sin: For he that
knew no sin was made sin for us, and carried our sins away in his own
body, and overcame death, for he could not be held of death, but ascended from
the dead. Yea, he conquered all his enemies; it was a crucified Jesus that
pricked the Jews to the heart.

Secondly, as they are performed in Saints; which likewise admits Christ
enlightens the understanding
of a threefold consideration.

1. Over their understandings; We are all naturally in the dark, ignorant of
God; yea, We sit in darkness; yea, The God of the world has blinded our eyes:
but now comes Christ, and binds this strong man, and opens our understanding,
whereby we come to know the Mysteries which were before hid in God: therefore
is it said of him, He shall give light to them that sit in darkness.

2. Over their wills; if Christ should never so open their understandings,
Rescues our wills.
and not conquer and rescue their wills, he would be a Savior but of some part
of the man, and so would be an imperfect Savior. Our wills are fattered and
chained, they seek nothing but vanity all the day long; but now comes the Lord
Jesus as a mighty Conqueror, and powerfully rescues our will from the hard
bondage wherein it was made to serve, by Satan and sin; and so causes the
soul to will the things of God: Therefore is it said, It Is God that works in
us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. We naturally will nothing but
vanity, but through his good pleasure we are made able to will the glory of
God, and life eternal. But methinks I hear some demanding.

Have not all men free will to be saved? Qu. Sol.


To which I thus answer; If by free will you understand a voluntary desire or
choice of the will from the true understanding of salvation: I say no man, as a
mere man in the world, has any such will; for our will is enslaved: We are
the servants of sin by nature: and it is the alone work of the spirit to renew
this will, to rescue it from the tyranny of Satan; but yet may some question.

Whether every man that wills salvation may have it? Qu. Sol.


To which I answer; If you mean by willing salvation, a desire of salvation,
from a true understanding of God in Christ, which is the hungring after Christ:
I say, whoever wills salvation or the Lord Jesus, let such a soul fear not,
but boldly go to, or believe on, or rest upon, and be confident in Christ, For
all that hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be filled. But the power
thus to will or desire is only of the Lord, Who only works to will and do
of his good pleasure. Our King Jesus in the salvation of any soul, first,
discovers his own excellency, then causes man's will, before averse, to choose
it: which he does through the mighty power of his Kingly dignity.

3. The Lord our King works upon the affections. We that before Christ
overcomes our affections.
had all our joy in the earth, love in, to, and upon the world; whose fears
were of a carnal nature, are now made able to love Christ, delight in Christ,
rejoice in him, fear him and obey him: and that is performed by him as a
mighty King, That rules in the midst of his enemies: whose power is
irresistible, For whom the Father foreknew, he did predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his Son: It Is not said, whom he foreknew would believe and be
conformable, them he glorified; but whom he fore-knew, he did predestinate or
fore-appoint, or ordain, should believe, and be conformable to the image of
his Son; And whom he did predestinate he called, and whom he called he
justified, and whom he justified he glorified; We love him because he first
loved us: And therefori is it said, We are translated from the Kingdom of
Satan unto the Kingdom of his dear Son.

Thirdly, We may consider his victories, as atcheived against all our enemies
as within us, so without us, as Satan, Death and Hell, and the like: but I
shall here only mind the world the wicked and ungodly thereof those that were
foreordained of old to condemnation, the world is an open enemy to Jesus;
which appears by the words of God, saying, That enmity was put between the
Serpents and the Woman's seed. Now it is the Lord Christ that Strikes through
Kings in the day of his wrath, and wounds the heads over many Continents.

If the world be Christ's enemy, and Christ such a mighty and just King: how
comes it to pass he lets them remain so long unpunished?

I shall propound only these three reasons.

1. Because he is unwilling that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. And because he would have all to be saved, that is to say, if God
should have cut off Adam when he sinned, or should destroy all sinners now,
what would become of all the chosen ones of God, that shall be begotten of
their loins? Had Adam sinned, the great design of God in bringing forth the
man Jesus had been frustrate; for he was the Son of Adam. God would rather
the ungodly should be here a long time, then any one of his should perish: So
that I say Gods being unwilling that any should perish, is meant only of any
of those whom he has ordained life for; which is the ground why he suffers the
wicked to have a being, and to continue so long, and not because Christ's death
was a sacrifice offered for their sins, as some ignorantly surmise.

2. Because God would exercise the faith and patience of his Saints; therefore
is it said, when God had foretold, the war Antichrist should make with the
Saints, and that he should at length be led into Captivity, Here is the
patience and the faith of the Saints.

3. God through the enmity of the world advances his mercy in his Son, and
his justice in the worlds ruin. Were not there great enemies, the conquests of
our King would not appear so glorious. Thus have I briefly shown the
victories of our King, Under whose feet the Father has put all things, Heb. 2.
8.

If all things be put in subjection under Christ's feet, how is it said he must
reign till he has subdued them: for the first assertion seems to imply he
has nothing at all to conquer.

I answer; Christ is said to have all put under him, in that he We see not all
things put under him, that is to say, though God has made him Lord of all, yet
we do not see his enemies fully destroyed; We see sin and death, which
being put under him, must be subdued to him: Therefore says the Lord to our
Lord Jesus, Sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstole.
Christ's enemies are his captives, whom as they all banded against his person,
he destroyed: yet still rebel against him, as in his members, whom he must
destroy; for he must reign till all his enemies of all sorts be subdued unto
him.

7. I am now come to speak of his soldiers, and they are fourefold. Christ's
soldiers are The Angels,


1. All the Angels of God they are ministering spirits at the commands of
Christ; therefore says Christ to Peter, Think not thou that I can pray to
my Father, and he shall give me more then twelve Legions or hands, of Angels:
for they do homage to Christ. When the first begotten of God was brought into
the world, says God, Let all the Angels of God worship him. Therefore we hear
so much of Gods sending his Angels to destroy his enemies, and to encampe about
his servants: It Is they that excel in strength, and do the commands of God;
Therefore are they called Christ's Ministers, Math. 13. 41. Which power out the
vials of Gods wrath, Revel. 14. 19.

2. The Saints they are made more then Conquerours through The Saints.
him that loves them. An excellent description of this King, and this Army of
Saints, you may see in the 19th of Rev. 11. to the end of the Chapter.

3. The World; God sanctifies or sets apart Cyrus to do his The world.
pleasure. God makes his enemies to serve him in the ruin one of another. Rev.
16. It is said the ten horns which be interpreted ten Kings, shall hate the
Whore, and make her desolate: God many times makes use of one Oppressor or
Idolater to destroy another.

4. And lastly, The whole Creation is Gods host; therefore The whole Creation.
it is said, The Stars in their course fought against Sisera. God makes use
of Sun, Moon and Stars for the accomplishment of his Victories: Therefore
are these called the host of God. Christ's weapons.


8. His weapons he uses bespeak him to be wonderful: none other but the mighty
God. I shall only instance these three.

1. His death. 2. His word. 3. His Spirit.
Weapons of another nature then the world dreams of.

1. His death; therefore is it said, By means of death he overcame, His death.
and by his death he show all his enemies, as Sampson when he died killed many
at his death: so our Conqueror by dying kills, slayes and crucifies his enemies.

And these are the weapons that Christ arms his Church with; for by their
sufferings the truth is advanced. And herein holds that saying true, that the
blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. His Word.


2. By his word; Christ when he goes forth to battle, effects his ends,
obtaines victory by the words that proceed out of his mouth. If Christ says
to the Fig tree, Wither thou: behold immediately it dryes up; His word is a
sharp sword able to divide between the marrow and the bones. With which he
smites the Nations, which Rev. 19. 15.
word is Christ's command for the accomplishment of his mind, and Every word
that proceeds out of his mouth returns not till it has accomplished that
whereto it was sent.

3. By his Spirit; Our weapons, says the Apostle, are not carnell, His Spirit.
but spiritual; mighty to throw down strong holds. Which serves sufficiently
to detect the falsity of that doctrine that shrowds it self under, and
propagates it self by secular or civil authority. The wed of the Lord, which
indeed is spirit and life, has a sufficiency in it self to defend it self,
and propagate it self from one family, Town, City, County or Kingdom, to
another: which spirit is the powerful operation of the word of God, the spirit
of truth: Oh what is so strong as truth! It is true, Christ makes the weapons
of the world to serve him; but the weapons he has approved, and ownes, and
has put into his soldiers hands to fight withal for the mannaging of the
affairs, and the subduing of the enemies of his spiritual Kingdom, are on ly
spiritual, and not at all carnal: Which we may see lively set forth, where is
said, Christ sits on a white horse, judging and making war in righteousness,
who is clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called, the Word
of God.

9. The Lord Jesus is righteous in his warfare, he is faithful in rewarding:
Now by the rewards of Christ we must not understand Christ's rewards.
that there is any excellency in the Creature, as his own, which deserved
these rewards; but the reward is, of grace, of him that works and rewards
the work.

Now besides the sweet sanctification, constant supplies, abundant experience,
and great joys they are refreshed withal, while they follow Christ, being
made faithful to the death, there are two things as just rewards conferred
upon them; As,

First, The resurrection of the body; This is a great privilege to the Saints;
it is the way to life eternal: Be thou faithful unto the death (says the
Lord Jesus) and I will give thee a crown of life. He that loses his life for
Christ's sake shall find it: He that believes on me (says Christ) I will
raise up at the last day. Now the body that shall be raised up, is the same
numericall or organicall body that suffers with Christ, or which men have power
to kill (when the spirit or soul cannot be killed, because it is immortal)
shall be raised up again.

But may some say, how can this be, that the same body should be raised again
which is laid in the dust, resolved into the four Elements, eaten by worms of
the earth, or fishes of the sea; which fishes again are eaten by men, and
become nourishment to them; and so the body suffer several mutations and
alterations.

Why wondrest thou how that can be, more then thou wondrest Philippians,
saying, The Lord Christ shall Phil. 3. last.
change our vile bodies, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself. Though we can see no reason looking upon it with a
natural eye, yet if we consider that it shall be effected by the same word
that said at first, Let there be light, and there was light: Even by the same
word that said, Let us create man in our own image: and did thereby create
him, there is no ground at all to question, but the very same word or mighty
power is able to raise up thy dead body. He has said, He will raise up thy
body at the last day: And who therefore shall dare to say it, it neither will
nor can be.

But some are ready to object, That the Resurrection the Scriptures speak of,
is spiritual, accomplished at Christ's coming into the soul; but as for the
resurrection of the body, that is a carnal thing.

That Christ Jesus at his appearing raises the spirit from death to life, is as
true: the Scriptures speak of a first resurrection; which implies another
resurrection; for indeed as soon as a soul is translated from death to life,
he is risen with risen with Christ; and so is planted into the similitude of
his resurrection. But to such who were thus risen with Christ, the Apostles
preach another resurrection; viz. the resurrection of the body; as it is said
in the Philippians, Who shall change our vile bodies into the fashion of his
own glorious body; the same body that dies is raised up again; The same
Jesus, says the Apostle, Whom ye crucified, has God raised up: It was the
humane body of Christ that was crucified or nailed to the Cross; and the same
body that was raised, who said unto Thomas (not believing that Christ was
risen) Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand,
and thrust it into my side; and be not faithless, but believing.

But the Scripture says, It is sown a natural body, but shall be raised a
spiritual body; therefore it is not the same body.

I answer; It is very true, it is raised a spiritual body; but mark

But say some, It is said, As dies the beast, so dies the man; how then say
you, man shall rise again, except the beast may likewise rise again.

The Wise man speaks not there his own, but the language of

But may some say, Are there any so brutish as to deny the resurrection of the
body.

Yea certainly; and let us not wonder at it; there were (as there

First, the Sadduces, that utterly deny it; and truly we have many Sadduces in
our days, who say there is neither resurrection, Angel, nor Spirit.

Secondly, Such who said, the resurrection is past already: which Doctrine the
Apostle says, Is an erring concerning the faith. To both which sort, I shall
only ask them; if they be risen again, how comes it to pass there is
marrying, and giving in marriage? seeing Christ says to the Pharisees, In the
resurrection there is neither marrying, nor giving in marriage: and shall say
to such that deny the resurrection (with Christ) They err, not knowing the
Scripture, nor the power of God. The excellency of the bodies resurrection will
appear more plainly, if we consider, that

2. The Lord Jesus crowns all his soldiers, being raised from Perfection is
the privilege and portion of those that are raised from the dead
the dead, with perfection; with a crown of life, of glory, setting them down
in his Throne, giving them an everlasting Kingdom, where neither fears,
tears, nor any manner of sorrows, are able to molest them.

Now the excellency of this condition we have not attained; nor are we able to
tell what it shall be: Therefore John says, Beloved, now are we the sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. We shall
then be fully glorious, within and without glorious, our souls shall be filled
with God. Our vile corruptible bodies shall be then immortal, incorruptible,
spiritual and glorious.

The Scriptures say, Let us, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: And again,
Be ye perfect as your Father is perfect: which is a perfection in this life;
how say you then perfection is not to be attained till the resurrection of the
body.

Perfection, according to the Scripture, is taken either

Comparatively; and so many are called perfect in comparison of that
wickedness in the world. Thus Noah was a perfect man: Yea, in this sense one
Saint is said to be, to know, more perfectly then another: Therefore says
Paul, We speak wisdom to them that are perfect. He means them that were
attained to a good degree of knowledge, or to them that were justified: and so
perfection in the Scripture is taken for a perfection, or excellency in some
particular, above that which is to be found in others: perfection sometimes
signifies uprightness or sincerity of heart; and so David has it, Psalm. 37.
37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: And when God says, Be thou
perfect as I am perfect: It is as if he had said, press forward toward
perfection.

But further; A Saint may be said to be perfect in some particular respect; as
thus he is perfectly freed from wrath and condemnation, and thus in
justification, is his spirit made perfect: and thus are we complete in him,
who is our fullness. Now in these senses Saints are perfect in this world; but
if by perfection you understand the most absolute, full and most glorious
condition that is the portion of every believer to attain to; which admits not
of any trouble or infirmity, neither of any increase or want, being uncloathed
of all corruption, and clothed with incorruption and immortality.

I say, This is not the portion of any man in this life; that is to say, while
our natural bodies and souls dwell together; for we must first dye, or be
changed (which is equivalent to a natural death) before this state of
perfection. And thus reasons Paul, saying, Not as though I were already
perfect, or had attained unto the resurrection of the dead, (as some men in our
days vainly affirm themselves to have) but I press forward. Therefore, says
he, Let as many as be perfect be thus minded. Behold here perfect men, not
already perfect; but press forward toward perfection: This seems to be a
contradiction, but there is no such matter in it; for those that were in a
sense perfect, perfect in comparison of the world, upright and sincere of
heart, having attained to a good degree of knowledge, being freely justified,
perfectly united in one with the Father and the Son, in a way of relation,
do press forward toward perfection; that is to say, that full, complete,
incorruptible state of soul and body, which they shall be invested withal in
the resurrection.

Now if any man, or Saint, shall yet say he is universally perfect, I shall
demand of him, what is it that is so perfect? Whether do you mean, your
soul, or body, or both, or neither, but God in both? If you only mean your
spirit, then do I demand, whether that be universally perfect? If any say it
is, I ask from whence come your passions, pride, boasting, unnatural
affections, unclean thoughts, or the like? But it may be some may say, We are
troubled with no such things: Well, suppose you say true (which I cannot
believe) this is but a perfection of part of the man; for body and spirit make
up but one man: what the spirit does, it does in the body, being united to the
body; and so it is not a full or universal perfection. If thou say, thy body
is perfect, how comes it then to pass, that it is subject to death? (which
natural death, though some have said, should not come nigh them, yet have they
been deceived, and are now in the dust.) But if you say, soul and body, the
whole man is perrect, how comes it then to pass that such imperfect actions
are committed by them? Can a pure sweet spring send forth bitter streams? If
you be so universally perfect, what need you to eat and drink, and to complain
of hunger, cold, or sickness? Such things as these with complete perfection
cannot stand together.

But if thou say, thou do not mean that thy external body or humane
soul, are absolutely and completely perfected, but it is God in thee which is
perfect, as some say: then tell me, whether God in thee is thy self? and
seeing that thou confessest that thou wast once unperfect, who now art perfect;
then tell me, whether God was ever unperfect: for if God was not unperfect,
then say I, it is not God in thee, but thy self, who art capable from an
unperfect creature to be made perfect. I might be large here, in showing the
vanity of these conceptions, and man's folly, in pretending the enjoyment of
perfection, while all men cannot but see imperfect actions flowing from him.
And how many souls are deceived in this vain opinion, because not able
rightly to distinguish or divide the word of truth: but I must pass forward.

I am now come to the last thing considerable in Christ's Kingly Christ's
judgment.
office; which is, his Judgments: wherein briefly observe,

First, The Judge himself; It Is that man Christ, whom the natural Jews
crucified, Joh. 5. 29. Who is the Son of man, who is both Who is the Judge.
Judge of quick and dead.

Secondly, The law by which he will judge men; that is, a law of
righteousness, the word of the Gospel; Jesus was in the The law by which
Christ judges.
world preached to the Gentiles to be the Christ, the only Savior: God the
Father gave this record of him, that eternal life was in him, and whoever
believed on him should be saved.

The world would not believe it, and therefore dyed in their sins in
unbelief, in that estate of wrath; and therefore this Lord, the Judge of all
men, condemns him for rejecting of him, and continuing in his sins: For know
this, if a man does believe in Christ, none of his sins can condemn him; the
rule by which his word judges, is according to the deeds done in the flesh,
whether good or evil.

Thirdly, The persons judged; and they are, good and bad, just and The persons
who are judged.
unjust, quick and dead, small and great; and these persons are not, as some
conceive, only sin and righteousness, as they are both in a Saint, but they
are those men in whom righteousness is revealed, which makes these men to be
Saints; or these in whom the God of this world has sole dominion, which are
ungodly: It Is the bodies and spirits both together; it is all nations, sheep and
goats: therefore is it said, He will render to every man; (it is not to every
evil or sin in man, but to the man in whom evil is) according to his deeds.

Fourthly, The sentence pronounced; and that is twofold; The sentence
either,

First, Of joy to the godly; for to them it is occasion of lifting up their
heads for joy; a time of refreshing; a time of restitution of all Math. 25. ult.
things; a time of redemption for their bodies, it is life eternal; Therefore
says Christ, The righteous shall go into life eternal; which is the estate
of perfection I have before pointed at.

Secondly, Of Terror to the wicked; and to them it is a sentence of eternal
punishment; Depart from me ye cursed: it is the terror of the Lord to them,
perdition and destruction; yea, eternal fire; it is hell kindled by the wrath of
God.

If any one ask me what hell is, I answer, it is the eternal wrath What hell is.
of God kindled in body and soul; an absence of all good; a presence of all
misery; it is a fire that never goes out; it is a stringing worm that never
dies; it is a consuming consumption; a dying death; a consumption always
consuming, and yet never ceases to consume; a continual dying, that never
dies; it is the second death, that endures for ever.

Lastly, The time when this judgment shall be: In this I shall propose these
two things.

First, That of that day and hour (if Christ be worthy of belief) The time
when the judgment day is.
knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven, no not the Son of man himself, as
he was the Son of man; it comes, as a thief in the night, unawares to the
world.

Secondly, It Is not till the resurrection of the body; therefore is it called,
The last day; the dispensation of Christ until the resurrection, is called,
The last days; but the last day, in respect of Christ's judgment, is only
appropriated to that judgment; it is not till the time of sentence that shall be
pronounced upon all men, good and bad.

But say so me, The day of judgment is come already; for Christ judges now in
the hearts of the Saints, which is the true day of judgment.

To this I answer; That the word, Judgment, admits of a various pronounce
condemnation as belonging to sinners, which is, while we are in the flesh: but
this is no where called, the judgment of the last day: but this judgment that
I speak of, is the execution of sentence of the righteous Judge for the
absolving and rewarding his Saints, and condemning and punishing the world. Now
this is not in this life, in the natural body. Let me freely ask thee, whether
now the wicked be punished? Whether they be condemned now? Surely thou will not
say they are in eternal fire, and have all the torment they shall have: now is
the time of their jollity, mirth and merriment; the Saints are now in trouble,
and the wicked rejoice: but hearken man what the Lord says, He knows how to
deliver the righteous, and to reserve the unjust to the day of condemnation:
They are now reserved till then: the righteous, who are the children of the
resurrection, are kept in their graves, as in a sweet and quiet sleep, till
the resurrection; and then says Christ to them, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; (though
not enjoyed till now) but the wicked that sport out the time of this life, must
die; for it is appointed for all men once to dye; and they in death are kept in
their graves as in a prison, and are raised up (not as a privilege to them (as
some conceive) for better were it for them never to rise again) to
condemnation; for after death comes judgment: To whom Christ says, Go ye
cursed of my Father into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; who are likewise kept in chains to the destruction of that day,
wherein all secrets of all hearts are judged; which I am sure is not in this
life.

Thus have I finished, according to the grace given me of God, the threefold
office of Christ, who is a Kingly Priest, and a Priestly King; who is a
Prophetical and Kingly Priest, and a Priestly and Prophetical King, as I may
so say What may be attributed to any one office of Christ, all concur in it;
for in every work of Christ all his offices have a joint operation. Now in
Christ is God seen in the most lively appearances of himself to the Saints;
Gods mercy and justice both reconciled in Christ; his wisdom and power dwell
in him; his brightness and glory live in him: In a word, whatever the Lord is
to a soul, he is it Christ; and it is richly, fully and completely in him, who
of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Chap. XVIII.
Shows wherein the Worship of God consists, with the true power and manner of
divine Worship, as it consists only in the Inward man.
HAving, through the goodness of God, finished my discourse The worship of God
as in the inward man consists.
of the true knowledge of God, without which nothing is performed well unto
God; I am now come to show wherein the worship of that God consists; which is
in the subjection of the spirit unto God; to the will of the Lord; which
consists in five particulars: As

1. Faith; By believing in God is God glorified: therefore is it In Faith, and
what true faith is. Romans 4. 20.
said, We give glory to God in believing: which faith is either a relying or
dependence upon the Lord Jesus for salvation, according to the will of God; or
a giving credit to the words of God: So is faith the evidence of things not
seen, and the substance of things hoped for: that is to say, it lays hold on
the substance hoped for, and brings it nigh to the soul: The effects of which
faith are, peace with God, victory over the world, and life eternal. The
duration of the life of faith, glorifying God is, till Christ come the second
time without sin to salvation; for he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. Now the just shall live by faith; Now, that is, till Christ comes.

2. In Prayer; This is a part of spiritual worship; which prayer In Prayer;
what! true prayer is.
is a pouring out the soul to God in the name and power of the Lord Jesus by
the spirit, for the supplying of our wants; which prayers acknowledge our
relation to God, and Gods sovereignty over us: The true prayer of the spirit is
not a composed form of man's invention, but the breathing of the soul by the
spirit, after the good things of God: this is to worship God when we seek to
him.

3. In fear, reverence and honor; If I be Master, says God, where In fear
and reverence, and what it is.
is my fear? If I be a Father, where is my honor? Therefore must we serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. The true fear of God is
the reverent, high and honorable thoughts and apprehensions a soul has of
God, as his Lord, Father and Creator, wrought in him by the spirit: Therefore
we are commanded, to Fear the Lord and his goodness. Which fear is no
slavish posture, but a Son-like temper, whereby the soul acknowledges all he
has to be from the Lord; and so lies low in his own apprehension, that God
may be exalted.

4. In Love; This is that which God commands of us, to love In Love, and what
true love is.
him, to delight in him; which love to God is the streaming forth of the
affections unto God: in which there are these several ingredients.

First, A true knowledge of God; of which before.

Secondly, A setting a high price of God; valuing him above all things in the
world.

Thirdly, A giving up the soul to God; the understanding to know God; the will
to desire him; the affections to embrace him.

Fourthly, The union of his spirit with God, the glory of love is union: love
affects union, and is not satisfied with any thing, till he is united with it.
Some say, love passes, or emits, or sends forth the spirit of the lover into
the beloved. I am sure it is true in divine love, which sends forth the spirit
into God: the perfection of which love is when the soul has nothing, enjoyes
nothing, but what he has and enjoys from God; when he wills nothing but
what God wills; when he can truly say, Thy will, and not mine, be done.

5. This worship consists in praise, and songs of joy, when we In Praise, and
what true praise in the spirit is.
would honor men; we set forth there excellency: a soul that truly honors
God, rejoices in him, and praises him: Now this praise of God is the souls
spiritual acknowledging God to be praife-worthy; preferring God in his
thoughts in all and above all; singing in his heart, making melody to the Lord.

I do but touch on these things, because I shall have occasion What the power
of inward worship is.
on to speak of them as they be the principles or foundation of more visible
appearances of the worship of God.

A word or two of the power of this worship, that is spiritual likewise; for
it is the power of God; it is not of the first creation, but of the second; it is not
of generation, but of regeneration; not of man's will, nor of man's activity, but
of God that shows mercy; we are all dead in sin; as void (as naturally in
the first Adam) of power truly to serve God, as a dead man is to eat and
drink: therefore is Christ the power of God unto us, who works irresistibly
in us. What the true manner of inward worship is.


As the power of divine worship is spiritual, so must the manner be; the heart
must be in a spiritual frame united to God; that is to say, in a way of
relation unto God, whereby he becomes a servant, a soldier, a friend and Son
of God; it must be performed in faith, love, fear and reverence: all these are
faithful and inseparable companions: If a man prays or praises God, he must
do it in faith, love and fear. But to put a period to the first part of this
discourse, all this service must be performed to God as in Christ; he that
prays to God must seek him as he is to be found in Christ; For it is in him in
whom only the Father is well pleased: God in Christ is a Saints rest, delight,
fullness and glory; a Saint by Christ goes to God, falls down before him,
rejoices in him, and lives sweetly and contentedly in meekness and humility,
yet triumphantly in the presence of the Lord for evermore.

Here a soul lives with God by faith; crying out, Holy, Holy, Holy, How long
shall it be? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Longing for the appearance of the
day of God, who will render tribulation to every soul that obeyes not the
Gospel of God, but eternal life to them that are faithful to the death. Thus
much concerning the true worship of God, as it consists only in the spirit in
the inward man, hid from all men or Saints, having a sweet intercourse with God
after an invisible manner in the spirit.

THE VISIBLE WORSHIP OF GOD.
Chap. I.
Shows what the Visible Worship of Christ is; and a discovery of what the
true Gospel to be preached to the world is; with the true Messengers or
Ministers of the Gospel.
IN the former part of this Discourse, I have held forth the worship that is
due unto the Lord, as it consists only in the inward man; and am now come to
speak of the worship of God as it is visible.

Now the visible worship of God is the subjection What Visible Worship is. 1
Cor. 6. 20.
of body and soul to the Lord; according to the words of the Apostle, saying,
Glorify God in your body and spirit: which visible worship shall be handled
under a twofold consideration.

1. As it consists in the visible administration of the Gospel, and commands
of the Lord Jesus.

2. As it consists in conformity to the Gospel and commands of Christ; of both
which in order, as the Lord shall enable me.

Concerning the first of these (viz:) the administration of the Gospel, and
the doctrine thereof, it is twofold; either to the world, or to Saints: but I
shall first discourse of it as it is to be administered to the world; and herein
shall show,

First, What the Gospel is which is to be preached to sinners.

Secondly, Who are those that are to administer, dispense or preach this
Gospel.

Thirdly, The manner how they are to dispense this Gospel.

Fourthly, To whom they are to administer or preach this Gosspell.

1. The Gospel is glad tidings, good and joyful news to Jews What the
Gospel is that is to be preached to the world. Luke 2. 10, 11. Isaiah 40, 9.
61, 11.
and Gentiles, to sinners by Jesus Christ, Who was born in the City of David,
and is come in the flesh, dead and risen again: therefore says Paul, We
preach Christ crucified, or fastened or nailed to the Cross, to them that are
called, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God: Therefore is it
called, the Ministry of reconciliation, the grace of God revealed. Salvation is
only in a crucified Jesus; eternal life is in him, that is the good news
that is to be divulged to poor sinners, even Christ dying to make atonement
for sin, to open the way to come to God; and that Whosoever believes in this
Christ shall be saved, and be raised up at the last day. This the Apostles
preached, which was glad tidings to the sinful soul; to Publicanes, Harlots,
the worst of sinners; good news to a spirit enslaved in sin; good news to the
body, the natural body; the resurrection of which Paul preached as good news
by Christ, though he was called in question for it: this is the only Gospel,
the everlasting Gospel promised to Adam, shadowed under the law, revealed now;
for grace and immortality are brought to light by Jesus Christ. And of this
Paul says, Though I Paul, or an Angel from Heaven, should bring any other
Gospel then that I have already preached, and ye have received, let him
Galath. 1. 8, 9.
be accursed: Therefore says he again, He that denies Christ to come in the
flesh is Antichrist. Which coming in the flesh is not a coming in our
particular bodies of the flesh; for I can, or another may say, Christ is not so
come to thousands, and never be judged Antichrists for so saying, except we
may be so called for speaking truth; but he is come in the flesh, that is to
say, in that particular form of flesh he took of the Virgin Mary, which was
of the same nature of our flesh, but yet as distinct a body from ours, as any
of ours is one from another. This Gospel is a Mystery made manifest, that was
hid in God; hid from Ages, yet now made manifest, being hidden only to them
that are lost, whose minds the God of this Ephesians. 3. 9. Coloss. 1. 26. 2 Cor.
4. 3.
World has blinded: It Is not to be revealed any otherwise then Paul preached
it, For God made manifest in the flesh, is good news, and a great mystery, yet
revealed to the Saints. Thus much for the Gospel it self.

2. I come next to speak of the Administrator or Preacher of Who are the true
Ministers of the Gospel.
this Gospel; and herein I will mind you, that the Gospel was preached by
Apostles, by Evangelists, by members of particular Churches, and by scattered
brethren.

First, By Disciples, Math. 10. The twelve are there called Disciples,
Disciples.
which he sent forth to preach the Gospel; who had a Commission from him,
while with them in the flesh. So the Seventy afterward were sent out by
Christ, Luke 10. Which Disciples did baptize, John 4. 2.

Secondly, By Apostles; These Disciples Christ afterward calls Apostles.
Apostles, to whom he gave a Commission before his death, and after his
resurrection; upon whom the spirit was given in the form of fire and cloven
tongues; whose work was now to bear witness of the resurrection of Jesus
Christ: and that not only to the Jews as they were before his death, but
their Commission was enlarged to all the world, Jews and Gentiles.

Therefore says Peter, Must one be ordained to be a witness of his
resurrection. Now of the Apostles some received a Commission by word of mouth
from Christ in the flesh, and afterward from him (as risen from the dead)
immediately. But Mathias first being chosen by the Church, God by lots called
him. Paul was immediately called from heaven, who received not the Gospel of
man, nor by man, but from heaven. These in a special manner were sent forth to
plant the Gospel, to plant Churches, to lay the foundation: therefore is it
said, The Saints are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. And
Paul says, I have laid the foundation.

Thirdly, By Evangelists; God has set in his Church some Apostles, Evangelists.
some Prophets, some Evangelists. Philip was an Evangelist; that is to say, a
Preacher of glad tidings, who was endued with the Spirit, Act. 21. 10. Philip
went up and down preaching the Gospel of Christ, baptizing both men and
women, Acts 8. 5. 12. Now the office of an Evangelist was not to be exercised
in a particular Church, but was to be exercised in the preaching of the Gospel
in several places. And thus did Timothy (who is commanded to do the work of
an Evangelist) accompany Paul, preaching the Gospel: And so Titus, Tychicus,
and others went from place to place preaching the Gospel: of whom we read
not that they had such a particular call by a voice from heaven, as the
Apostles had; but they were filled with the Spirit. Members of particular
Churches.


Fourthly, By Members of particular Churches; As for instance: Stephen who was
also a Deacon, (by which office, he was not to preach to the world) Acts 6. 8,
9, 10. Whose Commission was this, That he was full of the spirit and power. And
so Philip, who was at first a Member of a particular Church, then a Deacon
(being the same Philip, as I conceive, is called an Evangelist, Acts 21. 10.)
He preached the Gospel, and did baptize. Yea Barnabas went from Jerusalem to
Antioch, being sent thither by the Church; where he preached. And afterward
the same Barnabas was by the Church, through the revelation of the spirit,
separated from them for to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles: who was also, in
reference to this sending by the Church, called an Apostle.

Fifthly and Lastly; The Gospel was preached by scattered brethren, Scattered
brethren preach the Gospel to the world.
Acts 8. 4. They that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the
word; who preached both to Jews and Gentiles; whose Commission I find only
to be this, That the power of God carried them forth to it. His presence
accompanied them, and his blessing upon their labors pointed from heaven from
whence they came: as it is said, And the hand of the Lord was with them (viz:
those scattered brethren which were scattered upon the persecution of Stephen)
and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.

These scattered brethren, say some, may be some of the Apostles.

It cannot be so, for they were not scattered at that time, for they tarried at
Jerusalem, as it is said, Acts 8. 1. They were all scattered abroad throughout
the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles.

Thus may we see clearly, that one Gospel was committed to several sorts of
Christians to preach it to the world, who were all sent of God, being called of
God according to the working of his own spirit.

We confess (say some) that you say true, these did preach the Gospel, but
all these are ceased, the Apostles dead, Evangelists dead, and the brethren who
were then gifted and enabled to preach; So that we would now know; whether
there be any such Ministers of the Gospel in our days; and if there be, how
we may know them?

In answer to this, I grant that they are dead, yet I say, the faith I pray not
for these only, but for all them which shall believe in thy name, through
their word. And though those persons are asleep, yet their doctrine is the
same: there is but one faith, one Lord, one Gospel; that which Paul and the
rest preached, and the power is the same still; that is to say, the spirit: so
that there be Ministers of the Gospel in our days, that preach glad tidings;
who have the same spirit and power that they had; which to me is manifest:
where it is said, Christ gave gifts unto men, and he gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. From whence I
desire you to mind, that these are said to be set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28.

Which Church is not to be understood any particular and distinct visible
society, but that Church which makes up the complete body of Christ; viz. all
Saints; now the Apostles and Evangelists were set in them as the foundation of
the building; and the Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, to build upon the
foundation.

But what are the marks of those true Ministers that we may know them.

The only true ground of a visible judging or discerning them, John says,
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits: Hereby know ye the spirit of
God; Every spirit that confesses How to know the true Ministers of the Gospel.
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: that is to say, by trying
the doctrines brought unto you, you shall be able to judge from whence the
Preachers come.

Now to confess Christ come in the flesh, is to preach the Lord Christ, the
man Christ, to be a King, Priest and Prophet, to have put an end to all
ministrations before himself; to have given laws for his Saints to conform
to; yea, it is to know the mystery hid from ages: therefore says Christ, Go
preach the Gospel; he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.

But further; Though they may be true Ministers of the Gospel, preaching the
true Doctrine, that thou may be able to judge them by their doctrine, thou
must be endued with the spirit, whereby finding the operation of the word in
thee, thou can say doubtless, though he is not a Minister to others, yet he
is to me: without this spirit we may be deluded and deceived; therefore is it
said, when the Apostles preached, The hand of the Lord was with them, and many
were converted: therefore is it said, There are many deceivers entered into the
world, but ye have an unction that teaches you: which unction is only able
truly to teach us.

But the Apostles of Christ, and them that preached the Gospel, did work
signs and miracles to confirm their doctrine; so that if there be any true
Ministers, they are able to do the like.

To this I answer; It Is true that the Apostles did work miracles; Matthew,
Mark, Luke, the Of Miracles.
latter ends. It Is true, I find there this promise, that those that should
believe in their word should work miracles: which was accomplished when the
word of God began to spread. But however miracles were done by the Apostles;
and them that believed, yet notwithstanding they were not essential unto
preaching or believing; for many believed, to whom we find no miracle
exhibited; as the Eunuch, and Lydia, whose heart God opened at Paul's preaching;
and many more might be named.

Now if miracles were essential to believing, then if there be no miracles
there is no believing; and if no believing, no salvation: So that if miracles
be not essential to believing, neither are they to preaching the Gospel; for
they are as much promised to believers as to preachers.

Now miracles were wrought by many that did believe, and so is that promise
already fulfilled: for it was not made to every believer: for Paul says, Are
all workers of miracles? And so miracles in truth were for the silencing of the
world, and making the passage more free for the Disciples to travel up and
down; and upon this account did Gamaliel persuade them to let the Apostles
alone, because a miracle was done by them; and yet neither he nor they received
the Gospel: for, notwithstanding their miracles, they commanded them to preach
no more in that name. Neither did their miracles work upon many that heard
them, but rather enraged them the more; as in the case of Christ's raising
Lazarus is evident.

But further; if miracles were so necessary to the preaching of the Gospel,
that the Gospel cannot be dispensed without them; then I say, why did John do
no miracle, for he preached, and yet did no miracle. Neither does it at all
appear, that the Disciples that went abroad preaching the Gospel after their
scattring, ever did any miracle. For the true nature of miracles were to usher
in the Gospel of Christ, or Christ in the Gospel to the world. For miracles
were never given to continue; for indeed miracles are so from the rarity of
them, or their seldom appearance; which if they should grow common, would
cease to be miracles, and become as natural. Moses when he came to deliver
Israel, wrought many miracles: but after the Kingdom of Israel was
established, we read not of such use of miracles. So Christ and the Apostles,
the first beginners of the Kingdom of heaven, that is to say, the first
founders of this state of the Gospel, did many miracles; but afterward we
find not the use of them so frequent; and Paul indeed when he would make
manifest his ministry to the Corinths, he tells them not of his miracles, but
The proof of Christ speaking in him, he told them, was mighty in them; and so
bids them Examine themselves whether they were in the faith; 2 Cor. 13. 3, 5.
So that he wills them to consider what they believed, and if they were in the
truth, they knew him to be sent from Christ to them; but if they were not in
the truth, then it was no wonder if they were ignorant of Christ's speaking in
him; for the natural man discernes not the things of the spirit, neither can
he, for they are spiritually discerned.

It is true, miracles were not worked by all: for all, as Paul says, are not
workers of miracles; but notwithstanding miracles were wrought when they first
planted the Churches; and since that the Churches have apostatised, and none
have been found holding the faith: so that miracles are again requisite for
the beginning or planting of the Churches of Christ again, as at the first.

In answer to this, I desire you to mind, that miracles were Josiah
understood, by the writings of Moses, the will of God, when there had been a
great apostasy of Gods people, and without any new miracle, sets himself about
the work of the Lord. Nehemiah and Ezra also, after the Children of Israel
were carried Captives, Nehemiah ^8. 14.
they by the Book of the Law find, that they must put away strange wives,
dwell in booths, that the Aminonites and Moabites should not come into the
Congregation of the Lord. Now they according to the good hand of God upon them,
without any miracles put in execution, whatever they found commanded in the Law
of Moses, and set themselves to build the Temple, offer Sacrifices, and to
order the whole worship of God according to what they found written.

So that, I say, it is not miracles, but a command of Christ, or a good hand of
Christ upon a soul, discovering his duty to him that is the ground of the
administration of Ordinances; which is likewise evident in Peter, who finding
the Scripture that speaks of Judas, saying, Let his habitation be desolate,
and his Bishorick, office or Acts 1.
charge, let another take. And so finding their duty from the Scripture,
presently sets upon the matter, to choose an Apostle in Judas his stead.

That I may end this Discourse, we are to consider, that we have the Apostles,
and the miracles that Jesus and the Apostles wrought with us, that there needs
no pleading for Apostles again in the flesh, nor miracles neither: for by
having the Apostles, I mean their works, their writings, their word, their
Gospel, their spirit; which is the whole counsel of God for us. And so have
we their miracles, that is to say, they are still before our eyes, according to
the saying of Christ, They have Moses and the Prophets, when they had only
their writings, and not the bodies of either. And according to that saying in
John, And many other signs, truly, did Jesus, John 20. ult.
which are not written in this Book: But these are written, that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.

Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, are all in the Scriptures;
which Through faith in Christ Jesus, are able to make us perfect to every good
work. So that now for any to expect other miracles, it argues, they find not,
nor feel the power of Christ in them by the Spirit, who are likely to meet
with miracles, but indeed they are such as Antichrist shall work to deceive
the Nations, who shall come, and is come already, with power, signs, and lying
wonders.

But certainly seeing so many pretend to speak by the spirit, and to be sent
by the spirit, and there is but one true, proper preaching the word of truth;
and yet these cross, oppose and contradict each other; how shall I know which
to embrace? there must be some miracle to confirm the truth from error.

Truly to this I answer, That miracles are no certain signs of

So that I say again, First, we can never tell which of them is in the truth,
except it be revealed to us by the spirit of truth, which is only able truly
to judge of miracles, and of the differences of things; that in the midst of
ten thousand errors knows how to single out the truth of Jesus, being only
of its own nature.

So that again, I desire thou may not seek after a sign, like a foolish
and adulterous generation; left, while with Herod, thou would have Christ,
but with a desire to see some miracle from him, thou fallest short of Christ,
and Christ works none at all before thee, as indeed he, for the most part, if
not always, refused to do to them that demanded them of him.

But, notwithstanding, if thou shall yet say, surely none may preach except
Apostles, and them that are so sent, as they were; I shall only say this to
thee: Thou may as well expect Christ to come again in the flesh, to call
more Apostles to bear witness again of his resurrection; which surely would
be a very dark practice, and blind expectation: Therefore let us remain with
this confidence, that those whom God, by his spirit, gives a message to, and
enables them to declare it, for the gathering of the Saints into the fellowship
of the Gospel, are true approved Ministers of the Lord Jesus.

But if they be true Ministers of the Gospel, why do they not do, as the
Apostles did, viz. preach the Gospel to every creature?

I answer; That every one of the Apostles did not preach the Paul was a
Minister or an Apostle to the Gentiles.

But again; Some that preached the Gospel preached it but in some particular
places; as many brethren that went to some Cities, specified in the 8. and 11.
of the Acts. So that a man may be a Minister of the Gospel to the world,
though he never goes out of his own City or Country. But some, as Paul and
others, were to go to several Countries, who were furnished with the gift of
tongues for that purpose; which gift all that preached the Gospel had not:
neither is the gift of tongues needful, but for preaching to the persons of a
strange language.

I am now come to the manner how it must be administered; How the Gospel is to
be preached. Infallibly.
which is,

1. Infallibly, Certainly; Assuredly the Gospel they must preach must not be,
Yea and Nay, but Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus: they must preach the words of
God, the words of truth.

2. In the name of God: They must not go forth in their own In the name of God.
authority, but in Christ's: Therefore are they called Ambassadors of Christ.

3. Plainly; Not in the entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
Plainly.
of spirit and power; in words easy to be understood.

4. And Lastly; It must be preached fully; The word of the Gospel Fully.
must be declared fully, not only for conversion, but for building up in the
things of God; whoever believes and is baptized, shall be saved; teaching them
to observe all the commands of Christ.

To end this Chapter, I shall speak a word or two to the subjects, The
subjects to whom we must preach the Gospel.
to whom good news is to be preached; which are sinners as sinners, enemies as
enemies, prisoners as prisoners; he brings liberty for Captives, righteousness
for sinners; which is the acceptable day of the Lord to sinners; not that they
may continue in sin, but that they may be made righteous. To sinners both of
Jews and Gentiles, the Gospel of the Kingdom is to be preached among all
nations for the obedience of faith.

Chap. II.
Discourses of Baptism in four particulars; proving that Baptism was
commanded to be preached and practiced; that Saints were baptized: Showing the
several sorts of Baptism spoken of in the Scriptures; manifesting the
Baptism of water to be preached by the Disciples, and practiced by the Saints.
THE Gospel to be preached, and the Preachers thereof, being made manifest,
with the subjects to whom glad tidings are to be divulged for the obedience of
faith. In the next place I shall show you, that not only glad tidings are to
be preached to sinners, but they being converted, are to be informed of their
duty: Therefore says Christ, Teach them to observe all things which I have
commanded you. Which doctrine is to be preached to believers. Who may be
considered under a twofold consideration: Either as added to the Church,
walking in visible or Church Fellowship: Or as not yet added to the Church. To
both which sorts I shall endeavor to lay open their duty, that so they may be
conformable to their great Lawgiver the Lord Jesus. I shall speak of them in
order. But first, to such as are not in a true visible Church fellowship. The
commands of Christ to them are these two in an especial manner.

First, That they should be baptized.

Secondly, That being baptized, they should be added or joined to the Church.

In the first of these I shall handle several particulars.

1. That Baptism was commanded to be preached and practiced

2. That Saints were baptized.

3. The several sorts of Baptism spoken of in the Scriptures.

4. That Baptism of water was preached by the Disciples, and commanded to be
practiced by the Saints.

5. Who was the Author and Institutor of water Baptism.

6. What the true nature, use and end of Baptism with water is.

7. Who was, and is a true Administrator or Dispenser of it.

8. Who be the true and proper subjects of water Baptism.

9. The true manner of the administration of it.

10. The principle by which a Saint ought to be moved to subjection unto it.

11. The power enabling to perform it, or submit to it.

12. How long the Ordinance of Baptism was, and is to continue.

I shall presume to be more large in this point of Baptism then in others.

First, Because this lies most hid, and many Christians are enquiring after it.

Secondly, Because this being cleared up, the Controversies about Ordinances,
and Church visible fellowship, would soon be reconciled. In this Chapter I
shall speak of the first four particulars.

1. That Baptism was commanded to be preached, is evident, Math. 28. 19, 20.
Where Christ says, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them;
teaching them to observe all things which I have Baptism was commanded to be
preached and practiced.
commanded you. Now Christ taught them to baptize, and then to observe it as
Christ's command. Again, says Christ, Mark 16. 15, 16. Go preach the Gospel
to every Creature; he that believes and is baptized, etc. This was commanded
to be preached. Which commission the Apostle Peter executed faithfully, Acts 2.
38. Commanding every one of them to repent, and be baptized. So Acts 10. 48. He
declared it as their duty, and commanded their subjection to it. The truth of
this is so unquestionable, that I shall pass to the second.

That as it was commanded, so it was practiced, is manifest, Acts The Saints
were baptized.
2. 41. They that gladly received the word (preached by Peter) were baptized:
And many in Samaria, which believed, both men and women were baptized, Acts 8.
12. The Eunuch, the Jailer, Lydia, Crispus, and many Corinthians, were
baptized, Acts 18. 8. I think it altogether needless to insist longer on this
particular; well knowing, no man will deny this, but he that denies the
Scriptures likewise.

3. The Scriptures speak of several sorts of Baptism; which There are
several sorts of Baptism spoen of in the Scriptures.
I shall unfold to you, with their agreement and difference. Now Baptism in
the Scriptures admits of a threefold consideration.

First, As it is a Baptism of water.

Secondly, As it is a Baptism of the Spirit.

Thirdly, As it is a Baptism of afflictions.

1. The Baptism of water we find mentioned in diverse e Baptism water.
places; as John 1. 21. Acts 8. 38. Now this Baptism of water was with
material water.

2. The Baptism of the Scriptures prophesied of by John, called e Baptism the
Holy ^^st and 2. 28, 29.
The Baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire, Math. 3. 11. promised by God in Joel;
by Christ, Acts 1. 5. Ye shall be baptized (says Christ) with the Holy Ghost
not many days hence. Which was fulfilled, Acts 2. There appeared cloven
tongues, like as of fire, and they sat upon each of them; and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the
spirit gave them utterance. This Baptism is called, the Baptism of the spirit,
because it was the only work of the spirit, with which they were filled,
called the Baptism of fire, because of the operation of the spirit; which like
fire was a light to them that sat in darkness; like fire, because of its
refining nature, burning up that chafe and dross that was in them, and making
them more pure: a Baptism of fire, in respect of its consuming nature,
destroying the man of sin: it is a fire, that goes out of the mouth of the
Lord Jesus, that burns up, consumes and destroys the stubble and chafe of
Antichrist. Yea, of this Baptism it is said, There sat cloven tongues, like
fire, upon the heads of the Apostles: Which visibly demonstrated the power of
the spirit, in giving them the gift of tongues or languages, whereby they could
speak to all men in their several languages wherein they were naturally
borne, Acts 2. 8. Now this was a visible, glorious, spiritual Baptism: the
proper nature, end and use of this, was to crown the doctrine of Jesus with a
Crown of glory, to confirm, spread abroad to all Nations, and exalt the
Gospel of Jesus, and Christ in his Gospel.

This was that which amused the world; yea, to hear the Apostles speak with
tongues, they were confounded, amazed and mervailed Acts 2. 6. 7.
greatly.

3. There is likewise a Baptism of afflictions or sufferings: A Baptism of
affliction.
Therefore says Christ, I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, and how am I
streigthned in my spirit, till that be accomplished. This was the Baptism of
his death; into which death we are baptized. Now this Baptism holds forth to
us our descending into misery; as if we were overwhelmed with misery, and our
ascending from it into glory; We (as Christ did when he was in the world) must
take up his Cross, and follow him in afflictions; for, We bear about in our
bodies the dyings of the Lord Jesus. I might here show you, the sweet unity,
consent and harmony, that is in these Baptismes, and wherein they differ; but
you will see this more fully, if you consider what ensues.

But some may say, It Is true, there is a Baptism of water of the spirit and
fire, and of afflictions; but is there not a Baptism of the spirit besides
that Baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire (which, you say, consists in new
tongues, and miraculous visible appearances of the spirit) which Baptism of
the spirit is the work of Gods spirit upon the heart in believing, and the
like; according to that in Titus, We are saved by the washing of regeneration,
etc. Tit. 3. 4.

To this I answer; Yielding, That we are saved by the washing of regeneration,
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he viz: of tongues and miracles:
which is the Baptism of fire, to be promised to such as were already renewed:
(or should be renewed before they were partakers of those gifts) Therefore
says Peter, Repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 38. But if by the Baptism of the spirit, you mean the
dipping or baptizing the soul into the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ;
which is the true mystery of the Baptism of water. That there is such a
dipping or baptizing the spirit by faith, I own it, and acknowledge it:
though, in truth, I find this no where to be called, the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost and fire, prophesied of by John the Baptist, and fulfilled in the
Apostles in the day of Pentecost. I might further show you how the word,
baptized, is attributed to other things in the Scriptures, as to cups and
vessels; as it is said, The Pharisees drink not, but first wash. The word in
the Greek is baptize there cups, and show you how the Jews had their
baptismes or washings of several things. But these are not any part of the
Baptism commanded in the New Testament, of which only I am speaking, neither
tend they to my present discourse: Therefore I shall leave those Jewish
observations, and show you in the next place,

4. The fourth thing I propounded, that Baptism of water was commanded to be
preached and practiced in the New Testament; That Christ commanded Baptism of
water to be Preached by the Disciples, and to be practiced by the Saints.
which I shall evidence to you from several places of Scripture: and first
from the Commission given to the Disciples, Math. 28. 19. Says Christ, All
power is given to me in heaven and in earth; Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. And again, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Now that
this Baptism is with material water, I thus prove.

If it cannot be meant of any other Baptism then of water, it must needs be
the Baptism of water.

But that it cannot be meant of any other, I shall thus make manifest,

If it be of any other Baptism, then it is either of miraculous gifts of fiery
tongues or miracles, or else of the receiving of the spirit of regeneration or
renovation (if I may call that Baptism) but that it is not of the first, is
evident, if we consider that this follows this Baptism here spoken of:
Therefore is it said, And these signs shall follow them that believe, they
shall speak with new tongues, and work many miracles: which is the Baptism
of the Holy Ghost and fire.

But some may say, It is not said those signs should follow them that were
baptized, but them that believed.

It is true, it is said those signs should follow them that believe; Yet so,
that they should follow such persons, that believing were baptized, is as true.
For if it be denied, that they followed that Baptism there spoken of; then we
must affirm, they either are the same thing with, baptized, or accompany, or
go before it, or follow after it.

Now if any shall make this last promise to be all one with, baptized, the
words must run thus: He that believes, and shall work miracles, and speak
with tongues, shall be saved; wherein he will be much mistaken: For if you mark
the words, it is not said, he that believes and does baptize others, shall be
saved; But he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. In this Baptism
the man is passive, to have an Ordinance administered upon him by another: but
when he says, These signs shall follow them that believe; in my name they
shall cast out Devils, and speak with new tongues. Here they are active, they
are to be Ministers of the Lord to others.

When he says, He that believes and is baptized; he speaks of a work to be
done upon the believer: which is evident in Matthew; as it is said, Go teach
all Nations, baptizing them. The Disciples of Christ were to administer this
Ordinance; they were able to do it: but when he says, those that believe
shall do such things as he speaks of, it is a promise of the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost and fire to them, wherein their activity should appear; for they
should do great works to others, heal others: But as for this Baptism of the
spirit, I shall evidence it to follow Baptism of water, more fully from the
Scriptures.

But if any say, these gifts promised, accompany that Baptism, then I say,
they are not the same with it, but companions of it; and so are truly distinct
from it.

And if any say, those gifts go before the Baptism here spoken of, this is a
good demonstration that they are not the same with it.

But if any shall yet say, these gifts follow the Baptism spoken of in the
alleged text of Mark or Matthew, then likewise it is clear, they are not the
same with it. But further, to put this out of doubt (if possible) Consider;

The Apostles never gave the Holy Ghost, but they did baptize; the one they
could do, the other was peculiar to an ascended Jesus: Therefore says John,
He, viz. Christ, shall baptize thee with the Holy Ghost and fire. This is his
sole prerogative. Neither do we ever find the Apostles to be said to have
given the Holy Ghost; but this, we find them baptizing in the name of the Lord.

But-may some say, The Holy Ghost was given by the laying on of the hands of
the Apostles; and so he bids them teach and baptize; that is to say, do

Whosoever thou art that arguest thus, I wish only such a dealing from thee in
this point, as thou now usest: thou say, the Apostles baptized, but this that
they did, was only outward or external: and yet will thou deny Baptism of
water, upon this very account, because it it outward or external. Thou say
they that preached, laid their hands on the Disciples, and the Holy Ghost was
given unto them. The Scriptures also say, they baptized, and the Holy Ghost was
given. Surely their preaching was only outward, till applied by faith: so as
their preaching was, so also was the Baptism with which they baptized outward,
which they only fulfilled; but themselves prayed to God for to send the Holy
Ghost upon them, who were before baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; as is
undeniably made manifest, Acts 8. verse 12. 15, 16, 17. So that if they did
baptize in the name of the Lord Jesus, and yet could not give the Holy Ghost,
but prayed afterward for them, that they might receive it: it is very
manifest, that baptizing in the name of the Lord Jesus, and the gifts of the
Holy Ghost or spirit, are distinct: so that indeed all that we find the
Apostles doing, is something visible or external: they pray, they preach, they
lay on hands, and baptize, all these as performed by them, are only outward
acts: For Paul planteth, and Apollo waters, but God gives the blessing: Yet,
notwithstanding, though the acts of these be outward, yet the spirit, principle
and power, are all spiritual. And indeed as divine a power of the Spirit is
required in the true baptizing, or being truly baptized with water, according
to the Gospel, as there is in preaching, believing or praying.

But it may be, the Baptism of the spirit in the second sense, viz: of
regeneration

I answer to this; It cannot be meant of that, because that is the He that
believes: For no man can truly believe, but he that has the spirit of God;
for the fruit of the spirit is faith, and by faith are we renewed: So that if
it had been meant so, the words should have been rendered thus; He that
believes by the spirit, and is a believer by the spirit, shall be saved; which
is a fruitless, needless, and useless repetition of one, and the same thing.
So that indeed it cannot truly be interpreted of any other Baptism, then a
Baptism of material water.

And again; What I have said of the incapacity of the Disciples giving the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, is as true here, they could not, neither did they give
this spirit at all, either in regeneration, or miraculous appearances, but did
baptize.

But may some yet say, You speak of another Baptism, viz: of afflictions; and
though it may not be meant of any of the former, yet it may be of this.

That it cannot be meant of this, is apparent; for it was such a

But though it may not be understood of internal afflictions, yet it may be of
Conformity to Christ's death.

We are conformable to Christ's death, in believing; for we,

But if what I have said from this, prove not satisfactory to thee; go along
with me a little further, and let us consider, Acts 2. 38. Then Peter said unto
them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. He
first bids them, repent, which is the work only of the spirit in the new birth
or regeneration: And what then? And be baptized: with what Baptism? With the
Baptism of water, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost. He says not, your
Baptism is the receiving the Holy Ghost, but being baptized, you shall receive
the gifts of the Holy Ghost: that is to say, of tongues or miracles.

There is another Scripture yet deserves our consideration; which is, Acts 8.
12, 13. When they believed, Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom
of God; and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
Then Simon himself believed also; and when he was baptized, he continued with
Philip. Now would I know what Baptism it is that Simon was baptized withal?
Surely you will not say, it was the Baptism of the Holy Ghost; if you shall
consider, verse 16. The Holy Ghost was then fallen on none of them, for they
were only baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus: and afterward they received
the Holy Ghost. Anst if any say, it was the spirit of regeneration, that cannot
be; for Simon that was baptized, was in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, whose heart was not right in the sight of God, verse 22, 33. So that
I say, it was a Baptism of material water; a visible external Baptism upon
the profession of his faith.

But, notwithstanding all this, may some say, These are but arguments, where
does the Scripture speak of Baptism with water, either commanded or practiced
in the name of the Lord Jesus?

We are not destitute of Scriptures to evince this, if their authority Philip
and the Eunuch came unto a certain water, and the Eunuch said, here is water,
what hinders but I may be baptized? Acts 8. 36. 38.
To whom Philip answered, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may: And
so they went both into the water, and Philip baptized him. Which water is
material water, and not metaphorical or mysterious, as some may conceive: for
Philip required faith to be in the Eunuch, and so the spirit, before he would
baptize him with water.

Yet, to put all out of controversy, consider Cornelius, and the Gentiles,
having received the Baptism of the Holy Ghost; Peter concludes from thence
assuredly, none ought to forbid them; and makes a challenge to any one, if they
could, to show cause that they should be denied the Baptism of water; and
Commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Which Baptism of water
was not the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, but was dispensed upon them after they
had received that, Acts 10. latter end.

Surely you need not to spend so much time or paper, in the proof of a thing
that is so evident.

Had I not known it to be so confidently gainsayed, I should not

Chap. III.
Shows that Christ is the author and institutor of water Baptism; with the
true nature, use and end of the Baptism of water. The Lord Jesus is the author
and ordainer of the Baptism of water.

I Shall in the next place show you, who is the Author of this Baptism of
water, I have been speaking of; which was him that I have already proved,
commanded the Apostles to preach faith and Baptism, to baptize them that were
taught: Therefore says Christ, All power in heaven and earth is given to me;
Go ye therefore, preach and baptize; the Lord Christ from heaven is the
author of it; he instituted and appointed it.

But some may say, The Baptism of water is John's Baptism; for John says, I
baptize you with water, but he that comes after me, shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and fire. So that water Baptism is only John's, and not Christ's; as
spirit Baptism is only Christ's, and not John's.

In answer to this, I will show you clearly, the Baptism of water Sol. Of the
unity of John's and Christ's Baptism being one. In the outward element of water.
was Christ's as well as John's; and that by nnfolding to you the true nature of
Johnes Baptism, and the true nature of Christ's Baptism; wherein their unity
and difference will appear: their unity is manifest:

1. In that the element of both was the same material water; it is said, John
baptized with water; and I have already proved to you, the Saints were baptized
into the name of Jesus with water also: Cornelius and the rest were baptized
with water.

2. The Baptism of water, both of Christ's and John's, came from heaven. Christ
tells us, John's is from heaven, Math. 21. 25. The Both from heaven.
word of God came to John in the wilderness: He is said, To be sent from God
also. So the Baptism of water administered by Christ's Disciples, is like wise
from heaven: Therefore says Christ, All power is given to me in heaven and
earth; Go ye therefore, teach and baptize. It was the power of heaven
conferred upon Christ, which commanded and enabled the Disciples to preach and
practice the Ordinance of Baptism.

3. Both John's and Christ's Baptism pointed at Christ, though Both held forth
Christ. The difference between Christ's and John's baptism.
under a various consideration. Thus for their agreement; now I will show
wherein they differ: As

First, That the Baptism of water administered by Christ's command, after his
resurrection, was not administered upon the same ground as John's.

1. John's doctrine, upon which his administration depended, was They were not
administered upon the same grounds.
not the same with that the Apostles preached; for John held forth a Christ to
come, to dye, to suffer, to take away sin; but now the doctrine of the
Gospel is, That Christ is come, dead, risen, ascended up to heaven, and
sits at Gods right hand.

2. John baptized persons believing in a Christ to come after him; but now he
that shall baptize into a Christ as not come, denies the faith: For this is the
Antichrist that denies Christ to be come in the flesh, dead and risen again.
They preached the Lord crucified, and baptized them that believed in him, who
was then dead and risen from the dead. John's Baptism pointed at remission of
sins to be by Jesus Christ; but the Baptism of water administered by the
Disciples of Christ, held forth remission of sins already; and they were to
be baptized, to manifest their sins being pardoned.

3. The subjects of John's Baptism were only Jews: it is said of him, All
Judea and Jerusalem came out to be baptized in Jordan: But Christ's are, Go
preach the Gospel to every Creature; viz. Jews and Gentiles, baptizing them.
Thus was the Gentiles, with Cornelius, baptized with water.

4. That was a preparation to the Baptism of the Holy Ghost; for he prepared
the way of the Lord; but this follows after, as in Cornelius: and if by
Baptism of the spirit you mean regeneration; the Baptism of water always
followed that, at-least the profession of it, which is the true ground of
visible administrations.

5. The Commissions by which the Baptism of water was dispensed were diverse:
the one by God to John in the wilderness; the other from Christ to the Saints
being risen from the dead.

6. And Lastly, The Baptism of John is always called the Baptism of John;
and no where the Baptism of Christ; and therefore we shall find a distinction
between them; and the Disciples are said to baptize in the name of Jesus
Christ.

A second difference is this, That the Baptism of water administered by John
ceased; for he says of himself, I must decrease; that is They have not the
like continuance.
to say, my person, my office, my ministry, must all stoop to Christ, who must
increase. John's doctrine ceased in Christ, so his Baptism; for Christ being
come, dead and risen. John was not any longer by his ministry to prepare his
way: and truly if you take away the doctrine upon which any thing is
administered, you likewise take away the administration: but now Christ's
Baptism endures, being established upon a more strong foundation; Christ
humbled and exalted, dead and risen: therefore are the believers who were
filled by the Holy Ghost, baptized with the Baptism of water, in the name of
the Lord Jesus: The continuation whereof I shall prove afterward.

Thus is it manifest, that the Baptism of water was as well commanded by
Christ, as by John; and was not only John's baptism, as many suppose.

And whereas John says, I baptize you with water, but Christ shall baptize you
with the spirit and fire: It proves not, that Christ did not command his
Disciples to continue baptizing with water: but this it proves, that Christ's
baptism was greater then John's: John's was only water, but Christ's water and
the spirit too: I say, this expression of John's proves no more that Christ has
not a baptism of water, then Paul's words, saying, that Paul planteth, and
Apollo waters, but it is God that gives the blessing; proves, that God plants
not, nor waters: which would be strange to affirm.

To conclude this likewise, I shall only desire you to mind this: if the
baptism of water was only John's, and to endure only till souls were baptized
with the Holy Ghost (as those that say, water baptism is only John's, affirm)
then demand I, how comes it to pass, that being baptized with the Holy Ghost,
is used by Peter, as an undeniable argument, that Cornelius should be baptized
with water. Sure this is an undoubted truth, that that dispensation, which is
the only ground of putting an end to Baptism of water, (as they say the
baptism of the spirit is) cannot be a true ground to continue it: but Peter
uses it as an argument for its continuance from whence without wresting the
Scriptures, perverting the truth, dazzling men's eyes with the bare notions of
mystery, spirit, life or substance; we may safely conclude, that baptism of
water is Christ's baptism, as well as John's, and was preached and practiced by
the Disciples of the Lord Jesus. But lest we should be cheated or beguiled
through the false representations of the carnality of this Baptism, I will, in
the next particular, discover its great glory.

6. The way being now something more clear, I desire to proceed; The true
nature, use and end of water Baptism.
and show you the true nature, use and end of this ordinance or baptism,
wherein the true glory of it will appear, notwithstanding the endeavors of
men or Devils to stain it: it is an Ordinance of the New Testament of the Lord
Jesus; it is a part of Gospel, spiritual and heavenly obedience; whose use
and end is,

First, For the visible holding forth the death and resurrection It holds forth
Christ's death and resurrectiou.
of the Lord Jesus; That Lawgiver, who has given us tongues to speak of this
mystery, has given us bodies to express it: for what is our being overwhelmed
with water, but a lively representation of Christ's being in the grave, and our
ascending out of the water: what is it, but a fit publication of Christ's being
raised from the dead.

Secondly, It serves for the exercise of our obedience unto the ^ exercises our
obedience.
Lord Jesus: If I be a King, where is my honor? says Christ. Arise, why
tarryest thou? and be baptized, is the Law gone forth from our High Priests
lips, to be faithfully observed of all believers: Had we no ground but Gods
command, it is enough for us; hereby may we manifest our obedience; God has
not made our bodies in vain, but will be glorified in them, For our bodies are
the temples of the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, It serves for the exercise of our faith in the death of It exercises
our faith.
Christ, where we, by faith, see our selves dipped in the glorious mystery of
his death: Therefore are we said, To be buried with him in Baptism. Some
conceive, that is only meant spiritually; but, I say, he speaks of the being
baptized into his death by faith, even in the visible Ordinance: for in that
may we by faith see Christ dead, and our life hid in his death: by faith in his
death, we see our selves dead to sin; it holds forth our justification by
Christ; the washing away of our sins in his death, in his blood. So likewise
it serves for the exercise of our faith in the resurrection of Christ: for as
we have been baptized in his death, so likewise, by faith, we see the glory
of Christ's resurrection; for as Christ died and rose from the dead, so we, who
are buried visibly with him in Baptism, shall be raised by him, even as
certainly, as we arise out of the water, unto life eternal.

Fourthly, We are likewise, by Baptism, planted into the similitude We are
planted by it into the likeness of Christ's death and resurrection.
of his death and resurrection; for as Christ died, and was surrounded with
miseries, so in this Ordinance, by faith, we see our sufferings to be the
dyings of Christ in us; and as we suffer with him, so are we planted into the
likeness of his resurrection. We now by this see our selves planted into the
similitude of his death; whereby we dye to the world, to sin and vanity: and
likewise see our selves risen with Christ, by faith, unto the glory of God,
seeking the things that are above, where Christ now fitteth at the right hand
of God, in the glory of the majesty on high. We do not only, by this, hold
forth Christ's death and resurrection, by acting faith in it, that we shall
receive virtue by it, but see our selves also planted into the same similitude
of Christ's sufferings and exaltations.

Fifthly, It is a sweet and comfortable assurance of the resurrection It serves
for the assurance of the resurrection of the body.
of our bodies from the grave; We are buried with him, and shall be raised from
the grave by him: as sure as our bodies are raised from the water, shall our
bodies be raised from the grave.

Sixthly, By this they visibly demonstrate themselves to have put By this we
visibly put on Christ.
on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ. This putting on Christ is by faith, by which we are the children
of God; but the visible demonstration of it is in Baptism of water: and by
faith in this outward ordinance, have we communion and fellowship with Christ,
having put him on as a garment, to cover our nakedness; as an ornament, to
adorn our persons; as a shield and buckler, to secure us: we are in this
ordinance baptized into Christ under a twofold consideration.

1. In that we are baptized into the love, life, joy, peace, mystery and
righteousness of Christ: we, by faith in that ordinance, may see our selves
encompassed about with a love, and united to Christ; For by one spirit are we
all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. We visibly demonstrate our selves,
by Baptism, to be of Christ's sheep; as invisibly by the spirit, we are
dipped, plunged or interested into that spiritual body whereof Christ is the
head.

2. In that by baptism, we visibly give up our names to Christ, acknowledging
him to be our Lord; his will to be our law; his law our life; by this we
acknowledge his sovereignty, his excellency: by this we resign up our selves
to him; wearing his livery; whereby he distinguishes his people in a special
manner from the world: Therefore says Christ, Go teach all Nations, baptizing
them in or into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: That is to say, by
Baptism we are consecrated or set apart, unto the Father, Son, and Spirit; and
are visibly baptized into the profession of Jesus, of the mystery and spirit of
Jesus. This Paul explaines, where he says, He thanks God he baptized no more
of the Corinths, lest they should say, he baptized them into his name, that is,
lest they should have Idolized him, attributed that to him, which is proper to
God, lest they should say, they were his Disciples or his members, or call
themselves by his name.

Lastly, the end of this, as all other Ordinances, is to glorify By this we
glorify God.
God; God will be glorified by thy hands in ministering to thy own, or the
Saints necessities; by thy foot in carrying thee forth to preach: For how
beautiful are the feet of him that brings glad tidings: by thy spirit in
believing, by thy soul and body in being baptized; for we are not our own,
but are bought with a price, that we should glorify God in soul, body and
spirit.

Chap. IV.
Discourses of the Administrator, and proper subjects of Baptism.
IF you call to mind what I have already declared, concerning Who are the true
administrators of the Ordinance of Baptism.
the ministry to the world, you will see who are true Administrators; but to
speak a little more fully of this, they are twofold.

First, Such who are immediately stirred up by God, to preach the Gospel of
Christ: those having a power to baptize into or in the name of Christ: of this
sort were the eleven Disciples, Mark ult: Philip, who preached and baptized:
Ananias, who preached to Paul, and baptized him: Peter, who preached to the
Gentiles, and baptized them: Paul himself, who preached and baptized diverse,
Acts 16.

Secondly, Such as are sent forth by the Church of Christ; they may preach the
Gospel, and administer this Ordinance: thus was Barnabas sent from Jerusalem
to Antioch, being a good man, and full of the spirit: Thus was Paul and
Barnabas separated by the Church for the work of the Lord.

Now I desire you to mind this, that the power calling and enabling any to
preach the Gospel and baptize, is no other but the same power for the nature
of it, that carried out, and enabled the Apostles and Evangelists of old to
preach and baptize: I say, the Church has power to appoint or separate any,
whom God has made willing and able to do this as a part of the work of the
Lord; for Baptism of water is an ordinance, in relation to Church fellowship,
which is visible. And surely the Church is not destitute of power for the
accomplishment of that which is so necessary in visible fellowship; namely, the
administration of that Ordinance.

It is true, say some, many may preach the Gospel, but are there any who so
preach it as the Apostles did? for the word in the Greek, speaking of the
Apostles preached, is, (...); So says Christ in his Commission, (...): Preach
the Gospel: which holds forth a preaching with authority, having a message to
deliver; which word comes from (...), which signifies, a Gryer: So that the
Apostles preached even by way of Preclamation, as it were: But speaking of the
scattered brethren, Acts 2. It is said, They went (...), that is, Preaching
after such a manner as any other might do; declaring the Gospel of peace: but
so, that the administration of Baptism is tied to such who preach in the first
sense, and not to them that preach in the latter sense.

In answer to this objection, I say, That the Greek words, Acts, verse 15. the
word, (...), is used, as it is said there, (...); but verse 8. we shall see the
same preaching of Philip to be held forth by the word (...); for there it is
said, They believed Philip (...), Evangelizing or preaching the things that
concern the Kingdom of God. The same word is likewise used in the last verse:
And so Paul expresses the true nature of his preaching by the same word,
saying, (...). Sometimes we find the preaching of the Gospel to be expressed
by (...), as Acts 8. 25. so Acts 11. 19. There it is written, They went (...),
preaching the word to none but the Jews: By which it is evident, that the
preaching the Gospel is not so restrained to one particular word; as no other
word is sufficient for the holding of it forth. But further, the word, (...),
signifies a preaching a joyful message, like a good messenger: from which I
shall conclude that the Preacher of the Gospel: He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, is the true administrator of this Ordinance.

But may some say, Many that have professed to be the true administrators of
this Ordinance, and have administered it upon several persons, do now deny it:
so that except there be some visible, miraculous demonstration between them
that do truly preach the truth, who are really sent of God; and them that
only seem to be so, and in truth are not; we are like to be deceived in the
Administrator, and so the Ordinance will be without effect.

In answer to this; Grant that many may fall from what they many in the
Apostles days did so; and Judas, one of the twelve, fell from his profession
and ministry too; yet the doctrine that Judas was commanded to preach, did not
fall in his fall. Suppose a wicked man may speak the truth to thee, who wast
ignorant of it, and God should make that truth to be powerful in thee, and
that many should afterward deny it: shall their unbelief and backsliding make
the faith of God of none effect? God forbid; So if a man preach, thou ought
to be baptized, and thou do submit to the will of God, if he denies it, thy
Baptism is true; for indeed it is not essentially necessary to the
administration of Ordinance of Baptism, that the administrator should be such
a one that shall never deny the truth; for if so, it must be revealed from
heaven, who shall continue before we may be assured of a true Minister, which
we have no ground in all the Scripture to expect; neither is that any ground at
all for us to submit to that or any ministry. Visible appearances are the
ground of visible administrations, and our faith and practice is not tied to
the persons of any, but to the doctrine of Jesus Christ: So that if any one
comes in the name of a Disciple, preaching the doctrine of Christ, and God
makes us to see it our duty to conform to his doctrine, we should not
question so much his calling, as manifest our ready conformity to the will God.

I shall only add this, to this particular, that I cannot find, that Gods
people were ever made incapable of doing their duty for want of an
administrator: But the same God, that enjoynes the observation of a command,
likewise provides a suitable way for the execution thereof.

8. The next thing to be spoken to, are the subjects of Baptism; Of the true
subjects of Baptism of water.
which, without guesses, suppositions, or strained consequences, we shall find
plainly discovered to be Saints, visible professors, believers: Therefore says
the Scriptures, He that believes and is baptized: Baptism follows faith, as
Peter evidently demonstrated, (when the Eunuch asked, What hindered that he
might not be baptized) saying, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou
may. So it is said, that Crispus and many Corinthians believed and were
baptized: they are such that repent and gladly receive the word: these, and
these only, are the true subjects of Baptism.

But may some say, It is true, visible believers are subjects of Baptism; so
also are the Infants of believing parents: therefore you do amiss to restrain
it to them that make an outward profession of the Gospel.

These late years have so abounded in this controversy, that

First, Those persons are only to be baptized, whom Christ gave Against infant
Baptism.
a Commission to his Disciples to baptize.

But Christ gave a Commission to his Disciples to baptize none but visible
professors of the Gospel of Christ.

Ergo, Only professors of faith are to be baptized, and so not children,
because they cannot profess faith.

The major, or the former proposition, is evident; for if they baptized others
then Christ commanded them, they set up an Ordinance of their own, and were
guilty of will worship, and taught for the Doctrines of God their own
traditions. If any one shall deny this, I desire he would show me in the
Scripture, where the Lord Jesus has declared his approbation of any man's
setting up an Ordiance in his own house, which he himself enjoined not with
the reasons for such an assertion, and we will fully consider of the matter.

The second proposition is likewise clear, if we consider the Commission given
to his Disciples to baptize, we shall see the persons expressly denominated to
be believers: as first, that in Matthew, where Christ says, Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them. From whence many, though exceeding ignorantly, lay a
foundation for infant sprinkling; concluding all nations are to be baptized;
and infants are a part of nations: therefore to be baptized, not knowing, they
may as well conclude all Heathens, Infidels, Barbarians, Idolaters, and the
worst of men, or any part of the Nations, may be baptized by the same argument:
but the truth is, these words are a clear denial of infant Baptism; for they
are first commanded to teach the Nations, and then baptize them; that is to
say, them that are taught; as it is in the Greek, (...), that word, (...), is
to be referred to (...), included in the verb; and that this may appear to be
the clear mind of the spirit, we will show you it cannot be meant otherwise;
for if he means not them that are taught, then they have a command to baptize
unbelieuers; which surely no man that pretends to know Christ, dares to affirm.

But say some, they are to baptize those that they teach, which teaching is
their outward declaration of the Word; so that to whom they outwardly preach
the word they may administer baptism.

To this I answer first, This is not the true meaning of the word taught; for
the word signifies so to teach as to make Disciples; they who hear the word and
obey it not, which is contrary to truth. Again, in that Scripture in Mark, Go
preach the Gospel to every creature, and he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, Faith is still put before Baptism; if any shall yet say Christ
gives a Commission to Baptize any other then Believers, let them set down where
it was given, and when, and we will seriously weigh that Commission.

The second and last argument I shall at present propound (though the first
alone is sufficient) against Infants Baptism is this,

That which confounds the Church and the world making them both one, is
altogether unlawful.

But Baptism of Infants does confound the Church and the world together,
therefore unlawful.

The first, is evident, and so is the second, if we consider that all men by
natural generation, are but of this world natural; a natural man begets a
son in his own likeness: no man is born a Saint by virtue of his natural
birth; the children of Believers and unbelievers are all in one state in
respect of visible appearance.

But may some say, that children of Believers are in the Covenant, and so are
not of the world; therefore they may be Baptized.

If they are in the Covenant, they are either in the Covenant of grace, or some
outward Covenant of Church Ordinances, if any covenant of grace; I say, they
are, all of them so, or some of them so; that all are not so, consider what is
said of Esau To. 9. and indeed election is no ground of Baptism to be
administered, but profession: but if you say they are in an outward Covenant; I
demand the proof of such a Covenant in the Gospel: but if any say, there was
an outward Covenant of Churchfellowship with Abraham's natural seed, so now with
the natural seed of all believers: be not too hasty in your conclusions,
consider the Scripture, there is now no Seed of Abraham according to the flesh,
who are the only people of God; but if we believe, we are Abraham's children;
so that as Abraham's natural seed enjoyed many jewish privileges; so now,
Abraham's spiritual seed enjoy spiritual privileges: Abraham was in a double
capacity; as a Father of many Nations in the flesh, to whom pertained
Circumcision, the giving thelaw, etc. as a Father of the faithful, and so
believers are only his seed.

But the promise is said to be unto them, Acts 2. 38. The promise is to you and
to your children; therefore if the promise be unto them, why may not they have
the Seal of the promise?

Consider in answer to this, two things.

1. Those to whom the promise is made, are commanded, first many as the Lord
our God shall call; which must be restrained only to them, whether you take the
promise to be meant of remission of sins; for this is given to no man but upon
believing, or if you mean outward ordinances, they are only for the called;
baptism, Church fellowship, breaking bread, prayer, all are for the called who
are only able to act faith in them.

But children were circumcised; and Baptism comes in the room of
Circumcision,

This reasoning from Circumcision to Baptism of Infants will not hold, for if
you say the ground of both is the same, and say they were circumcised because
in the Covenant, and so children Baptized: if by Covenant you mean the promise
of eternal life, that was not the ground of circumcising any; for many were in
that covenant that were never circumcised; for in truth 'twas not the Covenant,
but the command of God that was and is the ground of submitting to any
Ordinance: but if you say, the Covenant was an outward promise of Canaan, and
so circumcision a seal of that; it nothing proves children to be baptized: for
as a fleshly promise was made to carnal persons, yet in a sense, all holy (for
Israel was a holy Nation) so a spiritual promise is to spiritual christians,
the true spiritual seed of Isaac, of the Lord Jesus.

But further, if this outward Covenant, be the ground of circumcision, why then
were not females circumcised as well as males, except you will deny them to be
in the Covenant: but if you say, the Covenant was a Covenant of outward
Ordinances, of which circumcision was a sign, and those Ordinances were the
ground of circumcision; then likewise demand I whether that if this Covenant be
a ground of circumcision, all that are in that Covenant ought not to be
circumcised? if you say they ought not, then that is not a sufficient ground of
circumcision: but if you say they ought, then why are not the females
circumcised? except you deny them to have a right to the Covenant, which I
judge you will not do. The truth is, there is nothing more evident then this,
that it was and is the command of God; which is, the true and sufficient ground
to administer any Ordinance upon.

But further, if the Covenant was the ground of it, why was Ishmael
circumcised, who was the child of the Bondwoman, who was cast out? and why
were not believers circumcised, who were in the Covenant, though not in
Abraham's family; as Lot, Job, and others? much more might be said of this, if
that I could now stand to enlarge my self.

But yet some say, Circumcision came in the room of Baptism; and so those
persons that might be circumcised, may also be baptized: which proves the
Baptism of Infants.

In answer to this, I say, First, That the Scripture says not, that viz:
Coloss. 2. 11, 12. proves no such matter; for truly if we mind that place, the
Apostle there shows how that the circumcision of the flesh made with hands, is
not that which cleanses us, but it is the circumcision of the heart; that is to
say, the cutting off or destroying those lusts and corruptions that are in the
body of the flesh; Which is by the Circumcision of Christ. If we seriously
consider it, we shall find circumcision ended in Christ; for he kept the whole
Law, to which circumcision bound the Jews, and fulfilled it for us: And whereas
the Apostle says, Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with
him through the faith of the operation of God: He goes forward to confirm
them in this, that their compleatnesse was in the death and resurrection of
Christ, which they held forth in Baptism. I profess seriously, I have weighed
that Scripture, and can find no other ground to judge, it proves Baptism to
come in the place of circumcision then this, because Baptism follows in the
next verse; which if that were a good argument to prove it, we might as well
say, because in the sixth verse of the said 2. of Coloss. it is written, As ye
have therefore received Christ the Lord, so walk ye in him; and in the seventh
verse, Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, etc. that to be
rooted and built up in Christ, comes in the room and place of walking in
Christ, and so walking in Christ must cease, because we are rooted in Christ,
which would be strange doctrine: I confess there may be some allusion between
baptism and Circumcision, but that the one should answer the other in every
particular, is quite contrary to Scripture, or that Circumcision succeeds
baptism, I see no proof of it, but rather the contrary; for I shall show you
clearly, that there is no ground at all to baptize infants now, because they
were then Circumeesed; which I thus prove.

First, I say, for Circumcision of infants it was expressly commanded of God,
but it is not so in the baptism of infants.

Secondly. The male was only to be Circumcised, but both male and female
believing in Christ, are to be baptized.

Thirdly, The command for Circumcision was not the institution of baptism,
which is evident, for that those persons who were circumcised, were by another
commission commanded to be baptized, neither did baptism put an end to
Circumcision, for both were in use under John Baptist together: again the
subjects of the two ministrations are far different; the one a natural see,
the other a spiritual seed, now we know no other spiritual seed, but
believers, visibly professing their faith.

Though we have not an express command to baptize infants, yet there is a
virtuall command in Circumcision.

To this I answer, The conformity to a command must not

But children were dedicated to the Lord formerly, therefore they may be
baptized.

By the same argument, because the Temple and all the Vessels in once would
cease to exercise our wit in drawing out institutions, according to our own
inventions, from mere bottomless allusions.

There are many other Arguments which are produced for infant Baptism; as that
of their being holy: and of such is the Kingdom of heaven; and the root is
holy, and so are the branches with many other; which, in truth, have no force
at all to conclude it either a duty, or lawful to baptize them: at best, they
conclude but probably, and not demonstratively; which suppositions will not
warrant our practice about the administration of such an Ordinance as Baptism
is. If thou desire a further answer to these or the like objections: I shall
entreat thee to consult seriously, first, with the Scriptures, and then with
their writings, who show its vanity from the Scriptures: as Master Tombs his
works, and many others, to which for the present I refer thee.

Chap. V.
Shows the true manner of performing this Ordinance; with the right principle
and power, that carries a soul forth to the practice of it.
9. THE ninth thing I propounded to speak of, was the true The manner of the
administration of Baptism is by dipping.
manner of the administration of this Ordinance; which I will dispatch with as
much brevity as I can, and show you that the true manner is, by dipping or
plunging the whole body into the water. I shall prove this to be the manner,
and the only manner from the Scriptures; and that from a twofold
demonstration.

1. From the signification of the word. The signification of the word proves it
to be so.


2. From the nature of the Ordinance.

First, From the signification of the word, Baptize; it comes from the Greek
word, (...), a (...), i. e. mergo, immergo, which properly signifies to dip,
dive, duck or plunge under water, to cover or overwhelme one with water. Now
surely Christ commanding his Disciples to baptize or dip in the water, means
not that sprinkling shall serve the turn; neither is Baptism ever expressed
by the word, (...), which properly signifies to sprinkle. I confess this
practice to most carnal heart, seems strange and ridiculous: and why? but
because they have gotten a Greek word into their mouths, not knowing the
English of the word, nor the nature of the Ordinance. If the word, (...), was
plainly, properly, and truly, as it signifies, rendered to dip, and Baptism
expressed by dipping: I am persuaded men would be ashamed to deny it, who now
cry out against it with open mouth. This was the practice in the Apostles
days; and if you will give credit to Authors in the Ages succeeding them:
therefore says one, Olim enim qui baptizabantur in profundum aquae,
mergebantur: that is, Those who heretofore were baptized, were dipped or
plunged into a deep water: Therefore is it said in the Scripture, Philip and
the Eunuch (...), they both went down, or descended, into the water; and
Philip baptized, or dipped, or plunged him into the water; and they both
ascended out of the water, Acts 8. 38, 39. So it is said of Christ, He was
dipped, or plunged (not sprinkled) by John, (...), into Jordan; and that John
and Christ ascended from out of Jordan, Mark 1. 9, 10. Which they could not be
said to do, had they not first descended into the water.

But may some say, It Is true, Dipping was used then, but it was in hot
Countries: if you should do so now, it would endanger their health; and if we
should do so to infants, it would endanger their lives: therefore we cannot
think this to be fit in our cold Countries.

In answer to this, Let me tell thee, if thou shall dip infants, it is

But surely this way is not civil for men to baptize women in the water; but
God will have us do all things with civility and modesty.

Nay, but oh poor man, who tells thee it is not civil nor modest; surely Satan
within thee, or some that never saw it: what, I pray you in civility is it, for
two men, or a man with a woman, to go into the water with convenient garments
about them? Is it more uncivil now, then it was in the days of Christ and the
Apostles? It may be some of the sons of Belial, delighting to scandalize the
just ones, may tell thee, they go naked together into the water: Oh these are
but scandals; I know not of any such practice, nor could ever hear any that
had so much impudence, as to endeavor proof of it: which, without
controversy, had any been known to have done so, both their names, time and
place should have been printed long before now. This we affirm, that it ought
to be done with all modesty, civility and comeliness, with fit garments, which
may serve to answer this objection.

Secondly, That this was the practice of the Disciples, and the command of
Christ to perform it in the same manner, is evident, from the nature of the
Ordinance; which truly holds forth the death and resurrection of Christ, and
our being dead and risen with him: therefore is it said, Coloss. 2. 12. We are
buried with him in Baptism. Now a man that is buried, is covered or hid in the
grave: so that the Baptism of water that is instituted to hold forth this,
must be in the same manner; persons are as it were, to be buried under water;
which is the most lively representation of the death of Christ.

But yet some object, That Christ's blood is called, the blood of sprinkling: so
that the death of Christ is as well represented by sprinkling as dipping.

To this I answer; That Christ's blood is called, the blood of Heb. 12. 24.
Moses sprinkled the blood upon the people, which sprinkling sanctified to the
purifying of the flesh: But this typified out the blood of Jesus, sprinkled
upon the Conscience, Heb. 10. 22. Heb. 12. 24. This held forth the death of
Christ; but now Baptism in a more special manner holds forth Christ's death
and burial, and shows him not only dead and buried, but also risen again:
therefore are we said, To be buried and risen with him in Baptism, Col. 2. 12.
Which most directly, plainly, and nakedly, holds forth the glory of the mystery
of Christ's death and resurrection; from whence we may safely conclude, it is to
be performed by dipping.

10. The tenth particular concerning Baptism, is the principle The principal
leading. forth of Baptism.
from which a Saint ought to submit to it, but because I have already in the
former part of this discourse handled the true principle of divine worship,
which worship is to be both inward and outward I shall speak the less of it
here, therefore briefly I shall show you.

First, It must flow from the knowledge of the nature of the ordinance, we must
not do things we understand not; but must be able to behold it, holding forth
the nature of Christ's death and resurrection.

Secondly, We must likewise know, that we are fit subjects for it, wherein we
must know our selves to be believers in that Christ, whose death we represent,
both which are evident from Philips words to the Eunuch, If thou beleevest with
all thy heart, thou may, he ought to know the nature of true faith in that
ordinance, and that he himself did believe in the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, He that truly performs that ordinance must know it to be an
ordinance of Christ, he that does any thing to Christ, and has not authority
from Christ, or a command for it, and yet does it as an ordinance of Christ,
his worship is will worship, his service is not regarded by the Lord.

Lastly, As he must have a principle of knowledge, faith, and life, so must he
perform it in love to Christ, he that receives truth, and not in the love of
truth, will soon fall from the truth which truly I conceive to be the ground
why so many Professors deny it; it is because they were biased with some
carnal principle, and were not in love with the truth from the true
understanding of the truth.

Having briefly spoken to the principle, I shall now handle the The true power
of Conformity to this Ordinance.
power whereby we are to conform to it, which is a spiritual, divine,
supernatural power, whereby the soul is enabled to perform the commands of
God, therefore says Christ, without me you can do nothing; and again says
Paul, I can do all things through Christ, that strengthens me; All Power,
says Christ, is given to me, therefore go ye; The power that is in Christ's
hand is communicated unto poor creaures, whereby they become conformable unto
himself.

i confess may a man say it is the power of Christ that neables us to do of his
good pleasure, but I desire to know whether every Saint at all times has not a
power to do every thing commanded by God?

That I may as clearly as possibly I can present the truth of this to Adam and
his generation; or to the second Adam the Lord from heaven and his generation;
now power in the first Adam, or indeed in the whole creation is that faculty,
whereby every thing is enabled to perform its several office or work; so that
there is a natural power in the Sun to move and to shine, and in the fire to
burn; so in man there is a natural power to move, or sit, or eat, or drink,
or fast, and the like: which power in the first man admits also of a double
consideration, either as in innocence; or since his fall, while he lies in sin;
in his first created state he had a pure natural power given him, of doing
what he would; so that man's will missed his power, for power is guided
naturally by will in man, but this power enabled him to serve God in the first
creation, which power was the power of God in him. But man notwithstanding this
power was through the subtilty of the deceiver beguiled; therefore it is said,
the Devil beguiled Eve, so that he fell, and his power was now lost to any
thing which was good, and confined to things natural, where in its force is
much abated, and its vigor eclipsed; but now is a man dead by nature, or
corruption to the things of God; thus much of power in the first man: Now power
in the second man is that ability where by we are able to serve God, fear him,
rejoice in, or conform to him; now this power is so essential to a Saint,
that take it away, you destroy his being; a man is not a man, any longer then
he has the power of a man, so a Saint is not a Saint without this power; a
Saint is an old man renewed in power, life, light, and spirit; though let me
tell you, this work is but in part here; so that I say, a Saint as a Saint
has power, it is his life, his portion, whose power is the very power of the
Almighty; for what the Father has, is given to Christ, and what Christ has,
is given to a Saint.

If this be true, how comes it to pass, that so many Saints complain for want
of power to do the things that are good, as Paul says, to will is present
with me, but how to perform I know not, and again the good that I would do,
that I do not, and the evil that I would not do, that do I?

That the first is true, notwithstanding this, to me is apparent, cries out for
sleep, but his pains are so great he cannot sleep, or fain would walk, but the
gout prevents him; now I say the proper reason, why he cannot walk, is not
because he has not as a man, a power to walk, but because his natural power
is obstructed through the violency of his disease, yet thus far it is true that
a man has not a power, as considered diseased, but this disease is
preternaturall or contrary to nature; so I say it fares with a Saint, as a
Saint in his right temper, he can move and run the ways of Gods commands, but
meeting with the opposition of a body of sin, or death, he cries out with Paul,
who shall deliver me.

Through the violence of temptation, a Saint may slip or fall, he may be for a
time led captive, but this is not properly for want of power, as a Saint, but
because of his temptations or enemies, which makes them complain of the
strength of the wicked one.

But further I say, the reason of Saints complaining, or being sometimes
overcome for a time, is not for want of power, for all the power that Christ
has is theirs, but for want of faith in that power, for by faith, we lay hold
on that power, by which we overcome the world, our strength is to lay hold on
the Lord; did we know our strength, it would appear to be no other, but the
strength of Christ: when Paul had been in a long conflict, Romans 7. with the
flesh, he cried, out till he looked to Christ, then says he, thanks be to God
who has delivered me. To this I have already said, I shall add this, that
though power is essential to the being of a man, or any creature, or a Saint,
yet without a constant supply of power or influence, or virtue from the Lord,
it soon Loses or forgoeth its course; the Sun though naturally it is in
continual motion, yet at Gods command, it stands still; without a continual
supply from Christ, we can do nothing, if God do not vouchsafe a continual
influence of his presence and his power, to the natural man he dies; so if God
withdrawes the sweet influence of his power upon us or in us, how soon do we
fall, a Saint has power, but knows not how to exercise it, he has power as
he is a new creature, but sometimes cannot exercise it through a distemper.

But do you judge that the reason why men in our days do not submit to this
and other ordinances of Christ, is for want of a power in them.

To this I answer, That I do believe the reason why many do respects, I
confess, I cannot but wonder to think any one should be clear in their
judgments, that God had commanded any particular act to be done by them, and
yet should say they want power, except they acknowledge it to be from a
temptation, or combat in them, and so their burden; it is true Paul, said, he
knew not how to do what was good, but it makes him cry out; the reason is
because of a combat with his enemies; but for any Saint to pretend a want of
power, and feels nothing hindering him, or fighting against him; I must be bold
to say to him, it is through the subtilty of the evil one, whereby he is become
careless and dead, through the World; or else expects what he is like never to
find; viz. an extraordinary power, he knows not what, considering that no
other power is needful to carry one forth to his duty, then that which does
accomplish or fulfill it, if a man should be hungry, and yet expect another
power from heaven to carry him forth to eat, then that natural power he is
created in, would not every man judge him not in hjs right mind? So I say here,
who ever expects any extraordinary power, whither he will or no (more then what
is created in him in the new creation, in the Lord Jesus) to carry him forth to
do his duty, when discovered to him, may for ought I know miss his
expectation; and let all such search their hearts, with a spiritual candle,
and I believe they will find it to be self, world, carnal reason, and Satan's
suggestions, which set up themselves in their hearts, and then they cry out
they want power, they want power; oh consider, if Will, I say, if Will be not
absent also; for he that Wills to do his duty, and desires to be made
conformable, surely God will enable him; that which I have said, concerning
Power in this, is true in any other command of Christ, for us to serve and
keep.

Chap. VI.
Shows the Continuance of this Ordinance.
I Shall now in the last place show you, how long the Ordinance Tha^ continu^
of this ordinance is till Christ come.
of baptism was, and is to continue; wherein I shall also show, the continuance
of Churches, and other Ordinances of Christ; which is, Till Christ come again
the second time, without sin to salvation; till he comes to raise up our vile
natural bodies, and make them like his own glorious body, which I shall first
evidence to you from the Scriptures, and then answer those objections that
seem to have weight in them against it.

The first Scripture that I shall instance in, is Mat. 28. 19. 28. Go ye
therefore, etc. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you, and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World.
Amen. The Lord promises his presence to be with his disciples in all ages.
That we may clearly understand this Scripture, we must consider, God may be
said to be present with them, to whom he spoke, two ways, either with their
persons, and so he was all their days; or with their doctrine, and so he is in
all ages; in this last sense I understand this Scripture, neither can it be
interpreted truly otherwise; for if any say as some do, he means his presence
shall be with their persons to the end of the world; that cannot be, for the
end is not yet, but if any say, the end is come to them, I answer, the Lord
says not til the end of the World come to you, but simply til the end of the
World, the word in the Greek is the same with that end the disciples asked
Christ of, Matthew. 24. 3. which is the end which Christ says, is not yet,
neither knows any man, the hour thereof.

But by the end of the world, we may understand the utmost parts of the earth,
and so Christ was with them to the utmost part of the earth.

The word mentions not earth, but World, and the end of it, so I will be with
you always, or, all days; but might some say, what mean you by always, even
to the end of the World, so that this last clause is ^a more full confirmation
and explanation of the word always, that is to say, for ever; from whence I
conclude, the meaning is, God will always, even to the last day, be present
with their doctrine; by which presence he is as truly said to be present with
his disciples, as Moses and the Prophets were said to be with the Jews; the
Apostles as the foundation are yet with us, and God with them; now their
doctrine was faith and obedience to the commands of Christ, Go teach, and
baptize, teaching them to observe all things I commanded you, and lo, I am
with you to the end of the World.

Another Scripture is, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. And he gave some Apostles, etc. For
the perfecting of the Saints, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. From whence we may observe, that Christ
has placed such officers in his Church, which is all his people to the end of
the world, that may be instruments to make all the Saints one perfect man. Now
all Saints make not up this perfect man, till they are all gathered together
into unity: That which the Apostle says, Hebr. 11. 39, 40. of the Fathers:
They received not the promises, God having provided some better thing for us,
that they without us should not be made perfect. Perfection, as I have before
in the first part demonstrated, is not by parts, but of all together; the
Fathers without the Apostles, the Apostles without us, and we without those
that are to come after us, shall not be made perfect: Now, till that time
wherein we shall attain unto the measure of the stature of Christ's fullness,
the Lord has placed in his Church Apostles, etc. which Church was not any
particular Church in whom all these officers or gifts were placed; but all
Churches, or the Church in all ages; according to that of Paul, I, as a wise
master builder, have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon: And
therefore is it said, The Saints are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Corner stone. Now the Apostles
and Prophets are the foundation of the whole building, as in their days, so in
our days; and now, what have we to do, but to build on the same foundation.

Again, Consider what says the Scripture, Math. 16. 18. And I say also unto
thee, that thou art Peter; and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Now the Church of Christ were a
company of Disciples baptized, professing the doctrine of the Gospel, as I
shall show more clearly afterward, Now against this Church the gates of hell
should not prevail, because it was built upon a Rock.

Many think the meaning of that Rock to be Christ; others judge it to be Peter:
but, for my part, I believe it to be meant of neither, excluding the other, but
of both: for Christ is the true foundation; For no other foundation can any man
lay, then that which is already laid, even the Lord Jesus. Yet I say also,
Christ is not called a foundation, but in reference to his doctrine given to
Peter and the Apostles, preached by them first; who are also said to be the
foundation; they, as instruments in Christ's hand: Christ, as the fountain and
fullness, that fills all in all; so that however behold a Church built, That the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

But may some say, The gates of hell did prevail against many Churches.

It is not said, the gates of hell shall not prevail against any Ephesians. 3. 21.
Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end, Amen. Behold here a Church, in all ages: the Churches, and so the
Ordinances of the Churches were not to abide only in the Apostles days, but
to the end of the world, in all ages.

But yet to evince this more fully, consider that the word preached by the
Apostles, is the only word to be preached, for faith and obedience in all
generations: therefore says Christ, Neither pray I for these only, but for
them also which shall believe on me also through their word, John 17. 20. The
word of God preached by them, and not their persons; is expressed by Christ to
be the ground of our faith that believe now; to whom and to all that shall
believe afterward, his prayer extends. Again, says Paul, As we have said
before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other Gospel unto you, then
that we have preached, and you have received, though it be an Angel from
heaven, let him be accursed, Galath. 1. 8, 9. Therefore is the Gospel called,
The everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. Now the word that the Apostles preached,
is that which was given to them by Christ; Go preach the Gospel, he that
believes and is baptized; this is to be held forth, as the word of God, To the
end of the world. The time from Christ to the end of the world, is The last
days, wherein Christ himself has spoken to us, Heb. 1. 2. Who by this
dispensation changed the old Priesthood and Law, Heb. 7. 12. Now he did not
destroy them, as evil, but changed them: for the Priesthood of Aaron, he
established his own by death: for the law of Ceremonies pointing out a Christ
to come, he established baptism, and breaking of bread, to hold forth the
establishment of his Priesthood in his death; who is already come, dead and
risen again.

Now as long as the Priesthood of Christ remains, so long must the Law
remain; for there is no Priesthood without a Law.

The life of obedience is required till Christ coming: therefore says Christ,
Ye know not in what hour your Lord shall come: therefore watch^ But lest any
should say, the exhortation concerns not us, Christ says, What I say unto
you, I say unto all; Watch: As Paul says, speaking of the judgments of God to
Israel, Now all these things happened to them for ensamples, and they are written
for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10, 11. So
are they for our admonition, and the Apostles doctrine our rule: therefore he
says to Timothy, And the things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also, 2 Timothy 2. 2. Let those that think the commands of the Apostles
only concern that generation, consider this Scripture: Yea, Baptism is so
far from being ceased, that it is called, One of the first principles of
Religion, Heb. 6. 2. Now surely if you take away that, you may as well take
away Religion also; and how you may wave that without bringing in another
Religion with other Principles, I understand not.

But if any say yet, all this satisfies not, then I shall demand, what ground
have any to prove its removal out of the way: for this is certain, no
dispensation given by Christ was ever removed, but by the bringing in of some
other: And Christ has now given out his laws, and will give out no other; but
it is high time to hear what is said against it, which I shall willingly do.

Chap. VII.
Answers several Objections.
SOme say, John baptized with water, but Christ with the Holy Ghost and fire;
So that John says, I must decrease, but he must increase: from whence they
conclude, that water Baptism must decrease, and He, viz. Christ, and his
Baptism of the spirit, must increase. John 3. 30.

This objection is grounded upon a mere mistake, conceiving John's, and not
Christ's; So that when John says, I must decrease, they can understand nothing
to be meant but water Baptism: when it is not John's intention, but John shows
his glory, his honor and ministry must give way to, and be swallowed up in
Christ, and decreased in this respect, that he must dye and cease; but Christ
increases by his death: through which he gives new institutions. I have already
showed the difference and agreement of Christ's and John's Baptism, wherein I
have proved the Baptism of water to be the Baptism of Christ.

But Christ says to the woman of Samaria, Woman believe me, the hour comes
when you shall, neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father: But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth: which is an argument, that Baptism
of water is no part of the worship of God; for that is outward, and God will be
worshipped in spirit. John 4. 22, 23.

In answer to this, I desire you to mind, that Christ does not at Jerusalem
and that Mountain wherein they worshipped, confining themselves to places:
therefore, says he, Neither at Jerusalem, nor at this Mountain.

Now Christ does not simply deny the worshipping of God at Jerusalem; for we
know the Churches worshipped God in their spirits at Jerusalem after Christ's
death; but prophecyes of the abolishing of that legal and ceremonial worship
of the Jews, which was tied to one place above another: and indeed the worship
of God under the Old Testament, was in comparison of the worship of the
Gospel, fleshly or carnal (not sinful) whereby they were tied to many
sacrifices and weary journies, in going up to Jerusalem to worship: But now
there is great liberty and freedom, wherein they profess God in ipirit: So
that to worship God in spirit and truth, is to worship him after a spiritual
manner, from a spiritual principle, in opposition to that legal state:
wherefore Paul calls himself, a minister of the spirit, and not of the letter:
Neither does that place at all deny outward Baptism: for Christ says, The
hour is already come, when those that worship God worship him in spirit and
truth. When you will not deny Baptism of water to be in use; neither can a man
truly worship God in any ordinance, without he worship God in the spirit.

But Baptism of water is a fleshly thing, an outward thing, which cannot be
admitted into the Kingdom of heaven: for the Apostle says, the Kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Romans 14. 17.

Consider, I pray thee, the Apostle there meddles not with Baptism, The
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink: For those things were not commanded to
be eaten or forbidded; so that we should sin if we do or do not eat: But
righteousness, etc. Now righteousness is the performance of all the commands
of God, to which Baptism of water is a part: as Christ says, Suffer me, for
thus it becomes me to fulfill all righteousness: Christ did all things
commanded, and that, as one of the commands of God. So that this is no Argument
at all, except you can prove Baptism of water to be the meat and drink he
there speaks of, which can never be made manifest: so that for thee to call
Baptism of water a fleshly thing, it argues a carnal understanding of the
commands of God.

But Paul calls it, a fleshly thing; for he says, We are the Circumcision which
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh: So that Paul relinquishes all outward things, as Baptism, and the
like, as fleshly, worshipping God in the spirit, Philip. 3. 3.

This Objection is like the first, where Paul points not at all at verse 5, and
6. Which very things he tells us, be they which he means, by flesh, and has
not confidence in them: Surely were we able to see how that we are commanded to
glorify God in soul, body and spirit, we should leave such carnal reasoning,
and not take Paul^ arguing against Jewish outward Ceremonies abolished by
Christ's death, as a ground against Baptism of water, which is grounded upon
his death.

But water Baptism ceased, when spirit Baptism came in, and was not to
continue after that; for fire Baptism devoures water Baptism.

Behold into how great mistakes men run, when they endeavor Acts 10. That the
Apostle Peter seeing Cornelius and those that were with him, baptized with the
Holy Ghost, (for the Holy Ghost fell on them as on the Apostles, Acts 11.)
makes use of this as a ground to prove, nothing could hinder him from being
baptized with water. Oh the subtilty of Antichrist, who makes wise men even as
it were mad, to forge their own reasons, endeavoring to make that a ground of
destroying water Baptism; which the Apostle used as an argument for the
establishment of it.

But some say, The Baptism of water was only used in the minority or infancy
of the Church: therefore when the Church grew higher in the knowledge of God,
they laid aside these things: Therefore is it said in the Hebrews, We must
leave the principles of the doctrines of Christ, and go on unto perfection; of
which principles Baptism is one, which we ought now to leave, Hebr. 6. 1. etc.

Whoever thou art that thus arguest against Baptism, by the same Chapter 5. he
tells them, They had need to have them taught again: But for not increasing in
the knowledge of God: Therefore he tells them, For their time they had need to
have been teachers of others: And so from these principles he draws their
thoughts higher into the mysteries of Christ. So that the Apostle says,
Leaving them we press forward; that is to say, leaving now, or at present, to
speak of them, which ye know and own already; we will go forward to speak
of higher things; which higher things destroy not the other: which is evident,
if you consider the other to be the principles or beginnings of the doctrine of
Christ. Now the building destroys not the foundation; these beginnings and the
other more perfect things are at perfect unity.

I, but say some, The Apostle says, He forgets those things that are behind,
and reached forth to those things that are before; So that we must not only
leave them, but forget them, Phil. 3. 13.

To which I answer; The word, forgetting, is not to be taken Paul did not, but
in reference to the glory of perfection, he had in his eye, he did as a man in
a race, running toward the prize; he does, as it were, forget all things
behind him, in respect of his continual motion; So in the things of God, we
ought day by day to press forward, till we come to the mark, to the enjoyment
of perfection. So that there is no good ground for such an Objection for the
Apostle James, Commends them that are not forgetful hearers but doers of the
word.

But, notwithstanding, surely to be baptized is to know Christ after the flesh:
therefore says Paul, Though we have known Christ himself after the flesh,
yet henceforth know we no man after the flesh, no not Christ himself, 2 Cor.
5. 16.

That we know not Christ after the flesh, is true; and yet it is as

That we may a little manifest the truth of this Scripture, we are to consider
what it is to know Christ after the flesh; if you say to know Christ after the
flesh, is to know him as dying at Jerusalem; I say, thus, we are always to
know him: neither do we know him at all truly, except we so know him: and if
you mean the knowledge of him in any Ordinance of the New Testament; that is,
to know him according to the spirit: But to know Christ after the flesh, is to
know him after a carnal manner, in a way of distinction or outward privilege,
by a fleshly relation: for thus Paul once knew himself, According to the flesh
to be an Israelite, circumcised the eight day, and not a sinner of the
Gentiles. Thus did they know Christ to be of the natural seed of Abraham, that
went forth preaching peculiarly to the Jews, Who said, Salvation is of the
Jews; but now they knew him not, after those fleshly distinctions: for now
there is neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, Barbarian nor Scythian, Male
nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus: therefore says Paul, verse 17. If
any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past away: that is
to say, the privileges the Jews have by birth, and that old administration:
therefore says Paul, We serve God not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in
the newness of the spirit: not in a fleshly manner, but spiritually: so that
this Scripture does not in the least speak against baptism, or breaking of
bread, but against the fleshly privileges that many Jews boasted of, which
were done away in Christ.

But the Scripture says, If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world; why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances (Touch
not, taste not, handle not; which all are to perish with the using) after the
commandments and doctrines of men; which directly speaks against Ordinances;
how then can you plead for the ordinance of water Baptism, or any other
outward Ordinance? Col. 2. 21.

If thou did but consider what Ordinances he speaks against, would have
spared this objection: he forbids the rudiments of the world, the doctrines and
commands of men in the things of God: these are not by Saints to be tasted,
touched, nor handled: for they perish in the using; that is to say, we reap no
benefit by them, but we suffer loss in the use of them; but I hope no man will
say, we are not to touch the doctrines, ordinances, and commandments of
Christ, if they shall: not only Baptism, but faith and spiritual worship
must not be touched, for these are the doctrines of Christ and the same
Apostle, that forbids these earthly sinful commands; himself praises the
Corinths, For keeping the Ordinances he delivered to them, 1 Cor. 11. 2. which
he received of Christ.

It is true, the Apostles did practice Baptism of water, but they did it only
as an outward Ceremony of John's baptism, which was not easily laid down, and
so they practiced Circumcision.

That the Apostles and Disciples did practice baptism I have already John's,
but Christ's account: And I say again, they did it as a command from Christ; for
if they had done it only as a Ceremony, how comes it to pass Peter commands
the Gentiles to be baptized, who were ignorant of John's baptism, and how comes
it in the Disciples Commission as I have more largely before proved it to be:
Again, if it was only practiced as a Ceremony I desire thou would show me,
where, how or when this Ceremony ended, surely 'twas not by fire baptism as is
most evident from Acts. 10.

Yea, this is evident all Ceremonies that pointed at a Christ to come, ceased
in Christ, but baptism as I have before proved, has its institution from
Christ, as risen from the dead; but for a more clear and distinct answer, I
say, it is true that the Apostle did circumcise Timothy in the Gospel, yet
notwithstanding the ground or account whereupon he circumcised, is far
different from the ground of the administration of baptism, for if you
consider it you will find that Paul did not circumcise Timothy, but upon the
desire of the Elders of Jerusalem, for the satisfaction of the Jews, Paul
being to go to them, that he might have the more advantage to gain upon them,
did this; for if you observe it, Timothy's mother was a Jew, and so of right he
ought to be circumcised; Paul had the greater care to do it, least they should
have refused to admit him into their company. But oh, how far different was the
administration of baptism, performed by virtue of Christ's command, as I have
plainly proved before, not to please any but in obedience to Christ. Again,
this was only once, and only to one, that we read of, practiced. For afterward
when they would have Titus to be circumcised Paul would not give way to it, no
not at all, and when the Galathians pleaded for it, he expressly told them, if
they were circumcised, Christ should Profit them nothing: Now do I demand of
thee to show me, where the Scripture says that baptism was administered to
please man, or where you find the Lord by the Scripture forbidding the use of
it, or disannulling the practice of it: So that for any one to conclude baptism
was used, because it was a ceremony, that ought, but could not easily be laid
down, is but a bare affirmation, which has no color of truth or proof; and
if any one shall affirm it is so, I pray him in love to give me the grounds
and reasons from the Scriptures for such an assertion, to which I here promise
in the strength of the Lord to return a further answer.

But some other object from Matthew. 28. That the disciples are there commanded
to baptize into the name, not in the Name of the Father, etc. that is into the
virtue of the Father, or into the Father himself, which is only true in the
baptism of the spirit, so that that baptism cannot be meant a baptism of water.

I have already proved that the Apostles did not by any act of of Paul to
plant, and Apollo to water, but only of the Lord to give the blessing: So that
the true understanding of these words are, that the disciples were commanded to
preach the Lord Jesus, and his name, and to baptize them into that name; that
is to say, to dip them into his profession to separate them unto the Lord; and
therefore Paul says, were you baptized into the name of Paul, that you so much
boast your selves to be of him, whereby is clearly demonstrated, that to be
baptized inthe name, is into the profession of their union with Christ, whereby
they are visibly clothed with Christ, it is the sole act of the Father to wash
their souls and bodies, with the Spirit of regeneration, but the disciples may
and did baptize or dip their bodies in water.

But they are commanded to baptize into the Name of Father, Son and Spirit,
which was not that baptism of water, the Apostles practiced, for that is said
to be only in the Name of the Lord Jesus; therefore for you to baptize with
water in the Name of Father, Son, and Spirit, is contrary to the Apostles
practice.

To this I say, to baptize in the Name of Father, Son, and Spirit; is to
Baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and to Baptize in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, is to Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit; for the Father
and Spirit dwell in Christ, and are not known without him; therefore when
Philip said unto Christ, Show us the Father, Jesus answered and said, have I
been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me Philip? He that
has seen me has seen the Father, and how say thou show us the Father, I
am in the Father, and the Father in me. John 14. 8. 9. 10. Whereby is fully
demonstrated that to do any thing in the name of Christ, is to do it in the
name of the Father, and so it is also of the Spirit, which dwells unmeasurably
in the Lord Jesus; therefore says Christ, Though I go away, I will come to
you, and I will send the Spirit the Comforter; I tell you plainly Christ is not
but as the Father and Spirit are in him: So that no man can baptize into the
name of the Lord Jesus, but he does it into the name of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, but if you say the Apostles used not that form of words in baptism,
viz. I Baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, I say also no
man is bound to use them, but ought to baptize it in that name, expressing,
what he does either in those or other words.

But Christ says not, Go, Baptize with water, but only Baptize; now for any
one to say, he meant with water, is to add a consequence of their own, for
Scripture, and to speak that which Christ intends not.

Thou that thus objectest, I pray thee tell me seriously, whither Baptism is
the Baptism of Water: And I say again, to Baptize properly signifies to dip in
the water, and where it is otherwise used as in affliction and the Spirit, it
is figuratively so used, and not properly, for in those there is a plunging, or
overwhelming the soul or body, as there is of the body in water.

The Scriptures say, Ephesians. 4. 5. There is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
which Baptism is a Baptism of the Spirit; therefore, for you to say Christ
has a Baptism of water, is to make two Baptismes, whereof one of them is of
your own invention; for to say Christ has two Baptisms, is to give the
Scriptures the ly.

If we shall say there is two baptismes, the word of truth will Heb. 6. 2. We
find the doctrine of baptismes spoken of, which surely are more then one, for
the word is in the plural number, and I have proved the baptism of water, to
be the Baptism of Christ; and for ought I can understand by any man to the
contrary, the Apostle means the baptism of water in this Scripture, for he
mentions not the Spirit, nor Water, so that I might as well retort this
objection, and say there is but one Baptism, which is of Water, therefore for
any to say there is a Baptism of the Spirit, they give this Scripture the ly,
which manner of argument, be it far from me; for the meaning of the Apostle
there, is to draw the Saints into unity from the consideration of the unity of
truth, There is one Faith, says he, yet notwithstanding it is easily proved
that there was then several sorts of faith, as of miracles, which all had not,
of the Gospel which every Saint had, yet one faith; so one baptism, yet there
was a baptism of water, of the the Spirit, and of afflictions; which in one
respect are diverse, yet in another they are one, that is to say, in unity; the
one not destroying the other, water Spirit and afflictions accompany Saints,
Spirit gives them a being in life, water manifests this being; afflictions are
sent from the Father to exercise them in this being; yea, further the holy
Ghost and fire and the Baptism of Water are one as centring in one head, the
Lord Christ, tending to unity, viz. the advancement of the Gospel, therefore
though in a sense, there are several sorts of Baptism, yet all agree in one,
the Water, the Spirit, and blood, the three Witnesses in earth, agree in one;
yet further, there is but one true baptism of Water, not several kinds of
which I judge he here speaks, so that from this Scripture, we cannot prove the
baptism of Water, not to have being, more then we may prove the baptism of
the Spirit not to be.

But say others what say you to that of Paul, he thanks God he had baptized
none of them, but few families; and says, he was not sent to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel, now if Christ had given a Commission to them, so to do,
Paul very ill observed it, that baptized so few; but certainly no such
Commission was given, for if there had, how could Paul truly say, I was not
sent to baptize, which surely will not easily be answered. 1 Cor. 1.

I do confess at the first sight this argument appears with much Paul spoke,
the ground of his speaking, and the end of his speech.

First, The Persons to whom he wrote were the Corinths, therefore he says, I
thank God I Baptized none of you, from whence we may not conclude he baptized
no others.

2. The ground whereupon he wrote these Words was, the carnal owning of
themselves after men, one saying he was of Paul, another of Apollos; those
Persons who did baptize them, were owned by them, in a way of distinction,
calling themselves by their names.

Thirdly, The end of his words which was to knit them together, which he
endeavors to effect by two arguments: First, by telling of them, they were not
baptized into his name, neither was he crucified for them, he died not for
them, neither were they Baptized into his death; Wherefore it was a very
carnal thing for them so to be divided, whose divisions made him to rejoice,
that he had baptized no more, for this reason, lest they should say, they were
baptized into his own name; he does not here at the least deny the baptism of
Water, but his words if you observe them are a clear proof that the Corinths
were all baptized, though not into Paul's name, yet into Christ's name, for says
he, I baptized none of you, but such and such; implying others had baptized
them, for in the Acts it is said, many Corinthians believed and were baptized.
Acts. 18. 8.

Secondly, That he might destroy their carnal reasonings in setting up
baptism so much in a way of opposition one to another and against Christ
himself, he tells them Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel; Which words are comparatively to be understood, for Christ did chiefly
and principally send him to preach the Gospel, such manner of speaking we shall
find usual therefore when the Israelites rejected Samnel and would have a
King, God says to Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected
me, that I should not reign over them, which words are to be understood that
the greatest offense was committed against the Lord, such another expression is
that in Jeremiah, where God says, I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded
them in the day that I brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, concerning
burnt-offerings, or sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them, saying, obey
my voice. Now we know God did command them to offer sacrifices, but that was
not the chief thing commanded, in comparison of the obedience of the heart
they were not commanded. Ier. 7. 22, 23. and so Paul says 1 Cor. 3. 6. 7. I
have planted, Apollo watered, and yet immediately he tells them, neither he that
planted, nor he that watered were any thing, that is to say, nothing in
comparison of the Lord; for otherwise they were something, for he calls himself
a wise master builder, in this we may see the wisdom of God, when any soul
extolls any thing beyond its Sphere, that, the Lord lays as it were low; James
saw many exalting faith, and sleighting works, he prefers works, and tells them
a man is justified by works; when Paul saw the Galathians advancing works, he
throws them down, and ranks them with loss and dung; so here when Paul saw
the Corinths exalting him and others, because they were baptized by them, he
reproves them for it, and spoke after this manner, Oh ye Corint^s, you
rejoice in men as if you were baptized into their names, but you are mistaken,
you were baptized into the name of Christ; you have little cause thus to boast
of me; for I for my own part baptized but few of you, neither was that my
principal office or work to baptize you, but to preach the Gospel.

But if this be true, how did Paul fulfill that command of Christ, saying, Go
teach and baptize; if that Baptism be meant of water, in the 28. of Matthew.

To this I answer; he may be truly said to do a thing that does it To make and
baptize more Disciples then John, when indeed he himself baptized not, but his
Disciples did it. So the Apostles did fulfill it, in baptizing some with their
own hands, and in commanding others to baptize also. The Apostles preached
faith and Baptism, but indeed were not able to baptize all with their own
hands, but had many brethren accompanying them to help them in that work: as
is evident in the example of Peter, preaching to Cornelius, Acts 10.

To conclude my answer to Paul's, saying, he was not sent to baptize,

I say, in the Scriptures this is considerable, that Baptism is not tied of,
necessity to an Apostle, that he must with his own hands do it; for Paul was
not so sent to do it, but Disciples may do it. So that the substance of my
answer is this, that the Apostle here shows what was his principal work or
office; to wit, preaching, hereby not destroying Baptism; which I have before
demonstrated to be Christ's command: yet in comparison of preaching he was not
at all sent to baptize; for that was not his work more then the work of many
others, but he was one of the chiefest of them that preached Christ Jesus.

It Is true, may some say, These were practiced in the imperfect state of the
Saints, wherein they lived under shadows; but now all shadows are done away,
and that which is perfect is come; so that we are not now to practice water
Baptism, which is a shadow, an imperfect thing.

I have in the first part of this discourse briefly handled this point Paul had
not attained that perfect state he speaks of, 1 Cor. 1^. 10. But says, when
he should attain it, he should know. as he was known; which is only true in
the resurrection, when we also acknowledge the ending of Ordinances. And
whereas you say, shadows are done away, I would fain see that Scripture, which
says, Baptism is such a shadow which is done away: thus I find the Jews
Ceremonies were called shadows of Christ, and were done away in Christ: but
where to find a footing for the proof of Baptism, being as yet done away; I
profess I cannot imagine, if you mean that in the 2. of Solomon's Song, That is
but a desire of the Spouse for Christ to turn to her, till they should flyaway;
which state we daily long for, that We may see Jesus face to face, who see now
through a glass darkely. And whereas you say, the state of the Church was then
imperfect, but now perfect: Alas! Their estate surely was more perfect then
ours; neither yet can any man make it to appear in any one thing, wherein we
transcend them, whether you mean in gifts, revelations, parts, wisdom or
knowledge: Consider Paul abounded in all, and was so wrapped up with visions,
that whether in the body, or out, he could not tell; yet he cries, We see but
in part, and I have not already attained, but press forward.

But notwithstanding all this that you have said, it seems to me, may some
say, Baptism was only used in the infancy of the Church; for we find not the
Apostles pressing of it afterward, neither to the Romans, Corinths, nor in any
of his Epistles, which surely he would have done had it been of such
concernment.

This objection is built upon a mistake of their Epistles; for they Paul in the
Hebrews telling them they had need to have the principles of the doctrine of
Christ taught them again; of which Baptism is one. But if you look into the
Acts of the Apostles, you will there find Baptism to be practiced as much as
any Ordinance; for there are the travels of the Apostles, and their doctrine to
unbelievers registered; where you shall find thousands baptized: Now Baptism
is part of the foundation in the house of God, which must not be laid again.

But yet some are ready further to object against Baptism of water, and say
nothing enters into, or has a being in the Kingdom of God, but that which
abides for ever; but water must perish, therefore it cannot be in the Kingdom
of God.

To which I answer; if by the Kingdom of God you mean that not always; for
the thing hoped for being enjoyed, hope cease.

But if you mean the Visible Kingdom of heaven, viz: the Church of Christ,
behold you are much mistaken; for tongues and prophesies were in the Church,
and shall not abide for ever: for the Scripture says, Prophesies shall fail,
1 Cor. 13. 8.

But yet I say, though that which is visible shall fade, yet that which is
represented by it, viz: the Fathers love in Christ Jesus, shall never fail,
and our obedience shall ever be recorded with the Lord.

That which you have said, is true, proves Saints may be baptized with water;
but yet it is an indifferent thing, and so it is no great matter if it be left
undone.

That which is neither commanded, nor yet forbidden, is left at Math. 28.
Mark, the last, with other Scriptures: He that said to the Disciples, Go
preach and baptize; likewise says to believers by the mouth of his Apostles,
Repent, and be baptized.

So that I say again, whatever believer shall neglect this command, sins
against the great Lawgiver the Lord Jesus.

Thus have I endeavored, according to my talent, to answer all those
objections I have yet met withal of any moment; hoping it will now appear to
thee, that Baptism of water is an Ordinance of the Lord Jesus, and not to be
so carnal as men suppose, but a spiritual Ordinance, whose author, principle
leading to it, power enabling to perform it, and true end of conformity to it,
are all spiritual, which though in a sense, viz: as it is performed with
water, may be called external or outward: yet the spirit and life of it is
like the Kings Daughter, Psalm 45. All glorious within, whose clothing is of
wrought gold. And surely it is no more outward then charity; which I suppose
none but some old hardhearted usurer will deny to have place in the Church of
the firstborne; and why may not Baptism be admitted likewise into the Kingdom
of the Lord Jesus?

Some say, It Is a yoke, and they say true; but it is Christ's yoke, whose yoke
is easy, and his burden is light: others say, if they should submit to it, they
shall. be in bonds, and not have that liberty they enjoyed before: they say
true, they shall be bound, but to nothing but Christ's laws, and be infringed
of no liberty that may be truly called Gospell-liberty: true it is, they are
like to be more carefully and narrowly watched over then formerly, that so they
may walk more conformable to the true nature of Christ's flock, whose
inheritance is the Kingdom of the Father. But this surely to an honest upright
heart, who fears the Lord, will be accounted as his great privilege and
happiness.

Chap. VIII.
Shows that believers being baptized, ought to be added to the Church, and
what the true Gospell-Church is.
THE first thing being made manifest, that all believers are to be baptized,

I come to the second thing I promised to discover to you which The Saints
baptized are to be added to the Church
was the command of Christ; for those that were baptized to be added to to the
Church.

By Church I here understand some particular visible Church; which every
believer ought to be a member of, and add himself to it. It Is not enough to be
baptized, which visibly enrights him into any Church; but he must be taught to
observe all things commanded, whereof this is one, to join himself to some
particular Church or Congregation; Therefore is it said, Acts 2. 42. They
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and prayers. Mark it, they were not only baptized, but walked in
the visible fellowship of the Gospel. And again it is said, verse 47. And the
Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. And again, Acts 17. 4.
it is said, Those that believed consorted to Paul and Silas: they embodied
themselves together, and cleaved to the Apostles, verse 34.

That it is the duty of Saints thus to do, I shall manifest by two Reasons.

1. From the nature of the Saints they are all one in Christ Jesus; they are
Christ's sheep, the nature of whom is to flock togegether; they are members
one of another. Now it behooveth the members to be fixed in their own body,
they are the soldiers of the Lord, who ought to be in continual order.

But 2. It appears from the nature of the doctrine of Christ, which points at
unity; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one Body, whereof Christ is the Head;
God is one, they are one; the Gospel is one; all which proclaims it to be
their duty to walk together as one in the Church, which is Christ's body.

But to make things appear more plainly, I shall show you what the true Church
of Christ is; to which every believer being baptized, ought to be added.

It is a company of people called out and separated from the What the true
Church of Christ is.
world by the word of the Gospel to believe in Christ, being baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus; walking together in mutual agreement in the visible
profession of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ their Head and King.

I am not now treating of the Church of Christ as it is invisible consisting of
all Saints in all ages, making up one body, but of a particular, visible
society or congregation of people; who are that Church I have before described;
in which description there are these things observable.

1. That Christ's Church consists of people.

2. That it consists of people called or separated from the world by the
Gospel.

3. They are a company of believers.

4. They are believers baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

5. That they are united together by consent, in the fellowship of the Gospel;
all which I shall handle briefly.

First, That Christ's Church are only people; I mind this in That Christ's
Church are only people.
a way of opposition to that carnal apprehension of ignorant souls, who
esteem Houses of stone or timber to be the Churches of Christ: not
considering, that That the most High dwells not in Temples made with hands,
Acts 17. 24. But in the contrite and broken heart; Though Heaven and Earth
cannot contain him, yet he dwells in men. Which blind conceit has begotten
such superstition in their hearts, that they esteem such Houses to be Holy;
and so making an Idol of them, they fall down before them; that is to say,
attribute that to them which is peculiar to the Saints.

Secondly, The church of Christ consists of people called out of Christ's Church
is a people called out of the world.
the World, wherein you may observe, that the very same men and women, who were
in the world, are the subjects of Christ's Kingdom, it is not something added to
man, which is saved in man, but the same man is the subject of salvation, who
before was in the the state or wrath; it is not something besides men's natural
souls and bodies, which are the subjects of Christ's church, but their bodies
and souls, which before were in an old state of sin and death, therefore
called old men; but now in a new state, therefore called new creatures, they
are Christ's members; these I say, are called, or separated from the world; the
word Church, in the Greek signifies called out, the church is called out, or
separate from the Kingdom of Satan, therefore says Peter, who has called
you out of darkness. 1 Peter. 2. 9. and again, Coloss. 1. 13. Saints are said
to be delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into another
Kingdom; Saints were once as others are, but now are they separated from the
world in a twofold consideration.

First, From the wicked conversation of the world, therefore are the Saints
said to be redeemed from the vain conversation of the They are separated from
the vain conversation of the world.
world received by tradition from their fathers, 1. Peter. 1. 18. Therefore
Paul says, we had our conversation amongst children of disobedience in times
past, in the lusts of our flesh, but God who had mercy on us, has quickened
us, when we were dead in sins. Ephesians. 2. 2. 3. 4. 5. they are to be separated
from all the abominations thereof, for the church of Christ is or ought to be a
pure Kingdom, into which nothing that desil^th should enter, they are called
from the works of the flesh, as lying, stealing, covetousness, drunkenness,
swearing, blaspheming, railing, adulteries, and the lusts of the flesh, wherein
formerly they were conversant; as is evident, 1 Cor. 6. 4. 10. no such persons
that are known to be such, are to be admitted into the Church which is the
Kingdom of heaven upon earth.

2. They are separated from the worship of the World, now by the They are
separated from the worship of the world
worship of the World, I mean, that seeming worship which men perform to the
Lord, without a lawful warrant from the Lord, even all the commands of man, in
the things of God. The world through the mighty operation of the man of sin,
who works in the children of disobedience, has set up a worship among men that
has the name of the service of God, when indeed God never commanded them any
such thing: We are commanded to come forth of Babylon, out of confusion, and to
touch no unclean thing, therefore, says the Lord, What an agreement has the
temple of the Lord, with idols; wherefore come out from amongst them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17.

We are to separate from all assemblyes who say they are Churches, and yet are
not built upon the Rock Christ, and the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner stone. There is much ado made
about churches this day, but there is but one true way of entering into a true
Church fellowship, therefore are we to separate from all those seeming
Churches, who never were admitted into the Church, through the preaching of the
Word, and believing the doctrine of Christ, being baptized into his name, but
were naturally borne into it, as all those are who stand in a any Church by
right of infant membership, or infant Baptism.

Christ's Church consists of a people visibly professing faith, all in Christ's
Kingdom must be able to declare whose they are, whom they profess, whose
subjects they be, and to whose laws they conform, therefore we shall find the
Eunuch not to be admitted to baptism, Except he believed with all his heart.

But may some say, many may profess faith, and yet not be believers, so that
if faith be absolutely necessary for the fitting of a man to be a member of a
church you will be able to prove few churches to be true, because many may be
hypocrites.

What I said before, I say now again, that visible appearances are Sol. Christ's
Church consists of people professing faith.
the true ground of visible administrations, with the heart man believes, but
with the mouth he confesses unto salvation: Had election, or a real interest
in the love of Christ been the only ground of receiving members into
fellowship, or of baptizing them, as some may suppose, the Apostles did very
evil in baptizing Simon, who was in the gall of bitterness; yea, if that
should be true, Christ did very ill in suffering Judas to go in and out, so
long with his disciples undiscovered, when he knew he was a wicked man; but yet
Simon professing he believed, ought not to be denied baptism: so that I say
who ever shall say that he believes in the Lord Jesus, that is to say,
profess that he depends upon Christ for salvation, and upon him alone, and
desires to be baptized in the name of Christ, professing he believes it to be
his duty, except we know that he has only a form of Godliness, and denies
the power thereof, he ought to be baptized, and be received a member with the
Church, I confess there is a doctrine spread abroad, that we must know men's
hearts before we can walk visibly with them; which truly never was, nor shall
be the ground of a visible fellowship, neither ought we to examine men's spirits
or principles, so much as their doctrines.

The church of Christ consists of believers baptized in the name The members of
Christ's Church are baptized believers.
of the Lord Jesus; therefore it is said, They that gladly received the word
were baptized, and the same day there were added, viz. to the church about
three thousand. Act. ^. 41. this was a doctrine to be preached commanded to be
practiced, and was observed by the Saints of old.

But do you think there may not be a visible church of Christ without
baptism of water; surely all the churches in the Gospel were not baptized
persons.

To this I plainly answer, First the Scriptures no where hold Acts. 10. and to
Paul himself believing, was it said, Arise, why tarriest thou, and be baptized:
If we look into the Acts we shall find there very many examples for it, and
not one to prove or tolerate any other practice.

Secondly, I say, there can be no true visible Church, without it has its
bottom or foundation from Christ, but there is no church consisting of others
then baptized persons, approved on by Christ, for Christ giving forth a rule of
visible dispensations, bids his disciples, first, Teach and Baptize them,
afterward, teach them to observe all that he had commanded them. Mark last.
19, 20.

Again, if we consider the nature of the Ordinance of baptism, and of the
church of Christ it will be evident, for the nature of the Ordinance is a clear
manifestation of putting on Christ; therefore says the Apostle, Know ye not,
that as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; and
the nature of a true Church, is of a spiritual nature visibly holding forth
that government Christ our head has in us: Again, baptism is the first act
visibly representing our union with Christ, which gives us a visible right to
all other Ordinances of Christ; But if any shall yet say there may be a true
visible church of the Gospel approved of by Christ without a submission to this
Ordinance, let them produce their grounds from the Scripture, and I shall more
thoroughly consider the matter: in the mean time, let this suffice us, that
while men walk in other ways doubtfully, without a rule for their practice,
we walk according to the Scriptures in being baptized, and added to the church,
and whereas they say many churches were planted without baptism; it is an easy
thing to say so, but hard for to prove, I am very confident all churches were
baptized, else the disciples of Christ had very ill observed their commands,
Go teach, and baptize.

Fifthly, It is not enough that Saints be baptized, but likewise The Church of
Christ is an united company.
they ought to join themselves together, first, to the Lord, then to one
another; therefore is it, that we find it recorded, that the Saints are a body
compact together, and that when many saw the judgment of God upon Ananias and
Saphira, they durst not join themselves to them; Now this joining after
baptism is nothing, but the mutual consent of each other, giving up
themselves to the Lord, and one to another, to watch over one another, and
walk before the Lord in his own ways; which of necessity must be done or else
the Saints would be disabled from knowing each other, watching over each other,
and admonishing or reproving each other; thus did Paul join himself to the
churches at Jerusalem; but this will appear more plain if you consider what I
shall say, when I come to speak of the true nature, and divine excellency of
this church, which I have already in a measure described unto you.

Chap. IX.
Shows the true nature of Christ's Church, and the power and authority thereof.
HAving thus described to you, what the true church of Christ is, I will now
show you its excellent privileges and duty, which I shall unfold to you in
eight particulars:

1. The nature of this Church.

2. The power of this Church.

3. The duty of this Church.

4. The gifts of this Church.

5. The Ordinances of this Church.

6. The Order of this Church.

7. The Ministry of this Church.

8. The Communion and fellowship of the Church.

The nature of this church, I shall first handle, which I shall demonstrate The
nature of Christ's Church: It is the house of God.
to you from the several names that God has given it in the Scriptures; as
first, it is called the House of Christ, or of the living God, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Paul gave many instructions to Timothy, how to behave himself, in the house of
God; God dwells in the midst of the church, the church is Gods household,
Mat. 24. 25. Herein may we see the nature of the church to be a compact and
united body, a house of living stones, 1 Peter 2. 4. it is not a company of
unpolished stones, lying scattered up and down, but a house built up, whose
foundation is Christ, yea, Christ is the corner stone thereof; it is a household,
whose master is Christ, who is the Lord of that family, which is called by his
name; the children of this household are Saints those that appear in their
wedding garment; the servants are the Ministers of the Gospel, who are placed
there to serve the family; their food is the word of God; the body and blood of
Christ Jesus; from whence al unprofitable and wicked servants are tobe cast
forth; it is a household, wherein every son and servant is enrolled by the bond
of unity.

Secondly, it is the City of God, Psalm. 46. 4. in which city every It is the
City of God.
member is a fellow citizen, Ephesians. 2. 19. it is a spiritual city, that descends
from heaven; it is a flourishing city, whose inhabitants are made glad through
that river, whose streams flow from the fountain of life; it is a City walled
with the almighty power of the Lord Jesus; it is a City defended with an
innumerable company of Angels, whose merchandise is not of gold and silver, but
of bread and water of life, of glorious garments of needle work, the clothing
of whose inhabitants is wrought gold; it is the city of Sion, of which it is
said, Walk about Sion, and go round about her, tell the towers thereof, mark
ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that ye may tell it, to the
generation following. Psalm. 48. 12, 13. it is a city incorporated, whose
citizens have one and the same Charter from heaven, whose head is the Lord
Jesus, whose foundation and gate of entrance is Christ, in which mercy and
truth meet together, righteousness and peace kiss each other.

Thirdly, The church of Christ, is Christ's body, Christ is the churches It is
Christ's body.
head; yea, he is the very life and soul of the church, it is his Spirit which
quickens all: it is Christ's body consisting of several members, every one is
placed in the body, for the service of the whole, therefore says Paul, We
being many are one body in Christ, and every one, members one of another. Romans
12. 5. it is a body fitly joined together, compacted by that which every joint
supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part
making increase thereof, edifying it self in love. Ephesians. 4. 16. Hence it is
that Saints are said to live in Christ, and Christ in them

Fourthly, Christ's church is the mountain of the Lord, Psalm. 2. 6. a mountain
looking toward heaven, ascending from the earth; a mountain It is the mountain
of the Lord.
visible, a city on a hill, which cannot be hid. Mat. 5. 14.

Fifthly, It is Gods vineyard; I am the vine, and ye are the branches, It is
Gods vineyard.
says Christ, as the branches are all upon one tree, so Christ and his are
members all of one body, branches of that stock, which is Christ Jesus, who
lops of all withered branches. John 15. 1, 2.

Sixthly, It is Christ's garden, that Christ takes delights in, to walk It is
Christ's garden.
in, I am come into my garden (says Christ) my sister, my spouse, he feeds
among the lillies, he delights even in his church, to gather his pleasant
fruits^ it is a walled garden, in which is an everlasting fountain to water and
refresh it; it is a garden well trimmed, continually weeded, wherein are all
manner of fruits, both new and old; it is an orchard of precious plants, set by
the water side; I might further show you it is Gods tabernacle in this world,
moving from place to place, till it attaines to its own country; it is Gods
temple, wherein his holiness dwells, 1 Cor. 3. 11. his presence is there, the
Arc of the Covenant, the mercy-seat, the incense of a sweet smelling savor
unto God, are there; God is prayed to, praised and admired there: In the
midst of my brethren, says Christ, I will sing praise unto thee; it is
Christ's friend, sister, and spouse, she is the Kings daughter, all glorious
within, her beauty is excellent, her relation is noble; she is a Queen, Psalm.
45. 10. united to Christ, the king of kings married unto him, in everlasting
bonds of loving kindness; it is a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a chosen
generation, born of God, united under one king, subject to one and the same
laws, being a pure and undefiled people; she is Christ's love, dove, and
undefiled one, she is all fair, she is but one. Cant. 6. it is a flock of sheep
feeding together having one chief shepherd, who separates them from the
goats, and keeps them from wolves, who knows them by name; it is his sheepfold
wherein all his sheep are folded together, not straggling up and down, but in
flocks together, that follow the Lord Jesus, knowing his voice. Chap. 10.

It Is a candlestick of pure gold, to hold forth the true light of the Lord;
it is a dove, innocent and gentle, feeding on the choysest food; it is the
communion of Saints, wherein Christ and Saints mutually communicate each to
other, Christ to them, light, life, joy, freedom, and glory; they to Christ,
praise, honor, reverence, and songs of deliverance; it is a Communion, wherein
they communicate each to other of al those treasures the Father of Spirits has
communicated to them; it is a ship, in this world tossed up and down, yet safely
arrives at the haven of everlasting glory, through the guidance of their
skillful Pilot the Lord Jesus

It is the Kingdom of priests, a Kingdom of kings, a kingdom from above, the
Kingdom of heaven, whose head, Jaws and inheritance are all heavenly: Thus
may thou see its nature to be spiritual pure, peaceable, mighty, gracious,
and glorious, being one with the Father, and the Son, and with each other
visibly in the Father and the Son: I might dwell longer here, but I must pass
forward.

The next thing I shall handle, is the power of this Church, The power of the
Church.
which is very large, consider what power a Kingdom, family, city, or body
has for the well-ordering, governing, and increasing of its self, this church
has the same: I shall branch its power forth in several particulars.

1. In receiving of members, it is a household that can admit none to In
receiving in members.
be of the family, but such who are enrolled as household servants, that this
power is in them, is evident, for Paul went to Jerusalem, and assayed to join
himself to the disciples, but they were all afraid of him; Yet they were
persons with whom he endeavored to join himself, which he had ignorantly
done, had not they a power to receive him; Acts 9. 26. 27. Again, Phebe a
servant of the Church of Cenchrea, being to go to the church of Rome, Paul
commends her to them, desiring them to receive her in the Lord, as becomes
Saints; where note, Paul commends her to the whole church, to all the Saints
there who were to receive her, but that the church has this power is evident,
for as I shall show you presently they have power to cast out also; now this
receiving in of members ought to be discharged faithfully; any person baptized
desiring, according to his duty, to walk with any particular congregation,
except any should know by a visible demonstration that he was unworthy ought to
be received.

But how ought the church to receive them that are members of another
congregation.

If a member of one congregation should have occasion to go Phebe's going to
Rome, Paul wrote a commendation to the Church at Rome, desiring them to receive
her; Romans 16. so in the case of diverse others, as when he sent Tichicus to the
church of the Colossians, he writes to them, that he was a beloved brother, a
faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord. Colos. 4. 7. 8.

But what, if by a providence unknown to the Church, or unexspected by him, a
member should be cast into another congregation, having no such letter of
recommendation, may not the church receive him.

To this I say, first, if any member knows him, or her to be a brother or a
sister his declaration or testimony is sufficient to the Church, as is evident
in the case of Paul's joining with the Church at Jerusalem, while he abode
there, it was upon Barna bas his testimony of him. Acts 9.

Secondly, but if none knows him, the Church upon the profession of his faith
and obedience to the commands of Christ, and of his orderly walking, may,
except they know any thing to the contrary, receive him; for the reason why the
church at Jerusalem received not Paul was, because they had heard what mischief
he had done; but here the church needs much wisdom, and if they can (I judge)
they would do well to inquire of him, if he be to remain among them, lest he
be one that should come in privily to In admonishing and reproving members.
sow tares amongst the wheat.

Thirdly, The church has power in admonishing and reprooving their members;
now admonition is twofold, either in instructing of them, or a warning of the
church, or any member thereof, from all evil; showing them the dangerous
consequence of it; therefore the Apostles, in the first sense speaking to the
Colossians, bids them admonish one another with Psalms, etc. In the last sense
he writes to the whole church of the Thessalonians, saying, Now we exhort you
brethren, warn or admonish them that are unruly: Now in the churches warning
them that are unruly, they ought to consider the nature of the offense, for
offenses or sins are either private or public; What a private offense is
a private offense is that which is committed against a particular person, now
this, every Saints offended ought to reprove privately, this is an offense that
is not a public scandal to the Gospel, but What it is to sin openly.
public sins are such as are open and manifest, which in their own nature are
of a public scandal or offense, these are to be rebuked, admonished or
^reproved publicly, as we see in the case of Peter's dissembling, Paul
withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed; yea, he blamed, or
reproved him before them all. Gal. 2. 11. 14. so that offenses that are
publicly known to the church, the church should openly reprove them; herein
Paul's rule holds good, them that sin, rebuke before all, that others may fear.
1 Timothy 5. 20. or those sins which have been of a private concernment, and the
persons offending having been dealt withal according to Christ's command
saying, If thy brother offend thee, go tell him of it between thee and him,
etc. and if they who have committed the offense shall refuse to hear them,
they may bring it bring it before the church, as Christ says, if he shall
refuse to hear thee, tell it to the Church, then the Church may, and ought to
take notice of it, and admonish him for it.

But is there no difference between admonition, reproof and rebuking in the
Scriptures? because you seem to put no difference between them, and the
Scripture does; for Paul bids Timothy, reprove and rebuke, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

Sometimes some one of these words, being used alone, comprehend the rest; as
in the case of Heretics being cast forth after Admonition, includes rebuking
or reproving: but when we find them distinguished, it is after this manner, to
Admonish, is to advise another, or forewarne him of some danger; to Reprove
him, is to blame him for some evil, manifesting the nature of his evil, and
the greatness of his fault, as Paul did blame Peter. But to Rebuke, signifies
a more powerful way of reproof: therefore he says, Rebuke them sharply: so
to rebuke them, is to command them, to desist their evil courses, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, with great authority; Therefore an Elder is not to be
rebuked but entreated, 1 Timothy 5. 1.

This rebuking is for them who are unruly; therefore when Christ cast out
Devils, he is said to rebuke them: so if any shall make commotions in the
Church, and be unruly, the Church must silence them, stop their mouths,
command them to be silent; for this the Church has power to do.

Now in reproving I shall give these few brief directions.

1. That it be done without partiality, to the highest as well as to the
meanest, the richest as the poorest; for we must not have the faith in respect
of persons: Husbands must not plead for their Wives; fleshly relations must
not mingle themselves with spiritual affairs.

2. Let it be done in love; therefore is the Church commanded, having noted a
disorderly brother, to admonish him as a brother: so says the Apostle, Let all
your things be done in love.

3. Let it be done seasonably, with good advice and caution: minding always
the frame of his heart whom you reprove.

4. Let it be done with all authority; let none despise it.

Lastly, The Church may choose whom she please, to declare her sense and
mind: this, if the Church has officers chosen, is The Church may determine
controversies about civil things.
most fit to be performed by them.

Thirdly, The power of the Church appears, in determining all controversies in
the Church in civil things, if there should arise any difference in the Church
between the members; they ought not to go to law, especially before the
unjust; but to suffer the Church to determine it; to whose determination they
are bound to subscribe, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. How dare you (says Paul) go to
Law before unbelievers? It is utterly a fault so to do; it renders the Church
to be exceeding weak, and themselves exceeding carnal; We ought rather to
suffer wrong then go to law.

But what if the Church should order any of them to give satisfaction to the
other, and he refuse it; what should then be done?

If he should refuse to hear the Church, he refuses to hear the

Secondly, They have a power to determine matters of differences About
indifferent things.
about indifferent things: as, suppose there should arise disputes about
habits, or meats, or drinks; the Church has power to end them. God in his
wisdom has so ordered the matter, that he has given us many commands
plainly and particularly: but yet we have many occasions of dispute about
things simply, neither commanded nor forbidden. Now the Church may determine
these according to Paul's rule, If there be any thing of good report, virtuous,
praiseworthy, think of these things. The Church has power to appoint their
times of meeting, their continuance when met, of choosing their own officers or
servants; as in the case of the seven Deacons is evident, Acts 6.

Fourthly, They have power to cast out members, to deliver The Church has
power of casting out members.
them to Satan; as it appears, 1 Cor. 5. verse 7. Purge out therefore the old
leaven, that ye may be a new lump. Now this was written by Paul to the whole
Church: Now his casting forth, or delivering up to Satan, is the returning of
his person into the Kingdom from What it is to be delivered to Satan.
whence be came; We, while dead in sin, are in the Kingdom of Satan; but
being made to believe in Christ, are translated into his Church, the Kingdom
of heaven: Now when any declare their hearts not to be right, but visibly to
belong to the Kingdom of Satan, they are to be put forth from the Church into
their own Kingdom, viz. this world, whose God Satan is.

This Ordinance is an Ordinance of Christ, to be done in Christ's name, power
and authority, for the destruction of the flesh, for the rooting out of
corruptions: it must be pronounced with love, and yet with faithfulness.

But for what cause ought any member to be cast out of the Church?

First, For being a Heretic. Now if any one ask me what a Heretic What a
Heretic is.
the faith; Of which sort were they that denied the resurrection, Christ come
in the flesh, dying at Jerusalem for our sins, and the like.

Secondly, For open, scandalous wickedness, as adultery, idolatry, theft,
lying, drunkenness, swearing, or the like.

Thirdly, For refusing to hear the Church; as Christ says, If any man refuse
to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican. And
again, If any man among you walk disorderly, have no company with him that he
may be ashamed.

But what if there should any one fall into some open sin, and should
manifest his repentance to the Church, before he be cast out ought the Church
to cast him forth?

No verily, For if the Church can judge their repentance to be Paul's words, 2
Cor. 12. 21. Who says, He is afraid he shall be humbled among the Corinths,
and bewail them which have sinned already and have not repented of their
uncleanness and fornication which they have committed. Which words, I say,
intimate to me, they ought to have repented of their evil deeds: and if they
had done so, Paul need not have bewailed them; but their not repenting made him
to be afraid.

5. They have power to receive in members (who were cast out) The Church may
receive members who were cast out if they repent
upon their repentance: Consider, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. We may there see Paul
writing to them, to forgive a wicked person, lest he should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow, and confirm their loves toward him.

Now if this repentance be true, it causes the soul to be humbled for his
sin, to acknowledge it before the Church, to mourn for it, and to desire
again to be received by them for if in truth he sees his evil, he will desire
to be entertained again by that people that cast him forth, that they may have
cause of joy in him, as well as once, they had of sorrow.

But this is not the whole Church that has this power, but the representative
Church; viz: the Officers in the Church; so that when Christ says, tell it to
the Church, he means the Elders.

To this I briefly answer; That the Church, viz: the whole Church has this
power; as is evident in the casting forth of the incestuous person: Paul writes
to the Church, bids them, Purge out the old leaven: he does not write to the
officers of the Church only, but to the whole Church: So Acts 15. when the
whole Church at Antioch sent to the Church at Jerusalem to advise concerning a
difference, The whole Church came together, and gave their advise: It is said,
The Apostles, Elders and Brethren send greeting, verse 23. Some bring this
place to prove a National Synod but if it should prove such a thing, behold
the whole Nation must be this Synod; for the whole multitude were there; viz:
of the Church with the Apostles and Elders, where every brother had his liberty
to speak.

But the Apostle Paul cast out Hymeneus and Alexander, and delivered them to
Satan; so that excommunication is to be performed by an officer.

Behold a thing here considerable; that which Paul did in his I have judged
already as though I were present, concerning him that has done this deed: In
the name of the Lord Jesus, when you are gathered together, and my spirit, That
you deliver such a one unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. Paul's spirit is his will,
approbation or consent; so that what the Apostle might do in person, they
might do by the same power and spirit that was in him and them: so that this is
no argument at all to prove any such thing: Now the end of this power given to
the Church, is not for destruction, but edification.

Chap. X.
Shows the duty and gifts of the Church.
HAving thus finished the nature and power of the Church, I The duty of the
Church.
come to show them their duty, and that under a threefold consideration.

First, Of members to members; their duty is to watch over each Of members to
members.
other: Under the Law, God placed watchmen over his people, at whose hands the
blood of them that miscarried through the watchmens negligence, was required,
Ezech. 33. 16. Christ has set the Saints in one body, to be careful of each
other; to watch over their words and actions at home and abroad, wherever they
have opportunity; They ought also to cover the infirmities one of another:
there is a great fault among Christians this day, who delight to spread abroad
the infirmities of their brethren: If thy brother offend thee, it is thy duty, oh
man, to tell him of it first, between thee and him; if he hears thee, thou
have gained him, thou ought to forgive him: If he refuses to hear thee,
take two or three more with thee; and if he refuse to hear them, (and not
before, as thou expectest to be freed from the charge of a violater of the
command of the Lord Jesus:) Tell it to the Church, and if he refuse to hear
them, let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican. Yet further, it is the
duty of every member to assist, exhort, advise, counsel and help his fellow
member; to relieve his necessities: it is our duty to study to please one another
in the Lord. This watch should be over one another in all things, in all
places, at all times, in all relations.

Secondly, The duty of the Saints in the Church, is to frequent Of the members
duty to the Church;
their assemblyes, not to leave them, not to burden, or trouble, or offend
them; to contribute their utmost assistance to them; to help forward the
building; to warn the Church of any thing may endanger it.

Thirdly, The duty of the whole is to look to each member, to The duty of the
Church toward its members.
enquire how it is with them in soul and body, to administer to their wants,
to reprove, rebuke, admonish, receive in, cast out; this watch of theirs ought
to have an eye into all relations; many may live well in the Church, but we
must enquire after every one concerning their behavior toward wives or
husbands, parents or children, masters or servants; for many may, at home be
passionate, careless, give ill examples, be idle, or the like; which cannot be
discerned in the Church; but this ought we to look after.

By virtue os what authority have you to do to meddle with one another in
civil things?

By virtue of that authority, whereby we exhort each other to Paul tells us, A
Bishop must be no striker, etc. which qualities must be known to the Church,
or else how can they choose him? Paul took notice of man's idleness, and of
others disobedience, which makes him urgent in these relations to press
conformity to the Law of the Lord Jesus: I say, the Church ought to strengthen,
build up, and edify each other in love.

I am now come to speak of the spiritual gifts given to this Church; Of the
duty of the Church. A word of Wisdom.
which are diverse.

First, A word of Wisdom; now a word of Wisdom is a gift, whereby a soul
is made able, not only to behold the great mysteries of the Lord, but is also
able to bring them forth seasonably, orderly, advantageously for the whole: it is
a word that is able well to rule, order, manage and dispose of the things of
the Church, for the edification of the whole.

Secondly, A word of Knowledge; Knowledge is that gift whereby A word of
Knowledge.
we understand the truth of God: there are many sayings dark in the Scripture,
now the word of knowledge makes them clear and evident; resolves doubts, and
teaches the ignorant: knowledge and wisdom differ (as I judge) only in
this, that the true ordering, and wise disposing of knowledge it self, for the
benefit of the whole, is attributed to wisdom.

Thirdly, Discerning of spirits; Here must be knowledge in Discerning of
spirits.
this also; for this is that by which we are enabled to try spirits by their
doctrine, for this is the very way that the Lord prescribes for the trial of
spirits; viz: by their doctrine, 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. This discerning of spirits
is not, as many conceive, that we should immediately know whether their spirits
be right or no, any otherways then by their doctrine and conversation; which
gift is not given to all, but to those, who by reason of spiritual use, have
their senses exercised to discern between good and evil.

Fourthly, Prophesy; Which Prophesy is twofold: either a foretelling of things
to come; as Philips daughters, and Agabus did; or else it Prophesy.
is a speaking in the Church, to edification, exhortation and consolation, 1
Cor. 14. 3. Thus may all prophesy one by one, and the rest judge. This prophesy
is an excellent gift, whereby the Church is edefied, the Lord glorified, and
Satan put to flight. I shall in this show you the true ground and power of
prophesy, the persons who are to prophesy, and the true use and of prophesy.

The true ground of propesy is the true knowledge of the testimony The true
ground of prophesy.
of Jesus, which is the doctrine of Christ; except a soul be led through the
inspiration of God in the light of God, he cannot truly prophesy; the power
enabling to it, is the power in the new creation, We believe, and therefore we
speak. Many conceive Saints are not to prophesy, till they have such an
immediate power seizing upon them, which may force them to speak whether they
will or no; which, for my part, for these two reasons, I judge contrary to
Scripture.

1. Because we are commanded, Not to quench the spirit, nor despise
prophesying: Now if prophesy did so move in a man who could quench the spirit
of it, surely it would work irresistibly.

A second reason why I so judge, is, because it is said, The spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets: Now herein are they subject, that One
must stay till the other holds his peace, and the rest must judge what is
delivered, Now, I say, these two things would be frustrate, was it by such a
power some plead for: for what need any to be judge, if it comes with such a
power? And how could they stay one for another, or keep silence one for
another, if such a power was in them: But this, I say, there is or ought to be
such a power as may enable them, To speak to edification, exhortation and
comfort and that by course: that there be no confusion: and this is prophesy
upon a good ground. I shall only to this particular add this word, that we
are no where commanded to judge the principle of a brothers actings, neither
his acting by his principle, but his principle by his actions.

Secondly, The persons who may so prophesy, are all the brethren, who may
prophesy.
all the Prophets: Therefore says Paul, Ye may all prophesy: this all he
interprets to be the Prophets saying, Let the Prophets speak two or three, and
let the rest judge, 1 Cor. 14. 29.

May not women prophesy in the Church? Surely, it is said, a woman praying

In answer to this, consider the same Apostle that says, Let the Prophets
prophesy; in the same Chapter also says, Let your women keep Whether a woman
may speak in the Church. 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12.
silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak: from
whence, and from that in Timothy, Let the woman learn in silence, with all
subjection; But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority. I
conclude, a woman may not so prophesy as the brethren may, in the 14 of Cor.
and that for these reasons.

1. Because she was first in the transgression through her forwardnes to teach,
and aspiring above her place, she was first deceived, and did deceive her
husband.

2. She is more subject to temptation, and to be deluded by reason of the
weakness of her nature: Now God will have her learn in silence; she that
taught the man to his fall, must now be taught by him, and be in subjection.

3. That hereby she may manifest her humility, in willingly becoming subject,
who subjected her husband through her enticement to so much misery.

But yet, notwithstanding, when I consider the reason of their being commanded
silence, to be taken from the Law, and yet under the Law; Miriam and Deborah
were Prophetesses: And when I mind that God made a promise, That his sons
and daughters should prophesy: And that Philip had four daughters which did
prophesy, Acts 21. 9. And when I weigh Paul's saying, A woman praying or
prophesying with her head covered; it makes me believe, that a woman may
prophesy, and that in the Church also: So that, I say, we must necessarily
consider the manner of her speaking to be here forbidden: she may prophesy, as
prophesy is considered an immediate gift from heaven, for the revelation of
some great, secret, or mystery, that the brethren are ignorant of; or for the
foretelling of things to come, she may speak, being carried out thereunto by a
power from the Lord; yet in this, her head, her own honor and glory must be
covered: without controversy, when paul says, He permits not a woman to speak
in the Church, he forbids not all manner of speaking: for then if the Church
should demand any question of her, she might not answer; which certainly she
may: So that, I say, this speaking that she is debarred of, is teaching, as the
brethren who are prophets, may all do, one by one; she must not so teach in
the Church to dishonor her head.

But if God has given greater gifts to them then to the brethren; How women
ought to improve their gifts.
I shall show them how they ought to improve them; viz. by taking a brother
home to their houses, as Priscilla did Apollos; and there instructing him in
the way of the Lord more perfectly, or by teaching one another modesty,
sobriety, meekness, humility, love and holiness; this I am sure is their
duty: therefore says Paul to Titus, The aged women must be teachers of good
things, teaching the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love
their children, to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their
husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed, Tit. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Thirdly, The end of prophesy, it serves for the Church, for building up in
faith, knowledge, fear and love; for exhortation from sin to righteousness,
for comfort in fears, doubts, terrors, temptations; the end of that, as of
all other Ordinances, is to glorify God, and serve our spiritual generation,
Our City is built on Mount Sion, compact within it self.

Fifthly, The gift of being a helper in the Gospel of Christ, Aquila Gift of
helps' what.
and Vrbane, and many more were Paul's helpers in Christ; this is a gift whereby
Saints are made able to be helpful, either in accompanying of the ministers of
the Gospel in preaching to the world or in any service of the church.

Sixthly, Governments, this is a special gift given to some persons Gift of
Government what.
in the Church, for the ordering its affairs in due order without confusion,
whereby they are able to know when the members in the church are confused, and
to rectify them; I say, this gift is useful in any church of Christ; this
gift is called ruling. Roman. 12. 8. wherein they are enabled to rule the
church of God, as a well disciplined family: there are other gifts spoken of in
the Scripture, as faith, charity, prayer, praise and the like, some of which I
shall speak of by and by.

But there was in the Apostles days other gifts then these, viz. tongues,
miracles, heating interpretation, and surely, if there be a true church, there
must be the same gifts now.

That is a great mistake, it is not required that all these several we have
gifts differing according to the grace given us; The Lord is the dispenser of
gifts to every man severally as he will, to one, one thing, to another,
another, and though we say it is needless for every church to have all the
gifts they had in the Corinths, yet we are not without sufficient gifts for the
being of a true church, the manifestation of the Spirit being given to every
one to profit withal in his own place and order; there is a gift of wisdom, of
knowledge, of discerning spirits, of prophecy, of helps, of governments, of
charity, of teaching included in knowledge, wisdom and prophecy, so that we
will not murmr for what we have not, but bless God for what we have, and
pray for more to him, who gives liberally and upbraideth not.

Chap. XI.
Of the Ordinances, Order, Ministry, and Communion of the Church.
THe Ordinances of this Church, I shall now speak of (having The Ordinances of
the Church. viz. Prayer.
spoken already of prophecy, which is a gift and an Ordinance to be
practiced,) are these following.

First, Prayer, all things are to be sanctified by the Word of God, and prayer,
this was practiced in the Church with an audible voice, Act. 4. 24. and so Paul
kneeled down, and prayed with the disciples. Act. 20. 26. Now prayer is the
pouring out of the soul to God, by way of supplication for the supply of
ourwants by Jesus Christ, which prayer is or ought to be the continnall posture
of Saints spirits, according to that of Paul, pray continually; therefore we
shall find the church continuing in prayer. Acts. 2. 42. this is a special
part of divine worship, whereby we acknowledge Gods preheminency; our relation,
subjection, and obedience unto God: I might here show you the prevalency of the
prayers of Saints, with God, had I time; but I shall conclude this with these
three things, which I desire may always accompany prayer.

First, Faith, believing that God is, that he hears us, and is gracious and
merciful, and will answer.

Secondly, Watchfulness, watch unto prayer, watch and pray, watch over thy
heart, thy corruptions to suppress and subdue them.

Thirdly, Constancy, continue in praying, for he will in due time answer, cast
not away thy prayers, but expect their return laden with blessings.

Secondly, Praise, Praise is that the Lord takes delight in, and Praise.
yet has in himself no addition of honor by it, the true praise of God, is
the acknowledgement of the glory and excellency of the Lord; it is the
declaration of the goodness of the Almighty; this praise is to be in the
mighty congregation. I will give thee thanks says David, in the great
congregation, I will praise thee among much people, Psalm. 35. 18. 145. 1.
Christ and the Saints both sing praises in the church together unto God the
Father, this true praising of God from the power of the Spirit, did the
Psalms, sung upon musical instruments under the law, point at; the gift of
singing Psalms is not a composition of David's Psalms into Meter, through Of
finging Psalms.
a natural faculty, which Psalms the Priest or the Clarke names; and all the
people must fing together, this begets a confusion, and is a mere tradition,
for such a practice has no more bottom then Organs or Choristers or Singing
men and women, in the Church of the Gospel; which surely we will not plead for
now: The melody of Psalms is not in the ear, but in the heart to the Lord.
Ephesians. 5. 19. To sing Psalms in the Gospel is, a special gift given to some
particular member in the church, whereby he does bless, praise, or magnify
the Lord, through the mighty operation of the Spirit. Ep. 5. 18, 19. which is
to beperformed, I say, by one alone, at one time to the edification one of
another, and therefore it is an Ordinance flowing from a cheerful heart; if
any be merry let him sing Psalms, that is to say, let him bless God; that all
should sing together is denied by Paul, who says, how is it brethren when ye
come together every one of you has a Psalm, they must speak orderly one after
another, for God is not the author of confusion, but of peace in all the
Churches of Christ.

Thirdly, Fasting; now true fasting flows from the apprehension Fasting.
of some great want, whereby the soul is engaged to give up himself to seek the
Lord, separating himself from his outward employments from meat and drink, so
far as nature will permit, that he may wholly without distraction, be earnest
with the Lord by prayer, for the obtaining of his request, the true nature of
this will appear evident, if you consider, Acts 13. 2, 3. 14. 23. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

Fourthly, Charity, which is more acceptable then hope or faith, Charity.
1 Cor. 13. 13. this is that virtue without which al other gifts are nothing;
it is a grace which is rooted in the heart, and is a true spiritual love and
endeared affection toward his Lord Jesus, and all his Saints, poor and rich;
which composeth the Spirit in a right temper, subduing covetousness, trampling
under foot vauntings, loving another as himself; the praise of which read, 1
Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses. It suffers long, is kind, envieth not,
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in
iniquity but in the truth, bears all things, etc. but I shall only mind it
here, as it That the outward necessities of the Saints must be relieved.
shows it self forth in the relief of the Saints outward necessities; It is
an Ordinance of God to relieve the poor Saints.

It is the duty of the Church to see that no member in it do want or lack any
thing necessary; it is not enought to say be warmed but they must administer to
the supply of their wants according to the ability God has given them. 1 Cor.
16. 2.

But all Saints are to have all things common, so that there must be no
difference between them, as it was in the days of the Apostles.

Mistake not the Scriptures, it is no where commanded, it is true Act. 2. 45.
4. 34. 35. And whereas they sold their possessions, they then testified their
great charity and thus far it is a president for Saints to imitate, that if
they have possessions, and their brethren be in want, and they cannot to be
relieved without selling their possessions, they ought to sell them; yet not
so, as to destroy their natural relations, for he that provideth not for his
family, is worse then an infidel: But this was not their constant practice for
afterward they had gatherings as God prospered them, 1 Cor. 16. 2. and indeed
had that been always commanded to be therepractise, wherein could there have
been a ground to press to charity, and to reprove for covetousness; there
always has been and yet will be a difference among men in this world, there
was an elect Lady, one of reputation (though few noble are called) who lived
accordingly, abounding in hospitality, yet we are always to mind this, that we
ought not to have the faith, in respect of persons.

Lastly, Breaking of bread: now I will show you very briefly four Breaking of
bread or the Lords supper Christ the author of it.
things considerable in this.

First, who was the author of it, that is the Lord Jesus, that said to his
disciples, do this in remembrance of me.

What does that speech concern us, being spoken only to his disciples before
his death.

It was not a command only to them, but to others also, therefore says Paul,
that which I have received of the Lord Jesus I deliver to you, do you eat
thereof. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24.

Secondly, The persons for whom he ordained it; and they are Church members the
subjects of it. The nature of this Ordinance
visible believers in Church fellowship, such as could examine themselves, such
as could discern the Lords body.

Thirdly, The true nature of this Ordinance, which is spiritual holding forth
Christ's death unto one another; for it is not an Ordinance for the world, but
the Church; and likewise it holds forth our union with Christ; for the bread we
break, is the Body of Christ, and the Cup is his blood, the blood of the
Covenant, and it manifests our union one with another; for we being many are
one bread, it is a visible seal to us of our interest in the Lord Jesus, which
is to be performed in knowledge, faith, discerning Christ's Body, that is to
say, seeing Christ, to be the true bread, and only food of a Saint he that
performs it not so, does it not truly: some say, we are not to do it, till we
see our selves above it, and live in the clear apprehensions of light and
life, being only to hold forth Christ's death to others, and not an ordinance
wherein we feed on Christ, but to me its clear we are to do it, when we see
our selves most barren and empty, for then are Ordinances fittest for us, so
that we by faith see Christ to have all fullness in him, and by faith meet him
in that Ordinance in a way of subjection, for it is an Ordinance appointed for
our souls refreshing, as well as the holding forth his death one to another.

Lastly, The duration or continuance of this Ordinance which The continuance of
this Ordinance.
is till Christ comes, do this in remembrance of me; and as often as you do
this says Paul, you show forth the Lords death till he come.

But say some, we are only to use that till Christ come in the Spirit, so that
he being already come in the Spirit, we are not any longer to use it.

The Apostles meaning is not till Christ come in the Spirit, but till Christ's
second coming without sin to salvation when he shall reward both good and bad;
for if you observe it, Christ was come to Panl, and to the Corinths in the
Spirit, yet they used it, and he that truly conformes to that Ordinance, must
have the Spirit, for he must discern the Lords body, that is to say, the
fullness, love, excellency, and virtue of Christ, which he cannot do without
the Spirit, so that for any to say, Christ's coming in the Spirit puts an end
to it, he says more then Christ, or the Apostles ever said: And if what such
men say, should be true, then this would unavoydably follow, that that
dispensation, which only gives a true being to an Ordinance, and without which
an Ordinance cannot be rightly embraced, must be that which puts an end to it,
which is contrary to religion, and right reason; For I say again the
dispensation of Christ in the Spirit, is that which only gives a true right to
it, and inables spiritually to conform to it, and receive virtue from Christ in
it.

As for those objections against this, which plead it to be a knowing Christ
after the flesh, and the like, I have answered them already in the doctrine of
Baptism of water.

I shall now speak a word or two, to the Order of the Church, Of the Order of
the Church
which is that sweet decent and due administration of every thing in its right
season, 1 Cor. 14. 40. this is that which directs how to speak, when to speak,
and what to speak, it forbids all confusion, many may not speak at once, this
puts the administration of every Ordinance in its right place; it first
commands faith, after that Baptism, then Church fellowship, and breaking of
bread, it does not turn things upside down, and set the cart before the horse,
as we use to say, as many men do in matters of religion, who will first break
bread, which is an Ordinance for their building up before they be baptized,
which visibly demonstrates their new birth. This heavenly Order does not first
baptize, and then preach conversion; but baptizing those that are already
converted, this is that which the Apostle rejoiced to behold in the churches.
Col. 2. 5.

I should now speak of the Ministry of this Church, which is a Of the Ministry
of the Church.
service committed by the Lord into the hands of some particular Members of the
Church, for the due and orderly edification thereof to whom he has given the
gifts before mentioned, for discharge of their said trust; which ministry,
first is evident in the brethren generally, afterward as occasion requires is
committed, especially by way of office, to some particulars; wherein I should
show you the true nature, ground, use, and end of a ministry in the Church; but
I must now hasten a period to this discourse, intending hereafter if the Lord
affords opportunity to enlarge my self on it, in the mean time know, there may
be a true Church without officers, which I shall evidence by this demonstration.

If you search the Scriptures you shall find all officers of any particular
Church are to be chosen out of the Church, as is evident in the choice of the
seven Deacons, Acts 6. and so for Elders, they were to be ordained in the
churches. Tit. 1. 5. which clearly holds forth the Churches were to be before
the officers, for if the church was not first, how could it be said, officers
must be chosen out of them, or ordained in them.

The last thing I shall now handle, is the communion of the The communion of
the Church iswith the Father.
church, and that is threefold. First, with the Father and the Son, as says
John, truly our fellowship is with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1. 3. viz. in
prayer, praise, breaking of bread, and prophecy, The cup of blessing that we
bless says the Apostle, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ; and
the bread that we break, is not the communion of the body Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 16.

Secondly, Their communion is one with another, which is in the With each other.
light and truth of the Father and the Son, communicating light, knowledge,
wisdom, relief, support, succor and assistance, each to other, joying,
rejoicing and sorrowing each with other; for they being many members, are one
bread, for we are all partakers of that one bread. 1 Cor. 10. 17.

Thirdly and lastly, the communion the church has with other With other
Churches.
churches; all the churches of Christ have but one head, and as members of that
head, receive influence from it, and ought to seek the good and preservation
each of other; their visible communion appears in their union in the doctrine
of Christ; there are two things principally belonging to churches to
communicate to each other.

First, Advice in matters doubtful, as is evident Acts 14. and 15. c. In
advice.
the church of Antioch sent to the church of Jerusalem for their advice,
wherein we see a liberty for every brother, till they were agreed to give their
judgment; now this we must not understand to be a dependency one upon another,
but only a sweet unity and agreement they have each with other.

Secondly, In contributing each to others necessities, as if one be
over-burthened, it is the duty of another church to contribute, as In supplying
each others wants.
is evident, Romans 15. 26, 27. 2 Cor. 8. and 9. chap. Acts 11. 29, 30. The glory
of the church of Christ in all these gifts, privileges and spiritual
immunities to which it is born by the word of God are innumerable, many of them
I might here unfold to you, but of all which with our Apostle, I must conclude,
saying, I cannot now speak particularly.

Consider seriously what I have written, and the Lord give us understandng in
all things.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 18. l. 23. for that r. for he that. l. 40. for at r. as at. p. 21. l. 25.
for made, r. he made. p. 23. l. 12. for appearance, r. appearances. p. 6 l. 21.
for sent you, r. sent me unto you. p. 25. l. 32. for nothing; to, r. nothing
to; p. 30. l. 22. for alone r. done. p. 32. l. 1. for God die r. God should die.
l. 14. for nature by r. nature appears by. p. 43. l. 1. for dow is r. dowes.
for thing r. things. for was r. were. p. 51. l. 10. for to. give r. would give.
l. 12. for many r. may. l. 25. for yet be r. yet he may be. p. 55. l. 22. for
to do r. do. p. 56. l. 35. for never r. ever. p. 66. l. 1. for though r. thou.
l. 4. for it r. then. l. 40: for copying r. coining. p. 70 l. 39. for chief r.
Christ's. p. 74. l. 2. for heads l r. l. for these r. these heads. p. 75. l. 20.
for wills r. thus wills. p. 76. l 19. for Adam sinned r. Adam been cut off as
soon as he sinned. p. 79. l. 14. for shall r. that shall. p. 83. l. 31. for him
r. them. p. 90. l. 26. for to come, r. to become. p. 114 l. 6. for many, r.
man. for their r. his. l. 22. for God r. of God. p. 116. l. 36. for some r.
none. p. 119. l. 10. for circumcision succeeds baptism r. bapt. succeeds
circumcision. p. 121. l. 2. for most r. the most. p. 132. l. 32. for forge, r.
forget.


