THE Clear Antithesis OR DIAMETRALL OPPOSITION BETWEEN PRESBYTERY AND PRELACY.

Wherein is apparently demonstrated, whither Government be most Consonant and
Agreeable to the Word of GOD.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Coules, and Henry Twyford, Anno Dom. 1644.

AN APPEAL TO Every Impartial, Judicious, and Godly READER: WHETHER THE
Presbytery or Prelacie Be the better Church Government, according to the Word
of God; being duly compared the one with the other.

By a judicious and learned Divine.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Coules, and Henry Twyford: Anno Dom. 1641.

THE PRESBYTERY AND PRELACIE COMPARED.
Whereby it may appear, whether of them is more for the safety of souls, the
reformation of men's lives, the advancement of a pure worship, the practice of
godliness, the abolishment of Popery and profaneness; with the rooting out
of Sects and Schisms, and for preservation of Unity and Peace amongst us.

The Presbytery.
I. THis is found in Holy Writ, and the Holy Ghost is pleased to mention it by
name, (1 Timothy 4. 14.) for the due honor thereof.

II. This consists of Presbyters, called Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 17. or Parochial
Bishops, or Bishops of particular Congregations, Acts 20. 17, 28. Phil. 1. 1.
of equal authority among themselves, not Lording over Gods heritage.

III. These have a divine Institution by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. and are
ordained by the Apostles, Acts 14. 23. and by the Apostles commandment, Titus
1. 5. 7. and have warrant we see from the Canonical Scriptures.

IV. These were joined with the Apostles, and sat in the Council at Jerusalem
with them; and with them made and sent out by the direction of the Holy Ghost
the Decrees, Acts 15. 4. 6. 22. 23. 28. and 16. 4. and 21. 18. 25.

V. These Elders were they who by divine authority did rule, they were called
Elders that ruled, of such speaks the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 24. and
the people had an Apostolical charge, to know them to be over them, in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. and to rule over them, Heb. 13. 7. and the people were to obey
them, and submit to them, Verse. 17. What can be more clearly delivered out of
the Text.

VI. The rule of these was Aristocraticall and conjoynt, and therefore we read
plurally of Elders; the Bishops in one City, Acts. 20. 17. Phil. 1. 1. Yea,
Elders were ordained in every Church and City; Acts 14. 23. Titus 1. 5.

VII. These rule after God, according to his Word, and according to such
Constitutions as shall be genera^ly (with one consent) agreed upon, and
warranted by the Word.

VIII. These can and do rule spiritually after a spiritual manner, Without
pomp and great revenues, Without a train of domesticke attendants; Without
their Chancellors and Archdeacons, Commissaries, and Officials, Surrogates;
Without Advocates, Doctors, and Proctors; Without charge of great fees, and
pecuniary mulcts; Without their prisons corporally to punish Delinquents.

IX. These use no base nor no lewd companions to come to call Delinquents
before them.

X. These calling offenders before them, proceed religiously with them only,
seeking their reformation and amendment; (and so they find it) and not to ma^e
game of the people, nor do they ever excommunicate any for not paying fees.

XI. These oppose all corruptions in Gods worship, the life and doctrine in all
sorts, as well in the Clergy as Laity, without respect of persons, to honor
thereby their Christian profession, and to procure glory to God, and salvation
to many souls.

XII. These make and ordain a preathing Ministry, setting over every
particular Congregation a sit Pastor, resident and painful, only attending
his ^^ecke, and wholly giving himself unto his Ministry, and not putting off
his charge to a Curate.

XIII. These allow not any one of them upon himself to ordain.

1. Any Minister alone. 2. Nor any man altogether to be Minister, without a
particular slock to attend upon. 3. Not to be made to pay any thing for his
Ordination, for a License to preach, for Institutions and Inductions. 4. Not to
swear Canonical obedience to them.
XIV. These Ordaining Ministers do thoroughly try them, not childishly by
asking of questions read out of a book, and answers made thereto upon the same
book; but in wisdom as shall be thought fitting for them to ask, and the
Ordained to answer unto with understanding, and this is done with fasting and
prayer very solemnly.

XV. These having thus ordained Pastors over Congregations, press them to
preach unto their flocks, and thereof to be very careful, or else shall they
be called before them, and censured for neglect of their duty herein.

XVI. These impose not needless Ceremonies; Cross, and the Surplice, and such
like, to be used in the time of Gods worship; for they observe the
Apostolical rules for indifferent things, and know how grievously they should
sin in imposing any such things upon Ministers, not sufficiently persuaded of
the lawfulness thereof.

XVII. These punish no Ministers for neglecting any indifferent, but for
neglect of performing necessary duties to God and men.

XVIII. These seek Pastors for to feed the people, and to fit them for the
Congregations, as they are less or greater, and learned or otherwise, and may
be most for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, and the
edifying the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12. such they carefully prefer without
sinister ends.

XIX These study carefully with all diligence to hold up goodness, and that
sin in all sorts may be speedily cut off.

XX. This Presbyterian Government therefore admits of four kinds or degrees
of Assemblies, for the well government of all in only causes Ecclesiastical.

XXI. The first is the Assembly of the Parish, called a Session or Consistory;
this consists of one Minister, commonly approved for his learning, his life,
and discretion in government. Secondly, of certain men called Elders, men of
best knowledge and holiest life in all the Parish: their number are more or
fewer, according to the largeness or sinallnesse of the Parishioners; they are
chosen with the peoples consent in their presence, and solemnly admitted to
their charge: their meeting is weekly, by these (to wit, the Pastor and
Elders) are Parishes well ordered, as the Law of God, and Law Ecclesiastical
of the Land appoint them, according to the Word. To these Assemblies come
another sort called Deacons, to receive directions in their duty concerning the
poor; for about them is the Deacons employment, men grave, holding the mystery
of faith in a good conscience, 1 Timothy 3. 2.

XXII. By this Assembly weekly at home among themselves, the spiritual estate
of the people is looked into; their walking also toward God, and one toward
another in love: Religion is upheld, and the exercise thereof; Gods worship
kept and upheld from pollution, Sacraments from being profaned by the keeping
back of unworthy persons, scandals and offenses removed, abuses reformed in
breach of the Sabbath, virtue nourished, and vice is suppressed, in persons and
in families by the office of these Elders, throughout the whole Parish, to the
joy of well-doers, and without chargeable expenses to the Delinquents.

XXIII. The second is, The Presbyteriall or Classical meeting: which consists
of particular Pastors of particular Churches in a certain circuit, much like to
our several Deanaries; and as with us there be many Deanaries, so are there to
be many Presbyteries.

Here an Elder of every Parish, appointed by the particular Session thereof,
does come and meet with the Ministers; and with these others also intending the
Ministry, who here exercise their gifts.

This meeting of theirs is somewhere once a week, but it may be once a
fortnight, or at farthest once in a month.

This has the power of Jurisdiction and Ordination, Deprivation, Visitation,
trial of Process, of Excommunication from the Parochial Session, and
direction to the Minister of the Parish to excommunicate, if need be.

Here the life and doctrine, the diligence of Ministers (within the
Presbytery) is looked into, and so the lives and behaviors of their Elders,
and the disobedience of any one to the Session, is with authority censured.

This is begun and ended with Prayer, as religious meetings should ever be.

XXIV. The third is called A Provincial Synod: there be many such with us as
Diocesses.

This consists of all such Presbyteries within such a circuit, as may be like
our Diocesses, and every Synod is kept twice a year.

Hitherto come all the Ministers, and one Elder from every Parish. It Is begun
with Prayers and Preaching, by a Moderator of a former Synod, who is ever here
chosen; and when he has done, another is chosen for the present.

Then they proceed to try all the Presbyteries, how they have ordered
themselves in their meetings, and faithfully discharged the power and authority
committed to them, and this trial is by the records presented to the Synod by
the Clarke of every Presbytery. In the end they conclude with Prayer.

Here is no calling for Procurations, nor purchasing of Licenses; no paying of
money to an Apparitor, nor to a Register to show letters of Orders for better,
and not for such base ends is this pious Synod kept.

XXV. The fourth and last meeting is, The General and National Assembly, the
highest Ecclesiastical Judicatory, and kept commonly once a year at the place
appointed.

This consists of Ministers and Elders, from every Presbytery, where are also
present persons of highest place, and of the Nobility.

This is begun with a day of Humiliation: after which is chosen by the
Assembly, a Minister to be Moderator or President. Here is handled all causes
Ecclesiastical, concerning the whole Church of God, every one has his free
voice: ^^^hes (...) ^^^^^les are propounded, and satisfied; and whatsoever is
ordained, is with consent of all: there be also chosen out certain
Commissioners, to present what of all is thought fit to the Parliament, the
King, the Counsel of the King, or the Convention of the Estates.

XXVI. By this most happy subordination of these four, stands the beauty and
strength of the Church Government, comfortable to all godly Pastors and
Professors; only distastefull to Prelaticall spirits, to Papists, Atheists,
Heretics, Schismatics, profane and Machiavillan Statists; for by this
Government all these are crushed in them, first appearing in Parishes by the
Session weekly, or in the Rural Presbytery monthly, or by the Provincial
Synod in the half year; but if these be not so prevalent on a sudden, yet are
they mightly suppressed once in a year by a National Assembly.

XXVII. Under this Presbyterian Government godly Ministers and people are much
encouraged, in preaching, in hearing, in frequenting Sermons in conferring
together after Sermon, in fasting and praying, no hinderance of neighbourly and
Christian meetings, to read godly means books, allowed to be printed. No
let, but rather heartning for one to instruct another; to build up, to edify
one another, without wicked jealousy of unlawful conventicling, whereby
knowledge of God increases, and brotherly love among the people.

XXVIII. This does allure none unto it, but only the warrantablenesse of it,
the goodness of it; the singular benefit which comes thereby to the Churches
of Christ, where it is erected; to wit, the safety of souls, the beating down
of sin and iniquity, the humbling of the people by often set fastings, and
other holy duties, which all that fear God should more affect in
Ecclesiastical government, then all earthly preferment.

XXIX. This is the government of the Churches of Christ, the reformed
Churches, with which we confess our selves to be one; and never was it east
out, where once it was erected, and carefully practiced among them, as any way
hurtful to religion, or the Civil State.

XXX. This, since the beginning of Reformation, has been desired of painful
and conscionable Teachers, and in following their desires to enjoy it, have
suffered much, as all know, for their writing and preaching, praying, and
petitioning to Sovereign Authority and Parliament for the same.

Lastly, this could never yet be endured here; to make a trial of it, and to
discern it in the happy fruits of it, as is humbly desired by many thousands
to be admitted.

The Prelacie.
I. THis is not to be found in the Apostles writings, nor does the HolyGhost
vouchsafe to name it, as being an over-topping title which Christ approves not
of.

II. This consists of Prelates, called Diocesan Lord Bishops, Lording over
their brethren contrary to Christ's forbidding, Mat. 20. 25, 26. and Lording
over their people, contrary to the charge of S. Peter, 1 Peter 5. 3.

III. These have no divine Institution* there is for their present standing no
warrant from Christ's word; but what they rest upon are two false Postscripts,
Apocryphal writings added to the end of the second Epistle to Timothy, and the
other to Titus.

IV. There is no mention made of these kind of Bishops, they had then no
being; nor was there in this Council then any mention at all of any Bishop,
nor any as yet had that name till Paul's preaching at Ephesus, who first
mentioned the name of Bishops, Acts 20. 28. and yet meaning no other then
Elders, Verse 17. neither then, nor long after, Titus 1. 5. 7.

V. These Lordly Diocesan Bishops have no rule over us in the Lord; if they
have, let them from Holy Scripture show it as the Elders can; the truth is, the
rule which these exercise is merely humane, and from the authority of men; as
has heretofore been acknowledged by themselves.

VI. The rule of these is Monarchical, and but one in a City, and over a
great Diocese, extending their power very far beyond that they are able to
perform.

VII. These rule after the will of man, and according to either Popish, or
their own devised Canons, thrust upon the people after the pleasure and lust
of some, without warrant from Holy Scripture: the truth of this appears from
their former and late Canons.

VIII. These neither can, nor do rule spiritually after a spiritual manner;
but with pomp: they cannot bear up their Prelacie, but with great revenues,
with many attendants; and all these forementioned, which the Presbyterian
government has utterly shaken off, as both needless and very burthensomely
grievous.

IX. These use Apparitors and others to cite men unto their Courts, very lewd
and base fellows all of them, of an evil report among the people.

X. These make gain of the peoples sins by their fees, in all and every of
their Courts, and seek not their amendment; for what one is made the better by
them? and if any of them pay not fees, they are excommunicated by them.

XI. These tolerate many corruptions in Gods worship, in men's doctrine and
lives in the Clergy; as is known by shameful instances to the House of
Parliament, and in the Laity, who if great, fearing to meddle with them; if
rich, by making gain of them; if very poor, neglecting them because no money
is to be had; to the great disgrace of profession, to Gods great dishonor, and
to the fearful damnation of many souls left to themselves: of the truth
thereof God and men can witness.

XII. These make and ordain a reading Ministry, allow Pluralists,
Nonresidents, idle Ministers, many giving themselves unto the world; not a few
Master Doctors intruding themselves into secular affairs, putting off their
Cures to some poor Curates.

XIII. These take upon them to ordain alone.

To Make a Minister without a charge: to be some Curate, or to employ himself
otherwise till a Living fall.

To be made to pay his fees for Ordination, and License; and when he is to be
admitted into his Living, to pay for Institution and Induction, with other
gratuities to the Prelates servants, and their gentlemen Apparators; and are
forced to swear Canonical obedience to their Lordly Authority.

XIV. These make Ministers upon slight trial, and in their Ordination the
Bishop out of book reads his questions, and the Parties to be Ordained
answer them, by reading in the book very babishly; and instead of fasting, the
Lords day after Ember week; and for prayers, they read the Letany and some
short Collects out of the book: thus slightly doing one of the weightiest works
of the Ministry in the Church of Christ.

XV. These having ordained Ministers, Instituted and Inducted them, allow them
not to preach, except they come and procure a License so to do: Which when
they have gotten, though they seldom or never preach, they are never called
into question for the same: so be it they read their Service.

XVI. These impose these Ceremonies, as so necessary, that they cry out No
Ceremony, no Bishop, though they know what S. Paul says touching the use of
things indifferent; they neither observe his Canons, nor fear to lay a
stumbling-blocke before their brethren, nor to wound consciences, nor to cause
them to perish, for whom Christ died, nor do they care to sin against Christ:
of all which four evils Saint Paul speaks in the 14. of the Romans, verse.
13. 1 Cor. 8. 11, 12.

XVII. Yet these sinners against Christ do not only seek to kill souls, by
wounding of consciences, making them to perish; but have ruined many faithful
Ministers in their estates, by suspensions and deprivations; yea, they have
killed their bodies by imprisonment, and all this only for not-conformity,
passing by many others neglecting necessary duties, being conformable. O ye
heavens stand astonished and wonder.

XVIII. These seek out and search for the fattest Parsonages to feed
themselves, and to fit their carnal minds, carefully preferring their Sons,
their Chaplains, their Friends, Kinsmen, and Favorites; endeavoring sometime
to deprive true Patrons by cunning shifts of the right of Patronage, to place
in whom they please; respecting men's persons, and not the spiritual good of
the people.

XIX. These study carnally to their utmost power, that they may hold up their
own greatness, and not nourish people in goodness: they strive not against
sin, but rather how to secure themselves in their Lordly standing.

XX. This Prelacie therefore allows of no such Assemblies, for that they fear
thereby their own downfall; and for that they only would have the guiding of
all, in all matters Ecclesiastical.

XXI. This is not allowed at any hand under this Prelacy, but instead thereof,
in many Parishes is a blind Shepherd, or a profane Minister, without
learning, honesty of life, and discretion to know how to govern. Secondly,
there are two Church wardens, and with them two Side men; not chosen ever for
their knowledge and godly life, but by house rous chosen they be, as the house
falls, and in some places otherwise, but admitted to their charge not after a
solemn manner, but by their names set down in a book their common office is
known; neither Pastor nor these have any rule Ecclesiastical, but the
Churchwardens must appear twice yearly to forswear themselves at
Visitations, to pay money for a book of Articles, and to make presentiments to
the Ecclesiastical Courts, according to these Articles, only to help the
Ordinary, the Registers Apparitors with money, but nothing reformed in men's
lives, but perhaps glass windows, and Church walls amended, Bells broken, and
Ropes prepared, Pulpits, Seats, Surplisses, and Communion Tables to be all fit;
weighty matters.

There be also in every Parish over seers of the poor, such as they be.

XXII. By this their Prelaticall way, and want of the Parochian Session, all
things go awry, and great is the spiritual misery of the people; they live in
much ignorance, little power is there of the life of religion, their worship is
but customary, the Sacrament is greatly profaned by unworthy Communicants,
open drunkards, known adulterers, common swearers, etc.

On the holy Sabbath the Lord is dishonored, much vice reigning among them, in
them; their families, (to the great grief of such as fear God) who
complaining of them, shall be heard; perhaps it may be for the Court to get
money, but if others complain of these, they shall surely feel the weight of
malice and ill will.

XXIII. Under this Prelacie is no such Presbyteriall Assembly.

Here are certain Deanaries, in every of which is held an idle Visitation by
an Archdeacon, or his Substitute once in half a year, to this resort all the
Ministers within that Deanary where the Visitation is kept.

Hereto come the Churchwardens and Sidemen, and such as have Wills to prove.

Where we have a Sermon made by such a one as the Archdeacon shall get and
appoint, after which all the Ministers by name are called to show their
appearance, but no trial of their gifts, nor any such things as be mentioned
in the Presbytery: they pay there their Paschals and Procurations, but none
hardly know why. Then the Churchwardens and Sidemen are called, and an Oath
administered, with Articles to make their presentiments by; then if any have
Wills to prove, they bring them, and an Oath is also administered to the
Executor.

Which done, the Assembly breaks up to go to dinner; after which, the
Churchwardens and Sidemen do come again before the Judge of the Court to
give in their presentiments.

This done, all is ended without a blessing.

XXIV. Here is no such Provincial Synod, but the Prelates trienniall
Visitation, whither do come all the Ministers out of every Deanary, one day
after another, where the Prelate is, which commonly is at the Cathedral
Church, where he sits with his Chancellors. It Is begun with a Sermon, after
which the Prelate makes a Speech, such as he pleases to utter.

Here is calling of Ministers and Churchwardens, but no trial of Ministers
gifts, nor enquiry of their proficiency; but here is paying of Procurations,
and buying of Licenses to rade prayers and to preach, and giving money to the
gentleman Apparitor.

The Churchwardens made to swear, and are to buy a book of Articles, and
make presentiments to the Chancellor, who receives their Bills.

Here the Ministers show their Orders and Licenses (such as have them) to the
Register, who gets much money for them.

If the Prelate have any private business with this Clergy, or to crave a
benevolence, (which dare not be denied him) he calls them together in private
by themselves.

Which ended, they may depart and go as they came, without any religious care
of them: the Prelate goes to his Palace with his train, and the Chancellor by
an Apparator invites the abler sort of Ministers to dine with him at an Inn,
to their proper cost.

XXV. Here is no such National Assembly, but a meeting called a Convocation,
when we have a Parliament, which is in two Provinces; one at York, in which
the Archbishop of York is President; and the other at London, where the
Archbishop of Canterbury is President; ruling and commanding, or cunningly
contriving to bring about what ever pleases him.

Here meet all the Prelates, all the great Deanes and Archdeacons, and the rest
of the Prelaticall body; and to these come two Ministers called Clerks out of
every Diocese, to represent all the rest of the Ministers: chosen these should
be freely by the rest of their brethren; but are appointed by the Lording
Prelates, such as they best like of* The Nobles and Gentry have nothing to do
here; the Prelates have ever had the Laity, as they call them in contempt,
scorning they should meddle in causes Ecclesiastical, though never so learned
and wise: here their corrupt dealing need not to be further laid open, it is so
openly known and condemned by the Parliament.

XXVI. By the unhappy want of such lively means here, and the overtopping
power of this Prelacie; many painful Ministers have been suppressed, many
people have been grieved, Papists, Atheists, Semi-pelagian Heretics have
increased; Separatists (through the Prelates severity in pressing of
Ceremonies) have multiplied, the profane have grown into much baseness, more
and more by their proclaiming of liberty to profane the Lords day; and by
their corrupt Courts: the proof hereof is the common experience of all this
Land.

XXVII. Under this Prelacy and Prelaticall Government, much preaching is not
valued, but rather suppressed, as it of late has been.

They give no heartning to people to follow the means of knowledge conferring
after Sermons, reading together of good books, singing of Psalms, and praying
together, and such Christian meetings, fill Prelaticall spirits with the spirit
of Jealousy, and causes them to hunt after such persons, and to cite them for
Conventiclers; whereby they hinder the growth of grace, and the increase of
Christian love, knowledge, faith, and godly watchfulness one over another,
much to be wished.

XXVIII. This has all worldly allurements whatsoever may entice carnal minds
to entertain and hold it up, as greatness, riches and pomp, glory, high
estates in dignity, pleasure and profit, ease, and what not, that may favor
of the flesh, the fruits whereof are peoples ignorance, profaneness,
licenciousnesse, liberty, neglect in most, and contempt in many holy duties,
privately and in families, reigning sins in public, to be with tears
lamented, no way to be suffered nor is suffered in a right ordered Church
Government.

XXIX. This is the government of the Papal power, under that Romish
Antichrist, against which we make open profession; and is a government
rejected by all the Churches reformed, and cast out as hurtful to the Church
of Christ, and to a Civil State; and is now so judged to be by many worthies
in Parliament, and that very justly.

XXX. This has been upheld by seldom preaching Prelates, by the like
Doctors, by Pluralists and Non-residents, Idle Ministers, Dependants upon
Ecclesiastical Courts, such as eat of the fat, and hope for preferment to
themselves and to theirs; these have been persecutors, but voluntarily never
came to suffer for mere Prelacie, but for other misdemeanors, if they have
suffered.

Lastly, this has stood up full fourscore years, and is well known with the
unhappie fruits of it; and therefore voted against in the House of Commons.

FINIS.

