Fructus laboris gloria

Adolescens Bacchum et venerem fugiens, recta adhonoris,
Et quietis metam tendit, dum vigilat currit, et
Caeli ac fortuna jniurias inuicto fert animo
P. Stent Excudit


A RIGHT INTENTION THE RULE OF All Men's Actions.

Converted out of Drexelius to our own proper use.

By John Dawson at Maidenhead Berksh. sometime of Christ Church in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Jasper Emery. 1655.

TO Our most gracious and Dread Sovereign King CHARLES, His Royal Consort
Queen MARY, The most Illustrious Prince CHARLES, And the rest of the Royal
Issue, Be all gracious and glorious perfections both of this life and that
which is to come, And let all that are of a RIGHT INTENTION say, Amen.
THe Ornament of the Head in old time (if we give credit to Suidas) was a
Tyar. A round Cap or Coronet worn by Kings and Princes in Persia.
This only Kings among the Persians did wear upright, but Captains bending
downward. Demaratus a Captain of the Lacedaemonians, but then an Exile, wisely
counseled the most potent King Xerxes, what course was best to be taken for
the success of his War. Xerxes now being taught discretion not by one
discomfiture only, thanked Demaratus, that he alone had told him the truth,
and gave him leave to ask what he would. He requested, that he might be
triumphantly carried in a Chariot into Sardis the chief City of Asia, wearing
an upright Tyar upon his Head. That was lawful for Ki^gs only. ( Senec. l. 6.
De benef. c. 31.) A Right Intention, most Gracious and Mighty Princes, not
only shows Kings, but also makes them to wear an upright Crown, nor is
but an Ornament of the Head, but the Head it self of all humane actions.
Without this Tyar, or upright Diadam, no man shall ever enter into that blessed
Kingdom in Heaven.

And although a Right Intention may be not unfitly likened to this peculiar
wear of Kings, an upright Diadem, nevertheless our Savior compared it far
better to an Eye, and that A single one. This eye is like a Rule wherewith
every straight thing uses to be tried. A thousand errors there be,
wherewith we are involved; if we deflect our eyes but for a moment from this
eye, or this line and rule. On this truly depend all things, by this all
things are to be examined. For that cause very necessary every way is a most
exact understanding of a Right Intention, as of our end in all things that we
do. And Plato Judged all Science unprofitable, without knowledge of the best
end. (Plato in Th^at.) And although a great many do apprehend that all things
are to be directed to God, yet it falls out with them, as it does with some,
which perceive not that they know what they know, even as we seek for that
many times which we hold in our hands: So for the most part we are not
ignorant so much what a Right Intention is, as negligent to exercise the same.
This was the cause which not only excited, but also constrained in a manner as
the first Author to endite, so me to relate the same answerable, if I could, to
our Tongue and mind, that the use of a most necessary thing might not only be
perfectly known, but also exactly and daily put in practice. That man must
needs offend in most things, yea even in all, which either knows not what a
Good, what an Evil Intention is, or neglects to apply that to all his
Actions, in all of them to abandon this. So great a matter it is, not only to
do what is fit, as to aim at the right mark. The eyes of all men must of
necessity be lifted up to that All-seeing Eye. He sees nothing, or at least
sees with offense, whosoever observes not that eye continually. Never shall
he be reckoned among those Kings in Heaven, which wears this Tyar either
bended f^^ (...) backward: (...) ^^n is (...) ^e the utter bane of whatsoever
falls out. Nor can that be ever termed good, which is done with an evil
intention. Intention is the even Rule of all actions whatsoever.

And this Rule, this single Eye, I here present with all humility to Your most
Gracious eyes, as those that are intent upon their highest welfare: Would to
God this present endeavor might any way prove the fit object of a look sent
down from them (...) constr^ (...) the purpose and matter it treates of, then
the outward form can make it. But that which blusheth at its own naked limbs
in another Language then it was first set forth in, takes new courage from the
Front, it is revived, and put in hope by the Title which it carries, A Right
Intention. For this only has skill to commend even the poorest gifts.

It is observed in old Histories, that Sinaetas a poor Country man brought
water out of the River Cyrus to King Artaxerxes in the hollow of his Fists.
This Present was received into a G lden Bottell, and reckoned for a mighty
treasure. ( Aelian. l. 1. Var. Hist. c. 32.) Nothing else made so slender a
gift acceptable, but so Good an Intention. Conon an Husbandman presented a
fair Rape to Lewis the eleventh King of France, this was likewise a most
acceptable Gift, and requited with gold. ( Io. a Coch. l. 2. Aphor. c. 17.) But
who set this high price upon a Rape? Good Intention. For indeed neither Silver,
nor Gold, nor any of those things which are accounted for mighty matters is a
kindness, but the Will it self of the disposer. And this is it which has
encouraged a mean person to express his will and good desire in such a small
piece of service. For it is not so much to be valued what is given, as with
what mind: because a man's respect consists not in that which is done or
given, but in the very mind of the Giver or Doer, that is, in His Good
Intention. Even as also the honor of the Gods (says the Roman Wise man) is
not in Sacrifices, although they be rich and garnished with gold, but in the
pious and right meaning of the Offerers. ( Seneca. l. 1. De benef. c. 6.) With
the very same this Rule new limned, this single Eye is here offered and devoted
to your most Gracious eyes. Grant that it may enjoy their favorable aspect,
which then shall not fear the night of any misconceiving eyes, when it shall
be refreshed with the Daylight of such a Sacred Countenance.

Vivat, Rox, Consors, Princep,
ac Regia Prola^,
In Spom, Rem, Columen, Fide^,
Regnique, S^^que,
So wishes the humble Subject of a Right Intention JOHN DAVVSON.

To the Reader.
I Hope Reader, thou will not contest with me about terms. Here often times
we bid Vala adieu, or any whosoever is greedy of delicate Language. It is our
purpose to discourse religiously, what matter, if less curiously? We treat of
A Right Intention, this let another term the end, or scope, let him call it
the meaning, or mark. Give he the thing what name or title soever he please,
we regard the matter, for indeed we desire not here to learn to speak, but to
know what we say. Neither are we ig^^ (...) not only not to be understood, but
also to be understood hardly. So we disdain not to speak less eloquently, so
that we may speak plainly. And would to God Augustus Caesar's Age might
return, when as yet men's words were not dangerous unto them. Sen. l. 3. De
benef. c. 27.

Our Discourse comprehends the sum of things, the Rule and principal point
of all humane actions, A Right Intention. This term, though of an obscured
derivation, we rehearse unto thee a thousand times, that, Luke 11.8.
as Christ gives us notice, importunity may at least persuade, what reason
cannot.

A Right Intention may not be unfitly called the head and Captain, the Castle
and Tower, and the Metropolis of all virtues, as that which defends them all
with her mighty strength. But forasmuch as she is not without her open enemies,
therefore we bend our forces worthily against two mighty mischiefs of mankind,
Vain Glory, and Rash Judgment, the most deadly enemies of a good intention.
These forces Reader, whosoever thou art that meetest with this book, labor to
enjoy as fully, as they are freely set forth for thy good. And that thou may
be certified, the knowledge of a Right Intention, is an Art, which in a brief
compendium teaches, never to offend. All other Arts make for the getting of
bread, but this for the gaining of heaven. Not to know this Art, is to loose
heaven. Wherefore, good Reader, be careful of thine own profit, and learn to
buy heaven without expenses. So much the better will be every one of thy
actions, by how much the sounder is thine intention. This I would have thee to
be acquainted with, and farewell.

A brief Index upon the Rule of a Right Intention.
The First Book.
CHAP. I. What a Right Intention is. Chap II What the most Right Intention is.
Ch^p. III. How necessary a Right Intention is. Chap. IV. That nothing which men
do, is pleasing unto God, without a Right jntention where briefly concerning
Vain Glory. Chap. V. Wherein a Right Intention chiefly consists where
somewhat is spoken of actual and vertuall Intention. Chap. VI. Whether a
Right, that is to say a Good Intention, can make an evil work good. Chap.
VII. What are the degrees of a pure and Right Intention. Chap. VIII What an
evil intention is. Chap. IX. How the making of a deed known, bewrays an ill
intention. Chap. X. How diverse and manifold an ill intention is. Chap. XI.
That great Herod the Ascalonite was a notable example of an ill intention.
Chap. XII. What we call an indifferent, what No Intention.
The Second Book.
Chapter I. That a Right Intention is that Good Will, which was commended by
the Angels. Chap. II. That God only is the full reward, of that which is done
with a Right Intention. Ch^p. III. How much a Right Intention is opposed by the
Divill. Chap. IV. That the greatest enemy which the Devil stirs up against
a Right Jntention, is Vain Glory. Chap V. Lastly what Vain Glory is, and how
shamefully it murdereth a Right Intention, unless it be prevented Chap VI.
Certain questions concerning a R ght Intention Ch^p. VII. What Observations
follow upon those things which have bin spoken concerning a right intentton.
Where more at large of Rash Judgment. Chap. VIII. What the practice of a
Right Intention is. Chap. IX. What the signs of a Right intention are. Chap.
X Certain Conclusions upon a Right Intention. Chap. XI. An Exhortation to the
Clergy, to Courtiers, to all sorts of men, to exercise a Right Intention Chap.
XII. The Conclusion of those things whieh have been spoken of a Right
Intention.
The ARGUMENT Or, The Survey of both Books.
Book 1. Gives us to understand, what A Good, Evil, Indifferent, None
Intention is.

Book 2. Declares who are both the Fautors, and also the foes of a Good
Intention, especially Vain Glory and Rash Judgment; the Signs, Practice, and
Rewards thereof.

THE FIRST BOOK explaines the Good, and Evil, Indifferent, or bad Intentions.
CHAP. I. What a Right Intention is.
Darius the King of Persia, most famous for his own Destruction, and the
Macedonian Alexande^s fortune, had a Sword, whose scabbard was of precious
stone, which he wore effeminately girt about him in a golden Belt. Hung.
( Curtius lib. 3. post initium) A gallant sword, had it light into a manly
hand. Most famous in the Writings of many is the Sword of George Castriot, whom
they called Scanderbeg, who as report went, could cut a man in twain with one
cross blow. Remarkable out of the Sacred Volumes are the Swords of Go^iah and
Saul. Many other Swords of valiant men are remembered by learned Authors, Set
forth.
sometimes reverenced with superstitious zeal. But indeed the sword of no
Commander was ever of such lasting fame, as the rod of the Hebrew Moses: that
Rod the worker of so many miracles, so many stupendous prodigies. God demanded
of Moses what he held in his hand? he answered, a Rod: to whom God, cast it
from thee (says he) upon the ground: he cast it from him, and it was turned
into a Serpent. The Lord Commanded again, he should stretch forth his hand
and take the Serpent by the tail; he put forth his hand and caught it, and it
was turned into a Rod. Exodus 4.2, 3, 4. Here God fairly has laid before our
eyes, that good and evil actions proceed from us in such manner, that if we
look upon the earth, and earthly things when we do them, they become
Serpents; deeds of wickedness stained with poison: but if we lift up our mind
to Heaven, they are Moses Rod, works aspiring to an eternal reward. So much
respect is to be had, how this Mosaicall Scipio is dealt with, whether held in
the hand, or cast upon the ground. This Scipio, this Rod of Mose^, devoured all
the rods of the M^gitians; this turned rivers into blood; this melted the rock
into a fountain, and out of the veins of hard Flint drew a sudden Torrent:
this divided the waves of the Sea into safest walls. Moses could say, by the
help of this Staff, I penetrate both rocks and seas; all things are pervious
unto me. In this Staff of Moses sacred Interpreters do say, a Right
Intention in all humane Actions is disciphered, to which all things are
penetrable. But here, this is the first question of all, what is a Right
Intention?

Christ our Lord teaches a Right Intention, (...) single eye. Why an eye? why
single? God Divines call Substantiam simplicis simam, A most simple substance,
wherein is no composition or mixture; nothing taken or borrowed from any other,
for there is nothing in God, which is not God. So it is called a simple
Intention, and eye, wherewith nothing impure, noe self-love, no foolish fear,
no vain hope is intermixed, but that which is pure; not troubled with any such
kind of filth, directed to God only, contented with him alone: Therefore a
Right Intention is, which when it works, makes God the end of her work; or
that which reduces all things to the honor and glory of God. Saint Ambrose
explaines this in the policy of the Eagle: She about to try her implumed birds,
Bastard from the right breed
and to sever the unkindly from the kindly, holds them aloft within her talons,
and opposes them to the Sunbeams; they which receive the Sun with open and
undaunted eyes are acknowledged for her brood, they are carried back to the
nest, suckled and well fed; even as if the Mother should say, these are my
Children, an Eagles race, worthy to be nourished. The rest which hardly admit
the Sun but with trembling and twinkling eyes, she throws headlong from her
Nest as degenerate, and disherits with a miserable fall as none of her stock:
even so they which can thoroughly look upon God with a continual respect,
insomuch that they direct all their deeds sincerely and wholly to his honor,
follow only his heavenly will in all things; are most truly the Children of
God, these have a single eye.

2. (a) There was a certain pious old man who as often as he went about any
matter, Vitae patrum.
stood still a while like to one in a muse: being demanded why he did so; our
wo^k^s he replied are nothing of themselves, but like a misshapen post, unless
they be covered and laid over with a right end, and sincere intention. And
even as they which shout one against another at the Buts, let not their Arrows
fly before they have taken their aim at the mark: so also I, whatsoever I am
in hand with, direct my purpose to God our last end and scope: and this is it
which I do, whilst I stand stiil, for this God requires of us. Saint Bernard
rightly thinks, all our obedience, and patience to be unsavory to God,
unless he be the cause of all things which we do or suffer. And even as
they which for a wager shoot with Guns at some round board, and be less wide
of the center, for the most part shut their left eye, using only the right,
whereby their sight may be the quicker, and more su^ely carried to the midst of
the mark. Just so must we also shut the left eye of so many worldly respects,
Coustmes
so many base observations, so many vain Sciences, so that only our right eye
is to be set open at large, to look upon God by a sincere Intention. This eye
of base respects is that which our Savior counsels us to pluck out, and cast
from us, that it hinder us not from the true light. John 4.
Mat. 8.29.

Our Savior sat by the Well weary of the way, and exhaust with hunger and
thirst, and when he had ended his discour^e with the Samaritane woman, his
Disciples setting before him such things as they had bought, Master, say they,
eat. To whom the Lord, I, says he, have meat to eat which ye know not of.
Nor yet do his Disciples give over to enquire among themselves, and has any
body say they, brought him ought to eat? At length plainly Christ, My meat^
(says he) is to do the Will of him that sent me, that I may perform his
work. This in like manner is the meat of all men desiring to serve God, that
they perform his work. And if we call the matter to a right account, we all
eat of the same dish, master and servant, rich and poor, learned and
unlearned; there is one meat of all, one only will of God, one only honor;
and as well is the first and highest to be contented with his chance, as the
last and lowest, when as if action of all men ought to b^e one, to aim at the
one and only glory of GOD in all things.

^i^at 16. de ebriet. and ingluvic.
3. The manner of living faith Basil, in a Christian man, has always a true
end set before it, the glory of God: And it is the precept of holy Paul,
serving not with eye service, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the will of God from the heart. And that he might imprint this deeper in
the mind, with good will, doing service as to the Lord, and not unto men.
Ephesians. 6.6, 9. God is to be loved in taking pains, and in loving God we must
take pains for God. This will appear by example: A matron of an honest life,
when she receives her Husband returned from his journey, safe and sound, who
whether he were living or no she knew not; from whom for a long time she
received no Letters, so soon as she sees him present, shows wonde^full
tok^ns of joy: here she reputes it not below her estate to do the part of a
Servant, to pull off his Boots, cle^ne his feet; she knows this to be the
duty of maids or servants, yet she taking this service work upon her
beforehand, will have her love and joy so testified: that service seems not
vile to her, which love makes so sweet: she accounts it an honor, to be so
humbled by her self. In like manner, if we whatsoever we be, attend only our
own charge, business, office, Estate.
fortune, easily will weariness creep upon us, and the very lightest labor
will be a burden; grievously shall we complain, as often as we cannot take
our ease at pleasure: But if we shall turn our eyes the other way, and look
upon God, doing service as to the Lord, and not unto men, we shall account no
labor neither too base nor too heavy; ease will be trouble. Tradesmen when they
know they work for their Masters themselves, do that with a far greater
diligence. A Tailor receives a Doublet to be mended: here the first question
is, for whom? if for his Master such a one, pr^sen^ly other things laid by for
a time, the master of the shop himself takes that work to him, which
otherwise he would have given in charge to his boy. Therefore let us not attend
our selves, but the Lord, doing service as to the Lord, and not unto men.

Our Intention shall be pure, says Bernard in Sentence: If in every of our
actions, we seek either the honor of God, or the profit of our neighbor; or
a good conscience. Very excellently Seneca, Epist. 48. initio. Not any man
says he, can live happily, which only regards himself, which converteth
all things to his own profits, advantages.
alteri vivas oportet, si vis tibi vivere, thou must needs live to another if
thou will live to thy self: every vice does so lead away a man from God, that
he may live to him self, wake to his own commodity, and be fast asleep to
other men's: where therefore the Intention does gape after Gold and Silver,
there is no welcomer guest then money: where the Intention savours of flesh,
there pleasure is numbered amongst the most intimate friends: but where the
intention aspires high after honors and dignities, there with careful
diligence are feathers gathered, which may advance to high matters, nor does
any bring a more acceptable gift, present
then he which gives wings fit for an ambitious flight. Behold, how the eyes
of such men are carried away from God after most vain things; thus they live
to themselves: but he cannot live to God, which will live to himself.
Therefore the eye constantly reflected upon God, this at length is simple, the
Intention waiting every where upon God, nor looking upon any thing, unless
withal it look upon God; this is finally both a Right and sincere Intention.
By this we live to God, even as it delighted that sweet Singer of Israel to
say, My soul shall live unto him. Psalm. 21.30. Secund. Hier. Hereby winning
from himself that excellent saying, Psalm. 101.4
I have set no wicked thing before me: or as we read, I will take no wicked
thing in hand,

CHAP. II. What a most Right Intention is.
We direct for the most part our Intention after a threefold manner unto God.
First, some m^n serves God, and keeps himself from the greater sort of
offenses, for fear of punishment; he dreads Hell fire, eternal torments:
such a one not long after dares some hing, Adventureth.
worthy of not only the Pr^son, or the turne-off, but of Hell ^ee adventu^es I
say something* and puts the matter to the hazard; for thinks he. I am not yet
so ^e^r to the pit of Hell, but I may with courage enough att^mpt this or that;
the debt which perhaps I sh ll bind my self in, I may lose by a penitent
Confession; the guilt which by chance I shall draw upon me, I may wipe off
again: let us go on therefore, we shall have time enough to return to our
duty. Ah, this is not a single eye, nor if it be, is it long such; for it
looks not upon God only. If the Devil and Hell were a fable, that man would
build a Heaven for himself out of Heaven, and would believe himself blessed,
if he might live at his pleasure; and wholly given to his belly like a Beast.
This is their Intention for the most part whom Paul calls natural men, which
perceive not the things that are of the Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.14.

Another way, the Intention is directed to God. Some man serves God, because
he desires to live among the blessed; Heaven is sweet to him: an eternal
reward, a reward over and above great. He enclines his heart to do
righteousness for retribution sake. This Intention is much better then the
first, yet not the best: I say it is better, for he which coveteth the joys of
Heaven, Cautions,
is more regardfull then he which only fears the torments of Hell, neither
fears them always, but sometimes forgetful of his dread, runs into that
which is forbidden.

The third way, he directs his Intention most rightly to God, who concludes
thus in his mind, I serve God, and therefore do I serve him, because this
Master is most worthy to be served of all men; and because he prevents me with
exceeding and innumerable benefits: I owe all things to him, I desire to please
him, and for him I do all things that I do: I am not any ways solicitous of
wages or reward: God I serve, and will serve whilst I live, wheresoever my
recompense be.

This is the most Right Intention of all, to do all things not with a respect
of ones self, but of God; not of gain, but only honesty: Of this Intention
the Hebrew King David making his boast: An Offering of a free heart (says he)
will I give thee, and praise thy Name (O Lord) because it is so comfortable.
Psalm 54.6. Here most eloquently Saint August. Why of a free heart, (says he)
because I freely love that which I praise; I praise God, and rejoice in his
praise, whose praise I am not ashamed of. Let it be free, both what is loved,
and what is praised, what is free? himself for himself, not for anything
else. What reward shall thou receive of God, O thou covetous man? He preserves
not the earth, but himself for thee, who made Heaven and Earth. Voluntarily
will I offer unto thee: do it not then of necessity, for if thou praisest God
for any other thing, thou praisest him of necessity; if thou had that present
which thou love, thou would not praise God. Mark what I say; thou praisest
God, namely, that he might give thee a great deal of money: if thou could
have much money elsewhere, and not from God, would thou praise God at all?
If therefore thou praisest God for money, thou offerest not freely to God, but
offerest of necessity; because thou love I know not what beside him. Contemn
all things, and attend him, love him of thy own accord; because thou find
no better thing which he can give, then himself. And I will confess unto thy
Name (O Lord) because it is so good; for nothing else, but because it is good.
What does he say? I will confess unto thy name, (O Lord) because thou give
me fruitful lands, because thou give me gold and silver, because thou
give me great riches, and excelling dignity: not, but why? because it is
good. I find nothing better then thy Name, therefore will I praise thy Name O
Lord, because it is good. Augus. Tom 8. in Psalm. 54.

1. Behold to serve God, for Gods sake, this at length is to serve God truly,
for so God both loves us, and serves us himself, even as he promises by
Osea. Osea. 14.15.
I will love them freely, says he, that is, merely of mine own accord. The
same he justly requires of us, for indeed he will not have us to serve him so,
as a dog serves his master for a bit or a bone, for if we serve God for
heaven, we make show enough, that heaven is dearer unto us then God. Most
fitly to this purpose Seneca, lib. 4. de benef. c. 1. There are found some
(says he) which use honesty for advantage, and whom virtue alone pleases
not; which carries no great show, if so be she has any thing common, whereas
virtue is neither invited by gain, nor affrighted by loss, nor corrupts any
man in that sort by hope or promise, treading profit under feet we must go
after her, whithersoever she calls, whithersoever she sends us, without any
respect of our private gain: yea sometimes must we go on not sparing our
own blood; nor is her command ever to be slighted. What shall I obtain,
say thou, if I shall do this, which I do frankly, and freely, nothing over
is promised thee, if any booty shall come in the way, thou shall reckon it
among thy vailes; the price of honesty is in itself. Lodovicus Blosius comes
for a convenient witness to this purpose, who m^king good this very thing: The
Lord says he, upon a time inspired a certain Virgin with these words: I would
have my Elect so persuaded in themselves, that their good works and exercises
do thoroughly please me, when they serve me at their own charge, Expenses.
but they * serve me at their own charge, Tender me service.
which although they taste not any other sweetness of their Devotion, yet
perform their prayers, and other pious exercises as dutifully as may be: being
confident of my goodness, that I will take these things willingly and well at
their hands.

We approve therefore of this Intention, as the best and purest, whereby a man
does any thing, because it so pleases God, because God^ will, because God for
his immense goodness is most worthy that it be done to his honor: Wherefore
let every man determine thus with himself. I serve God for Gods sake, who is
so great, that if there were neither Heaven nor Hell, is yet only most worthy;
to whom all Angels, to whom mankind, to whom whatsoever is created should
perform most exact service. Moreover it is easy to apprehend, whether a man
conceive thus in his mind, for it falls out many times, that we rashly despise
one another, and say in contempt: Scorn.
What great matter has this writing, this saying? what rare thing is in this
counsel, this action, this work? let it be enjoined others, any man might
do it: with these cavills a man of a Right Intention is nothing at all
troubled; but with a generous spirit: O good Sir, lirtle am I moved that this
displeases you, I did not this that you should praise it; let it not please
you, and a thousand more, I take no care for that, so it displease not GOD
only. It is the greatest praise and reward to me, to have done well. Let God
approve it, though all the world say nay, truly I weigh it not a rush; I have
already learnt to contemn, and to be contemned. Let men know me to be such a
one, whom they may offend without danger. I know what Master to call upon after
my labor; I know how to rejoice within. These things the leavell of a Right
Intention teaches. Rule.


But if any man, because his things are not highly esteemed by others, thinks
it a great punishment, is troubled, vexed, grieved, and falls in his mind,
saying: therefore hereafter all my care shall be, that these Wits may not have
what to condemn: it shall be more delightful to me to be at ease, Pleasure,
then to under go these perverse judgments. Lo, silly soul, here thou art
taken in a burning fault, for if thou had a Right Intention to God, thou
would put amongst thy smallest accounts, not to have thy self and thy
doings commended by others; and to be beaten by sinister judgments and
speeches: these things never move a man of a Right Intention one foot: he
lightly esteems to be lightly esteemed: he has an eye to God, to whom alone
he desires to approve himself, and his doings.

Alas, how miserable were we, (and truly are) which turn the judgments of
other men to our own torments, believe it the greatest hurt to displease
others, esteem praises flowing from the common assent to be the chiefest
good; nor to take pains is ever pleasing unto us, unless when others begin to
commend us, or at least to cast a favorable aspect upon our doings. Or are
we ignorant, that humane eyes are seldom and hardly satisfied, which only
respect the deed they see, but pass by the mind in a trance? To serve God is
both pleasant and easy; for God, as Gregory speaks, weighs the heart, and not
the matter, Nec cogitat quantum, sed ex quanto quis operetur, nor regards how
much, but out of how much a man works.

II. The root of a Tree either makes the fruit sweet, or marres it with
bitterness; for as the sap of the root is sweet or bitter, so also the fruit.
If the root be holy, so are the branches. Romans 11.16. and as the water of a
stream is of the same taste with the fountain; so likewise the actions of men
are of the same goodness, or ill quality with the intention, which is both the
root and fountain thereof. Excellently, and briefly withal Saint Augustine,
Attend not greatly, says he, what a man does, but what he looks upon when he
does it. August. in Psalm. 31. Some man has given a great piece of money, but a
rich man, but not like to feel the want of it; another has given, but a poor
man, but ready to make away a part of his Patrimony. The sum is all one, not
all one the good deed; the Intention varies it. Seneca like one of the soundest
Christians, delivering most excellent instructions concerning this matter:
Because indeed says he, the praise is not in the fact, but in the manner how
it is done; this he confirms by examples: the same thing if it be bestowed
on superfluity is base, if on comeliness, is without reprehension. Some man
abides by his sick friend, we approve it; but if he do this for an
Inheritance, he is a Raven, he waits for the carcass: the same things are both
base and honest: it kills, wherefore or how they are done. Therefore ought
there to be a fast persuasion, (we call it an Intention) belonging to the
whole life: such as this persuasion shall be, such shall be our doings; such
our thoughts: and suc^ as these shall be, such will be our life. Marcus Brutus
gives many instructions both to his Parents, and Children, and Kindred: No man
will do these things, without a reference to somewhat. We must propose the
chiefest good for our end, whereto we must endeavor; to which every one of our
deeds and sayings may have respect (No Christian could express this more
Christianly) we must direct our course like Sailors by some Star. Vita sine
proposito vaga est, a life at random is no life No fast purpose, no fast life.
what could be spoken more religiously?

Publius Mimus has spoken indeed succinctly, but excellently with all: That
man is to be termed evil, which is good for his own sake. Therefore not only
is it lawful for me to be evil for my self, but neither also to be good for
my self: all things for God. Let every thing that we do or say have respect
(as Seneca speaks) to the end of the chiefest good.

Wisdom guided the righteous in right paths, and showed him the Kingdom of
God. Wis. 10 10. But in what kind is that true was not Paul, when he was the
Preacher of the world a just man yet by what tedious circuits, (...) how many
turnings, and winding by what crooked paths was h^ led to the Kingdom of
Heaven? Senec. Longiss. sed aurea Epist 95. circa. med.


First of all a Jew, was a Discip^^ of the Pharisees, most zealous o^ the Sect,
whereunto he wa^ brought up: afterward of a Disciple a master, an earnest
Pharisee a stiff Rabbine. Thirdly, he wa^ made a Persecutor and tormento^ of
the Christians, chief of the Officers, that if he found any o^ this way,
whether they were me^ or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. Acts
9.2 Fourthly he became a Discipl^ again, but of Ananias, a very good
Christian. Fifthly, he himself also became a Christian, and the Orator of
Christians. Sixthly, being sent by God into every coast of the World, he passed
both Sea and Land, Iournying
* going from land to land, from sea to sea. Are not these doubtful ways?
Besides, with how many chances, with how great dangers, with what almost
innumerable troubles was he pressed? now the sea threatens his death, now
false brethren, now Thieves lay wait for his life: one while the Gentiles
molest him, another while the Jews vex him; now within the ship, now in
prison, now in the wilderness, now in the City he feels strange alterations:
one while he is beaten with Rods, then pressed with stones; almost every day
dying: who may not call these paths untoward? But hear my good man, this so
cr^bbed a way is not the right way to Heaven. Another, not Paul, might endure
as much as this, and more then Paul, and yet go wide of Heaven. Therefore
Paul's straightest way to Heaven, was his most pure and sincere intent on to
God, in undergoing all these things he aimed at the glory of God only.

This is the exact way to Heaven, this all the Saints took, from this no just
man turned into any by path: Wisdom has guided the righteous through right
paths. But those so various changes, such multiplicious troubles, such
uncertain and ill events whereof our whole life is full, warn us to carry our
selves like Soldiers. In war it is no new or strange thing to raise winding
Bulwarks, yea when the General intends to cast a Trench before the walls
of a City, he lays it not straight along, but bending to and fro. This is the
right way to besiege a town which is so crooked and wavering: So God leads
us to Heaven through all kind of calamities, yet because in this so very a
froward path, the intention of the just is most right to GOD, it is most truly
affirmed, The LORD Conducteth the Righteous in right paths, and that which is
nearest unto it: the righteous live for evermore, their reward also is with the
Lord, and the care of them with the most high. Wisd. 5.15. Because they
incessantly think upon this, care for this only, to please the Lord, not men:
therefore they shall receive from God a most ample reward. This therefore (as
Bernard speaks, is the purity of Intention, that whatsoever thou do, thou
do it for God, and that blessings return to the place from whence they
proceeded, that they may abound. Bernard in v. g. Nativit. Dom. Sermon. 3. med.
Mat. 6.2^.


CHAP. III. How necessary a right Intent^on is.
IF the Divine pages were altogether silent else where concerning a right
intention, The necessity of
it would appear at large from this one saying of our Savior, how necessary
that is for all men, most apparently Christ: If thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall b^ full of light. Augustine affirms, that Christ our Lord d d here
properly speak of a Right Intention, as he which a little before discourse^
particularly of Prayer, Alms, an^ Fasting; that no man therefore should choke
all the force of h^ prayer, Largess
pittance, fasting, in hunting after a little vain report, on Savior adds a
most wholesome instruction concerning the eye, which is either single and pure,
Diverse
or vario^^ and wicked. Therefore even a when the eyes are bright, clear
sharp, and lively, the body hat^ day within, and carries his Sunn^ about with
it, moves up an^ down at pleasure, and is i^ light: but if the eyes be sore,
an^ diseased, if asquint, or purblind, bleared, or grown over with filme, all
the body is in misery, an groans under a cloudy mansion Just so if the
intention be sincere and free from all shadows o^ vain glory, our prayers,
alms deeds, abstinences, are clean from the dreggs of vice: but if the
intention be evil, all a man's actions are such. What says Gregory, is
expressed by the eye, but the intention of the heart preventing its work,
which before it exercises it self in action, contemplates that thing which now
it desires. And what is signified in that appellation of the body, but every
action which follows the intention as her eye going before? The light of the
body therefore is the eye, quia per bonae intentionis radium, merita
illustrantur actionis, because the defects of the action, are illustrated by
the rays of the intention. Greg. lib. 28. mor. c. 6. prope finem.

Saint Ambrose was wont to say very well, As much as thou intendest* so much
thou do; for surely thy labor is of such worth, as is thine eye which goes
before it. If thine intention be right, right also will be thy action, without
doubt in the eyes of God: for herein are the eyes of man a thousand times
deceived. Of these Saint Bernard said wisely, Opera probant, quae cernunt, sed
unde prodeunt non discernunt. They approve the deeds they see, but from whence
they proceed they discern not. Bern. tract. de humil. grad. 5. Thus the sum,
and foundation, and ground of all our actions is the intention. Hereof notably
Gregory, The supporters of every soul are her intentions, for as the building
upon the pillars, but the pillars do stay upon their bases: so our life in
virtues* but our virtues subsist in our innermost ^ntentions. Most inward.
And because it is written, Other foundation can no man l^y, then that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11. then b ses are in the foundation,
when our intentions are made strong in Christ ( Greg. in c. 38. Job. ad fin.)
We are altogether such, as our intention is: we get the pra^se of virtue, o^
the mark of vice, from our intention. If our intention look upon earth, we
are made earthly; if heaven, heavenly: and most commonly where a virtuous end
is wanting, there comes in a vain, sensual, and vicious one.

Excellently Laurentius Justinian: In all works says he, whosoever desires
his souls health, let him look to the manner of his intention, and direct it
to that end, which the Divine Law commands: that he spend not his labor in
vain. He adds: It is to little purpose, to meddle with difficult affairs, to
converse familiarly with Kings and Princes, to get a famous name of sanctity
and science, and to do all this with a wrong intention. (Laur. Just. de Regim.
prae^at. c. 22.) Richardus Victorinus, That, as the body is, says he, without
life, the same is a deed without a good intention. Rich. De statu inter hom.
c. 7.) even as often as Christ proclaims that his, Attendite, Take heed, or
beware, as when he admonishes; Beware of the Scribes, Beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees, Beware of false Prophets. (Luke 10.46. Luke 12.1. Mat. 7.15. Mat
6.1.) for the most part some grievous danger is at hand, and then we must
deal very warily. In this voice Christ calling aloud to us all, Take heed
says he, that ye do not your alms before men. Have a care to your feet,
there creepes a Sharke behind you ready to pluck off your Cloak: as soon as
you look back, he will fawn upon you, he will kiss your hand, he will
counterfeit a thousand services. What, who is this Thief? who this Sharke?
Intention, but that wrong one of pleasing men, of satisfying the eyes of men,
of striving for humane praises; therefore Christ significantly added: To be
seen of them. Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen
of them. (Mat. 6.1.) Augustine: Let them see says he, your good works, and
glorify not you, but God: for if you do good works to glorify your selves,
it is answered to you, what he himself spoke of some such: Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward: (a present reward of worldly praise, not of future
glory.) Therefore, thou will say, ought I to hide my works, that I do them not
before men? I command not says the Lord, contrary things: take heed to the
end, sing to the end, see for what end thou do them: If therefore thou do
them to glorify thy self, this I have forbidden; but if therefore that God
may be glorified, this I have commanded. Sing therefore not unto your own
name, but unto the name of the Lord your God. Sing you, let him be praised;
live you well, let him be glorified. ( August. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 65.) St.
Gregory expounding that precept of the Lord touching the concealing of our
alms: Let the work says he, be so in public, as that the intention may
remain in private; that we may both give an example of the good work to our
neighbors, and yet by the intention, whereby we seek to please God only, we
wish it always secret. (Greg. Hom. 2. in Evang.) Therefore a good intention is
necessary, which only knows best how to avoid these Cut-purses: Therefore
take heed.

3. Amongst the ceremonies of the old Testament, which God required of the
Israelites, for commending the Sacrifices, this was one of the chief; To lay
the hand upon the Oblation. Thus the Lord commanded: He shall put his hand upon
the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be accepted. (Levit. 1.4.)
Expositors enquire, for what reason God exacteth this imposition of hand, that
so the Sacrifice might be both grateful to him, and availeable for the
offerer. Oleaster: God would have says he, that the party about to sacrifice,
should not only offer a burnt offering, but moreover should adjoyne himself,
his heart, will, and intention. All this together is necessary, for beasts
only are neither acceptable to God, nor beneficial to the offerer. Hence
Augustine, upon that of the Kingly Prophet: In me sunt Deus vota tua. Thy vows
are in (or upon) me O God. (Psalm. 56.12.) inquire thou, says he, what thou
must give unto God? not beasts offered upon Altars: out of the Cabinet of thy
heart, out of the closet of a good conscience, out of thy self bring forth thy
self. Even so, offer thy will, thy mind, thy heart; say unto God, in me, O my
God, are thy vows; for those things which thou requirest of me, are within my
self: these things thou O Lord, demandest of me for an offering, not those
outward t^ings void of a heart and intention. August in Psalm. 56.

In ^he judgment of Chrysostom, ^^e true Sacrifices of Christians are
Almsdeeds, Prayers, and temperance: but God will not have these naked, but
that a man add himself thereto, whereby it may be an offering full of marrow
and fatness: for the Royal Psalmist determining thus with himself; I will
offer, (says he,) unto thee fat burnt offerings. Psalm. 66.13. What is, says
Austine, fat or full of marrow? I will hold fast thy love within, that which I
tender shall be not in the outward parts, but in the marrow? then which
nothing is more inward. The bones are within the flesh, within the very bones
the marrow. Whosoever therefore worships God outwardly, Out side
will rather please men then God: for he which has other thoughts within,
offers not burnt offerings of fatlings; but whose marrow God beholds, him
he wholly accepts. Aug. Tom. 8. in dict. Psalm. Those works therefore are
fat burnt offerings, wherein is a good will and Intention. By no means will
God have dry, starveling, saplesse bones. You may find many, who frequently
say their prayers, and are present at holy duties, sometimes hunger-bite
themselves, give the common dole, but alas, how little marrow is in these
works? these indeed are like smooth white bones, but there wants juice,
spirit, a right intention, a pious affection; which should lift up these deeds
to God.

Amongst all the Sacrifices, the burnt offering was chief: others made also
for the good of the Offers, but this was wholly burnt to God and to his honor.
And even as the offerings in times past were distinguished, so now our works.
Some are also a benefit to us, as to eat, to drink, sleep, walk, read,
write, make accounts; these works be good, if well done, and as they ought.
Others use to be contrived to the honor of God alone, in the manner of burnt
sacrifices, as to pray, to endure want, to wait upon divine Service, to purge
ones self by hearty consession, to come to the Lords Table. Those of the first
sort with most men, have seldom any marrow in them; for when the hour comes
they go to their meals, and have no further thoughts; when sleep invites
them, they make have to bed, nor does any thing else take up their mind, but
rest: when fair wether calls them into the field, their heart is set upon
nothing else then pleasant walking: thus many eat, drink, prattle, go about
their matters, and look no other way; it is enough for them that these things
be done, in these they unite not their mind with God, they lift not up their
meaning to God. These are not fat burnt Sacrifices, they are not: but it is
more to be admired, and more grievously blamed, that the burnt offerings
themselves have no fatness; that prayer is without attention, fasting without
amendment, alms without commiseration, the communion of the Lords Body without
devotion: out of the lips we pour prayers, Common rates.
out of the purse money for the poor, but where are the fervent affections?
where the ardency of mind? where the earnest desire of pleasing God? where the
marrow? Therefore you that will offer any thing grateful to the heavenly
power, offer fat burnt Sacrifices. Pour out your hearts before him. Psalm.
62.8. Honor God with a full and whole Intention.

Cyrill of Alexandria moves the question, Why did God forbid the blood of the
Victime to be eaten? in these he so answers: The blood is the seat of the
life, he which takes away the blood, takes away the life also: God has
therefore required in every Sacrifice, that the heart, will, and intention
should be poured out like blood before him, not so much as a drop being
reserved for other uses. When therefore we Sacrifice, when we pray or fast,
thither only let the intention tend that we may please God, and reject
whatsoever is contrary hereunto. From hence Eusebius Emesenus agrees upon these
two things, the first, every good work whatsoever is of so much price with
God, as this effusion of heart, and intention in man is The other, we ought in
every good work we go about, to have the greatest care of a right intention,
or good will. Emes. in c. 6. Matthew. The Law formerly gave order, All thy
estimation shall be according to the shekel of the Sanctuary. Levit. 27.25.
for these only weights were void of deceit. Just so our works also are not to
be esteemed or weighed according to the opinion of the vulgar, or outward show,
Gloss
or credit of the eyes; and oftentimes by the falsest testimonies, but by the
only intention of the heart. How often are the noblest works valued scarce
one groat, which by God the most equal esteemer of things are received as an
hundred pound of silver? Of how small a price were the Hebrew Widows? two
brazen mites believed, to that great heap of silver which was cast in by the
Pharisees? and yet they did far exceed this. Mark 12.42. How ponderous
might the prayers, fastings, almsdeeds of the Pharisee, praising himself in
the Temple seem? they were all scarce worth the least counterfeit Jewel; Stone
they might all have been recompensed with the poorest reports of men.
Slightest


The Devil is not ignorant of this, he understands most exactly, that all the
worth comes to a work by the right intention, therefore he moves every
stone, and labors extremely, that either he may take away a right
intention, or spoil it: skillful enough, that then we toil to no purpose,
and in doing much do nothing, and in vain expect a reward, where labor so
ingratefull^ God went before. Wounded
Surely God cleanly confessing himself to be wonde^fully taken with this
single ey^ Thou have wounded my heart says he, my Sister, my Spouse thou have
wounded my heart wit^ one of thine eyes, and with on chain of thy neck, Cant.
4.5 In the Hebrew Idiom, Thou ha^ ravished my heart. Tertullian considering
this: Solomon, says he, had respect to the fashion of women in the East,
which for maintaining their honor, went abroad with their faces covered,
leaving only one eye unvailed. The Spouse therefore commending this use as an
argument of honesty, confesses himself rapt so in love with this one eye. But
others searching more deeply into this mystery, say that here the admirable
whether union or unity of the eyes is set forth, for both ever go with equal
pace, nor does this ever wander any way from that, they always behold the same
thing together, nor can there be so great dissent between them, for that to
look upon Heaven, this the Earth: the same also is the unity of the Hairs,
when all are platted together in that order, that they may seem one hair. The
eyes of the heart are the affections, and intentions, the cogitations the
hairs. Here nothing is more deformed then the disagreeing variety of these
eyes; if this be carried this way, the other that way: if we desire to please
God, and withal not to displease the world: if with this eye we look upon
Heaven, with that unjust gain Luxury, or any unlawful thing, then is the
heart wounded with love of the Divine Power, when there is the eye of man, and
that fixed upon God, one intention, and that erected to God.

And this did God evidently declare in Abraham's Sacrifice, wherein he was
commanded to offer both Birds and other living Creatures, these namely divided
and cut in pieces, those not so. Genesis 15.10. whereby is signified, that
although one may impart his cares upon his Wife, Children, Household, Subjects,
yet that his intention, which the Birds exemplified, is not at all to be
div^ded. Let the Father look to his Children, let the Merchant think upon his
wares, the Shepherd upon his sheep, the Consul upon his Citizens, the
Exchanger upon his money; in the mind s of all these men innumer^ble
cogitations will offer themselves thicker then the hairs of the head,
notwithstanding let these hairs be united, let all these cogitations look to
one thing, God, Gods honor, Gods Service. This one hair, one eye is necessary
before all things. In this manner the heart of the King above is most sweetly
wounded, in one of the eyes, and with one hair of the neck.

CHAP. IIII. That no action of humane affairs is pleasing to God without a
Right Intention: where strictly of vain glory.
THe Vesture of Aaron the high Priest, wherein he performed Divine Offices was
of such great worth and beauty, not only in respect of matter, but of art;
that all the robes of Kings and Emperors cannot any way be compared with it.
Beseliel, the best Artificer wrought that Garment: but it had a greater Artist
then him, which dictated, which prescribed the manner of making it, and guided
the masters hand himself, as it were a child's. Of this Vesture the Son of
Syrach: He beautified him with comely ornaments, and clothed him with a robe
of glory: He put upon him perfect glory, and strengthened him with rich
garments: and again in conclusion, he set a Crown of gold upon the Mitre,
wherein was engraven Holiness, an ornament of honor, a costly work, the
desires of the eyes, goodly and beautiful: Before him there was none such.
Ecclesi. 45.8.12. What comely thing soever in this kind even the most curious
eye could desire, that it might behold in this one garment. The desires of the
eyes, this robe satiated all desire, even of the greediest eye: nothing more
precious, more beautiful would any man wish to see; no not in the most
excellent wo^ke.

This the good God would have for that end, that the chief Priest going to the
Temple, should snatch the eyes of all after him: and for that cause also he
commanded three hundred sixty six golden Bells to be hung at the lower Hemme
of this Vestment, that the Priest with his very going should convocate all from
every part to the spectacle; nor was there any which would not willingly loose
his eyes in this show: yet in the mean while was it not lawful for this high
Priest, which turned the eyes of all upon himself, to cast his eyes upon any
body: he that was to be looked upon by all, ought himself to look upon none.
For God would that the Priests eyes should go together only upon the
ineffable Name of God, which therefore the Priest wore upon his forehead,
engraven in a plate of gold.

This is a most noble pattern of a man just to a farthing; let a man that is
good in earnest show by proof in himself, whatsoever honest eyes would wish
to look upon: In all things show thy self a pattern of good works. Titus
1.9. In such a man as this, let the wealthy see an example of pious liberality;
the afflicted and poor, of patience; the angry and quarrelsome, of meekness;
the impure and intemperate, of continency; the idle and slothful, of industry:
finally let him be such, the desire of holy eyes. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works. For indeed they which draw the
eyes of others unto them by the example of a more holy life, must themselves by
no means cast their eyes upon their sp^ctators, that they may please them, but
that they may learn of them: Let them look^ upon the honor of God alone in
all things, even as Aaron kept his eyes upon his frontall only: so these
contemplating God only with a steadfast look, let them refuse even praise
offered, and pass it from themselves to God, and as much as they displease
themselves, so much let them desire to please God only, by a true and sincere
intention in all things; of which was spoke in the Chapter next before, how
necessary it is: now it shall be moreover showed, how none of our actions
without this can please God.

Wedding Song
1. In the divine Epithalamium, the Kingly Bridegroom from Heaven does
marvellously commend the eyes of his Royal Love, but by most unlike
similitudes, insomuch that a man unskilful of heavenly secrets, may not
without cause demand: I pray, is not this Bridegroom beside himself, with
what words commends he his Spouse? Thou have Doves eyes says he; and again,
Thine eyes are like the Fish-pooles in Hesbon by the Gate of Bathrabbim. Cant.
7.4. Have Doves eyes any thing with a Fish Pond? what is less like one to
another then an eye and a great wide Poole? the Divine Spirit has folded up
this mystery in an elegant cover. The eyes are like Doves eyes, for to look
with, compared to the Fish-pooles in Hesbon, to be looked upon. Hesbon, the
royal City, according to Hierom, was twenty miles distant from Iordane, at one
of the Gates hereof were two most stately Fish Ponds, as clear as Crystal;
hither the people upon holy days did flow in whole troops, to the spectacle
of this Crystal sea: It was therefore almost a daily thing for these
Fish-pooles to be looked upon, and from hence the Holy Ghost compares such eyes
as please him both to Fish-pooles, and Doves eyes; and indeed first of all he
assimilate them to Doves eyes. The Dove i^ the understanding of all Nations was
a Symbol of the mutual fidelity of man and wife, when a one regards the other
with equal faith. And this the Heavenl^ Bridegroom greatly praises in as
undefiled soul, that it has Dove-like eyes: Thou have, says he Doves eyes;
faithful and cha^ eyes, which thou deflectest upon me only, and which I
only satisfy for indeed in whatsoever thou do, thou respectest no other but
me; and toward me is thy desire. Can. 1.10. And even as either married party
turning away their eyes from the other, moves suspicion of an adulterous
mind: So the soul, if she cast the eye of her intention upon any other thing
then God, makes show that her will is to break promise, and to please others
besides God: for the faithful soul does daily ingeminate that saying; Mine
heart has talked of thee, seek ye my face: thy face Lord will I seek. Psalm.
29.9. Mine eyes are both of so wide and narrow capacity, that besides thee, my
God, they can receive none; nor can serve the eyes of none, but thine.

For that cause such constant Doves eyes are also compared with the Fish-pooles
in Hesbon, for God will have his lovers to be seen of all men, he will have
the eyes of all men to be fastened on them, that the proud man by observing
them may learn, what an excellent virtue Humility is; that the covetous person
may see what liberality can do, that the dishonest may perceive, how comely
Chastity is; that the wrathful may know, what meekness and placability can
perform. GOD will have his friends to be like the Fish-pooles in Hesbon,
which many may contemplate, out of which they may draw, from which they may
take virtuous examples. And although these Fish-pooles be seen, yet let them
not perceive themselves to be seen; nor let them look upon others so, as
that they covet to please them, altogether as Aaron which received the eyes of
all upon himself, himself daring to send forth his eyes upon none. Therefore
let him not covet to please others, who covets to please God; nor let him fix
the eye of his intention upon any created thing, who desires to stir up the
love of the Creator toward himself.

Here is the principal matter, that man continually observe God, the end of
all his actions. Surely the duty of a Christian is not to be measured by the
beginnings; one may go out of the meanest Cottage to London into the Kings
Court, again he may from hence take his way to the poorest Country house, and
by these bounds of the way both that, and this journey is to be esteemed. But as
a Traveller about to go to London, has his mind continually running upon
London, museth with himself day and night on London, dreams of London, this
cogitation forsakes him not going to bed, nor rising, for London is the utmost
bounds of his way: so in all our actions let us ever set before us our end: let
every man say to himself daily, whither do I go? what do I seek? for what
do I weary my self? This intention is as necessary for him that will live
godly, as it is necessary for him to draw his breath, that will live naturally;
and that for a twofold cause. The first to drive away vain glory: the other to
increase good deserts. Vain glory a vice most dangerous and also most subtle,
so diversely treacherous, that it can be hardly avoided. Other vices lay wait
for us on earth, but this sets traps almost in heaven it self; it invades him
on all sides that is busied in virtues: Yea the more holily one lives, by this
it takes to it self the more liberty, and rushes on so much the bolder, by how
much the more defense it sees against it self; it increases, and gets
strength from our virtues. Every sort of Vermin, as Froggs, Mice, Mothes,
Beetles, Worms, and such kind of Creatures are bred of putred matter out of
the earth: But this most filthy worm, vain glory, proceeds out of a fresh
and generous seed, out of large alms, out of rigid fasting, out of fervent
prayers takes her birth, and spares, as Hierome speaks, No State, Order, or
Sex, and being overcome rises up more vehemently against the Conqueror.
Vain glory is a strong Hecticke sucking up the marrow, and scarce ever, if it
have possessed a man, forsaking him, the first and last vice we have to
overcome, in Augustines opinion.

How sweet was it to the Prophet Jonah, to repose at noone under his shady
Gourd? one little worm confounded all that amenity. After this manner our good
works flourish, like a tree spreading forth his fruitful arms, but as soon
as the worm of Pride bites this Tree, all things in a moment wither. This
little worm knows how to hide her self so, so privily to gnaw, that they
themselves which swell with vain glory, not only take no notice of it, but
not so much as believe him which notes, and gives them warning of it: This
worm suffers it self to be driven away, and gives place to the Charm, but
presently returns. It is not sufficient that vain glory has once flowne
away, she returns a hundred times, a thousand times she returns, and often
with the greater assault. Therefore this venomous Serpent is daily, and more
often to be laid at with sacred Enchantments. A true Charm against this plague
is that of the Kingly Prophet: Non nobis, Domine, non nobis: Not unto us Lord,
not unto us; but to thy name give the praise. Psalm. 115.1. Whilst we live, as
Bernard admonishes, Let not this Sacred Charm of the Hebrew King go out of
our heart and mouth. But who is so cheerful to sing this always? He which
in all things is of sincere and right intention: this exciteth, and makes
quick, this teaches to do well, and daily to sing forth: Not unto us O Lord,
not unto us, but to thy Name give the glory: to thine, O Lord, not to our name,
nor to our merits, but thine: all things for the greater glory of God. So
necessary is a right intention, that without this no man can avoid vain glory;
which rightly Cyprian calls a most subtle evil, which penetrates the more
hidden secrets of the heart, and infuseth it self insensibly in more
spiritual minds. Cypr. De ^ent: et ieiun: initio. elegantly Peter Chrysologus,
Vain glory, says he, is a secret poison, the stain of virtues, the moth of
sanctity. Chry. Sermon 7. Excellently John Chrysostom: O strong kind of
calamity, says he, O this furious disturbance, what the Moth cannot corrode,
nor the Thief break into, those things vain glory quite consumes. This is
the Canker of the heavenly treasure, this is the Thief which steals eternal
Kingdoms, which takes away from us immarcessible riches, which like a
contagious disease corrupts all things So because the Devil foresees it to
be an inexpugnable Fortress, as well against Thieves and Worms, as other
warlike Engines, he subverts it by vain glory. Ch^y. in c. 22. Mat. Hom. 27.

Behold even Heaven is not safe from these worms. Christ perswads: Lay up for
your selves treasures in Heaven. Matt. 6.20. and yet neither so indeed are the
things altogether secure, which are laid up there; vain glory creeping behind
with a thievish pace, privily a sporteth the treasures already laid up in
Heaven, unless a right intention be set for their Keeper, which yet may not
go a nails breadth from the riches committed to her trust: what good soever
we have done at any time, whatsoever we shall do hereafter, let us fence on
all sides with a most right intention, unless it delight us to spend our
labor in vain. The most difficult, as also the most excellent works are of
no moment, unless a good intention accompany: all labor is vain, which a
right intention commends not.

This God looks upon in all our actions, to this he will aim the reward.
Scarcely is there a greater or more memorable design, then for one to spend
his life for another. But although one cloth a hundred Gibbets with his body,
put on six hundred torturing Wheels, purple a thousand Axes, and dye a
thousand times, unless that be done for Christ, in Gods cause, with a holy
intention, he may dye, but he shall never be a Martyr; that shall profit him
nothing unto heavenly glory. Not pain, but the cause, but the purpose makes
Martyrs; as Hierom witnesses, Hier. in c. 5. ad Gal. The same reason is, in
other things of greatest moment.

Since therefore the intention is of so great nobility, rightly in the divine
Leaves is it called the heart. The heart is the beginning of life, such a life,
as a heart. A man turns into a beast, if a beasts heart be planted in him; a
beast turns into a man, if a man's heart be added to him. God would have
Nebuchadnezer the King to be made a Beast, and to live among them as one of
them: therefore he commanded, Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a
Beasts heart be given him, Dan. 4.16. but GOD would that this Beast should
again be changed into a man; it was done: and, it stood upon his feet as a
man, and a man's heart was given to it. Dan. 7.4. Such is the intention, the
heart of all things, which we do.

Consider me here I pray you, the same sentence pronounced in two Courts. In
the Court of Jerusalem, Caiphas the High Priest being President, in a full
assembly of Senators it was said: It is expedient for us that one man dye for
the people, and that the whole Nation perish not. Ioh. 11.50. This the chief
Priest Decreed, the rest subscribed.

The very same thing was Decreed in the Court of Heaven, by the most Holy
Trinity: It is expedient that one man dye for the People. But this same
decretory Sentence, was indeed in the Counsel of Jerusalem a thing of
greatest folly and injustice; in the heavenly Counsel of greatest Wisdom and
Justice: there the Savage heart of Caiphas, and the Senators by his malice and
envy was stirred up, against this one man; but here the Divine Heart was
carried with exceeding love toward this man. Thus the heart is the beginning
of life; and even as the heart being hurt, death is nigh to all the faculties
of the same: so no work of man can be termed living, which wants this heart,
which is not for God: all labor is as good as dead, whatsoever is destitute of
this living intention.

Appianus Alexandrinus relates a marvelous thing of two heartlesse Sacrifices.
Julius Caesar the same day which he fell in Court, before he went into the
Senate, made the accustomed Offering: the beast opened, there was no heart. The
Southsayer Prophesying, I know not what of the Emperors death, Julius laughed,
and commanded another to be brought, and this also wanted a heart. Mavelous
indeed, twice mavelous. Cicero l. 2. de Divin. And by what means could a
Creature live without a heart, whether then at first consumed, or else wanting
before? if before, and how did it live? if then, and how was it consumed?
Whatsoever the matter be, a Beast offered in Sacrifice without a heart, was a
sure messenger of Death; so also a work without a right intention, is a dead
work; unprofitable, none. Therefore keep thy heart above all keeping, for out
of it are the issues of life. Prove. 4 23. Therefore how often soever we
undertake any business, either about to pray, or to hear divine Service, or
to give alms, or to do any other thing; let us care for this only, and
before all things, that such a heart as this be not wanting to us in these
actions, that by a right intention we may do all things for Gods honor. It
is not virtue, nor any right deed, whereunto the best part of all, a right
intention is deficient. Look to your selves that ye loose not the things ye
have wrought, but that you may receive a full reward. Ioh. Epist. 2.8.

CHAP. V. Wherein a Right Intention chiefly consists; where somewhat of the
Act and habit of Intention.
A Strange kind of Covenant, and almost incredible, if one should thus agree
with another: We will enter into friendship, but for the establishment of a
mutual League, I will have thy Nose cut off: thy Nose shall be to me instead
of Bonds, and Seal, and subscription. Yet this bloody and barbarous Covenant
would be more tolerable then that of Naash King of the Ammonites, with the
men of Iabesh Gilead, which requested they might be taken into League, and so
would serve the King. To whom Naash the Ammonite: On this condition says he,
will I make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes. 1.
Sam. 11.2. The cruel King would make the poor wretches wholly unfit for
War, for the left eye was covered with a Buckler, the right he would have
thrust out. This therefore he did, that not only they should not know how to
overcome, but also to fight.

Lucifer the King of Hell, enters into friendship with man upon no other
condition, then that he suffers the right eye of a good intention to be thrust
out of his head, that single eye, to be directed unto God. As soon as this
League is admitted, Satan sounds a triumph; he overcomes a man very easily,
and makes him his Vassaile, for he wants that, which only is to be used
against the enemy. Of this right eye, which Christ calls Single, has
hitherto been entreated, how necessary, and how without this nothing can
please God. Now moreover we will explain, what is most agreeable with this
eye, wherein chiefly a right intention consists.

There was a cause why Christ should reprehend his Disciples, wherein they
seemed not at all to have deserved reprehension. The seventy, says Luke,
returned again with joy, saying: that even the Devils are subject unto us.
Luke 10.20. for indeed they had performed their parts with credit, and also had
done miracles; were they therefore to be sorry, or weep for this? but yet
Christ replies to their story. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not: Your doings
O my Disciples, I mislike not; but this truly is not to be looked upon in your
deeds, let not your intention tend hither, nor indeed is this fountain of joy
pure enough, although this be a rare and great gift, admirable and
magnificent, this power over evil spirits, yet this work is not yours, but my
Grace, nor does it belong to your safety that the spirits are subject, but to
others. Others there be, and more excellent gifts, in respect whereof you may
soundly rejoice; you are to make most of this one thing, that you are in good
esteem with my Father: but rather rejoice, that your names are written in the
book of life. Luke 10.20. at this let all your actions, your joy leavell at
this.

Behold how the Heavenly Physician has wiped the ill-moystened eyes of his,
and dried the flux of their not commendable intention. An ill intention
always looks upon some frail and vain thing, and with that is vitiously
contented. A good and pure intent desires not but everlasting things, and if it
be the purest, only God.

We said in the second Chapter, that to beware a fault only with that mind,
left the fault may be punished in flames, is an intention not to be
condemned, but by no means pure; nor of so great price in Gods estimation. And
even as that Citizen is not of so good note, which precisely keeps that
Civicke law of not making Feasts out of the City, yet not for reverence of the
Law, but for love of his money; he spares his purse, not his credit; for he
should drink so much dearer then another in Country Tavernes, therefore he
rather Gormandiseth in the City: so neither is that altogether the purest
intention, to obey Gods Law for that end, that it may be lawful to lead a
life eternal in joys: It is good indeed, and better then the former, but it
savours of some self-love. It is the best and purest intention, and a truly
Single Eye, which looks upon God, only so steadfastly, as that he which has
this eye, may pronounce most sincerely of himself: I will serve God, for God.
In this sense the Hebrew King heretofore cries out; And, whom have I, says he,
in Heaven, but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire in comparison
of thee: My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever. Psalm. 73.24, 25. For thee only, O my Lord, will I
willingly eschew all things, which thou have commanded to be eschewed; gladly
will I do and suffer all things, which shall come in my way to be done or
suffered. That only thing, For thee Lord, for thee; O my Lord, for thee, is
still, still six hundred times, and still a thousand times, yea continually to
be ingeminated. Let no day pass, nor yet hour, wherein we readily submit not
our selves to labor, and even to any trouble, with a fervent repetition of
this very thing in our mind: For thee Lord, for thee; both to abstain from
this, and sustain that: I am ready to do this, and to endure that; but for
thee Lord, for thee. For thy sake are we mortified all the day long. Psalm. 44
22. Rightly Bernard, Bern. Sermon 83.
Pure love, says he, is not mercenary. It is not ignorant that reward will
follow the work, but it never aims at that, nor therefore speaks well, that
it may be well fed; nor therefore does holily, that it may be copiously
repaid. Pure Love sets God before it for a Pattern, which made all things for
himself, and for his own glory: Prove. 16, 4. It is altogether equal, that
man should refuse to do or suffer no thing for this same Lord and Maker: such
was that heavenly Spouse, which says that She kept all manner of pleasant
fruits, both new and old for her beloved Cant. 7.13. The fruits new and fresh
are, those which spring from the Grace of God in the new Law, such as are to
love God, to believe and hope in God, to pray, to undergo watchings, fasting,
and other asperous things for God; and this is to Crucify the old man with the
affections and lusts, and these are those new and redolent fruits. The old
fruits are those works of nature, to eat, to drink, to repose, to talk of
Affairs, and such like, which yet are to be offered together with the new;
that even when we are to do these things, we should never but say, For thee
Lord, I will eat and drink, for thee will I rest, for thee will I do all
things, that I may please thee alone, although I displease all men.

And albeit it be not hard to do those works of the first sort for Gods sake,
yet those works of the second sort is hard, whereas the inferior ability of
the soul, and more depraved nature, draws to it with an incredible affection,
whatsoever it knows gainefull and pleasant to it self; hither it wholly
hasteneth, and does that of all that it may not fare ill, and if left to it
self, serves its own turn most carefully. Therefore she is to be compelled
by force, Nature.
that she permit all those things to be done for God; that therefore only a
man may be willing to eat, drink, speak, sleep, because that pleases God;
all in that manner as shall be pleasing to him. And this is it which holy Paul
so seriously commending: Whether therefore says he, ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye d^e, do all to the glory of God. 1 Corint. 10 31.

Basil demands, By what means (I pray) may one eat and drink to the gl^ry
^f God? To this his own question he answers after this manner: Let him come
to the Table with a mind not to loose, and gaping only after the meat, which
only may command; bring away, bring away, the meat is my own, I dip in mine
own Platter, I live at mine own cost, therefore I will take care that I may
do well, and feel my self live. We must not so speak, nor so eat, but
resolve this in our mind: I have GOD my overseer, therefore I will take meat
in that manner, that none be offended therewith, Gods glory not diminished: I
will not be the slave of my belly, that here I may follow pleasure only;
neither indeed do I live that I may eat, but eat that I may live: and may
be sit to take pains. In a word, he that will take repast without offense,
let him never eat and drink, but do the same to the praise of God; For thee
Lord, for thee will I eat and drink; thee will I seek for mine end in all
things.

But is this to be our cogitation at that very time when we come to the
Table? It is to be noted here, that there is one intention which is called
Actual, another which is called Vertuall; the Actual is, when one offers to
God that which he does whiles he does it, or whiles he begins to do. And
surely with this intention we must begin every day, before we do any thing,
by offering to Gods glory, whatsoever we are about to do.

But it is expedient to set before God not a confuse company of works, and all
on an heap, but expressly and premeditately the actions of the ensuing day in
this manner: My God, whatsoever this day I shall speak, or do; yea whatsoever
I sball think, I offer wholly to thee: These and these prayers, that and that
business, those and these my affairs I consecrate to thee; nor desire any
thing else, then whatsoever I shall perform this day, every hour, my God, may
wholly turn to thy honor. This intention whilst it is thus conceived in the
morning is Actual, for then the will is in operation. With this so begun one
goes into the Church, into the Market, into the Court; or say into the
Tennis-Court, any place of honest Recreation, nor thinks any further, that he
goes hither or thither for Gods honor: and then his intention which in the
morning was Actual, begins to be Vertuall, if so be that any power thereof
stick fast in those remote actions, even as a stone being flung with the hand,
whirling aloft through the air, is swayed, and carried not with his own
weight, but by force of hand. Here the perpetual custom of the Saints is to
be noted, who not contented with that matutine Resolution, to congest all
their deeds as it were upon an heap, and so deliver them to God in gross, but
as often as they take any new matter in hand, so often they renew their
intention, always repeating that with themselves: Lord, I will do this for
thee, for thee will I labor; I will think this for thee; for thee will I hold
my peace now, and now will I speak for thee.

This is the perpetual course of upright men; and there are Divines which deny
the said matutine intention alone to be sufficient, to consecrate all the
actions of the day to God. For it is necessary, that the Virtuall intention at
least wise persuade and promote action: but what enforcement is there from the
morning intention, when one at noone comes to the Table, being admonished by
the time, by hunger, by custom, without any remembrance of God, or the Divine
Honor. There is not in that matutine purpose any other strength, then that
thereby the things be thought good, which afterward are done as it were by
command thereof; but those things only are put in execution, which proceed
from hence by a force not interrupted: but that again oblivion, cogitation, or
diverse natural action breaks off. From hence it appears, that it is not
sufficient for a righteous man, so as to work deservingly in all his actions,
to offer himself wholly to God in the beginning of the day, with a purpose of
doing all things to his honor: but it is necessary that this purpose be
effectual, and hereunto a general intention is not enough, but it is
requisite, that it be peculiarly set down, as for example: A sum of money to
be given to the poor, which moreover by the virtue of that purpose may be
distributed. This is the mind of Divines. Thom. l. 2. q. 144. Art. 4. Bonavent.
Did. 41. Art. 1. q. 3. Et aliorum.

From hence also it is clear, why Christ to good deeds promised a reward of
glory, yet not without this Appendix; if they be done for his Name sake. A
purpose conceived in the beginning of the week or the day, of doing all things
for the love of God to his glory, is truly an Act of Charity and Religion, so
much more excellent and of greater worth, by how much the more ample and
extended object it has; yet it puts not the excellency thereof upon all the
actions of that day or week: for, that the works following out of such an
act, may procure Gods love and heavenly glory, it is necessary that they be
effects thereof; out of a good intention either actual or vertuall are the
things, which proceed from her power, as a Tree springs out of the seed. As if
a man be going some far journey, about a matter undertaken for Gods glory,
all actions to be exercised in the way, or labors to be endured, shall be of
singular good estimation, if those be exercised, these endured out of the
strength and necessity of that purpose never recalled. And that we may
summarily speak; the work of a righteous man gains eternal glory, if it
be governed by the act of charity, or a right intention, and be referred to
GOD, as to its last end, either by the present act of a good intention (which
is to be actually referred) or by the fore passed, from whence it may proceed
as from the moving cause, which is to be referred vertually.

Therefore, if we desire to imitate the examples of the righteous, if we do
out of virtue, if to consecrate all our actions to God, let us by no means be
weary of this not laborious endeavor, but with a matutine purpose renewed often
through the day, and with an actual intention (which goes with a surer foot
then the vertuall) let us dir^ct all things to God. How often do mechanical
Work men examine their work by a true square, Ievell, rule? how often in a
day does the Carpenter, or Pargetter with his rule prove the lengths, with his
square Angles, with his plummet the altitudes? how often does the Statuary,
Mason, Stone-cutter apply his Compass? how often do Architects,
Picture-drawers, Mathematicians measure all things, every way by their Wand or
Line? so let Christians examine all their doings by the plumbe-rule of Gods
holy will, that they may not be deceived or err, and least some oblique
intention creep in, and deprave all their goodness.

It is most grateful to God, in all and every action, to apply the line of his
Divine honor after the aforesaid manner. Blosius reports of a holy Virgin
admonished by Christ, Pertude
that she should consecrate all her doings one by one to him, not only her
reading in general, or writing, but the words she was to read, the Characters
she was to write; nor only the meat or drink which she was to take, but the
morsells which she was about to eat, all the words she was ready to speak,
all the steps she was to go, all the breath which either sleeping or waking
she was to draw, she should offer with a singular affection. Blos. instit.
spir. c. 9. What other thing is this, then to require that a hundred pieces,
which are owing to another man, should be told back by every half penny and
farthing? But why does God require such a strict reckoning of us, as we note
in that speech of Christ, that men shall give an account in the day of
Judgment of every idle word. Mat. 12.36. It is not for us to ask, why God
would have this or that, (for who can say, why do thou so?) Job. 9.12. But
yet the reason is at hand: God will have men to be exquisitely careful of his
service, vigilant, industrious, and to be attent upon his whole worship, which
may perform that they ought not loosely, perfunctorily, or in a gaping sort,
which may never halt in their duty, halt before their best friend, and do
nothing dissolutely, but look to all things most studiously and diligently,
which day and night may do nothing else, then seek how to please their Lord,
which strive with all their pains and abilities, to approve themselves to him,
whom they desire to please.

This contented industry of man, is acceptable to God, even in the smallest
things. Palladius Bishop of Helenopolis, of himself a young man, On a certain
day, says he, I came to Macarius of Alexandria very pensive, and said unto
him: what shall I do, father, my cogitations afflict me daily casting in that:
Palladius c. 20.
thou do nothing, get thee gone, all thy deeds are in vain. To these
Macarius answered: say thou to thy imaginations, I keep the walls for Christ.
What I beseech you is more easy then to keep walls, which not only not run
away, but not so much as can be stird out of place? and yet this very keeping
of the walls is greatly to be esteemed, for that single eye sake which is cast
upon Christ.

Turned.
T^ere are two things in every sin, Aversion, and Conversion, or turning away,
and turning to. He which does against reason, Conscience, Gods Law, turns
himself away from God, as a degenerous untoward Son from his father standing
against it, and reclaiming with a loud voice: stay son, stay at home, stay:
He nevertheless running out of the house thrusts himself into some Tavern
forbidden him by his Parent. This refractory young man is a double delinquent:
he gets him gone from his father, and goes into the forbidden Stews. The very
same reason is of all more grievous offenders. He to whom his own lust, or
dignity, or purse is of more regard then Gods Law, very easi^y contemns Gods
Commandments, he will not be d^iven from the door of that he loves,
therefore he turns him away from God, and runs after unlawful th,ngs; this
man forsooth after money that man after a Harlot, the third after other
forbidd^n pleasures. But which of the two is more grievous in the offense of he
rebellious son, whether his running out from his father, or his going into a
noted House? surely this flight from his Father seems more grievous, as it
were the cause of his fault following: even so in every sin, Aversion from God
is the greatest evil, and the Original of the evils proceeding from thence.
After the same manner plainly in every virtue there are two things to be
respected. Let the example be pious liberality to the poor, wherein is seen,
both a bountiful hand toward the needy, and a mind turned to Christ, whom it
desires to please, and whose Law he wishes to perform, which is liberal to
the poor in that manner, but yet this conversion to Christ is of more worth
then that other, and procures very much grace to every action. As much
therefore as thou intendest, so much thou do.

CHAP. VI. Whether a good or Right Intention can make an evil work good.
GOd giving a Sacrifice in command to Abraham: Take me, (says he) an Heifer
of three years old, and a she Goat of three years old, and a Ram of three
years old, and a Turtle Dove, and a young Pigeon. Genes. 15 9. God will not
have a Pidgeon alone, unless a Turtle Dove be joined with it, to wit, that
Bird which belongs to the kin: he admits not a Vultur, not a Lapwing, not a
Hawke, into the Society, but a Turtle Dove; for indeed God requires, that to
all things which we offer unto him, we adjoyne the Dove, a sincere Intention:
but if any one to this Dove join a stinking Lapwing, he shall offer a most
ungrateful Sacrifice. Let the Turtle be with the Pidgeon, let a deed every
way not evil be with a good intention: otherwise the Pidgeon and the Lapwing
are joined in unequal marriage. A good intention, and an evil work, is a
hateful Sacrifice to God. From hence it is manifest how unwelcome a gift comes
to the Almighty from him, who takes from some to give to othe^s, or as we say,
robbes Peter to pay Paul, which clothes the poor, but steals cloth and
leather for these Garments. This is nothing else, then to thrust the Pigeons
and the Lapwing into one Sacrifice, to go about to cloth an evil work with
a good intention, which is nothing so. But thou may not without cause ask
the question: why can not a good intention make an evil work good, when as an
ill intention may make a good work evil? From whence I pray has an evil
intention so much force, that it can corrupt even the best work, whereas a
good intention is not of so great strength, that it can heal an evil work? A
good work is contaminated with an ill intention, and how comes it to pass
that an evil work cannot be amended by a good intention? if fasting out of
covetousness be of no worth, why is not the stealing of Bondmen out of mercy
a thing of some desert? most clearly Christ: If thine eye (says he) be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light: but if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. It seems therefore in equal right,
that a good intention should be able to perform in an evil work, what an
ill intention can in a good work. We answer, according to Saint Bernards
meaning: Two evils are stronger then one good: where a good intention is not,
although the work be good, there are two evils, namely an ill intention, and
d^ceiveable er^our. For examples sake: I abstain in a manner three days from
drink, and take it very sparingly* for there is to come to me a not^^^ed
inker, that I may answer him at his own weapons, for the present I drink
less: that afterward I may drink more largely.

Here is a double evil: the first, an Ill Intention. I suffer thirst for
drunkenness sake: the other, an error of Faith, which persuades me to
believe that this temperance of liquor will not displease God. And here is a
good work joined to a double evil, Intention, and Error, which elegantly
Bernard: That the eye says he, be truly single, there is required charity in
the intention, and truth in election. Bern. De Praecept. et dispens.) But now
where there is an evil work with a good intention, the intention is the only
good, all the rest are naught. Hereupon though this leaven be good, it is not
of such strength, as to penetrate and change an evil lump into better. It is
well known, In asymbolaes, such as are Fire and Water, Things void of any
likeness.
the Transmutation is not easy: to think well and do ill, are Asymb^laes in
the highest degree. It is not sufficient to a good action, to think that it is
good; it is also necessary that there be no error or deceit in it: To an
evil action it suffices that one only part thereof be evil. Most divulged
is that of Saint Denis. Bonum constat ex integra causa, malum vero e quovis
defectu: Good consists of an entire cause, but evil out of every defect.
Which Seneca confirming, Add now hereunto, says he, that nothing is done
honestly, but with what the whole mind has been present and intent upon,
what it has gainesaid with no part of it self. Senec. Epist. 82. prop. finem.
To walk well, says Hierome, men must go in the middle and beaten path: to
do good with an ill intention, is to bend too much to the right hand; to do
ill with a good intention, is to decline too much to the left hand whether of
these be done the Divel^ greatly cares not, so either of them be done, so the
Traveller be led out of the mid way, whereas that is ever the course of
virtue; that which exceeds does as bad, as that which fails.

Gregory Nazianzen confirming what has bin spoken: who may doubt says he,
that it is a thing of greater skill, to restore health to the sick, then to
take it from the sound; that it is harder for bitter liquor to become sweet,
then sweet Wine to become bitter; for to this there need but a few drops, to
that a huge Tub is scarce sufficient. It is a Rule in Logic: The conclusion
follows the weaker part, where a good intention, and an evil work is, the
whole conclusion is naught. So it is a trick and mee^^ cousenage, to go about
to set forth an action of it self naught under a good end, to desire so to
cover vice with a good intention, as that God may take it for virtue.
Excellently Gilbertus, What when a good deed is pretended, says he, and not
good indeed, but the contrary is wholly intended, shall this eye be called
dark all over, or dim in part; To me indeed it rather seems quite blind:
For although light be deputed in the work, yet none is acknowledged in the
intention. But how is the intention good which wishes not good? or how single,
Ma^keth
which hides it self under a bare show of goodness? Gilbert Sermon. 22. in
Cant. D. Bernardo in hoc labor succenturiatus. He which recalls to memory the
state of former years, and weighs the horrible troubles of the Christian
World, and the most grievous rebellion of so many Provinces, will perhaps
favorably descend to that opinion, as to suffer himself to be persuaded, that
many of the rebellious were deluded with a most honest end. Purpose
How great a clamor was there of the parties calling to Arms, and animating
one another with mutual encouragements, but for what end, with what intention?
what store might thou have heard say: That the Word of God may grow, that
the Gospel may be p^opagated. Many I doubt not, deceived themselves with most
holy words, which had this one thing in their mouth: We fight for God and the
Gospel. But O good ^irs, if indeed ye fight for God and the Gospel, why do
ye rise up against the lawful Magistrate? why without apparent cause, do ye
so cruelly bend your forces against these and these? This is against God,
against Gods Word, this the Gospel forbids. The Word of God is not pleased
with Seditions, not with tumults, not with rebellions: neither is any evil to
be committed, that any good may come of it. Therefore let go the most specious
Titles, you shall never cloak as you think, a most wicked work with a good
intention. A good end and a naughty means are ill joined together: the Lapwing
and the Dove are no pleasing Sacrifice to God. To take by maine force from one
what thou may give to another, is a thing forbidden. A good intention shall
never put true honesty upon an evil deed.

In like manner, did not they which murdered the Apostles, purge the deed with
an excellent intention? Christ premonishing in a most clear Prophecy. The
hour comes says he, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does
God service. Ioh. 16.2. For indeed therefore were the Apostles killed, that
religion should not be innovated, neither strange worships brought into the
Provinces. Thus they overlaid a most grievous crime with a most virtuous Title,
for there is scarce any kind of unrighteousness, which may not be covered
with a mantle of honesty.

This is to be most apparently seen in Saul King of Israel: one would have
sworn that the King was reprehended by Samuel the Prophet, more out of passion
then reason, that Saul dealt providently and with a good mind. The matter went
thus. It was commanded Saul, Go and smite the sinners the Amalekites, and
utterly destroy all that they have. God required that men and Beasts together
should be put to utter destruction. 1 Samuel 15.3. But Saul, and the people
spared Agag, and the best of the Sheep, and of the Oxen, and of the fatlings,
and the Lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but
every thing that was vile and refuse, that they utterly destroyed, v. 9. Samuel
therefore comes to him, And what means then says he, this bleating of the
Sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? To whom Saul:
They have brought them from the Amalekites, says he, and the people spared the
best of the Sheep, and of the Oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, and the
rest we have utterly destroyed. What harm I pray is here? is not this a very
good intention, to Sacrifice them to the Lord thy God? Is not this to do
wisely, to spare the best things for use of the Sacrifice, and to consume all
the rest that was refuse? But notwithstanding Samuel weighing this fact in
another Balance, Wherefore says he, did thou not obey the voice of the Lord,
but did fly upon the spoil, and did evil in the sight of the Lord? Yea, I
have obeyed the voice of the Lord, says Saul, and have gone the way which the
Lord sent me. To whom Samuel, Has the Lord as great delight in burnt Offerings
and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Did thou fear the
people? but God thou ought more. Have thou offered these things to the Lord?
but obed^ence is better then sacrifice. Did thou think that Gods
Commandments are to be taken in a more favorable sense? but Rebellion is as
the sin of Witchcraft. Did thou imagine God not to command that so strictly?
but stubbornness is as iniquity and ^dolatry. The sum of sums is this:
Thou have done foolishly my Saul: disobedience cannot be defended with a good
intention. To steal Leather closely, and to make shoes of it for the poor,
is alms worthy of a halter.

Of the same kind is this: The Master calls presently for his Servant, which
then being drunk, and not able to stand on his legs, another of the Servants
to excuse him; Master, says he, he is not well: Here he lies, as he thinks
honestly. But is this lawful? not at all, a lie is the enemy of truth, it is a
fault, although thou cast the cloak of a good intention upon it. It is true
indeed which Bernard gives us to understand: A good intention excuses a word
or deed which is not so very good, Si non a toto, saltem a tanto, if not
wholly, yet at least in part; to make it be the less fault in him, which
loves the right, and does the wrong unwittingly. Bern. l. de praecept.

In how great a straight was the most chaste Susanna, when she was taken alone
in the Garden by the two Elders lying in wait for her? the loss of good name
and life was present before her eyes, nor yet that she might not loose her
good name and life, could she be drawn to commit Adultery, and forgo her
right intention to God. Daniel 13. After the same manner does one seek
recreation of mind: he seeks here a thing not unlawful, a good intention,
but if he set two together by the ears to fight, or wrangle, he shall never
defend his ill deed with a good intention. He does the same, which keeps wild
Beasts to hunt for lawful sport, but this is to the damage of his Neighbor,
and diverse others, whose Corn he treads down, and spoils their grounds:
here indeed is a good intention, but an evil action by no means excusable,
just like a stolen Hide, and shoes given out of it for an alms.

Augustine confirming all this elegantly. There is much respect to be had,
says he, for what cause, for what end, for what intention a thing is done;
but those which we know apparently to be sins, we must not do with any
pretense of a good cause, not for a good end as it were, not as if with a good
intention. And to distinguish works good of themselves from others, which are
neither good of themselves nor evil, he adds; Because those works of men,
even as they proceed of good or evil causes, are now good, now evil; which
of their own nature are not sins. But whereas the works themselves are
sins, as Thefts, Whoredoms, Blasphemies, or such like, who is it that can
say, These things must be done for good causes, either to make them no sins,
or which is more absurd, to make them righteous sins. Who is it may say, that
we may have somewhat to give the poor, let us steal from the rich, or let us
sell false Othos, especially if the harmless be not hurt thereby, but the
wicked thrown down the rather by the sentence of the Judge? for two
conveniences are wrought by the sale of this one lie, that so both money may be
got to sustain the poor with, and the Judge deceived, that a man may escape
punishment. Why do we not suppress, although we can, true Wills or
Testaments, and put false in the place? that unworthy people may not have Lands
or Legacies, which do no good out of them, but rather they by whom the hungry
are fed, the naked are clothed strangers entertained, captives redeemed,
Churches reared? why may not those evils be done for these good things sake,
if for these good things sake, neither are those things evil: Who may say
these things, but he which endeavors to turn the world and all rights and
customs upside down? August. Tom. 4. l. Contra mendac. c. q. ante med.
Therefore in Augustines judgment, no evil must be done, although we hope a
manifold good will come of it. But Augustine making this Objection to himself:
Some man, says he, will say, therefore any Thief whatsoever may be compared
with that Thief which steals with an intent of mercy. Who can say this? but
not any of these two is therefore good, because one is worse, for he is worse
which steals for covetousness, then he which steals for compassion: but if
all theft be sin, we must abstain from all theft. Lib. antedict. c. 8.
After the very same manner we may say with Saint Austin. If every lie be a
trespass, we must avoid every kind of lying, whether it be the lie of
Honor, or the lie of Office, or the lie of compassion. Service
For witness the same Saint Austin, If we lay open this way to sins, to
commit lesser, that others may not commit greater, all vices will enter in and
reign without bounds or limits, an infinite compass. To be wise in this
manner, what is it else, but to play the fool, or rather the mad man?

How ill therefore do Parents provide for themselves and their Children,
whiles they gape after all kind of gain, that they may not leave their issue
in a mean estate. A good end, to increase their Childrens living, but an evil
deed, to steal out of the poor man's Box, to rob the Spittle, to hunt after
all kind of advantage.

In the year nine hundred forty nine, Thuis King of Hungary with a mighty Army
invaded Italy. King Berengarius cast about how to free the Italian Coast, and
to repel the enemy; a good end, a very good intention, so he had used a good
means in the business: but surely he took no good course, he did so pill
the Temples and Houses of the Commonalty, that from all parts he shaved a
mighty treasure, out of which the Hungar could easily measure ten bushells of
money, whatsoever remained he kept to himself, being made richer even by
means of his enemy. Luitprand. Ticin. l. 5. Hist. c. 15.

So also when one desires to be cured, and made well of his disease, a very
good end: but he sends to Fortune Tellers, and Prophets, to Diviners, and
Wizards; to Conjecturers, and Magitians, this now he does very ill, neither
shall he clear his offense with an honest end. So one sues for an Office,
Calling, Dignity; he desires to rise, an end in it self not evil. If a man
desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. 1 Timothy 3.1. but if
he go about this, least a poorer, though a fitter man then he come before
him, if he be free of his money and gifts, if after much bestowed he promise
more, and so climb high by Silver stairs, or if otherwise he remove another
out of his place, that he may succeed into it himself, they are naughty
deeds, although that which he affects be not evil.

So some body else desires an end of a suite at Law, surely he longs for a
good thing, but because he anoynts these and these men's hands with silver, and
draws them with bribes to his side, therefore he corrupts and destroys a good
end with base liberality. Evil is not to be done, that good may come of it: I
may lawfully go into a Chamber, but not through the windows. So all actions
which are destitute of Christian Prudence, shall never put on the credit of
true virtue, although they be done with the best intention. Without Prudence
no act is good. Be ye wise as Serpents. Math. 10.16. Nor does it excuse to
say: I thought it was to be done so, I thought not this hurt would have
followed, I thought this man was to be punished. He was as thou say,
worthily to be corrected, but not to be defamed, not so rigorously handled.
Many have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Romans 10.2. The
Jews were carried with that fervency to the Law of Moses, that wheresoever
they could, they went about to extinguish the honor of Christ: behold under
the great zeal of the Law, did lie their hate of the Law Maker. But if a good
intention cannot thoroughly correct an evil action, what will it be to add an
evil work to an evil intention? if to use good things ill be evil, to use
evil things ill will be worst of all. The heavenly Spouse is praised for the
comlynesse of her cheeks. The cheeks are comely. Cant. 1.10. No body is
beautiful, in Bernards estimation, which has one cheek blobbed, or is like
wax, it is necessary that both of them smile with a lovely color. Study says
he, to have both these cheeks of thy intention beauteous. Bern. Sermon. 40. in
Cant. post med. For it is not enough that the intention be good, but beside
this a good action is required, or at least that which is not evil. We must
aim at this mark, to do all things with a most sincere intention. Nor let us
love to be deceived with such specious pretenses. Howsoever I am of a good
meaning I have reasons and c^uses for that matter; I did this and that out of
this or that inducement. I pray let us not deceive our selves, we shall not
get credit to our actions by words, he is good to small purpose, which is good
but from the teeth outward. And truly it is to be feared, that many times
there is little virtue, besides that flattering conceit which b^guileth us.
Affection too too frequently overswaies our judgment. And as often as we are
driven upon this or that, either by custom, or some sudden motion which is not
good, notwithstanding we vainly give out that: to Gods glory. Therefore
examine thy self, I pray good Christian, whether indeed the glory of God has
moved thee to this? or whether some thing else were the cause of it? or whether
custom or thine own affection lead thee hereunto: And how comes it to pass
that thou can make such have, yea and run to the Table, to gadding, to
sport; but to those things which are thy duty, and the part of virtue, scarce
go or creep. Is this to go about all things with an even pace for the glory
of God? Believe me, such manner of speeches as these are commonly mere
pretexts, whereby we shall never excuse our evil deeds to GOD. What I said I
say again: GOD will have the Turtle to be joined with the Pidgeon, not the
Lapwing. A work every way not evil to be with a good intention; not directly
contrary, no obliquely, but just for his glory.

CHAP. VII. What are the degrees of a pure and Right Intention.
EXperience teaches, that water which flows from an high place, although it
t ke the course by diverse turnings and windings, meander-like, yet at length
ascends to the height of the first fountain, and is equalled with the
original Spring, as is to be seen in diverse Conduits. The very same in a
manner we may observe in the actions of men, which all flow from the
intention, this is the sowrse and fountain thereof, for whereas no man does
with reason, which does without intention; by how much higher then the
intention is, by so much also the action: for truly our actions do sometimes
let down themselves into a deep Gulf, and run headlong into a profound
valley, and as it were quite lose themselves.

And that there have been some religious men, which being delicately brought
up, accustomed to no other then precious garments, to no other then dainty
fare, only to honorable affairs, would have thought it a terrible trespass
before, to handle a Besome, to sweep a floor, to make clean but one little
Pot. But when they have taken a religious life upon them, accounted it an
honor and a pleasure, to do all those things, and far baser very readily.
So Saint John Damascene formerly the Kings chief Prefect of his Court,
afterward a ragged Monk, was found by a great man making clean very Sinkes.
Scouring
Behold into what a profound depth did this water precipitate it self! but
like as a Torrent falling from some steep place, recurs to his fountain, so
these actions also though the vilest, because they have a lofty Original,
because they are undertaken for Gods sake (for from this intention they issue)
therefore they come home to their Original, and return to their first
fountain, they take their end and reward both from God, from whom they took
their beginning. So much it makes for advancing the most contemptible actions
to greatest dignity, to have the highest intention, which is God himself. And
hereof we have spoken hitherto, It remains to show certain degrees therein,
and those three; to ascend the uppermost and loftiest of all these, will not
be hard to him that is willing These deg^ees I now assign in order.

The first is, in all things so to attend the honor of God only, that all
affection to these transitory things may be put to death, by earnestly
respecting that only which may please the Lord. He which in hot weather comes
home weary of long travail, suffers all the burden of his Garments to hang
loose about him, At random.
puts off his Hat, throws away his Cloak, opens his Doublet, undoes his
Collar and his Girdle, so exposes himself to take the cool air. In like
manner whose heart is inflamed with God, he easily puts off the affection,
which formerly he bore (...) these sading things. Bernard of the inner house,
For how says he, do thou perfectly love, or art loved unless thy mind be
carried upward in desire of true goodness? Bern. 1. a^tedict. c. 69. sine.
Collect thy self to thy self, and rest in the only desire of God. And here
the saying of Saint Austine is most true. He loves thee the less. O Lord,
which loves any thing beside thee.

Esther that mighty Empress, which had Assuerus reigning over an hundred and
s^ven and twenty Provinces in her power, which might have flowed (if she
would) in all kind of pleasures, yet notwithstanding: Thou know O Lord,
says she, that I hate the glory of the unrighteous, and abhor the bed of
the uncircumcised. Neither had thine Hand maid any joy since the day that I was
brought hither, but in thee O Lord God of Abraham. Est. 14.18, And this is the
first degree of a pure intention. To depart from the love of created things.

The second is, A departure from ones self. This teaches by what means one
may not be mindful of himself, but account it the only pleasure, to be
satisfied with the Will of God only. Even as it is a mavelous delight to the
blessed in Heaven, to see the Will of God taking its course through the whole
world, and even through Hell it self as it were with a still foo e, Without
stumbling.
nor any thing any where to be found, which can resist his divine purpose. Yea
which is most to be admired, that pleasure does not so affect them, because
they possess goods which cannot be lost; as that God is most benevolent
toward them, bears a special respect to them, and does very much favor
their joys. And this is it which David the King of Israel cries out: O give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good. Psalm. 118.1. O give thanks unto the
Lord, not because he has made me of a Shepherd a King, not because he has
made me of a poor man a rich man; nor therefore because he has promised to
give me so great things besides. But confess unto the Lord, because he is
good, because his mercy endures for ever. This is another degree of a pure
intention, yet not easily to be exceeded by that which the Kingly verse thus
notes: Men will praise thee, when thou do well unto them. Psalm. 49.18. In
this degree therefore one forgets and forsakes himself, which is not so ready
at hand with all men: for it is not hard to forgo ones goods, but very hard to
forgo ones self. This forgetfulness of ones self consists in virtue.

The third is, when a man serves God, not only that it may please God, for
yet this also has I know not what humane respect in it, but because God
pleases him in this service, or it pleases him to serve God in this manner,
or because God is good, that he vouchsafes to accept of our endeavors, and
shows himself to be taken and contented therewith, The divine Psalmist, I
will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy
righteousness only, Thou O God have taught me from my youth up until now:
therefore I will tell of thy wondrous works. Psalm. 71.14, 15. I truly am a man
unlearned, for I have not known Literature, but I do so well understand Gods
Omnipotency and Justice, that I have nothing more frequently in my mouth: I
will therefore most gladly serve this so good, so potent, so just a Lord, and
for that cause will I serve him, because he is so good, so potent, so just.
Bernard, O pure, says he, and spotless purpose of the Will, and indeed so
much the more spotless, as there is left in it no mixture of her own. Sic
affici deificari est: Qualified
to be so affected, is to be deified. Bern. de dil, Deo.

Christ about to charge the first of the Apostles, very accurately stirring up
this purest intention in him. Peter, says he, love thou me? This now I do,
that I may commend the care of my Office to thee, and commit my sheep to be
fed, but thou can not execute this duty, and undertake my part, without a
most pure intention. Therefore my Peter, love thou me? neither did Christ
before assign this charge to him, then he had three times plainly pronounced,
whether his heart, eyes, and intention went, and had said, Lord thou know
that I love thee. At length Christ: Therefore my Peter, if I do so much please
thee, and thou will serve me for mine own sake, now I commit my Flock unto
thee. Feed my Sheep. Ioh. 21.15. O Prelates, O Bishops, and Archbishops: O
Princes, O Magistrates* and Presidents, O Judges and Guides of the people, take
heed whither your eyes, whither your mind and intention is carried; see what
ye seek, whether your selves and a prey of your subjects, or else the safety
and good of your Subjects: Mark whether ye plead rather your own cause, or
the Common Wealths: consider, I pray, whether ye look after God and his
glory, with a most pure intention in all things. Be wise now therefore O ye
Kings: be learned ye that are Judges of the earth. Psalm. 2.10.

The Emperor Augustus in times past dismissed a young man from the War,
which carried not himself like a good Soldier, and when the young man
required, what answer he should give his Father at home? Augustus to him
again, Tell him, says he, that I do not please thee. He would have said,
T^ou do not please me, therefore I can very well be without thy service.
We Christians, let us do so with God, that every one may think thus for his
own part: Lord, I desire to serve thee, and will serve thee to the utmost of
my power, because thou please me exceedingly in all things; for that cause,
my Lord, plainly for that, and with this very intention will I serve thee, as
long as I live, and set all my veins to work upon this, that I may spend all
my desire, and my self wholly upon thy service, because thou can not but
please me. This is a sincere and pure intention indeed, this is Midas his rod,
turning all it touches into gold.

But this intention because so pure, therefore also so delicate and impatient
of all mixture. Gardiners know that some fruits are spoiled only with a fall
to the ground; scarce any fair Apple, or Pear falls from the Tree, but it
gets some scarre, and shows it self hurt. A sincere intention is a tender
fruit, and is marred but with one dash against the earth. To serve God, for
fear of eternal punishment, is not a thing forbidden, nor is this fear,
evil, but yet it is servile: unless it were good, David had not well said, My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am aff^aid of thy judgments. Psalm.
119.120. Notwithstanding Divines say, that he should sin, which should
think in this manner, if there were no Hell, I would commit this offense, for
such a thought would proceed from a perverse will. To serve God in hope of an
eternal reward, is a better mind then that before, yet not the best. I have
inclined my heart to keep thy Statutes always even unto the end. Propter
retributionem, for great is the benefit thereof, according to Hiercmes
Translation; o^ as we find it Psalm. 19.11. In keeping of them there is great
reward. To serve God for Gods sake, this is the best and purest intention of
all. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: because his mercy
endures for ever. Psalm. 118.1. This last intention is continually to be
inculcated by all men, for the greatest respect is to be had, with what mind
one does all things: at this point lies the eternal, exceeding great
recompense of reward

There was one which was about to counsel his very good friend, did first
demand of him: Have thou I pray any silver which is pure and unmixt? I have,
says he, five hundredth Florens more or less. He again: If thou will hear
me, says he, Do not turn it into cash, but prepare it for some other
present: Should I give it for a present, says he? my means will not bear
this. He once again: My dear friend, says he, thou shall give it in this
manner, and grow ri^h by giving. Believe me, to bestow fitly, is the way to
bring increase This ^hou shall do by my advice, thou shall get a Basin and
Ewer made of thy silver, and give to the Prince: the first week after five
thousand Philips will return to thee, together with thanks and ample favors.
I engage my house, if it come not so to pass. This Lord can endure nothing
less, then for any thing to be given him gratis, and he recompenses all
liberality toward him with so great interest, as a man would esteem the
present ten times of more worth then it is. Therefore give unto him, if thou will increase thy estate by venturing. The party gave his friend infinite
thanks, and promised he would use his counsel. Have ye understood this? The
Intention is after the very same manner: Some serve God, and like vile and
abject souls they fear torment, they stand in awe of hell, very Drudges.
Others do like Pensioners, which that they may get a place of public
maintenance, lay out all their money; for so these shall be ever provided for:
So very many serve God in hope of reward for heaven as their wages, p^oper
servants. Others in conclusion serve God for love, as children a most loving
parent. A son under age, when his father makes a feast, stands amongst the
servitours, and ministers to the guests, yet thinks upon no recompense, for he
is the son, which often hears that sweet one from his father; Son thou art
ever with me, and all that I have is thine. Luke 15.31. Such, O Christians,
such altogether let us likewise be, not slaves, not servants, but Sons,
since God himself vouchsafes so great honor to us worms and no men, for
behold what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that we should
be called the Sons of God. 1 Ioh. 3.1. Does not a Servant also, which is any
thing ingenuous, account it a great matter, that his master is pleased with
him, and likes well of his service? this is dearer to him then Gold. May not
the Son therefore repute it the greatest riches to please his Father?
Chrysostom: Requirest thou, says he, another reward yet, besides this very
thing that thou have desered to please him? thou know not at all how great a
good it is to please the Lord Chry. l. 2. de compunct: cord. Be ye therefore
followers of GOD, as dear Children. Ephesians. 5.1. Let it delight you, not to
sell, but to give all the silver of good works to GOD, nor to require wages or
reward for them: so there will return not only a thousand Florens for an
hundred, but also so many and more for a farthing. Chrysostom fitly
admonis^ing: Let us not think, says he, that we shall want our reward if we
l^bour not for reward; y^^ for this very thing our reward shall be greater.
Chry. Hom. 5. in Epist. ad Romans For every work by how much less it aims at
the g^ine of the doer, has so much the purer intention, and is it self the
more perfect. If we be C^ildren, then Heirs, Hei^es of G^d, and joint heirs
with Christ. Rom 8 17. God is more ^e^dy to ^ender gift for gift, then to set
up (...) Brokers Shop, and put money to exchange.

The Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt, hired Moses his mother for a sum, to
bring up the little one for her, but she not p^r^waded with the money, but
induced with motherly love, very readily did what she required. Such eyes as
these, such a loving intention as this will God have: for they which serve God
for hope of reward, or fear of punishment, se^ve him so, as we do meat and
drink, not for themselves, but for our own sake. Here immoderate self love
intermixeth it self, which Christ setting forth in his own colors: Ye seek
me, says he, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
loaves and were filled. Ioh. 6.26.

The Devil in this case tries every way how he may either corrupt the
intention, or that which he cannot corrupt, he may at least wise affright.
Two certain men, lived in a solitary place, rather to God then themselves in
great unity, and no less proficiency. The fiend envying them these treasures
of life in so great poverty, and that he might let a trappe in their way, puts
on an Angel of a glorious shape, so appearing to the elder, that he might
deceive them the better. I am a Messenger, says he, of no good news to thee,
or surely to thy Associate, for that young man thy fellow Soldier and
companion in this holy conflict, being fore known of God, is already destined
to eternal flames, therefore what ever he does never so well, he does all in
vain. The old man was astonished at these speeches: O terrible news says
he! therefore must this young man's so excellent pains and endeavors come to
naught! ah, my soul pitties it. Here again the Angel from Hell: I knew, says
he, that thou would hear this not without sighs and groans, but yet the
Divine Decrees cannot be rescinded: So vanished out of his sight this most
beautiful Bugbeare. By this means the old man could never look upon the
young man his Companion without a deep sigh, presaging his grief. At length
the young man noted it, nor deferred to ask, what the cause was, that, as
often as he looked upon him, did withal fetch a sigh? whereat the old man
again, showing the same pitiful exp^ession: why do thou enforce me, says
he, to repeat mine ineffable sorrow? thou may wish me to hold my pe^ce
here, rather then speak. This same tergiversation of the old man greatly stird
up the young man to extort his answer. The old man therefore wearied with many
entreaties, Speak out
that he would declare whatsoever it were, at length not without groaning. It
is signified unto me, says he, that thou art to be damned and strivest in
vain for Heaven. Here the young man with a singular alacrity: o my Father,
says he, let not this trouble or afflict thee: Hitherto I have served GOD not
as a mercenary for Heaven, but as a son out of duty, because he is the
chiefest good, to whom I owe my self wholly, whatsoever he may finally
determine of me. The elder admiring so sincere Intention of mind; let us
serve GOD says he, to the uttermost of our strength: that good Father cannot
put off a Father: he has care of us.

Neither did GOD defer to show his fatherly affection toward such obsequent
Children. Shortly after he sent down his true Angel to persuade the old man,
not to believe the Tales of that cheating Devil, that the young man was
ordained by God to eternal rewards, and that he was singularly well pleased
with such a generous mind in his service. God will therefore be served of us,
not to that end that we may escape the bottomless dungeon, nor to that end that
we may inhabit the heavenly Temple; but because he is most unworthy of the
duties of all men and Angels: wherefore the greatest reward of good deeds is,
To please GOD. For indeed GOD is of so great goodness and liberality, that he
does not reject the homage even of Slaves fearing Hell, or servants hoping for
heaven, but they which serve a plainly voluntary and free servitude; these he
embraces as truly loving Children, to every one of these answers that
lovely saying: Son, all that I have is thine.

CHAP. VIII. What an ill intention is.
THe Waspe is a little Creature, but that member which it has struck, how
does it ache, and beat, and burn? The Gnat is a much smaller Fly; how slender a
Nebb has it? yet therewith as with a Gimlet it draws blood, and the part
which it has wounded, presently swells. More subtle
What is thinner then the sting of a Scorpion? the eye can scarce perceive it,
yet therewith as with an invisible Dagger the whole man is stabbed to death.
How great a lump of Dowe does a little Leaven pass through in a few hours?
one little measure of Vinegar, or a drop of Gall, spoyleth a whole Vessel of
generous Wine. An ill intention is so strong and cruel a Poison, that it
depraveth any good action whatsoever. We have hitherto entreated of a good
intention, what it is, and how necessary. Now moreover we will discourse of an
evil one, and declare how this Leaven, how this filthy poison infecteth the
best things: how this subtle sting of a Scorpion kills without more ado.

The Statue appearing to King Nabuchadnezer, was a prodigy for price, matter,
and magnitude; an incomparable Tower of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron. But because
the lower part thereof was not firm, because the feet were of Earth and Clay,
therefore one little stone did so shiver this precious heap, that not so much
as a Tyle was left fit for use. Then was the Iron, the Clay the Brass, the
Silver, and the Gold broken in pieces together: and became like the Chafe of
the Summer threshing floores, and the wind carried them away. Dan. 2.35. Even
so an ill intention does so batter a good work whatsoever it be, that it
leaves it not the least goodness behind. That which has an evil end, is it
self also evil. Those two hundred and fifty seditious Princes of the assembly
offered incense; every one of these had his Censer. Thou would have said
there had been as many Priests, as there were heads of this Function.
Overagainst them stood Aaron by himself. So on both sides they did the same
thing, as if they had strove who should better execute this Office: which part
therefore overcame? which did more please the Lord? God was extremely against
them all, not because their Censors were little worth. For Aarons Censor was of
the purest Gold, but these men's Brazen. Vide Jacob. Salianum Tom. 2. Annal.
vet. test. Anno Mundi. 3547. n. 1 Numb. 16. or because their Incense was less
fragrant, but because their intention was the worst, whereby they endeavored
to draw Moses and Aaron into hatred with the people. Wherefore they were all
swallowed up by the revengefull earth, And they went down alive into the pit,
and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the Congregation.
Their Censers were mad^ broad Plates for a covering of the Altar; that it might
be a perpetual m^nument to the Israelites, whereby they might be put in
mind, that God bears not respect to the action, but to the intention. That
which has an evil end, is it self also evil.

How great things have been done in all Ages, and are at this day done in the
world, which to humane eyes may seem most excellent, most holy, whereas the
all discerning eyes of GOD, condemn the same as stark naught? And note me I
beseech you, the Royal young man Absolon, how humane, how obsequi^us, and how
modest was he? First he stood early in the morning at the Kings Gate like a
Porter, and when any one came to do him obeisance, Absolon put forth his hand,
and took him, and kissed him. 2 Samuel 15.5. Who ever saw a young man of the
Royal Blood equal to him in courtesy? for if any one came about business to
the Court, he called him unto him in a friendly sort, asking from what City
he came; which as soon as he understood, most familiarly cheares up the man:
thy matters says he, seem to me good and right; but there is no man deputed
of the King to hear thee. O what a clement and benign Lord is here, and how
fit will he be hereafter to fit at the stern of the Kingdom, and bear rule!
for says he, O that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man that has
any Suite or cause, might come unto me, and I would do him Justice. Behold a
mighty friend, both of labor and Justice. But who may not see that under this
stone lies a Scorpion, which most subtly poysoneth all the deeds of Absolon?
For to what and is all that mildness, and prolixe courtesy? to what end are
so many Complementing services? to what end rises he so early in the morning,
takes comers and goers by the hand and kisseth them, promises himself a
Judge, but that he may strike off the Crown from his Fathers head, and set it
on his own? That which has an evil end, is it self also evil.

Besides, what is more holy then to vow to God and pay? this very thing did the
same righteous, I may so say, deceiver Absolon: he vowed a Sacrifice and
Pilgrimage, and for that cause requesting leave of his Sovereign Father to be
gone: I pray, says he, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed to the
Lord in Hebron, for thy Servant vowed a vow, while I abode at Geshur in Syria
saying, If the Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then will I
serve the Lord. Is not this an excellent act, what is better then the same? I
vowed a vow, says he, and will Sacrifice to the Lord. All this seems very
worthy of praise: but what is the drift of all this? deceitful, perverse,
impious. That he might thrust a good Father out of his Throne, and reign
himself, he invented all these things, all tended hither. From hence was it a
wicked vow, a wicked Journey, a wicked Sacrifice. That which has an evil end,
is it self also evil.

Of the same painted wickedness was that Galilean Fox Herod. This King also
counterfeited a Pilgrimage, to go to worship the new King of the Jews: That
I, says he, may come and worship him also. Matt. 2.8. Had not this I pray
been a holy Journey? yes truly: but with what intention had he come? that he
might murder the little Infant newly borne in his Cradle. That which has an
evil end, is it self also evil. But how frequent is this in Princes Courts?
what a daily thing almost, to cogge, and dissemble, to kiss the hands, and
stretch them out at length, to bow down at other men's knees, to act a thousand
pleasing tricks, to omit no ceremonies, to promise all humble service, to feign
himself an entire friend, to drop words sprinkled with Sesamum and Poppie,
to speak mere honey. But where is the heart and intention? The tongue is in
honey, but the heart in gall. The hands indeed are benevolent, the mouth full of
humble services, the countenance promises friendship, but the intention
whispereth the contrary. This many times wishes the Gallows, the Rope, the
Devil, and all the crew of ill fortune to take him. The tongue indeed saluteth
very kindly; there is not any one, my Brother, that I had rather see, then you:
the intention adds, but upon the Gallows. The tongue, as it is taught, very
readily prates: I desire nothing more, then to serve my Lord; the intention
suggesteth: but for mine own profit. The tongue most efficiously wishes: I
would I could gratify my very good friend in some great matter: the intention
shows how, but without my pains. O Herod, O Fox, how far different is
this, to say, and think the contrary to what thou say? It is easy to vent
words, but to add a good intention to every word and deed, this is virtue.

Exquisitely Publius Mimus: Look not, says he, how full hands one offers
unto God, as how pure. For a testimony hereof, I propose two Suitors together,
Ezechias, and the Pharisee, who out of the same kind of Petition do supplicate
the Divine Majesty. King Hezechias: I beseech thee O Lord, remember now how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: and have done that
which is good in thy sight. 1 King. 20.3. The Pharisee: God I thank thee that
I am not as other men are. What else is this then to say, That he had walked
before GOD in truth, and with a perfect heart? which also Ezechiah spoke of
himself. The Pharisee goes on: I fast twice in the week, I give Tithe of all
that I possess. Luke 18.11, 12. Both of them commends himself, the Prayer
of both is the same in substance: Why therefore did his please, but this man's
displease? Saint Gregory resolving this doubt: It falls out many times, says
he, that the just and unjust have words alike, but yet always an unlike
heart: and out of what speeches the Lord is offended by the unjust, in the same
manner also he is well pleased of the just. Behold the Pharisee justifies
himself in deed, Ezechiah in affection: why therefore does he offend, and this
please? Almighty God weighs every man's words by his thoughts, and they are
not proud in his ears, which proceed out of an humble heart.

But I propose other two, doing very like one another with far different
conceits. Thomas Aquinas, a holy man, and the Trojan adulterer Paris, Saint
Thomas, as they remember of him, sitting at meat, cast his eyes very
steadfastly upon a beautiful woman, being demanded the cause of it by one that
sat near somewhat offended thereat: I admired says he, the Creator of the
World: for if there be so much beauty and comeliness in created things, the
Maker and Creator himself must needs be infinitely more comely and beautiful;
if frail men do so excel in favor in this Pilgrim state, what shall the
blessed be after the resurrection in Heaven? Vide specula p. Joan: David.
spec. 9. page III. So Thomas Aquinas rose from the Table with a free conscience
and good intention, and increased in the love of God. And perhaps this holy man
did no less out of virtue, then Pior Abbas, which did the contrary, which
would not so much as look upon his own sister, a sickly old Wid^w woman but
presented himself to her with his eyes shut. Like unto Thomas Aquinas in fact,
but not in mind, was the lascivious yonker Paris, which did not much otherwise
at Menelaus his Table, where he continually beheld Helena none of his wife,
but with unchaste eyes, but to his own and the perpetual infamy of his
friends, for he thought upon Rape, lewdness, adultery. That which has an
evil end, is it self also evil.

I propose three other Persons, Christ's mother, Christ's Disciple, but whom he
called a Devil, and Christ's Hostess, whose Action was in a manner all one,
but their intention most unlike. The mother of Christ a thousand times saluted
her Son in his swaddling bands with a reverend kiss. Magdalen kissed the Lords
feet with like reverence, when Simon the Pharisee was reprehended for
neglecting this duty: but even Judas Iscariot also fastened a kiss on his
Masters mouth. Here is as unlike desert, as intention. His mother obtains a
mighty increase of Gods love and favor. Mary Magdalen pardon of her sins,
Judas Hell. From whence is this so great inequality in a mother, Disciple,
Servant, kissing the very same man? The Mother did this out of most chaste love;
Magdalen with a most religious affection; Judas with a most wicked desire of
betraying him. That which has an evil end, is it self also evil. The same
is to see in many other things, one stays by his sick friend, not because he
is a good friend, and mindful of his duty, but because he is an insinuating
companion, yea because he is a Raven, which from the next hill, spieth Cattle
fainting sick, and ready to kick up their heels; he waits for death, and
expects a Legacy. Lo how an ill intention does most filthily corrupt a good
action. In like manner, both Herod and Zacheus desired to see Christ; the
action of both was all one, but unlike the intention. The Surgeon binds a
sick party very fast, he wounds his arm, cutteth off his hand, saweth off
his leg, yet thanks are given him, and Gold for his payment. A Thief
likewise maimeth a man, but the Gallows is due to him for his reward: and the
reason is, he addresseth his weapon, that he may cure the hurt, but this man,
that he may hurt the sound.

After the same manner a godly man takes up a stone, that he may lay it unto
the building of a Church; an angry man also takes up a stone himself, but that
he may throw it at him whom he stomachs. Two men go together to an eminent
City, the one in some religious behalf, the other to kill his enemy; a reward
from Heaven belongs to the one; to the other from Hell. Intention makes a
difference of reward* There was one, which intending to do another a
mischief, would take upon him to cut open a great swelling; was he therefore
to be thanked, or receive a recompense for this, because he launced an
Impostume, which the Chirurgions hand feared, and cured him by a desperate
adventure, whose destruction he longed for? perceive you how there is not any
great matter in the action it self, but in the intent of the doer: so he
seems not to have conferred a benefit, which did good with an evil mind; for
the benefit came by chance, an injury by the man. Vide Senec. l 2. Debenef. c.
1^. initio. Ciceron. l 3 de Not. Deor. Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 8. Plutarch: De
utilitate ex inim^c. capiend.

A fault out of forgetfulness, neglect; error, deserves not so many stripes.
But when there comes intention and a will to resist, this shall scarce be
expiated with a hundred blows. For this of stubbornness and contumacy, is as
the sin of Witchcraft. Excellently and truly Bern. The pride, says he, of
the contemptuous, and obstinacy of the impenitent, even in the least
Commandments, makes no little fault. Bern. l de praecept. and disp. Here we
must be very cautious, least in any kind of offense to negligence
heedlesnesse, in obedience there come pride, contempt, pertinacy, for by this
means vices do wonderfully multiply themselves, and grow beyond measure. And
for as much as those which I said, are lurking faults, an evil intention
adds an abominable weight to them, with mavelous celerity; Therefore the
Devil cares not so much what good or evil we do, so he can obtain this,
that we may do good with an ill intention. Gregory of this craft of the
Devil: He sees the whole Tree, says he, to bring forth fruit for him,
which he has infected in the root with his venomous tooth. And in Bernards
judgment, a naughty intention does quite Condemn a good man. Christ himself
most apparently: If thine eye, says he be evil, thy whole body shall be
full of darkness.

But there is a sort of Vizards in the world to be found all about, whom GOD
will never admit into Heaven, namely, good works clad with an evil intention.
It may be said of these Devils elfes: A wolf plays the Thief in Sheeps
clothing, vice goes in the habit of virtue. Satan looks like an Angel of
light. Job. Mine own clothes, says he, shall abhor me. Job. 9.31. I am so
filthy, and full of loathsome corruption, that mine own Garments detest me, as
if they scorned to touch a man so impure. The Garments are external good
works, these do abominate, condemn, contemn him, which inwardly and in mind
is so ulcerous, and flows with evil intentions, even as if they grieved, that
a man should be so fair without, and foul within. If thine eye be evil,
thy whole body shall be full of darkness, although thou put a sheep skin
about it, or a cloak of virtue, or an Angels Garment. Gregory: When even any
right thing is done with a perverse meaning, although it be seen to shine
bright before men, yet it is proved dark by the examination of the secret
Judge. Greg. l. 28 mor. c. 6.

And this God evidently showed on a certain time. The same holy Writer relates
a mavelous thing in this manner: Fortunatus Bishop of Todi, a man of
wonderful sanctity, by Prayer cast out a Devil which possessed a man, the
Devil being driven out of his Lodging, that he might make up his injury, God
so permitting, put on the habit of a Traveller, whom counterfetting out of
subtlety, he came into the City about twilight, and like a poor exile began
to cast out complaints against Bishop Fortunatus, and, Lo, says he, what a
holy man is Fortunatus your Bishop; see what he has done, he has excluded a
man which is a stranger, and over-taken by ill fortune from his Lodging:
Whither shall I go? there is none that may receive me into his house. Whiles
he makes this lamentation, a Citizen hears it, sitting by him, the Friar
with his wife and little Child, and by and by with an envious curiosity he
enquireth more narrowly, what wrong the Bishop had offered him? As soon as he
heard the complaints of the subtle stranger, freely offered his own house for
an Inn, not so much that he might show courtesy to a stranger, as that he
might traduce the Bishop whom he wished very ill: So drew the counterfeit
Devil along with him to the Fire side. Here when they had had much discourse,
his Guest suddenly leaping out a doors, takes up the Child, and with all
violence throws him into the fire, and killed him. Greg. l. 1. Dial. c. 9.
Alas wretched Parent, confess at length, either whom thou receivedst into thy
House, or whom your Bishop roosted out of his Lodging. Hospitality is a most
laudable virtue, but if an evil intention deprave it, it degenerates from
virtue to vice. To entertain strangers was a most commendable thing even in
that great Abraham, but if a good meaning be wanting, a Devil is as soon
received as an Angel. All other virtues are in the same manner, whereunto if a
wicked intention insinuate it self, the evil spirit finds an open Inn,
which he may take up at his pleasure, and makes a man an Idolater, that he
may adore his own belly, his own money, his own Treasure Chest, or the Table
whereon he eats, which is seen to be the course in every deadly sin. If
thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. Ah, how
circumspectly must we attend here, that we weary not our selves in vain, and
throw away our pains, least we loose all the reward to be obtained by good
deeds, by an intention that is not good. Therefore with the sweet Singer of
Israel, we must continually pray: Create in me a new heart O God* and renew a
right spirit within me, that so I may desire to serve, and please thee in all
things. Psalm. 51.10.

CHAP. IX. How the Publication of a work may discover an evil Intention.
THe Hebrew Spies, sent by Joshua Captain of the Wars, having entered the City
Hiericho, took Rahabs house the H^rlot for their Inn. She received them, hid
them, fed them: They, that they might requite the kindness of their Hostess,
after thanks, promised a matter of great moment, but upon that condition: If,
say they, ye utter not this our business: but if thou utter this our
business, then we will be quit of thine Oath which thou have made us to
swear. Iosu. 2.14.20. The men were wise enough to know it could hardly come to
pass, that they should be altogether indescryed. And indeed the Neighbor
smelling the business as close as it was, presently brought it before the
Magistrate. But Iosuahs men required no more then this very thing: Do not thou
betray us, for if it be revealed by thee, that we are here, we will not pay
thee a farthing for our entertainment, we will not stand to our promise. Good
works are Spies, and Letter-carriers to heaven, which being strangers in this
world are hated of all the Citizens. The world reckons Cousenage, Iniquity,
Vice, Deceit among her Citizens. Moreover those Spies do promise us rewards,
which neither ear has heard, nor eye has seen, to be given then by that
great Joshua Christ, when he shall come to burn Hiericho, that is, this World.
But they require that condition: If thou utter not our business. When thou
do thine Alms, Christ admonishes, do not cause a Trumpet to be sounded
before thee. Mat. 6.2. virtues vanish in a flourish.

For indeed boasting and vain glory is so full of tongue, that there is
nothing which it does not at once betray, and bewray. Speak and spill.
This prating Monster therefore must have not only her mouth, but her feet and
hands tied, that it may not be able to give any token of the heavenly
messenger, good Works undiscovered. It is often up with that precept of
Christ: Take heed that ye do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them.
When yet in the same Sermon he commands: Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works. In what sort these agree, and who is the
betrayer of good deeds? now we will dispatch.

One of Jobs friends demands of him: Can the Rush grow up without mire? or
can the Flagge grow without water? Job. 8.11. Bulrushes are green in Marshes
and Ponds, nor indeed can the Rush prosper without mud, nor the Flag without
water: But these stalks yield no fruit, no Figs are gathered from hence, nor
any thing which is fit for humane uses. So you may find many, whose outward
habit is neat and trim, which say and do many things daintily, but
therefore because they have both Auditors, and Spectators, therefore they grow
up and flourish, whilst they are seen and praised; this makes the Rush lusty,
the mire of humane praise: when such men as these leave off to be commended,
they leave off likewise to be in their fresh Colors. For because, says
Gregory, He studied to do rare things without right meaning thoughts, he
shows that he flourished without a root. Greg. l. 8. mor. c. 24. ante finem.
Which the same holy man much lamenting It is great idleness, says he, to
perform laborious matters, and gape after the air of praise, with strong
endeavor to follow the heavenly precepts, but seek for the reward of an
earthly retribution. Greg. ibi. c. 25. initio. For that I may so say, He which
for the virtue he expresses, desires the favors of men, carries a thing of
great worth to be sold for a mean price. He asks the money of a little
transitory speech, for that which might gain him the Kingdom of Heaven. He
sells his work therefore at a sorry rate, because he does great matters, but
has small commings in.

Plato, when he had invited some of his more noble friends to Supper, and had
commanded the Banqueting room to be dressed up after the best fashion; in
rusheth Diogenes the Cynick, and with his beastly and durty feet began to
trample the Carpets. Plato entering with his Guests: What do thou, says he,
O Diogenes? I tread upon Platoes pride, says he: Thou treadest upon it
answered Plato, but with another greater pride. There was certainly a more
unbridled kind of state in the mind of Diogenes, because he was poor, then in
Platoes, who presented all that bravery to the eyes of his friends* not to
himself. So you may find very many, both proud and poor together, which in
their own eyes seem better and holier then other men, which are rich only
under this color, because they have nothing: as if the Lord had commended a
low estate, not a lowly mind; and as though it were virtue to want, and not
rather to take want in good part. That same Diogenes suffered many things hard
to be borne, but with that mind, that he might draw every bodies eyes to
look upon him. Therefore when in the deep of Winter he went into the cold
water to wash himself, and the people came in abundance to the spectacle; and
some also pitying the man, did as well entreat that he would spare himself.
Plato among the lookers on cried out: Si vuitis misereri, ^bite.
If ye will have pity upon him, get you gone. Plato knew the quality of this
disease, which is then forsaken of its own strength, when it wants the eyes
and ears of others.

Take heed that ye do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them: as
much as others do seek the eyes of men, so much do you avoid them. Aristotle
truly accounts him magnanimous, which will have neither more nor less honor
bestowed upon him, then is fit, Arist. l. 1. mor. c. 25. But in the Academy of
Christ this precept is exploded. Christ judgeeth him magnanimous, which can
despise all honor, and himself moreover. Surely no honor whatsoever shall
be a reward worthy enough for virtue. Honor is a light and inconstant
possession, and plays the runagate like a stranger, nor is in the power of the
honored, but of the honourer. Therefore Christ pitying our childishness, so
carefully warns: Take heed that ye sell not your virtues at too vile a
price: If ye will be Seen of men, GOD will turn his eyes from you. Take
heed, otherwise ye shall have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven.
Therefore be not willingly deceived; the greatest honor for the least good
deed, is every way an unequal and unworthy reward.

Without doubt Seneca thoroughly understood this, and urging the same in his
Epistles, The price of all virtue says he, is in themselves: the reward of a
thing well done is, Recte facti merces est fecisse.
to have done it. No man in my mind seems to esteem more of virtue, no man
to be more devoted to it, then he which has spoiled the report of a good man,
least he should spoil his conscience. Senec. Epist. 81. A good name indeed is
of very much worth, but a good conscience more. But thou may say perhaps, I
desire not to be commended of men alone, but of GOD and men together. O my good
friend, thou have not yet known God, if it suffices thee not to be praised
of God only. The Ark of GOD, and the Idol of Dagon are no more then the
Arc: Let God therefore be so much to thee, as God and all other things
together. Thou know also that Christ and the World are not friends, why
therefore will thou be enriched or commended by the enemy of Christ? neither
art thou ignorant that God has a care of thee, if it may be for thy profit;
he will spoil Egypt, that he may furnish thee. The greatest reward of virtue
is, that she suffers not her friends to lie hid; she brings them forth unto
glory, but in her own time. In the mean space endure thou to have all
hurtful honor removed from thee, and complain not: I am not honored, as I
have deserved, another respect would be fit me etc. These are most vain
complaints; Take heed, yea, So will not God have the favors and honors of men
to be loved of us, as that he permitted even his own Son to be called
Beelzebub; nor is there almost any kind of contempt or injury, which the
Savior of the World did not undergo, who that he might make all humane praise
most hateful to us, in that most excellent Sermon, which Matthew has
described, endeavoring to persuade this one thing in a manner: Nesciat omnino
faciat quid dextra, sinistra.
But when thou do thine alms, says he, let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand does. Mat. 6.3. Let the countenance of a Christian turn it
self wholly inward, let it never go curiously abroad with Dina, let it not
look after a stranger with Sampson, not an Egypti^n with Solomon. For what
reason do we yield the wealth of our virtues to humane praises, as it were to
flattering Heirs? they carry away all by flattering. Let not therefore thy
left hand know, what thy right hand does.

Christ goes on, and presses it diverse ways, that every work is to be done
with a most pure intention for Gods sake; nor must we enquire here, what
relisheth with us, what pleases, or agrees with our humor: Let not thy left
hand know. Believe it, we loose very much of our labors, whilst we follow
only our own taste and sense in them, and do, as we call it, according to
our devotion: If these things be wanting, we rashly omit both our prayers, and
our duties, and this, and that, because we have no taste of the matter; but
surely when this is in our mouth, when that which we do, or pray, or endeavor
agrees with our palate; this is to sacrifice to our selves, not to God. If
Boys will not learn, unless they may have white bread and butter to carry to
School with them, they will become Doctors at leisure. Our works for the
greatest part have then most worth, when least delectation, when we drive our
selves thereunto by a godly constraint, when we feel a certain molestation and
loathing in them, but yet we overcome it. Let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does.

Moreover also, the very party which is succored is to be deceived, that he
may have, nor yet know from whom he receives. Every good man is contented
with Heaven and God for his witness, and comfort himself with Iob^ Also
now my witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on high. Job. 16.19. This is a
part of our folly, when to our selves we seem to labor in vain, unless
there be many spectators and witnesses of our pains. God, O vain people,
has his Theater in the dark, why do ye so hunt after the light and open
world? But one may ask, what hurt is it, if a Servant desire to please his
Master, and approve himself to him? I say: let every one perform his duty,
even as it is commanded: when he goes about, whatsoever his master would have,
let him do that which is to be done, as accurately as he can for his heart;
for the rest, let him never be sollicitous, whether he shall please or
displease, otherwise he shall be accounted to have served the eyes of men
only.

Gedeons Soldiers going to fight against the Madianites, in their left hand
held a Pitcher with a Lamp in it, and Trumpets in the right. And when it came
to the point of joining Armies, and skirmish, they blew their Trumpets, and
brake their Pitchers, and gave a shout withal, crying: For the Lord, and for
Gedeon. Judge. 7.20. In like manner we, when we break our Pitcher, and beat
down our body, when we sound with Trumpets, and extol the Religion of Christ
in our Churches, our Lamps burn bright Excellent^y all this, so no man cry
out: for my self, and for Gedeon. Not so, but for the Lord and for Gedeon. Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the glory: Not to me, but to
Christ: not for my self, and my own palate, but for Gedeon, and the safety of
many others. Let us seek only the glory of God, and for God only, not for
our selves; being so far from our own, that the left hand may not know what
our right hand does.

Peter Ravennas, If he will have thee thy self not to know, how much more
another? Augustine, calls love and a pure intention to God, the right hand;
an eye cast a one side upon the shadows of false glory, the left. August.
Sermon. 60. The sweet Singer of Israel: If I forget thee, says he, O Jerusalem,
let my right hand forget her cunning. Psalm. 137.5. When we are not mindful
of Heaven, our right hand is forgetful of us, nor stands us in any stead, as
good as if we had none at all: when this right hand is out of action, then the
left hand bestirs it self. Do we not reprehend little Children when they
offer their left hand to one that salutes them, when with their left hand they
take victuals; who does not cast it in their teeth? You may be ashamed, not
to use your better hand. Nay, we dissemble not the matter in such as are of
ripe age, when we observe them to be Scaevolaes; much rather in things
concerning the Soul, to use the left hand, and go a hunting after the speech
of people, is far baser, and not only carries baseness along with it, but
mischief. But as Children have their left hand tied, that they may be apter
with the right: so he which notes his intention to be untoward in many
things, let him tie it up with the consideration, of the exceeding and eternal
damage which arises from thence.

Very daintily Peter Chrysologus: The righteousness, says he, which places
it self in humane eyes, expects not the heavenly Fathers reward. It would be
seen, and it is seen; it would please men, and has pleased them; it has the
reward which it would; it shall not have the reward it would not. Chrysostom. Sermon.
9. And how congruously Seneca to the Christian Law! Let us apply that peace,
says he, to our souls, which good deeds will apply, and a mind intent upon
the only desire of honesty. Let the conscience be satisfied, let us not labor
at all for fame, let it even fall out to be ill, so long as thou deservest
well. Senec. lib. 3. de ira. c. 41. Does not Saint Paul often inculcate the
very same? But now a days in all places (which Pliny notes) Many are afraid
of their credit, Multifamam, conscientiam pauci verentur.
but few of their conscience. Most take no heed how well they do themselves,
but how well others think of them; how readily they applaud them: so they be
in the mouths of men, so they be praised, how praise worthy they behave
themselves, this is the least care that troubles their heads.

The heavenly Spouse far otherwise: His left hand, says she, is under my
head, and his right hand shall embrace me, Cant. 2.6. H^re are an hundred
mysteries; but ours is this: The left hand under the head cannot be seen, but
the right hand embracing sees he which is embraced. The Spouse therefore
beholds not the left hand, but the right she beholds. In the Bridegroomes
left hand are riches and glory, but such as shall perish with time; in his
right hand is length of days, most blessed eternity. Hereupon the faithful
Spouse affirms, that she fastneth her eyes upon eternity, but riches, and
honors, as the left hand are not beheld of her. What therefore Christ
commands, let not thy left hand know, This also the Bridegroom gives in
charge: Let my left hand be under thy head, my right in thine eyes.

Moreover, even as he is a faithful Servant, which paieth many millions of
Florens to his Master with so great trust, that not so much ^s a farthing
sticks to his pitchy fingers ends: so he deals most truly with God, who
whatsoever humane praise he receives, pays it all back again to this his
Lord, nor reserveth the least part thereof to himself. Whereof notably
Chrysostom: It is the greatest virtue, says he, for a man to ascribe all to
God, to esteem nothing his own, to do nothing for his own glory sake, but
to have his sight perpetually cast upon the Will of God. For this is he which
will call for a reckoning of our life spent. But now a days the course is
altered; and we fear not him greatly which is to sit Judge, and take account;
but we are sore afraid of them, which shall stand at the Bar and be judged
with us. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Epist. 2. Ad Cor.

It falls out sometimes, that Letters are delivered not to the right Owner
whom they are written to, but to another; these if some wiser body receive, as
soon as he looks into the superscription, presently: these Letters, will he
say, belong not to me; this titulary Preface speaks not to me, nor does so
high a style befit my person. Just so does he, which acknowledges praises to
be due not to himself, but to God, who deriveth all glory to God from
himself, this man at length is a faithful Servant, serves God sincerely, his
left hand knows not, what his right hand does.

But so let thy left hand not know, what thy right hand does, not as though we
may do nothing in public, nor will have any of our works to be seen of
others, but so as not to be commended of others. It is not ungrateful alms to
God, says Chrysostom, which shall be seen of men, but which is done
therefore that it may be seen. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 9. Nay let them which
bear an eminent and public person, do some things publickely, and with that
example animate others to attempt the like. Nor in this case let them be of a
fearful and dastardly mind: for, as Augustine nobly, If thou fear
Spectators, thou shall not have followers, thou ought to be seen, but not
do to this end, that thou may be seen; public the work, the intention
secret. August. Tom. 9. Tract. 8. in Epist. Sancti Ioann. That they may glorify
your Father which is in heaven. Matt. 5.6. But he which is weak in virtue,
must be made acquainted with that of properties: -- Learn to stay at home.
Disce manner Domi. Prop. l. 2. Eleg. which Gregory also very well remembering:
But it is the part of those, Property.
says he, that are very perfect, so to seek the glory of God by a
demonstration of the^r works, that they know not how to express any inward
joy to themselves, for praises offered by others. For then only a laudable
deed is presented faultlesse unto men, when the mind truly scorneth to accept
of commendation for it: Which because all such as are weak overcome not by
perfect contemning, it remains necessary, that they keep close this good,
which they work. For many times they seek their own praise from the
beginning to show a work, and many times in the full show of it, they desire
to lay open the Authors glory, but being taken up with favors, they are wrapped
into desire of their own renoune: and when they neglect to examine themselves
within, they know not what they do being outwardly d^splayed, and their deeds
march for their own advancement, and this service they imagine they perform
in favor of the Great giver. And indeed this threefold observation is to be
kept of these men.

First, let them cast the eyes of their mind upon GOD as every where present,
whether they do any thing privately, or publickely: Let them wish to please
GOD alone, as if God only were in the world: although it be hard fot these
weaker ones not to loose God abroad. The other: Let them set out no signs of
their good deeds: to cry virtue about the streets, is to make it nothing
worth. This publication is a Trumpet, calling Spectators together which may
look on, and praise it. Christ prohibiting this: When thou do thine alms,
says he, do not sound a Trumpet before thee. Mat. 6.2. So also will he have
our fasting to be covered, least they be described as it were in the
countenance: But thou when thou fastest, annoint thy head, and wash thy face,
that thou appear not unto men to fast, but to thy Father which is in secret,
and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. Ibid. v. 17, 18.
So let our goodness look inward. The third: Let such men as these, shun not
only the open world, and hide themselves from eyes to be their praisers, but
let them shun themselves, and forget what they did, least happily they become
selfe-pleasers. Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. Very well
Job. Though I were perfect, yet should not my soul know it. Job. 9.21. Let a
spirit, Christian friend, let a good and upright spirit know what thou art
about to do, this will direct thy deeds; nor let it much deliberate with the
flesh about them, otherwise thou shall be entangled with a thousand
reluctances, and stubborn humors, and innumerable other intentions, smelling
of flesh and earth will intermixe themselves, thus thou shall rather seek thy
self then God. Therefore so perform thy work, that the flesh may not be
conscious of it, and look after this one thing: To will what God will. Let not
therefore thy left hand know what thy right hand does: Let thine alms, and thy
other good deeds be most secret, and void of all ostentation. But thy hand is
then as it were conscious of thy benevolence, when it is made a chief actor in
bestowing it. Wherefore if it be sufficient that thy right hand should know it,
let not the left also be used. Be thou so far therefore from all love of
ostentation, and this desire of Hypocrites, which lay their deeds in open view,
that thou, for thine own part, would have thy doings utterly concealed, nor
look after any witnesses, nor would so much as take any notice of what thou
do well, nor remember the things any longer then thou art about them, and
may presently put in oblivion what thou have performed, least thou should
be taken up with selfe-admiration, Self conceits.
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forward unto those
things which are before. Pbilip. 3.13. But if we be possessed with a greater
estimation of ou^ own deeds then is fit, if our mind be carried up and down
with the matter, we shall be rapt up with our selves for spectators, admirers,
and praisers of that which we have done, which is nothing else, then if the
other hand be employed without any need. Negligentiorss facit, et in
arrogantiam tollit,
Chrysostom plainly to the matter: Nothing says he does so much frustrate
and spoil good works, as the remembrance of those things which we have done
well, for it begets two evils* it makes us more negligent, and sets us on the
wings of pride. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Epist. ad Philip. God in times past gave
charge that his Altar should be built not of hewn Stones: And if says he,
thou will make me an Altar of stone, thou shall not build it of hewn stone:
for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it. Exodus 20.25. Is
there so great Religion in this? much truly. Stones are hewn, that they may
be looked upon, those that are to be placed within side the wall, need not any
polishing of Tools. So God in the Soul of man as it were an Altar built to
him, approves those virtues, which are practiced out of a pure and simple
intention: but such as are therefore practiced, that they may be seen, are
like hewn stones not fit for this Altar. It is enough and enough to all good
minded men, that their righteous dealings shall in the last day of Judgment
be known of all both men and Angels. This at length shall be true honor, to
have done well, and to be commended for it by the whole World.

CHAP. X. How diverse and manifold an ill intention is.
THe Salamander is no great Beast, but a little Creature of a speckled and
bright spotted skin, like a Lyzard, but it carries so much poison about with
it, that if it touch the root of a Tree, it kills all the fruit in the root,
and takes away all life from the Tree. The Devil, that Orcinian Serpent, the
most true Salamander, Hellish
to be consumed with no fire, if he set his teeth into the root of a fruitful
Tree, corrupts it all over. The root of al our doings is our intention, if
the Devil do but touch this, and infect it with the poison of an ill
intention, the whole tree becomes unfruitful; every venomous deed whatsoever
is made unprofitable, perverse, poisonous, which is hurt by this trick of the
subtle fiend. It is a known saying: when the intention which goes before is
untoward, every deed which follows after is naught. If thine eye be evil,
thy whole body shall be full of darkness. We showed in the Chapter next
before how near a Kin it is to an evil intention, for a man to proclaim
his work: now we must express how various an ill intention is, and how from
many several fountains this kind of poison issues.

Scarce any thing springs out of the earth, which does so fortify and enwrap
it self against winter, as an Onion: seven Coats are not enough for it; but
moreover it fasteneth the head under ground. Shootes
Not unlike to these Coated Onions are the eyes of those, whereof the Son of
Syrach. A fools eyes are manifold* Oculi insipientium septemplices.
Eccles 20.14. They have many Coats like an Onion. Such eyes are not single at
all, as Christ would have them. Most like to these eyes, and these so well
clothed Onions is an ill intention: if thou take away one coat from her,
there is another at h^nd: do thou take away this also? another is presently
to be seen. And even as Onions do hide themselves, so likewise an ill
intention: no mortal man can sift her out sufficiently, and search deep
enough that way. An evil intention, will not seem evil; she wants no kind of
colors or pretenses. Christ reprehended the Pharisees, for causing a Trumpet
to be sounded before them, when they went to give alms, they casting the Coat
of a very honest excuse upon the matter: We do not these things, said they,
to set forth our liberality, but to call the poor together, not that others
may call us bountiful, but that the needy may come all about to the Dole.
Fools eyes look sundry ways at once: an ill intention is manifold, of a
speckled, and changable colored skin, like the Salamander.

All of us by nature long to know, but how diverse and multiplicious is the
intention in this only desire of knowing? Curiously Bernard: There be some,
says he, which desire to know, for that end only, that they may have
knowledge, and this is idle curiosity. There are, which desire to know, that
they may be known, themselves, and this is filthy vanity: be sure these people
shall not escape the scoffing Satyrist, reading this Lesson to such as these:
Scire tuum nihil est, nisit escire hoc scia^ alter.
A Pin for that skill, which no man was ever the better for but thy self.
Persius, Sat. 1. And there are, which desire to know, that they may sell their
knowledge, namely for money, for honors; and this is filthy gain. But there
are some also which desire to know that they may edify, and this is charity.
And some likewise there are which desire to know, that they may be edified, and
this is discretion. Of all these the two last only are not found in any abuse
of knowledge; for as much, as they labor to understand only for this end,
that they may do good. Bern. Sermon. 36. in Cant. med. Lo, how manifold an ill
intention is in one thing: lo, how many study not for their life, but for
their purse! and what a number vanity and pleasure, gain and curiosity draws
to their books. Seneca observing the same: Some, says he, come not to learn,
but to hear, as we are led to a Play for pleasure sake, to delight our ears
with speech, Language Conceits
or voice, or merry ^ests. You shall see a great company of Auditors, which
make loyterers Inn of the Philosophy School; they do it not, that they may
put off any of their vices there, that they may receive any rule of life,
according to which they may square their manners, but that they may find sport
for their ears. And yet some come with Table Books, not that they may note
matters, but words, which they may learn as well without profit to others,
Senec. Epis^^ 108. post init.
as hear without their own.

The intention of those is in a manner as diverse, which come to Church to
hear a Sermon. Some draw nigh, not that they may learn, nor that they may
become better, but only for to hear. Others that they may pass away the
time, and feel their stay the l^sse till dinner: others that they may do
according to custom, these that they may sleep, and take a sweet nappe before
noone; the Preacher is instead of a Minstrill to them, softly lulling them
asleep. Moreover others are present at Sermons that they may prattle, and
maintain a talk sometimes with this body, sometimes with that: others that
they may obey their Masters command, because they cannot otherwise choose;
whether they will or no, they are driven to this kind of duty. If any one now
enquire: From whence I pray after so many Sermons, after such loud cries, after
so many serious exhortations, does not the world put on a new face of honesty?
Another
it is easy to answer. Very many come not at all to Sermons, too many others,
although they come, a good intention is wanting; they are drawn by curiosity,
by custom, by necessity; for many, if they had the Law in their own hands,
would stay out altogether, and of those very people which frequent Sermons: who
is it for the most part which brings a mind free from other thoughts? which
abounds not with innumerable fantasies, which gives his mind seriously to
what he hears, which in conclusion will be the better? You shall hardly find
an Auditor wholly composed to hear. Here is the grief of it, because a good
intention goes not along with them to Church, or is changed into another by the
way, and very easily is bent into an evil one. Excellently Senec: He, says
he, which waits upon the Schools of Philosophers, let him carry away some
good thing every day, let him return home either the better indeed, or the
better to be wrought upon. Aut sanior, aut sanabilior. Either sound or in
better case.
Senec. Epist. antedict. The very same I shall say of the Sermons of
Christians: he which comes to Church to hear the Preacher, let him always
carry away some good with him; let him return home either the better indeed,
or the better to be wrought upon. But he shall so return, whosoever will, for
that is the power of Christian erudition, Teaching.
that it becomes a very great help to all Auditors of a sincere intention.
whosoever comes into the Sun, Quia in selem venit etc.
although he come not to that purpose, shall be Sunne-burnt. They which have
sat in an Apothecaries Shop, and stayed there any long time, carry away the
smell of the place with them. And they which have bin with the Preacher, must
of necessity have got somewhat, which had profited even the negligent. Mark
what I shall say; negligent, nor obstinate. What therefore? do we not know
some, which have sat many years under the Pulpit, and got not so much as one
look like it? such as these, would never reap any profit, but only hear.
Attalus both a subtle, and eloquent Philosopher was wont to say: Idem and
docenti, et discenti debet esse propositum: ut ille prodesse velit, hic
proficere.
The Master and the Scho^lar ought to be both of one mind; he to be willing
to profit, this to proceed. Hereupon let no body marvel that he has received
no benefit by so many Sermons, but let him marvel that he would receive none.
This is the business of a good intention, and earnest endeavor. But let us
proceed farther.

Self-love knows how to insinuate it self in the finest manner almost into
all actions, and whiles by degrees, and closely it withdrawes a good intention,
it puts an ill in the place. Self-love is a friend to all pleasing affections,
and teaches this one thing thoroughly, to seek ones self. This is the very
fountain, this the Original and root of all evil intentions. Every man has
his pleasure: Trahit sua quemq. vo^^^tas.
there is none but is a favorable Judge in his own cause, which can endure
nothing less then to hate himself. An ill intention always seeks after
either delights, or riches, or dignities, but not eternal ones. For this is
the difference between a good and evil purpose: the good never but has an
eye to some eternal thing; the evil is contented with such as are transitory
and vain; this takes up all her time, to look upon her self and her own
commodity. And this forsooth is a subtle kind of Idolatry, and most privy
adoration, to be found in all deadly sins, Maine
when the furthest end is placed in the Creature, which should be reposed in
the Creator only. But there is scarce an offense so grievous, so it be
secret, whereupon that spotted and speckled Salamander cannot put a false dye
of innocence. An ill intention has her pretenses, colors, names, titles,
shapes, Maskes
wherein she can feign her self beautiful. And where I pray does not
Avarice set forth it self un^er a Cloak of Parsimony? Frugality
The pomp of apparel, and excess of diet, and all kind of intemperance,
advances it self under the name of necessity: Ambition creepes forth under
the scheme of Office, duty, assistance. Envy applaudes it self in the title of
most just indignation. An ill intention ever finds a hole open, Triumphs.
at which it may escape, for it is most subtle: but let us demonstrate the
matter by examples.

First of all for worldly respects; alas how much good is usually omitted, and
how much evil committed? who almost is there, which gives not heed rather to
others then himself, nor weighs so much what his own duty is, as what other
men's opinion. How many which being reasonable honest men in the rest, should
yet use more means to help others forward in a right way, but are hindered
with these very respects: and what, say they, would this and that man speak of
it, how would such and such dislike it, what louring eyes would they cast upon
me? A thousand such things there are, whereupon variable eyes are continually
shot. Oculi septemplices.
A single eye respects the one and only honor of God. He which has a
single eye: this, says he to himself, is my good meaning, and this is my
conscience; this my care, and this my duty: whatsoever this or that body
objecteth, whether it please him or the other, I stand not upon that: this
ought to be done, and therefore no care is to be taken whether they like it
or no. I regard God, not men; whatsoever mortal people say, if the King
immortal command otherwise, I follow him.

Again, and which is to be noted in the second place: What strange things are
not done only for a little gain? Lucre Worlds end
the Merchant to fly poverty runs to the Indies. I pass by innumerable
Slaughters and Robberies. Pauperiem fugiens Mercator currit ad Indos. Lucri
odor bonus est ex qualibet, te ^t quolibet modo.
It is the common rule of the world: the smell o^ gain is sweet out of any
thing, or any way. We do infinite matters only for a little lucres sake,
which if we did with a right intention* for the love of God, should not lose
its reward. He said very true: Men run a great way for a small living, but
many will scarce lift one foot from the ground, for eternal life. We seek
for that which is nothing worth; there is sometimes filthy striving about a
poor farthing: and we think it nothing, to let our mind run day and night
upon a small promise, and that which never comes to pass. Thom. a Kemp. l. 3.
c. 3. n. 2. Iethro in old time reproving his Son in Law Moses: The thing,
says he, which thou do, Stulto labor consumeris
is not good: thou will surely wear away. Exodus 18.17, 18. The very same is to
be uttered again and again to all those Cormorants, which live upon the
catch; every one of these must have this Item: What do thou, O Man, thou will
surely wear away; thou will make a fool of thy self: the thing which thou
do, is not good: but to make it good, use a good intention, that thou may
be a gainer, let go gain, especially all which is not honest, or which uses
to run away from a good conscience.

Thirdly, how much is endured in respect of pride? it is most true: either be
not proud, or be patient. Many dissemble when they are a cold, that they may
not spoil the grace of their fine cloths; they will not put on good thick
Coats, and soundly lined like Farmers. So the shoe be neat and sit close to
their foot without wrinckles, although it wring it is no matter. H s Collar
pincheth this proud man, his Dublet that. Another that he may show the
strength of his pride, Express the spirit
refuses not to be loaded with Garments, this body that he may go according
to the fashion, is ready to starve himself. Nay forsooth, we have got a trick
to eat p^int, Cretam.
that we may bring our faces to a dainty white color. What should I say of
other Torments of this madness: these and other things more then can be
uttered pride bears patiently, but she bears them for her self and her
own ends, which if they were undergone with a Right intention for Gods sake,
how highly would his goodness reward them? Such a Vassal of pride as this
has also this lesson rightly played to him: Thou will make a fool of thy
self at last. Stulto labor consumeris.
Sir Thomas Moore, a man as religious as learned, by chance looked in upon a
maid in her Chamber, standing before the glozing judge her Looking-glass,
which platted her hair with great labor and pain, to make her a broad
forehead, and laced her stomacher very strait, that she might seem slender.
Sir Thomas Moore to her: Unless God, says he, reward thee with Hell for this
mighty pains, certainly he shall do thee great injury. And he did seriously
affirm, he was verily persuaded, That many in this life did get Hell with
that trouble, with one half whereof they might have purchased Heaven. For want
of what must we think this comes to pass, but only of a good intention.

Fourthly, what is not done to gain, retain, and increase favor? here no
labor is spared, no trouble refused, nothing thought intolerable: to wait
whole days in presence of great men, is accounted no pains. Some religious
men in times past, stood diverse years together upon Pillars, and from thence
took their name, Simon the Stilete, Daniel the Stylite, Alipius and Theodulus
the Stylites. These men stood day and night to worship the Lord, and keep
down their bodies. This Sect of Stylites, standing certain years continually
had an end, but theirs not so, which stand upright many hours together, and
expect a little favor only, which notwithstanding is placed upon a slippery
stone and ready to turn up the heels, and may far sooner be lost, then
gotten. Joseph the Viceroy of Egypt, Protex.
was in mighty grace with his Pharaoh, next unto him in power, but another King
succeeded, which refused to know Joseph. How dear to Darius was Daniel, and
yet all the favor of Darius could not deliver Daniel from the Den of Lions.
T^^anta.
Achitophel Absolons Jewel was a Counselor in greatest Grace, but this grace
put not a Gold-chaine about his neck, but a Rope to hang him. Haman most high
in favor, and almost another Assuerus, yet by these golden stayers of favor
he went up to the top of a stately Gallows. And what was Belisarius under
Justinian, a General most renowned for so many Victories? he lost at length
not only his favor, but both his eyes also, being tumbled down to extreme
poverty. Who was Seianus under Tiberius? ere while another Tiberius in a
manner, was dispoiled of his reputation and life also; being drawn with an
Iron Dragge, and cast into the River Tiber. The day would sooner end, then I
could express even the Titles only of these Tragedies. Let Argus have a
thousand eyes; no man can deny that favor has a thousand wings to fly away
withal. And yet this light and inconstant Gossip is pursued with such earnest
desire, and entreaties, is gone about with so many labors, is sought for with
such sweating, with so many solicitous thoughts and cares, is scarce after all,
and very hardly obtained: to hold her when she is obtained, no less labor and
care is bestowed, the mind being always fearful, and troubled every way,
least what is purchased with so great charge, may be all dispersed with one
little blast. So you may see these Hunters, for favor always trembling and
doubtful, ever solicitous, and fearing the loss of credit, as the greatest
hurt that can happen; the sound of a shaken leaf chaseth them. Levit. 26.36.
They sleep in a manner like Hares with their eyes open, they do so shake at
every blast of favor. For (which is a great evil) they begin now to have need
of fortune: their life following is doubtful, suspicious, fearful of
chances, and hanging upon the Moments of Time. They never set their virtue on a
sure foundation, but bid her stand a side in a slippery corner. Mark these
things I beseech you Courtiers, mark them other people. And what a hard
serv^t^de is this, In unius gratiae gratiam.
to do and suffer these things day and night for favor, only of favor? H^e
which should do and suffer these things with a good intention, for Gods sake,
how much advantage should he bear away? But now whiles this man and that, and
another and another neglects this, every one of them must have this Lesson
played him: The thing which thou do is not good; Stulto labor consumeris
thou will make a fool of thy self in the business, a very fool, a most
egregious fool, for thou do this, that thou may hurt thy self with a
great deal of pains and trouble.

Fifthly, what do not others out of Court endure, both men and maid Servants?
They must swallow many times not only words, but also blows. How often does a
Master, or a Mistress cry out when they are moved, rogue, hangman, fool,
beast, sl^ve, ass, villain; after these Thundering words many times follows
lightning coming from the hand, Cudgels fly about, and whatsoever weapons
anger and madness bring in play. And what gain have the poor wretches by
this? a little wages, some slender fare, and for the m^st part out of season,
and most commonly cold. Whosoever bears these things for that end only that
he may live, wears out himself also like a fool, a very fool in the
business. But if a Maid or man Servant offer these things with a generous mind
to God, and says; Lord, for thy sake I will suffer my self to be wearied and
vexed, for thy sake, my Lord I will endure all these things: for I know very
well that thou art a more gentle and liberal master* then he to whom I am
enthralled; of thee, my God, I will expect my reward. He truly is wise which
sells his pains so, as Saint Paul excellently instructs such kind of
people in these: Not with eye service as men pleasers, but as the Servants of
Christ, doing the Will of God from the heart. Ephesians. 6.6. Sixthly, what misery
do not Mechanical workmen endure? They return early in the morning to their
hard labors, and follow the same till dark night, yet many times they rub out
scarce one brown Loaf for themselves and their family: they suffer heat,
stinkes, frost, very many inconveniences for a little gain, who is poorer then
many of these, if we look only upon the body? and who again is richer then
these people, if any one of them shall likewise say in his mind: My God, I
pour these drops of my sweat into thy hand, I offer all my labors to thee,
for thy sake I am wearied, Good Lord, thou art that rich Householder, which
never but surpassest the pains of thy Servants in liberal payment, nor
suffer any thing to be done gratis for thee, more then to do it: thy
rewards infinitely exceed our poor endeavors. J therefore consecrate and
present to thee all my sufferings, together with thine own Sons: of such as
these bringing all their matters to God in this manner, Saint Paul truly, That
in every thing, says he, ye are enriched by him, in all utterance. 1 Cor.
1.5.

If we cast our eyes round upon all estates and orders of men, surely we shall
find many things to be endured in all of them. And even you your selves, whom
we salute as rich and blessed, and adore after a sort, have you not your
shares of troubles and vexations? which of you complains that you want
somewhat to endure? it sounds of virtue when every good man, although most
afflicted, dares say with a generous spirit: O Lord give more, send harder
things for me to suffer. The case stands very well with this man, such a
request as this is a clear sign of a pure intention. But you others, O
fortunes darlings, O great ones, and abounding with all kind of wealth, and how
do you bear your afflictions? I d^ubt not at all but you are perplexed many
ways, although ye say nay, which in this case are not to be credited: nay I
am verily persuaded, that you are often more grievously, though more secretly
tormented then any men of the strictest Orders, whose life is a mere act of
penitency: You have softer Beds indeed then those poor men, but it may be a
question, whether you, or they sleep quieter, for we do not go to Bed that
we may lie well, but that we may take our rest well: I cannot not deny the
time of your rest to be longer then theirs, but I know not whether I may
believe it to be sounder and sweeter: there be very many things which
disturb your sleeping, which do not theirs one jot. You have much more
variety of meats and far better, but it may be a question again, with whom
they relish better, neither indeed do I doubt, that to many which are kept to
their stint, their Sallets and Oate-meale, Pottage, boyld Barley and Lettice
taste more pleasant, Barley pudding
then Capons to you, fed with nothing but white bread and butter, and the very
brains of Jupiter do. You have more and more curious Clothes then they, but
here also let me ask the question, who have the fittest, they which suffer the
least cold in them, and are least pinched? Their shoes seldom hurt poor
people, but you more commonly. You have greater leisure, and more holy days,
but perhaps many labor with more case* then you play. Lastly you have freer
liberty then poor people, but many vices accompany your liberty, Rent
the remorse of mind, and deep wound of conscience. Now therefore, observe, I
beseech you, whether ye come to Bethany for Christ's sake, or else to see
Lazarus; whether ye sustain those things which ye ought to sustain, with
such a mind as is fit. Two men hung by Christ on either side upon mount
Golgotha, both of them Thieves, both Crucified, both dyed by this one and the
same punishment, but one was received in^^ Paradise, the other into Hell. What
I pray made such an unequal division between them equally guilty, and having
equal execution? Intention. Besought
He desired Christ to accept of his submission; the other turning away from
Christ, ended in impatience. This is the way from the very like cross, to
contrary Kingdoms, if the intention be so different.

Therefore we must take great heed, that we be not the Worlds Martyrs, the
Devils Confessors, the Disciples of Mamon, and the Scholars of Venus.
Self-love finds out a thousand cunning tricks, she most smoothly persuades
what she list, and takes for he scope private Judgment, Determination.
curiosity, self-will; this it does, that it may make intention, wrong,
unsound, far from God, and such from which God justly turns himself away.
If you offer one that is very hot and thirsty the best Cream that can be to
drink, yet if it be out of such a Cup wherein a great many flies are swimming,
do you think you shall do him a courtesy? who will presently drink,
although he be sore a-thirst? the snow-white licour invites him indeed, but
the Creatures that swim up and down make him affraide: first throw out the
little black birds, Bugs
afterward bring the milky Nectar to him. So good works, like a white and
sweet potion, like the daintiest Dishes, shall for all that never be pleasing
to God, if Vain glory, self-will, curiosity, covetousnes, Self-love and
conceit defile them. Dead Flies spoil the Apothecaries Ointment. Eccle. 10.1.
So all intention which is not right and sincere, corrupts and destroys the
most excellent deeds that can be: who would not laugh at that Inne-keeper,
which inviting a stranger into his Tavern, with most gallant words: Good Sir I
pray turn in hither, I have very rich and delicate wine indeed, but that it is
a little sower? Out upon you with this your delicate wine, which is either
sower, or water-washt, or dull. GOD in times past makes this very complaint by
the Prophet Esaias: Thy Wine is mixed with water. Esaias 1.22. The same may be
spoken of many: This deed of his, these works, this service of his, this
industry, this endeavor would be good wine, unless it were mingled with the
water of an ill intention: when the intention which goes before is untoward,
every work which follows after is wrong, although it seem to be right.
Greg. l. 1. Dial. c. 9. In the old Law, when any person that had the Leprosy
was to be made whole, Cleansed
the tippe of his right ear, and the thumb of his right hand, and the great
toe of his right foot, were to be anointed with Oil. Levit. 14.17. What does
God more commend unto us by this observation, then when we are about to use the
oil of mercy, or give alms, or perform any deed of Charity and Religion,
that we touch nothing that belongs to the left side, that no ambition, no
boasting, or wrong intention intermixe it self. Let not thy left hand know,
what thy right hand does.

Two Women strove about a Child before Solomon's Iudgement-Seate, both of them
indeed had a Child, but one a living Child, the other a dead; for she had
ove^-laid it in her sleep. This contention instructs us, if we mar^e it. We
indeed pray, give alms, assist with counsel and hand, use abstinence and
other things; good Action begets these Children as it were, but unless we
watch over all these things, unless a most sincere intention always defend
these Infants, we over lay them with careless sleep, our prayers, our
Almsdeeds, our abstinence, and all kind of suffering we destroy with
drowsinesse, and so take away what life and strength soever was in them before.
For as Richardus Victorinus excellently: That which the body is, says he,
without the soul, the same is an action without a good intention. Victor.
tract. 1. De statu inter Hom. If therefore these Children of ours be dear
unto us, if we will not labor in vain, let us always labor so, as to do
those things; not because it so pleases and agrees with our humor, nor
because it is the fashion, or because it is done of others, but because it
pleases God so. Let a single eye aim at the one and only honor of God in
all things, wherein it refu^eth to err. Let God be the cause, why we do
these things, avoid the other, endure those things. If now, as it falls out
many times, they be more slack in recompencing our pains, upon whom it is
bestowed, we have God for our Surety and Pledge: what God said to Abraham, let
all that are of a good intention account the same to be spoken to them: I am
thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1.

CHAP. XI. That Great Herod the Ascalonite, was a notable example of an evil
Intention. President

IVo, a man learned and religious, of the Order of Saint Dominicke, was sent
Ambassador by Lewis King of France, to the Sultan of Damascus: A mavelous
thing happened to him in his journey, and as is credible, was done on purpose
for the instruction of many in this manner. An old Woman met Ivo in a certain
place, carrying a Pitcher full of water in one hand, and a Copper Vessel full
of fire coals in the other. Burning
Ivo wondering at the strange approach of the old Wife bearing fire and water,
enquireth what these things meant? to whom the old woman: I carry Coals says
she, that I may set Paradise on fire with them, and burn it up: I carry
water, that I may quench the infernal flames and destroy Hell. And now Ivo
wondering more at such a desperate answer, demands farther, to what end she
went about such things, and for what good? That hereafter says she, all
intention which is not right and pure, may cease, that no man may be righteous
only in hope of Heaven and reward; no man also may hate sin for fear of
punishment and horror of Hell, but for the only love of God, and desire to
please him.

There came three great Princes from the East, to the Manger and strawye Cradle
of the Babe Christ: In all their Journey as well in Herod's House, as other
places, Palace
they were heard to answer things so frequently, Readily Et venimus adorare eum.
as that of a most right intention: And we are come to worship him. Mat. 2.2.
But Herod also pronounces the very same with sober mouth: That I may come and
worship him also. Earnest
ibi. v. 5 Here no hope of reward, or fear of punishment intermixed it self;
nor indeed is there any mention made either of Heaven or Hell: the only end of
the Bethlemiticall Voyage, is Divine Worship and Adoration. As well Herod as
his Guests seem to agree upon this truly sacred intention. The Worshipers are
ready.
They are ready to go to worship, being provoked neither by any fear of
punishment, or hope of reward. And who can say Herod determines not the same,
as those pious strangers? But now we will demonstrate, that there is as much
difference between the intention of Herod and his three Guests, as is between
Heaven and earth: And Herod shall appear to be an egregious Idea of an ill
intent.

It is the common saying of Philosophers: Vitimum in action, primum est in
intention.
The last thing in action, is the first in intention: the end is that to which
all things are referred. That is manifold by daily experience, one takes upon
him diverse kinds of labors; this week he brings in Lime, the next Tiles
and Stones, the third Sand, the fourth Boards, afterward he deliberates with
his friends; one while he measures this, another that; now he turns about
his Compasses, and then he tells his money; one while he talks with
Carpenters, then he sendet^ for Masons; now he hireth a Glazier and a Smith,
and wherefore all this? For a House. A House is the end of all this, the first
indeed in intention, but the last in action. Matthew reports of three great
Lords taking their Journey from the East toward Jerusalem; Dynasta^.
this journey was long, difficult, laborious, and of great expenses. But what
is the the end and scope of this our journey? The adoration of the new King.
And we are come to worship him. All the way they meditated upon this: Appointed
We are come to worship him. This intention of theirs set the voyage, this
laded them with diverse gifts, this prescribed necessaries for the way, this
brought them to Jerusalem the Metropolis of Judea, this sought the
entertainment of Herod, this most faithfully obeyed the conducting Star: the
end did dictate all these things, truly a most excellent and laudable end, And
we are come to worship him. But Herod also says the same, and that with the
same words: That I, says he, may come and worship him a^^o. Who would not
believe Herod and his Royal Guest to be of one mind, of like purpose, of the
very same intention? But see I pray, as much as Heaven and earth differ, so
much the mind, purpose, intention of Herod, and the three Sages disagreed.
Their end was the best that could be, none worse then his. Hereof these are
most clear arguments.

First of all, When Herod the King had heard these things, Mat. 2.3.
he wa^ troubled. The matter is suspitiou^ already, and behold the first
Argument of an evil intent, to be troubled. A man of a good meaning is never
wholly troubled, howsoever the business goes, although all things fall out in
the foulest manner, he alters not, he is like himself. There shall no evil
happen to the just. Pro. 12.21. For he cannot fall from the good intention
which he has: Hero^ therefore was troubled, because he feared to be thrust
out of hi^ Kingdom. But from whence is this fear? being too great a friend to
himself, he loved and sought himself so fervently. In the year 1414. there
were three Popes, (that was the stain of the Age) John, Blemish
Gregory, Benedict. In these troubles, Johannes Dominicus, one of the purpled
Fathers, Cardinals
a very sincere man, could not dissemble his truly honest mind and intention
For though he alone could do all things with Gregory, and by him also had
been raised to that state, yet notwithstand ng he fail^d not to advise
Gregory, that he should descend of his own accord from so high a Throne,
whereinto he had entered by a negative and unlawful w^y Gregory obeyed one so
since^ly admonishing The other two were removed by force from this Sea. Which
done, Johannes Dominicus the purple Senator, endeavoring to reduce himself
also into order, went to the Counsel of Constance, To reform
put off his purpose for another that should be more worthy, and placed
himself below Bishops. See, how many ways and how happily a right intention
triumphed over ambition. Herod because he was so ambitious, therefore also so
troublous. If a man had blowed into his ears day and night, that the Messiah
was borne, but nevertheless would do not the least hurt, nor that he came to
take away Kingdoms, but to give; Notwithstanding Herod in this most
troublesome state would have feared daily, nor cast any thing else in his mind
then the speedy slaughter of the Infant King. But if one little vein of Herod
had flowed with a right intention, he would have reasoned thus with himself:
If the Child be borne which is the Messiah and Christ indeed, God will be with
him; but if otherwise, I trust God will stand on my side. But the wicked King
gave place to no such honest thought, his mind run upon this one thing: Let
this Child dye, let him dye; and although I must stab him through a thousand,
Smite
although through fourteen thousand bodies, let him be stabbed, let him be
slaughtered, let him dye. That so many Children were slain, is the assertion
of the best authors. And yet covering this Parracides mind with such pious
words and countenance; That I, says he, may come and worship him also. The
first sign that betrayed evil thoughts under a fair spoken tongue, was
disturbance. And when Herod had heard these things, he was troubled.

Secondly, And when he had gathered all the chief Priests, and Scribes of the
people together, he demanded of them, where Christ should be borne. What was
the intent of Herod in this? To know the place where the Child was borne. What
hurt I pray is this? This forsooth, because there is no good at all therein. To
desire to know, is of it self indeed, as they call it, an indifferent
intention, which is neither good nor evil; hereunto if an evil action be
joined, neither of them can be termed good. And why would Herod know the
Country where Christ was borne? whether that he might salute, present gifts,
adore him? That he might murder him. This was his mind, this was his intention.
Thirdly, Then Herod when he had privily called the Wise men, enquired of them
diligently what time the Star appeared. Neither is this a sign of a good
intention. To call the Wise men, was no evil; to call them privily, was little
goodness, and next door to evil* For every one that evil does, hates the
light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved. John.
2.20. This is a sure sign of no good meaning in any one, if he labor so much
to hide, cover, keep close a thing, that it may be no ways known of others:
this: person hates the light, and desires that not himself, but his faults
may lie hid.

Many things without question are done in private, which are never so much as
spoke of; the Court has her secrets, and so the Camp, and yet in these very
places, no body fears to have his witness, if he know it to be necessary.
How much alms is given privately by some, when the Author is known scarce to
one, many times to none? Religiously this, holily, and to the mind of Christ.
If yet they which give, did understand it to make for the greater honor of
God* that they should be known, it is like they would not suppres these
speeches: I am the man, it is I that give. Vices are not after the same manner:
for there are private places and corners, where they play, where they drink,
where they steal embracements* where they take unlawful pains. These fly
Merchants, these Players, these good fellows, these Lovers will be known by
no means. What Orator can persuade such as these? (...) will b^e for Gods
honor that it should be known, who they a^e themselves, and who their
companions They hear nothing, but they bind every one with threat^ing, either
hold thy peace, Aut file (...) peri.
or pay dearly for it. There is none of them from whom thou can wring this
speech: I am a Gamester, I am a Companion, I am a Wencher, and a Spend-thrift.
These things use to be done by stealth and privily. But this same privily, is
an evident token, that all these things are done with no good meaning: Things
carried in secret, are for the most part not without suspicion Herod therefore
while he privily sends for the Wise men, Tecta p^^num^. suspecta.
makes himself openly suspected of an ill intent. From this corrupted root,
there sprang up such branches. Whatsoever Herod did here, he did vitiously.
When the intent which goes before is perverse, every deed which follows after
is naught. As soon therefore as he had privily called the Wise men, he
enquired of them diligently the time of the Star, he sent them away to
Bethlem, commanded every thing to be narrowly sought out, and tidings thereof
returned him: all maliciously and with harm enough, for he added a most
deceitful and wicked intention: That I may come and worship him also. Behold a
Devil* but a fair one, and trimmed up in the habit of an Angel. An Angels
Plumes
O most subtle Fox! our Savior not without cause gave that name to the
Herodian breed. They trusted to cover a bloody, inhumane, mischievous mind with
a Foxes cunning. Wiliness


But Herod's sacred Senators, and privy Counselors, of what mind and intention
were they? Of a diverse: For when the Counsel was called out of course, it is
credible that there were some of them which said: What Devil has brought
these Outlandish men from the East Country, as if we had not enough to do
without them? You might have heard another say: I would have these Idolaters,
to stay at home, and not come and disturb our peace. Another cursing them,
said perhaps: Let these fellows go with a mischief, they have made us
ashamed of our selves. Must they know these things in Arabia, and must we be
ignorant of them in Judea? Others, a little more modestly: We owe this out of
duty to the King, to whom we have obliged our selves for performance of this
matter, therefore it behooves us to go to our Books and search, which is the
native Country of Christ. But neither were these men of so praiseworthy an
intention. For a good intention seldom puts men on, when force and necessity
constrain. It is no virtue to say to him which gives a good thing in charge: I
will when I needs must
Indeed I will not, but I ought. Although we search Herod's Court all over, we
shall searce find any right intention therein, and which follows, no good
action. For all those things, to come together, to enquire, to examine Books,
to give answers, are a thing of policy, and indifferent actions, Adiaphorae
whereunto if a good meaning be not joined, they obtain no heavenly reward at
all. Moreover that disturbance of Herod, Perturbation
consultation of the Rabbines, astonishment of the City, might have made those
three Kings of the East very doubtful, have drawn them into error, and
perswad^d them to return without performing their businesse^ For they had
occasion enough to say, What children are we, and worthy to be laughing-stocks
for Kings. Behold in the very midst of Judea, they know nothing of this King of
the Jews, whom we seek for, and we so rashly following a dumb star, Mutum
ignem.
forsaking our own Countries h^ve cast our selves upon these foreign
Coasts: we have troubled King Herod, and made work for his Counselors of
Estate, we have raised the City of Jerusalem to no purpose, wh^t vanity have
we sought for by this Journey? They let in none of these thoughts, they let in
none; but with what foot they began, with what intention they set forth, with
that they went on constantly, they gave no other answer to all men then this:
We are come to worship him. If any one had questioned them in the Cave at
Bethlem: Stable
And what do these gifts of yours mean, what this humble carriage of men
prostrating themselves, what this bowing of your bodies to the ground? they had
never answered any thing else, then this: We are come to worship him, neither
fear, nor force, or any necessity drove us hither, no hope of gain
constrained us, this one business brought us out of doors. We are come to
worship him. And what is he, O men, whom you are come to worship? The very
same, say they, whose Star we have seen, whom the Stars obey, which has
brought a Torch for us from Heaven, him we are come to worship. Hunc venimus
adorato.
At length they obtained their end, and fell down flat and worshipped him.
Every one might have said for his own part: I have not sought mine own glory,
but his that is borne King of the Jews; I give my mind to this, for that cause
I undertook this Journey, for this end I brought these Gifts: they had all one
mind and one voice. We are come to worship him. Being brought at last, by the
Conduct of a Star, to the meanest Cottage, to a house for Beasts, to a poor
little Infant, nor having any God like Book, nevertheless They fell down and
worshipped him. Behold, good Christian, what an evil, what a good intention
teaches: Behold how dissembling and fearful that is, how constant and erect
this, and how both bewray themselves every way by their own marks! Discover
Herod though he were an abstruse and concealed man, and knew how to dissemble
his truculent mind in cunning!, yet he gave apparent tokens enough of his
wicked intent. The three Wise men from the East did go astray something, when
they sought Herod's lodging, but this very error proved some good to them, for
their good intention, it was a help so to err. Whereas therefore they were
carried to the Cradle of Christ newborn, with a very good intention, they had
not only a star for their Guide, but also an Angel for their Guard, which
most faithfully instructed them, carefully to shun their treacherous Lodging,
not to return to Herod, but depart home another way, that they might not
deprave the excellent intention, wherewith they came. Neither indeed did the
Wise men follow the Star with any other mind, then that they would wholly
submit themselves to his will and pleasure, which had sent the Star for their
Conduct. This is a true, and pure intention indeed, To follow the Will of GOD
in all things. Hereof a Divine of our Age: He which is so minded, says he,
that he desires nothing else, then to fulfill the Will of GOD, God can never
forsake that man. Tymp. in Spec. Epist. Signo. 117. A mighty promise.

Le^ this therefore be the intent of a Christian man in all things that he
does, to say daily to himself with a sincere heart: Lord, I do all things for
thine honor, I desire to obey thy Will in all things, whether they be easy
for me to do or hard, whether sweet or sower. I come to worship thee, not as
Herod, but as the three Kings out of the East, I desire to adore thee Lord
always, and in all my actions; for that cause I live, therefore I eat,
drink, rest, labor that I may serve thee, please thee, obediently follow thy
Will every where, always, in all things: will so live, so dye.

CHAP. XII. What we call an indifferent intention, what None.
ALthough there be no voluntary Action, which is not derived from some
Intention; for whatsoever we do willingly and wittingly, we do with desire of
obtaining some end or other: notwithstanding we perform many things so
doubtfully, most things so gapingly, loosely, and heedlesly, that in many
things we may seek to have an adiaphorous or indifferent Intention, in most
none at all. But what intention we call Indifferent, what None, now we will
plainly express.

It is called an ^ndifferent intention, or Adiaphorous, which in it self is
neither good, nor evil, nor makes any thing to honesty or dishonesty, and
has commonly mere natural Actions for her end, such as are, to eat, Go up
and down
to drink, to walk, to sleep. Seneca comes for a good light to this purpose,
who in a plain Christian sense: Indifferent things, s^ith he, I term to be
neither good, nor evil, as sickness, pain, poverty, banishment, death; none of
these is glorious by it self, yet nothing without these: For not poverty is
commended, but he whom poverty dejecteth not, nor ma^es him steope. Banishment
is not commended, but he which taoke it not heavily. Grief is not commended,
but whom grief has nothing constrained. No body praises death, but him whose
spirit death sooner took away then troubled. All these things by themselves
are not worthy, nor glorious, but whatsoever virtue has enterprised or
exployted by reason of these, it makes worthy and glorious. They are placed
between both: This is the diffe^ence whether wickedness or virtue lay hand on
them. Senec. Epist. 82. Med. And that we may clearly know, what indifferent,
what good, what evil is, Annaeus adds. Every thing receives honor which
had none before, when virtue is joined with it We call the same Chamber-light,
which in the night is all dark: day puts light into it, night takes it away.
So to these which are termed indifferent and ordinary things of us, Riches,
Strength, Beauty, Honors, Rule: and on the contrary Death, Banishment,
Sickness, Grievances, and other things which we fear less or more, either
Wickedness or Virtue gives the name of good or bad. A piece of metal which
is neither hot nor cold of it self, being cast into the Furnace becomes hot,
being thrown into the water grows cold again. Idem ibid. Therefore, only
virtue is good, only wickedness evil. Indifferent things are neither good,
nor evil by themselves: use gives them their name, when either virtue, or
vice comes to be joined with them. So Wit, Art Science, Health, Strength,
Riches, Glory, Nobleness, be things indifferent, because they be natural,
nor rise any higher then whither a good intention lifts them, which also if
she contains her self within the bounds of nature, nor mounteth up to God,
continues indifferent, and without reward. Hereupon to go, to stand, to sit,
to run, to speak, to labor etc. are not good, no^ gain the name of a good
desert but only from a good intention, which extolleth a small action although
the least and vilest, to a very high degree of honor; which that we may
thoroughly understand, Lodovicus Blosius instructs us excellently after this
manner: Those things which are to be done (although when it behooveth us to
take meat and drink, to give our selves to rest, or to apply any other
nourishing comfort to our bodies) let this consideration go before, that thou
desire to do these very things purely for Gods honor For even as a matter
which seems of it self t^ be weighty and of great moment, is wholly
displeasing to God i^ the intent of him that d^eth be impure: so ad^ed which of
it self is accounted poor and of no importance, d^eth very much please the
Lord, if the intent of the doer be right. And this can a good intention do,
but an indiffe^ent intention can do none of these t^ings, but m^keth the
action wherewith it is coupled neither worse nor better, as we will show more
at large hereafter.

That ^s called Noe Intention of us, when one does this or that lightly out of
custom, and proposes to himself no end of his doing, and l veth as it were
by chance* This is ^ great abuse of life, and privy gulf devouring all our
pains. Seneca most justly complains heretofore: And it must needs be, says
he, that chance should prevail much in our life, because we live by chance.
As often as thou will know, what is to be avoided, or desired, look unto the
chiefest good, and purpose of the whole life, for whatsoever we do, ought to
be agreeable to that. None will set every thing in order, but he which has
already resolved upon his end. No body, although he have colors ready, will
make a Picture, unless he know before hand what he means to paint.
Therefore we offend, because we stand all upon the part of life, but none
deliberates upon his whole life. He ought to know what he Arrowe: which will
let fly his aims at, and then to direct and rule the Weapon with his hand. Our
devices go astray, because they have no end, whereat they should be directed.
Ignoranti quem portum petat, nullus suus ventus est.
No wind fits for him, which understands not to what Po^t he saileth. Senec.
Epist. 71. init. All very excellently; and he is truly ignorant to what Port
he applies himself, which wearieth himself in vain with No Intention. Rudis
indigestaq. moles,
Where an action has no sure end and scope, there is confusion, and a rude and
indigest Chaos over all. God gave charge in times past. All the fat, says he,
shall be the Lords, by a perpetual Statute for your generations, throughout
your habitations. Levit. 3.16. What marvel says Isychius, that GOD so
straightly required the fat of the out^ard and inward parts: This fat is a Right
Intention, to be directed to God in all things; God leaves this for no body.
But he which sets no intention before his doings, he takes away the best of
the Sacrifice from God. Such a one as this, whatsoever he performs, he does
either out of inclination, or custom, for he knows not why he does it, or to
what purpose, or for whom. This sort of people are in a most miserable estate,
which after a great deal of pains can hope for no certain reward.

Who is more restless then Children at three or four years old? they run
whole days to and fro, nor ever stand still long in one place: now they think
they are riding, Play with
then they toss a Shittle-cocke into the air, anon they build houses, by and
by they leap up and down upon stools so they weary themselves off of their
legs, being never idle in nothing but idleness, and when they have worn out
the whole day, and beat themselves out of play, at length wh^t is all their
pains and weariness? they have dealt with trifles, they have chased away
flies, they have drawn water with a Sieve, they have sowed in the water, with
baby-like and frui^lesse pains. Very like to these babyes are all those, which
govern their doings with no intention, they scarce ever lay hold upon any
great matters, or if they touch them, they run over them with a sl^ght hand,
and rather nibble upon the top, then search to the bottom. Reach cunning.
The Cloudy Satyrist fitly enquireth of these people: Est aliquid quo tendis,
and in quod duigis a^cum?
An passem sequeris corvos testaque lutoque,
Securus quo pes ferat, atque ex tempore vivis?
Persius Sat. 3.
What go thou after with thy bended Bow?
Or do thou follow every wandering Crow?
With Stones, and Clods, not looking to thy way,
But stayest upon a course, that knows no stay?


Have thou any certain end whither thou referrest all things? or live thou
for a day without purpose, without providence, as nature persuades thee?
Suggeste^^
And what is that Carrier, who to one that asks, Whither travellest thou?
should reply, indeed I know not my self. O fools head return home, silly
fool return, and think first whither thou go, before thou go forth. In
this life, O Christians, we must not play the idle Gossips, and run a gadding
whither our foot leads us: every hour must our last hour be thought upon,
and Iournies end, a Right Intention must be renewed almost every minute. Very
great respect is to be had, how we affect things, whether for love of
goodness, or of our selves; to set forth naked works is nothing
praiseworthy. And indeed where the intention is not right, there it is either
evil, or none. The disposition which thou replenishest not with virtue, lies
free for vices, even as a field which thou shall cease to Till, for fear of
over-loading it with crops, will of its own accord eat it self out with
unprofitable weeds. So for the most part as soon as we cease, to do well,
we begin to do evil. Hereof likewise exceeding well Seneca: Let us imagine
some body, says he, to do that which he ought: he will not do it
continually, he will not do it equally, for he knows not why he does it.
Some things will come forth right, either by chance, or continual doing, but
there will not be a rule in the hand by which they may be squared, which he may
believe that the things he did are right. He will not promise himself such
for ever, because he is good by chance. Moreover it may be Statutes will tell
thee what thou ought to do; but they will not tell thee how to do, in that
manner as thou ought: and if they perform not this, they bring us not home
to virtue. He will do, I confess, what he is charged: but that is a small
matter, because indeed the commendation is not in the fact, but in the manner
how it should be done. Senec. Epist. 95. Med. Most excellently every way, and
according to the rule of Gods sacred Word. Truly the commendation is not in
the fact but in the manner how it should be done. It is not sufficient not
only to do, nor yet to do well, unless this very thing be done with a good
intention. So much therefore let us account of a single eye at all times, and
every where to lift it up to GOD But are we not often more foolish then every
Child, whose sight fails us in so great light, nay we make all things
darkness to us, and by that means we see nothing at all, neither what is
hurtful, nor what expedient; we run up and down all our life, nor stand still
for all that, or set our foot the more circumspectly. But who knows not how
furious a thing violence is in the dark? Impetus
But surely we do it, that we may be called back the farther from home:
and when we understand not whither we are carried, we run lightly hither and
thither, at last any whither, with blind have.

God most faithfully warning us by the Prophet Aggee: Set your hearts, says
he, to consider your ways, ye have sown much, and bring in little: ye eat,
but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink ye
cloth you, but there is non^ warm: and he that earneth wages, earneth wages
to put i^ into a bag with holes. Thu^ says the Lord of Hosts, conside^ your
ways. Agge. 1.5, 6, 7 Lo, how God presses that matter: Consider, call your
ways to account. How would he have i^ thought upon, which way an whither we
go; Lo how every where he requires a good intention. Siminastit multum, et
intulistis parum.
But all that are negligent hereof have this lesson sun to them: Ye have sown
much and brought in little. There be some that sow money, so much money forsooth
they bestow upon their T^ble, so much upon cloth s and housholdstuffe, so much
upon recreations, plays, banquets, so much also for the hearing of news, so
much upon diverse creatures, so much upon Books, which they neither read
themselves, nor suffer to be read by others, but keep them as a Dog does the
manger. So much money they spend over and above upon fawning companions,
Ieasters, Iuglers, Parasites, Fools; to say nothing of other base kind of
people; so much also they lay out upon curious conceits, Devices
and many times pernicious, so much upon other most idle fooleries, so much in
conclusion they give away upon alms and benevolence, if so be that be done
with a sound intention. These people believe it, sow very much money, thou may
rightly say of every one of these, He has dispersed, but not, given to the
poare, but to them that were rich before; or he has given to taylers, he has
given to Cooks, Comfit-maker Clawbacks, morris Dancer Tale-carriers: he has
given to these, and those, and the other, that he might draw them to hi^ side,
that he might corrupt them and buy their mouths for him self. But what has
he given wit^ a good will to religious uses, so the maintenance of truth? O
wretches I Ye have sown much and brought in little, because ye^ have sown
not with a due intention, hereupon your harvest is s^ mean, so none: Ye have
eatet^ but ye had not enough; ye have drank, but ye were not filled wit^
drink. There be some which may eat and drink, there be^ which may hear
many and excellent things of Divine matters they are diverse ways persuade to
goodness: and as Cooks us^ to do which serve in sometime boiled meats,
sometimes roasted sometimes baked: now dry, now laid in broth; now cold, now hot
and smoking, that they may whet the stomach to eat: so virtue must be
commended with a lovely variety to these fastidious hearers of holy things,
they hear, Mealy mouthed
and as it were eat that they hear, they show themselves greedy, but
presently they long for something else, they bury what they heard in speedy
oblivion, and turn their mind another way: they become neither in better state
nor stronger for it, for they give ear to sacred admonitions not with that
intention, that they may grow better and more holy. O silly wretches! Ye have
eaten, but ye are not satisfied. Ye have clothed your selves, but there is
none warm. There be some which now and then take virtues part, they frequent
the Church, they pray, they arm themselves with confession of their sins, with
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and yet are not warm for all that, partly
because they direct not these things to God by a sincere and servent intention,
partly because they presently expose themselves again to the cold; they are
scarce gone out of the Church, from prayer, from holy duties, but they return
to their former wallowing in lust, they take up their ancient course of cursing
and swearing, they avoid no ill occasions; so they never put off their old
manners, they stand still benumbed in their accustomed vices, as before. O silly
wretches! Ye have clothed your selves, and there is none warm. And he which
earneth wages, puts it into a bag full of holes. God is most liberal in
bestowing gifts, which we put up into our bag, but such a one many times as
has holes. Our mind like a bag has so many slits, Graces
through which the gifts of God may fall out, as it avoydeth not occasions,
which invite unto wickedness. Bernard comprising all this daintily: He sows
much, says he, to his own heart, which knows much of the divine
Commandments by hearing, or reading but b^ing forth little fruit by negligent
practicing He eats, and is not satisfied, which hearing the Word of God,
coveteth the gain or glory of the world. But he is well said not to be
satistied, which eats one thing and longs for another, he drinks, and is
not filled, which listeneth to the voice of preaching, but changes not his
mind. Greg. l. 1. in Ezech. Hom 10. God in times past to Ezekiel: Son of man,
cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this role that I give thee.
Ezekiel 3 3. But what else, says Gregory, are the bowels of the belly but the
treasures of the mind, a Right Intention, an holy desire, an humble affection
toward G^d, and pitiful towa^ds our neighbor. Let us weigh, my beloved
brethren, how godly this promise is. For many re^d, and are hungry, as soon
they h^ve done reading. Many hear the voice of p^eaching, but go away empty
after the hearing of it. Who se bowels are not filled, although their belly
eats, because though they perceive with their mind the meaning of Gods Words,
by forgetting and not keeping the things which they heard, they lay them not up
in the bows of their hearts. Greg. l. 1. in Ezech. Hom. 10. post init. O poor
souls! Ye earne wages, but ye put it into a bag with holes. Here the same
Gregory: We see, says he, when money is put into the torn bag, but we see not
when it is lost out. They therefore which look how much they bestow, but weigh
not how much they steal, put their wages into a bag with holes: because
fors^oth they lay it up looking upon the hope of their confidence, but they
never look when they loose it. Greg. par. 3. Curae pastoral. c. 22. sine. Thus
in conclusion we labor in vain, which take no care for the soul of labor,
intention. We set the good which we do before our eyes, but we make no
account of the right intention, which we neglect: ^o we earne wages, and put
it i^to a bag with holes.

There is no more troublesome labor, then labor in vain, and without effect.
No body would willingly loose their pains. Some forsooth labor like Asses,
they take many and heavy burdens upon them, and place all the credit (...)
that, to undertake great matters: Issachar is a strong Ass etc. he bowed his
shoulder to bear, and became a servant to tributes. Genesis 49.14. But these
labor not for themselves, but others, when they want that intention which
should commend their labor to God. Some moreover suffer like Martyrs, but it
shall not be sung of them: The noble army of Martyrs praise thee, in Angli.
Liturg. Te Deum. Men in a pitiful case indeed, and so much the more to be
lamented as they be more in number. Ah, how many are there which make a great
profession of bearing the cross, and yet go on scarce a foot in the way to
Heaven, for want only of intention. They suffer mighty matters, but therefore
because they are constrained to suffer them. They hang back for certain, they
beat themselves miserably, they resist as much as they can, but because they
cannot shake off the cross which is laid upon them, they go on in a recling
manner. This is not to suffer for Christ; this is to row up and down in the
air, to set in into a cold Oven, to build upon the sand Baalims Priests what
pains I pray did they spare, that they might excel Elias in sacrificing? They
called upon their God from morning even until evening, continually crying out,
Baal ^eare us, O Baal hear us etc. And ^hey leapt upon the Altar which was
made. And when it was noone, Elias mocked them, saying, cry aloud. And they
cried aloud, and out themselves after their manner with Knives and Lancers,
till the blood gushed out upon them. 3 King. 18.27. Nevertheless there was no
voice of Baal, no spark of fire, no success of the matter showed it self.
Kindled
The mad Priests should first have stird up fire in their minds (as Elias d d)
have rowzed their intention to God, and by this means they had called fire out
of Heaven. The world as it were another Baal, does trouble, weary, vex his
own diverse ways, these it draws to all wickedness, those to any slavery
whatsoever. The wretches are disturbed with going, standing, running. They are
exercised many times with odious, difficult, troublesome, wicked, mad, unworthy
labors. Businesses
They which serve the world, had need be able to swallow all kinds of
invectives, reproaches, reprehensions, dispraises, bitter taunts, many wry
looks: and as Iuglers devour Knives by cleanly conveiance, so these are
constrained to endure and take down whether they will or no many bitter and
stinging words indeed. They have their detracters, corrivals, adversaries,
malevolent and envious antagonists, yet notwithstanding they are driven to make
low congees to them, to kiss their hands, to reverence them with a thousand
ceremonies and pleasing gestures, or else to renounce the service of the world.
Neither yet do they want cares, vexations, perturbations and troubles at home.
All these things taken together would be like a fat Ox cut in pieces, so that
fire were not wanting, so that a right intention like the celestial flame
would lick them up. But now because many bear such things, but impatiently,
they bear, but not offer them to God; they suffer these things, but without a
right intention, they suffer not for Christ, but for themselves, for their own
and the worlds sake, hereupon no desert or reward is to be thought of in this
case: they beat the air, they sow upon stones, they deserve no favor from
God. Of these people elegantly and truly Bernard: Woe be to them, says he,
which carry the cross, not as our Savior did his, but as that Cyrenean
another man's. For they are broken with a double contrition, which are of this
sort, both for as much as they temporally afflict themselves here for temporal
glory; and for their inward pride are dragged to eternal punishment hereafter.
They labor with Christ, but they reign not with Christ. They drink of the
brook in the way, but they shall not lift up their head in the gate: they
mourn now, but they shall not be comforted. Bern. in Apol. ad Gul. abb.
initio. So that reviling Thief was Crucified indeed by Christ, but he did not
go with Christ from the Cross to Paradise. In like manner many take much
pains, but in vain; sustain much, but also in vain: they exercise virtue
likewise, as it seems, but all in vain, yea with loss, because they want a
right intention in all these things. Oseas the Hebrew Prophet deciphering these
very people: An Heifer, Osc. 10.11*
says he, that is taught to tread out the Corn. They which labor without a
sure and right intention, are like Oxen which tread out the Corn, these though
they be loosed from their work, yet return of their own accord; they are
already grown perfect in this labor, which also they enjoy, for thereby they
fill their mouths full of Provender, and so willingly perpetuate this
business, and put on the yoke again very easily. No otherwise do these
Scholars of the world, whom Gregory notably setting forth: They willingly
toil and moyle for the glory of the world, and likewise how their necks with
all devotion to the yoke of hard labors. And what wages have they for their
work? a mouth full of Provender, but not a purse so well filled with moneys.
They be Heifers indeed taught to tread out the Corn, they labor like Beasts
that draw or grind, or like blind horses in a Fullers Mill, they are driven by
one boy with a whip, and run all day. And whither do they come at length in
the evening? they are in the very same place, because they go round in a
Circle: so they which want a right intention, are stark blind, and make no
progress at all in virtue this day: to morrow, the next day comes without any
difference to them. These Oxen always plough in the same path, and have this
labor for their pains, therefore they can expect nothing else from God. This
is the cause why Paul so contentedly exhorts: Whatsoever ye do in word o^
deed, do all in the name of the LORD JESUS, giving thanks to GOD, and the
Father by him. Colossians 3.17. The same Apostle as earnestly pressing it
again: Whether ye eat, says he, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of GOD. All, all which must so eat, so drink, so do every thing
else, that GOD may be honored, no man hurt or offended.

Chrysostom explaining this precept of Paul: Although a thing, says he, be
spiritual, yet if it be not done for Gods sake, it hurts him very much that
does it. Chrysostom, Tom. 5. Orat. Calendis dicta. And even as Masons do
carry their Rule from Angle to Angle, so let that Divine saying of Paul be our
rule: Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory
of God. Most rightly therefore Laurentius Justinian: Let the first Word, the
first Thought, the first Affection, sound of the divine praise; let it direct a
Supplication inkindled with zeal to GOD. Just: de discipl. et perfect. Mon. c.
10. Fine. A thing well begun, is as good as half done. Dimidium facti, qui
been coepit, haber.

The end of the first Book.
The Second Book declares who are both the favorers and foes of a good
intention, but chiefly Vain glory, and rash Judgment; the Signs, Practice,
and reward thereof.
CHAP. I. That a Right Intention is that good will commended by the Angels.
GOod will, is the Soul of action, good will it never but rich, good will can
do all things. The night which Christ was borne, Genij
the heavenly ministers sung a wonderful Song on earth; they which heard these
Musicians from Heaven were Shepherds; the Quire, Et in terra pax, hominibus
bona volungat.
the Field; the Song i^ self, And in earth peace, god will toward men. Luke
2.15. I beseech you, let us take so much time, as to enquire: this very thing
of all those which dutyfully stood about the strawen Cradle of Christ, what
Good will is? Let us begin first to demand of the Angels themselves.

O most pure and blessed Spirits, why do ye come down in troops unto our
Cottages, what seek ye in earth that can be wanting in Heaven? we have no
lodging worthy of you. To this our question, this is the voice of all the
Angels at once: O mortals, we know well the condition and inhabiters of the
place. Neither indeed do we seek famous adventures, rare inventions, exotic
Arts, strange fashions, nor Gold or Jewels by this our coming, but Good Will,
which is more precious, and dear to us then gold, and all kind of Jewels. And
surely herein the Angels seem in my mind to have done so, as Great men
sometimes use to do when they come in their Journey to a poor Alehouse. For
the t^pster when he sees an honorable Baron, or noble Earl to be his
Guest, first of all he purposes to excuse the meannes of the house, that they
can find no delicates or dainties there, no Beds fit enough for so great a
stranger, that they have bread and drink in a readiness, but are without
almost every thing else, and that indeed the manner of living in the Country is
no otherwise: yet if he please to stay, at his Masters command he will be
ready to bring forth whatsoever he has in custody over all the house. Is M of
The Earl courteously and pleasantly to encourage the man: I know, says he,
my good friend, what house I am come into; if thou shall bring me a couple of
Eggs and a cup of thy Beer, thou have provided enough for this mean; neither
did I come hither to feast my self, an unknown Guest that desire to be
private, and to leave thee the richer. Do thou like this? The Host full of
joy, and with a cheerful countenance: What else, says he, O my Lord, what
else but this, with all my heart? Charge, call, command; I, and mine will do
what you require to the utmost of our powers. This forwardnes of mind, this
most ready will, the Angels those great Powers from above did seek in this
inferior world, and that for our profit, Pax Hom. bonae voluntatis.
that they might leave us far richer then they found us. And in earth peace,
good will toward men. So Otho the Emperor taking occasion to visit Romualdus,
would not only go into his Cell, and taste of his victuals, but also in his
poor and hard Bed would so great a Majesty lie. Hier. Plat. l. 2. de bon.
stat. rel. c. 37. So other Kings and Pr^nces turning sometimes into most desert
Cottages, have made use of the fountain only, and bread almost as hard as
stone for their Diet, not without pleasure. And so Angels delight amongst us,
is good will, and a right intention. But let us enquire of Joseph also, with
what intention he came to Bethlem.

O religious Householder, most chaste Joseph, what seek thou in this journey,
so long, so difficult, especially the time so contrary? why travellest thou to
Bethlem? all the Innes every where are taken up, not so much as a corner is
empty for thee, thou art every way an excluded man; thou may go to a
thousand houses to look bed and bo^rd, a thousand bars will keep the doors
shut, none will let thee and thy wife come in: Therefore rather go back
again, and dwell at Nazareth. Here no body will bid thee welcome, much less
entertain thee with a cup of Wine. Joseph full of most holy resolution: It is
no matter, says he, that no habitation of men is free for me, therefore we
will make hold with Catell, neither truly did we take our Journey hither, to
dwell conveniently and at ease, but that we might obey the divine pleasure, we
bent all our mind to this, that which we seek, is obedience, thither will we
follow, whithersoever the Will of God shall call us But by your favor, Threshed
O good Joseph, you seem to be beside the matter: Thi^ is not the Will of God,
but the pride of the Roman Emperor. It may be Augustus Caesar desired to know
his strength and power, therefore he troubles all Kingdoms and Provinces,
that he may understand how great he is, and be more proud by this occasion. On
the contrary Joseph: God, says he, finds this very pride of an Idolater, to
be a fit instrument to accomplish his own Will. It is the Lord: let him do
what seems good in his fight. 1 King. 3.18. Forasmuch therefore as Augustus
Caesar, the supreme Magistrate, has by Gods Providence made a Decree
throughout the whole World, that every one should repair to the City of their
own Tribe: therefore we also undertook this Journey, that we might show our
obedience to this Edict: This is mine, and the Virgins intention committed to
my trust, which we can as conveniently perform in the poorest Cottage, in the
vilest corner, in a Stable, as in the Palace of King Herod, or Annas the High
Priest. But ask we likewise the Blessed Virgin her self concerning the same
matter.

O most Blessed Virgin, if I shall call thee the Mother of God, Give thee all
due praise
I shall lay all praise upon thee. Thou art that truly worthy Mother, at whose
maiden Travel the Angels should descend from Heaven. What I pray, divine
Virgin, lookst thou after in the native place of thy Lynage: or art thou
ignorant? there is none acknowledges poor Kindred. And it is much to be feared
least thy Journey be taken in vain, for the richer sort of David's stock have
taken up every Inn of the City before hand: you must either live abroad in the
streets, or else return. Never think that those that be of your race will
give place to you, there is none of them will come to see you, we will send
meat and drink to entertain you, which will bestow any honor upon you. None
will be known (...) your alliance, all courtesy banished from hence already
nor any little Inn will recei^ you: They which be poor as despised, though
they be nev^ so good. Mortuus vivos frequentat, pauper inter divites.
And it is truly said: poor man amongst the rich, com^ as welcome as a Ghost
to the ving. Vet. monast. Trochaic. Wherefore, O most entire Virgin, ^ther the
open street must be t^ house, or thou must take the sa^ way again, which thou
came Hereunto the Childbearing Vi^gin: My Joseph, says she, and seek not
after our Kinsfolk, a^ the honor of our Parentage, (...) a convenient place
to lodge i^ but the one and only Will God, which God has declar^ unto us by
Augustus Caesar. B^ O most blessed Mother, g^ leave to a word, this seems
(...) to be the will of God, but of man which is an enemy to Go^ for that the
poor are burdened miserably and without cause done by command of Cyrinus t^
President, Wearied
this is the man which disquiets and disturbs all Syria, this is he which
calls all men hither, and thither out of their dwellings. Whereunto the
Virgin: But who, says she, has permitted Cyrinus to do that? I may think,
say I, Augustus Caesar. The Virgin again: Has any permitted Augustus Caesar?
God verily, I have answered. Here at last the heavenly Virgin: Therefore says
she, we follow Gods permission of this man, we obey his pleasure, with this
intention we undertook this Journey: We are not troubled with conceit of our
Inn: God will provide. Genesis 22.8. If men deny us place, perhaps beasts will
not refuse us. Gods Will be done. But let it please us, to enquire this of the
most divine Infant himself.

O Infant wiser then any Solomon, O king of Angels, what seek thou, may we
presume to ask, amongst poor exiles which thou may not find a thousand
times better among thy Citizens the Angels? What does it please thee for thy
mind sake to taste of strange and country fare, what does it deligh^ thee to
change thy Heavenly Tempe for this most horri^ wood? Rude forest.
O Lord, the world does not know thee, and unl^sse tho^ discover thy self some
other way it will tread upon thee with al^ kind of contempt. Hereunto the child
Christ, either with a sign only of his eyes, Nutu Wink
or with tear alone, gave answer enough t^ this sense: I seek not honors nor
pleasures, nor desire any daintin^ of Diet, My meat is, to do the will of him
that sent me, that may perform his work. Ioh. 4.3 It will be easy for me to
want a other kind of meat, but that mos^ pleasant meat, that meat which is
truly mine I long for with (...) greediness, this I seek: this is (...) end,
this my intention. But as no^ ye see me lie in the Manger, (...) one day ye
shall see me upon t^ Cross. And all this shall be do^ according to the rule
of my Father Will. For as now my Father uset^ the pride of the Roman Emperor
and discourtesie of my Kindred to that end, that I may be thrust low into this
filthy Cave, so he will use the envy of the Hebrew Priests, that hereafter I
may be lifted up upon an ignominious piece of wood. My meat is to do the Will
of him that sent me, because I seek not mine own will, but the Will of him
that sent me. Ioh. 5.30. Because I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own
will, but the Will of him that sent me. Ioh 6.38. This is the answer of Christ
to us.

What therefore is that Good Will, whereunto the Angels give a blessing of
peace? Saint Leo very rightly to this demand: A Christians true peace, says
he, is not to be divided from the Will of God. We must say unfainedly every
hour: Thy Will be done, O Lord, both in me, and in all men most perfectly, at
all times, as it is in Heaven. This, O Christians, is Good Will, to desire this
one thing in all things with all the heart: O Lord, thy Will be done. This
Will, this intention of mind the Angels commend. Truly hereof Saint Gregory:
No richer thing, says he, is offered, then Good Will. Hom. 5 in Evang. This
will begets true peace. This will the Shepherds brought along to the Cradle of
Christ. They would go and seek, they went and sought out that very Infant,
whom the Angels persuaded them to seek, from hence grew their mutual
consultations: Let us now go even unto Bethlem, and see this thing which is
come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us: And they came with
have. This will that most crafty Fox, Herod the Ascalonite wanted altogether,
which promised that he would both come, yea and worship him also. Forsooth he
had come to cut the Child's throat, not to kiss his knees. Lastly, in this good
will and Right Intention consists true peace and quietness. Do whatsoever
thou can, O Christian, thou shall find a thousand troubles in all things
else? there is nothing any where so quiet as it should be without this good
will. Distemper and innumerable disturbances by the body, by the mind, by
friends, by Kindred, by Children, by Subjects, by Servants, by Office, by
Business; troubles at home, abroad, at Church, in the world, in the waters, in
the woods; troubles in recreations and pleasures themselves, ^boundance of
troubles will environ thee on all sides. And though thou composest all things
for peace, notwithstanding thou shall find peace no where but only in this
good will, which tyeth it self to the will of God in an insoluble Band. And
this is Heaven out of Heaven, or the gate of Heaven. Entry
Peace to men of a good will, good, constant, safe peace; true peace, and that
none needs to repent. One may use that speech of the Vulgar in many other
things: I had rather have a good quarrel then an ill quarter: A good staff
then an ill stool
if the spirit will make a league with the flesh, obey the lusts thereof, cover
every fault of stubbornness; a very bad peace, and far worse then War and
discord. Therefore there can be no good or safe peace to any, but only to men
of a good will and Right Intention.

CHAP. II. That the deed of a Right Intention can be recompensed by God only.
Act

THe rule over the Celestial Spheres and Stars, over all orders of Angels,
does not equal the dignity of an Action coupled with virtue. For example, a
half penny given to a Beggar, but with a sound and right intention, how highly
suppose you, is it esteemed in Heaven? Put all Kingdoms of the world together,
both Turkish, and Indian, and Persian; Spanish, and French, with all their
wealth, yea with all their pleasures, and yet thou have not pitched upon the
full price of that half penny. The reason hereof is most evident: all those
things as they had a beginning, so they shall draw to their end, they are kept
in with close bounds on both sides. But that half penny bestowed upon a poor
Beggar has amounted to an eternal value. Our light affliction which is but
for a moment, worcester eth for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
2 Cor. 4.17. What can thou call less, then that which is light and but for a
moment? So one sight for God, one groan in earnest for our former offenses, a
cup of cold water offered to the thirsty (can I speak any thing less^ (...))
do obtain an eternal reward, Meaner
and great above all measure: The woe ke an eternal weight of glory. The gold
of all the Kings in the World brought together into one place, may all be
easily examined by the Scales in the space of a week, nor indeed can it make
an infin^^e heap: But now that increase or a half penny, which we spoke of,
cannot be weighed throughout all eternity, it is infinite. But how comes it to
pass that this half penny is so precious? By the grace of God, Et cum Deus
coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat qua^ munera sua.
which August most truly affirming, says: Grace only works all our
worthiness in us, and when God crowns our deserts, he crowns nothing else
then his own gifts. Aug. Epist. 105. ad sextum. The grace of God makes a
marriage between God and the Soul. Assuerus the mightyest of Kings, which was
Emperor of an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, was yet pleased to take
Hester a poor Orphan maid, the kinswoman of a captive Jew to his wife, and
made her a Queen: Nor enquire thou the cause. This was his pleasure. Who now
can deny the Children of Assuerus and Hester to be Heirs of the Kingdom. Our
Soul being most poor of it self (when as we are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, 1 Cor. 3.5.) yet God makes choice
of her for his Bride through the admirable benignity of his grace. From hence
the Inheritance of a Kingdom is derived to our Children, that is, to our
actions, from hence we shall hereafter Be parta^ers of the divine nature. 2
Pet. 1.4. For the spirit it self bears witness to our spirit, that we are
the Children of God, and if Children; then Heirs. Romans 8.16, 17.

Therefore GOD only can fully pay the reward of that half penny which we
said, nor will by any other payment, but himself. That Sun of Theology, for so
the holy man understood very well, that God is the fittest reward for a good
action. To this purpose Saint Paul most diligently advises us, saying: I cease
not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, That the God
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory may give unto you the spirit of
wised me, and revelation in the knowledge of him: the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened: that ye may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of his glory in the Saints. Ephesians. 1.16. This the
Apostle incessantly prayed, That God would give them the spirit of wisdom and
revelation, how that such a reward is assigned by God to every right action, as
all the wisdom of Philosophers cannot comprehend. Whosoever shall give to
drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you he shall in no wise loose his reward. Mat. 10
42. The Lord proposes here the most despicable persons, and the meanest thing,
a cup of water not warm, for it could not be warmed without cost, but cold as
it runs out of the spring. He shall in no wise lose his reward, which may
rejoice him for ever. They were very great gifts which two Kings did promise,
but amongst their cups. Assuerus in the heat of wine: What is thy Petition
Queen Hester, and it shall be granted thee? and what is thy request, and it
shall be performed even to the half of the Kingdom? Hest. 7.2. Herod assured
the same in a manner to the Damsel which danced before him: Whatsoever thou
shall ask of me, says he, I will give it thee, though it be to the half of
my Kingdom. Mark, 6.23 Behold here the greatest gift of a King, the half of
his Kingdom, but such as shall not endure. God who is a more bountiful King,
is ready to bestow his whole Kingdom which shall never have an end, even
himself, for a reward of the least good work that can be, of one half penny.
He has called us unto his Kingdom and glory. 1. These. 2 13. For the present
God conferreth all things for the most part by his Creatures, by the Heavens,
the Stars, the Earth, the fruits of the ground, by his Ministers the Angels.
But hereafter, When he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and
power, 1 Cor. 15.24. then the Ministeries of all created things shall ce^se,
then God shall exhibit all kind of pleasure, to the blessed in himself, for a
reward of their good deeds. He shall be all in all. Therefore Saint Chrysostom
judges him to be a cruel tyrant against himself, which can be contented
with an other reward, then God. Chrysostom. Hom 21. in Mat. And surely such a one
as this is more foolish then he, which exchangeth the noblest Diamond for five
farthings, or a few Apples.

If therefore for every good action there be a reward decreed which is
infinite, eternal, inexplicable, God himself: or that I may speak more
plainly, if for every, even the least good deed an everlasting Guerdon is to
be expected: no marvel then that Steven would not sell his stones neither to
vain glory, nor to violence, nor to any of those Huckstresses, for none could
pay a price worthy of them, but only the Father of that Infant, whose Cradle
was the Manger and Straw at Bethlem. But we most silly Babies (I have said
little) most cruel tyrants against our selves do sell so many worthy deeds
for a poor apple, for an Oyster-shell, for a broken piece of Glass, or a few
painted trifles, yea for the short smoke of a little glory, for the light
breath of favor, either to the eyes, ears, or tongues of those whom we desire
to please. Thus all the wages is, to be seen, to be heard, to be praised.
How truly Saint Gregory: He that for the goodness says he, which he
shows, desires the favors of men, carries a thing of great and mighty
worth to be sold for a sorry price: He asks the rate of a little transitory
speech, for that whlch might gain him the Kingdom of Heaven. Greg l. 8 Mor.
c. 28. ad finem. For that cause Saint Paul so seriously exhorts, saying:
Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh, not with eye
service as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God. Whatsoever
ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and not as to men, knowing that of the
Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord.
Christ. Colos. 3, 22. Therefore let us especially take heed of this, that we
go not about to approve our endeavors unto men alone, and serve their eyes
and presence only, but rather fulfill all the parts of our duty with a
certain singular Candor of mind, coupled with the fear of God. In which
respect whatsoever we do, let us do truly and heartily, certainly
persuading our selves, that we perform service not to men, but to God, the
Author and Lord of all good things. And because we ought to be sure and
certainly acquainted, that the everlasting seat of the blessed is proposed as
a Crown, reward, and recompense to our labors and good endeavors, it is very
meet, that all our intention be directed to Christ only, that these eyes of
ours be bent upon Christ, that we sell all our things most readily to Christ,
who is willing to pay so liberally for them. To set them free from the mouth of
the Dragon, and to enseate them in glory.

CHAP. III. How much a Right Intention is impugned by the Devil.
THat Apocalypticall Angel Saint John, saw a woman clothed with the Sun, shod
with the Moon, crowned with Stars, and this woman in travail. Before her
stood a Dragon with seven heads, waiting while she brought forth, that he
might take away her Child and devour it. But he waited in vain for a prey.
For that woman brought forth a man Child, and her Child was caught up to GOD,
and to his Throne: and the woman fled into the Wilderness, where she had a
place prepared of God. Apoc. 12.5. So the hunger-bitten Dragon was deceived of
his booty. It is wonderful to be thought, how much the Devil that wakefull
Dragon labors, what subtle devices he uses about this one thing, that he
may turn a good intention into an evil or unprofitable one: here the gaping
Beast waits, whiles the young one is brought into the world, that he may
presently devour it. Christ had scarce given a new Charge to Peter to execute
his Office, when straightway Peter turning him about, said: Lord, and what
shall his man do? Ioh. 21.20. O Peter what I pray do these things concern
thee? have a diligent care of thy self, look to thy self. There is one which
lies in wait that he may interrupt the course of thy duty: What is that to
thee, follow thou me: Let thine eyes wait upon mine, let thy feet cleave
close to mine, follow thou me. That therefore we may defend a good intention
from the power of this seaven-headed Dragon, we must now unfold the vision of
Saint John, and show withal, how diversely, and how solicitously the evil
spirit bestirs all his veins in this matter, that he may either take away or
corrupt a Right Intention.

The woman which John saw great with Child, signifies the Soul, which is in
favor with God. All things do service to this Soul, the very Stars wait
upon it, the Sun and the Moon obey it, Transcription.
Heaven is made subject unto it. Such a Soul is never but in travail with
good desires, of serving God more faithfully and respectfully; neither only is
she in travail, but has issue also, and brings her holy purposes to effect,
she is happily delivered, and gives the world a fight of most excellent deeds
in all kinds. And as a great-bellyed woman is of a very dainty stomach, and
loathes many times those things that before seemed mere Honey to her, and longs
for those that before were in her conceit like gall: So the mind of man great
with chaste desires, abhors all the pleasures of the flesh, all the world;
but in the mean time it embraces all adverse things whatsoever, and the whole
provision of patience with great affection. Here the seaven-headed Dragon
watches, and lays wait every moment, that he may infect that mind, either
with secret pride, or subtle avarice, or blind envy, or privy luxury, or
again with godliness, but glozing, or with any other faire-seeming, but
sinister intention. So the Hell-armed Serpent stands gaping before the woman,
ready to be delivered. What therefore must the Soul do in this case, if even
by the least token a wrong intention bewray it self, what resistance must be
made? Let the Child be snatched up to GOD and to his Throne, let the intention
advance it self to the Creator by these wings of prayer. My Lord, I have done,
and am about to do this for love only of thee. And let the woman fly into the
Wilderness. Let the Parent of this Child say: I desire not, my Lord, to be
seen to be known, I affect not to be praised: I will not have it proclaimed
in the Market, I will not have it commended for a mighty and rare thing, I
would have this done so, as if I had done it in the remotest desert, in the
most desert Wilderness: So thou, my GOD, know it, as thou know all
things: thou only art a Theater large enough for all my actions.

Cornelius the Centurion, that approved Soldier to God above, sent all his
Sons and Daughters, that is, all his good works before him into Heaven.
Therefore the Angel most courteously spoke unto him, saying: Thy prayers and
thine almsdeeds are come up before God for a memorial. Acts 10.4. For he
was a devout man, and one that feared God, and prayed to God always. Thus all
his Children were caught up to God, and to his Throne, that Stygian Dragon
being deluded, which exceeds all Thieves, Pirates, Robbers by many degrees.
For this roving Thief is never but in hand with his wiles, he observes a
Traveller before he passes by, and also in his very passage. The Devil is
weary of no labor, many times in the beginning of an action, sometimes in the
middle, very often in the end he endeavors to pull a Right Intention in
pieces, which Gregory eloquently setting forth: For we must understand, says
he, that the old enemy pursues our good works three manner of ways, that the
very same thing which is done right before men, may be spoiled in sight of the
inward Judge. For sometimes in a good work he polluteth the intention, that
every thing which follows in action, may for so much not come forth pure and
clean, as he distempers it in the very Original. But sometimes he is not able
to corrupt the intent of a good work, but opposes it in the action it self
as it were by the way side, Subiuncto latenter vitio, quasi ex insidiis
perimatur.
that when one makes account he goes out more secure, by setting vice privily
to dog him, he may be killed as it were by treachery. But sometimes he neither
corrupts the intention, nor supplanteth by the way side, but entraps a good
work in the end of the action, and how much farther he faines himself to be
gone from the house of the heart, or the passage of the deed, he waits so
much more craftily to disappoint an action at the journies end: and by what
means he makes every one that is not wary secure by thinking him far enough
off, thereby he suddenly runs them through with a harder and more incurable
wound. For so he contaminates the intention in a good work, because when he
perceives the hearts of men easy to be deceived, he presents the air of
transitory favor to their desires, that in these things which they perform
right, they may be inclined by the strength of intention, to covet base
matters: whereupon it is rightly said by the Prophet under the similitude of
Judea, of every soul which is caught in the trap of a wretched intention.
Facti sunt hosts eius incapite.
Her enemies are the chief. Thren. 1.5. As if it were apparently said: When a
good deed is undertaken not with a good intent, the adversary spirits are
chief over it from the very first thought, and possess it so much the more
fully, as they have also dominion over it by the beginning. Greg. l. 1. Mor. c.
19. initio. Yea, as Chrysostom has moreover noted, The Devil sometimes by an
evil intention distaineth works even now already committed to Gods custody.
Laid up in
And if he be not able to hinder a deed by casting diffi^ulties before it, he
provokes the intention, and endeavors to defile it. Nor yet does his policy
prevail; he sets upon it with diverse engines to disturb it. Meither so
indeed does he effect what he would? he studieth to pervert the end of the
action. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in illud. vidi dominum.

Horace tells of a most importunate fellow, whom that he might send away from
him, he pretended diverse businesses to be dispatched here and there. -- Vsque
sequarte: Nil habeo quod agam, et non sam ^iger: usque sequar ^e.
But he most importunately answered this one thing, I will ever follow thee. I
have nothing to do, and I am not idle: I will ever follow thee. Horat. l. 1.
Sermon. Sat. 9 So the Devil which has nothing else to do, then to impugn and
vex us, and is truly no sluggard, He like an individual companion,
continually mutters that -- I will always follow thee, ever and ever will I
pursue thee; ever will I hold and follow thee close: I will not be quiet, I
will not cease, I will not give over, till I turn aside thine intention
another way, that it may not go so right to God; I will ever follow thee.
Surely he does so, whom he cannot delude by vain glory, them he deceives by
anger, or by sorrow, or impatience, or else by joy, or immoderate desire, or
too much longing. There be a thousand ways to hurt. If pains succeed ill, it
puts out of courage: what will be said of the matter? thou shall be nothing
esteemed, thou shall be a laughing-stocke to all, this will certainly be great
hurt to thee. But if the matter fall out according to wish, Hellish
the Orcinian Fox is at hand again. Behold the practitioner, behold his
device! very well, excellently, passing well, he could not have done better,
what has this or that man done like it? there is none that can come near this
deed, all men will commend it. So the blind body seems such a proper fellow in
his own conceit, pleases himself so admirably: he carries his ears listening
every where like a Bore what people think of him, to hear how they praise
him: forsooth it is a great matter in the sorry judgment of the man, and a
brave thing to be pointed at, and have it spoken, Et pulcrum est digito
enonstrari et dicter hic est. Top
this is the man. Pers. Sat. 1. v. 28. O poor Soul! His enemies are the
chief, indeed. The beginning and head of a work is the intention. The Devil
aims at this mark, he throws right against this forehead, as David did to
Goliath. If this head be hurt, if a good affection to God be corrupted or
extinct, all the rest of the building tumbles down. David greatly rejoicing
that he kept this head safe: O Lord God, says he, thou strength of my
health, thou have covered my head in the day of battle. Psalm. 140.7. Pliny
reports, that the Pelican a most crafty bird, lives by roving upon the waters
after this manner: She flies unto those birds which swim in the Sea, Dive,
dip themselves
and catches at their heads with her Bill, till she plucketh up her prey.
Plin. l. 10. Not. Hist. c. 40. Righteous men not much unlike to birds, have
their habitation indeed on high, but they fly down to the waters for their
food, and dip themselves therein: they refuse not to undergo cares, vexations,
labors, diverse troubles; they carry these waves upon their backs, for no
otherwise are good works made evident; there is need of sweating and industry.
No body endures want with virtue, unless his body feel it. No man prays so
as he ought, unless he watch, and excite his mind to attention. In this
manner the godly get the nourishment of their souls. But the Devil, like a
Pelican assaulteth the head of these birds, Intention. Does he see one praying?
he plucks away the rule of a right intention, and, many, says he, look upon
thee; let them go now and say if they can that thou art not a lover of Prayer.
Does he see money in the hand for the poor? he snatcheth away the eyes after
spectators of the alms, or draws the ears to the beggars importunate cries,
that whiles he gives alms, he may give a reproach with it, and say look
here shameless Dog, cease to bark. Most men will proclaim every one his
own goodness: but a faithful man who can find? Prove. 20.5. Does he perceive
in thee some charity, patience, obedience? presently he seeks letters of
commendation, he takes up the least words of them that praise thee, and drops
into thine ears: lo, thou art of a good report, thy submission has pleased
this Lord; in good troth this is to be reckoned among thy praises. This hellish
Pelican fasteneth a thousand such gripes, whilst he wounds the head, Till
and kills a right intention. Therefore in all actions, let that be diligently
observed of the mind: To God, and to his Throne. Otherwise we shall not escape
the Stygian Pelican, unless every one of our Children, ^ll our good actions,
be caught up to God, and to his Throne.

It is to be ^dmired which is remembered among the acts of St. Severine Bishop
of Coleine. (Surius Tom. 5. die 23. Octobris. Severinus flourished about the
year 40^) There was in the time of Severinus the Bishop an Hermit descended of
a princely stock, brought up in his youth to all kind of delights, who when
he was grown of ripe years for a wedded est^te, took a Bride not unequ^ll
to him in means and blood. And now Hymen sounded over all the Court, and now
the nuptial Bed called upon the new married Couple, when ^n a sudden the
Bridegroom being taken with great fear, saw a young man in a most beautiful
shape standing close by his side, which spoke to him with a cheerful
Countenance, and said: If I should surely promise thee greater d li^hts,
Betroth thee with
and far more illustrious beauty, would thou follow me whither I go? I
would, says the Bridegroom, if thou promise things excelling these To whom
the Angel in a man's shape: More then this
I promise thee, says he, heavenly delights, and immo^tall glory, if so thou
be a man, and know how to contemn these in respect of those. The
Bridegroom forthwith filled with greedy ambition to enjoy these promises, and
taken with love of the promiser: Surety
Behold the man, says he, pass thy word, and lead me whither it lists
thee, I am ready to follow. He said, and did it: neither earned away any thing
else with him of all his treasure beside a wooden Bottle. The Angel having
brought him following so courageously into a place remote from all company of
men: Here, says he, be free to God and thy self: forbear to care for any
thing else. So withdrew himself out of sight Upon this Stage did this new
Actor pl y the part which he undertook exceeding well a long time, where God
and Angels being Spectators, he followed his austere course of life very close
for diverse years together, exhaust in a manner with continual prayer,
watching and fasting. At length a desire inv^ded the men to know, who should
receive an equal reward with him in Heaven, for he l^^d a life almo^^
immitable. H^ was answered from Heaven. That the Bishop of Colein should be
like him in the year of the B^^ss^d The Hermit wondering at this equality of
reward in such an unequ^ll state of life, H^e beseeches therefore very
earnestly, that this man may be showed unto him. Might h ve a sight of
And without delay, he very same which h^d conducted him thither, stood before
him, and showed the way whereby he should come to the very pl^ce where this
Bishop was. The Hermit thus instructed, upon a solemn day came to Colein, and
was present at divine Service, after Church he was admitted into the room
where the Bishop dined, to look on. Here the Anchorite saw a feast, although
not according to the profuse Genius of our Age, Genium saliare.
yet sumptuous and liberal. This the Bishop gave to the chief men of the City
of Colein. The plenty of Dishes, the variety of dainties, the great richness
of Plate to serve in, was in that age accounted an example of rare prodigality.
Here this same devout Spectator began in mind to confer with himself: Have
not I therefore with my Can of water, says he, with a piece of dry bread,
with unsavory roots and herbs, by daily fasting, almost continual prayers,
and forsaking all this bravery of mine own accord, deserved more favor at
Gods hands, then this Bishop in so great excess? What do I, if I do no more,
then this prelate which abounds so much with riches and delights? O my very
good Anchorite, thou may reason perhaps discreetly, but not holily; hear I
pray, and suffer an answer of the Angel that guides thee, whose words are
these: This Bishop, whom thou see, is less delighted with all his pomp of
dainty Dishes, then thou with thy wooden Platter. Understand thou this?
That man is truly great, which uses earthen Vessels so, as if they were
Silver, and uses Silver so, as if it were earth. Sen Epist. 5. Here the
discreet Palmer acknowledged, how that God would weigh not so much the deeds,
as the intents of the doers, nor value how much every one did, as with what
respect. Right so it is: -- Qui quid agant homines, intentio judicat: Omnes.
Intention is the Judge to try,
What all men do, when, how, and why.


And lo, how the Acherontick Pelican, could not by all stately abundance
extort from Severinus, his Love and good intention to God. This Bishop of
Colein sent all his Actions, as it were his Children before him, to God, and to
his Throne. And in this Stratagem, he delivered from that most w^tchfull
Dragon, whatsoever piety he exercised. But whom may we find imitating it? It
shows rare virtue indeed, not to be corrupted in the midst of riches, and
pleasures, when the most rigid poverty that is, may find some occasion or other
to offend a good meaning. For this other which betook himself to the
Wilderness, being every way else an holy man, and of a most commendable life,
nevertheless had let fall some of his good intention, and better affection
into his wooden Tankard. We do after that sort even in the smallest things,
let go or gain no small mat^er, according as our intention leans either to
the Creator, or things created. Satan has very many sn^res and ^lmost not to
be descried, which he places closely under foot to entrap a Right Intention.
Our dainty-mouth'd senses, and too much self-love offer themselves of their
own accord to be entangled in these Nets: it is sweet to them to be so taken.
What action soever therefore of ours is not at the very first sent up to God,
and to his Throne, is presently caught and devoured by the most nimble Dragon.

The Hebrew Prophet Ezechiel, saw four living Creatures, whose wings and heads
were lifted up toward Heaven: Their faces and their wings were stretched
upward. Ezekiel. 1.11. The upright both looks and flight of these Creatures, put
us in mind of no other then th^s very thing, that nothing whatsoever is safe
enough from that Dragon, which flies not up instantly to God. It perishes,
Preserves
whatsoever withdrawes not it self by this means from the Dragons claws.
Thereupon Richardus Victorinus c^lleth him, which performs good works yet
with an ill intention, a murderer of his own Children. Here we meet with two
things worthy to be noted. Let the first thing in question be, wherein does
the sap, kernel, strength and force, Nervus. Maine drift
or the Masterveine of a good intention consist? whereat must we principally
aim in this point, or what man ever had a good intention indeed? Christ the
repairer of mankind, of whom his Father pronounced from Heaven: Hear him.
Mark, 9.7. This Master of ours, had chiefly three intentions. The first was of
Obedience. This Commandment says he, have I received of my father. Ioh. 10
18. For the first moment that he put on man in the Virgins Womb, his Fathers
Sentence was objected to him. Thou must be Crucified, thy Father gives such
charge. Christ most obediently submitted himself to this Decree of his Father.
H^reupon it may be truly said, The Savior of the world did hang upon the
Cross four and thirty years. For the intention of Christ went all his life
long toward the Cross, did cleave to the Cross: This Commandment he received
of his Father. The Second was of Respect to his Fathers honor: For I, says
he, seek not mine own glory, but I honor my father. The third was, of Love
and affection to his fath^rs Will. I says he, do those things always which
are pleasing to him, because so it seemed good in thy sight Nevertheless, not
as I will, but as thou will, thy Will be fulfilled. This threefold intention
is almost ^he very same in substance, but yet it may be perceived also in that
difference. For it is one thing to do any matter therefore, because it is so
command^d; another, because it makes for the honor of another, and another
thing yet, because it so pl^aseth another. He which is of this mind, to
observe another will, and be also at his b^ck, and offers himself freely,
may say: What need have I to be hidden? I am none of them that are to be
compelled by force, or power, or Law; I will do this of mine own accord, upon
this persuasion only, because I know it pleases him that is in authority, his
desire is set upon it. And therefore I am as ready to do, as he to wish, his
Will is to me instead of a thousand Commands. And this, I take it, is the top
and highest point of every Right intention. And this was the intention of
Christ our Lord in his life, in his sufferings, in his death; in all things:
His fathers Will Even as the father gave me Commandment, so do ^. Ioh.
14.31. The father which sent me, he gave me Commandment, what J should say and
what I should speak. And I know that his Commandment is life eternal:
whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.
Ioh. 12.10.

Hereupon let that never depart either from our mouths or hearts: O my Lord,
and my God, I offer my self, and all that I have to thee, to thy good pleasure
in every thing. Or that: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight,
even so Father, even so Father. Or this. Nevertheless not as I will; but as
thou will, thy Will be fulfilled. The other thing also in question is, and
that most frequent amongst men of a doubtful conscience, Fearful
whom it troubles and vexes diverse ways Thou may hear many saying. So I
knew in what manner my case stood with God, that I were in favor, and Gods
dear servant, whether my actions pleased that most wise searcher of hearts, so
I were thoroughly acquainted herewith, most willingly would I perform
whatsoever is required of me. O my good Christian, desire thou to know this?
examine thine own conscience: Do but weigh what man^er of intention thou
have, how sincere and pure, for how much the more sincere and pure this is, how
much the more conformable and nearely knit to the Will of God: so much better
thou art, so much the more acceptable and dearer to God, never doubt it. Or
know thou not, whatsoever men do, intention judges them all? It is not
possible, that thou should be of a sincere intention, and good mind toward
God, and yet not please God, unless thou would make God unjust. It is the
voice of God. I love them that love me. Prove. 8.17. and I do not contain, nor
can otherwise choose, but embrace them again with a benign affection, which
are so well affected toward me.

Thou therefore, good Christian, have especial care of this, always most
readily to attend the divine pleasure in every thing. Let Gods Will be both thy
Will, and Deed. In this manner thou shall wound the heart of God with the
golden dart of Love. For this gains such an interest in Gods favor, that we
may procure very much not only by speaking and doing, but also by omitting and
making holy day. Lodovi^us Blosius, a truly pious Writer: If any one, says
he, resists his own will even in the smallest matters for Gods sake, he
performs a thing more acceptable to God, then if he should raise (let it be
marked) many dead men to life. So it is necessary that he be ready prepared in
all other matters, which would be of a Right Int^ntion, that it he know any
thing tha^ God desires, he also may desire the same how ^pposite soever it be
to his own Will. To which purpose (as Blosius instructs) let him frequently
say with himself: F^r thy sak^. O Lord, I will (...) that thing, when it is
not necessary that I should see it: in respect of thee J will not hear that, I
will not taste that, I will not speak that, I will not touch that. Lord if my
Clothes, if my Diet, if my Affairs, Labors, or that which I am in hand with,
displease thee, I refuse not to be covered with a course clout, to live with
Bread and Water, to put away these and these things far enough from me. But
we, O how often do we both speak, and do a great deal otherwise? you may
hear him many times that says: I am at mine own pleasure and disposing, what
Controller need I fear? I am wont thus to do; this is my custom: this cost
is out of my Purse; I feed upon mine own Trencher: what do I regard others? I
will have it to be in this manner; no body shall appoint me what to do in
this case etc. This is not to carry himself answerable to the Will of God.
Happy
Therefore O thrice blessed he, which with a most sincere intention, follows
the one and only pleasure of God in all things. This man of all others
escapes the eyes and claws of the ever-waking Dragon, and whatsoever he does,
he sends before hand with safe conduct to God and to his Throne.

CHAP. IIII. That the greatest enemy which the Devil rages against a Right
Intention, is Vain Glory.
THis Enemy of a Right intention is worthily to be feared of all men: Vain
Glory steals away the rewards of all virtues, and turns them to most grievous
punishments.

Herod Agrippa, no degenerous Impe from the wickedness of his Forefathers,
slew James the Son of Zebedee, a most holy man, God passed by that: He cast
Peter in Prison, neither was he punished of God for this, he added more
outrages to the former, neither yet did God revenge that. But when he made an
Oration, glittering in Royal Apparel, not to instruct the people, but for
his own ostentation sake, and the multitude gave a Shout: The voice of a God,
and not of a man, immediately the Angel smote him, because he gave not GOD the
glory, and he was eaten of Worms, and gave up the ghost. He has him sure
enough He took away a man's life, and God held his peace; he would have
stolen the glory from God, and here God rises in his own defense, and he was
consumed of Worms and gave up the ghost. He paid so dear for Wind. Augustine
rightly pronounces against Herod. Lo^d he that will be praised because of thy
gift, and therein seeks not thy glory but his own, although for thy gift he
be praised by men, yet he is discommended by thee, because that out of thy
gift, he sought not thy glory. Aug in Medit. But he which is praised of men,
when thou rebukest, is not defended by men when thou Iudgest, nor shall be
delivered when thou condemnest.

There are two special things to be found in all the Works of God, Vtility,
and Dignity: God would have the Vtility to come unto man, the Dignity he has
reserved to himself. Even as a famous Painter easily yields the Picture
which he made to another, accounts that only to be his, which he writes
underneath, Pr^togenes invented it, Timander made it, Apelles drew it. So
likewise God: and for that cause also he ordained that the Offerings in times
should be made in this wise, that Flesh, Fruits, Bread, and pure Incense
should be offered together, which he parted so liberally, that what profit
soever was herein, it should turn to the benefit of the Sacrificers, he
required the perfume of the Incense only for himself. And even as when two
Merchants become partners, both of them lays out upon Traffic what their
means afford: Or say that one finds all the expenses, another the pains,
sometimes equal portions either of money or Wares, the gain which comes by
Traffic they divide, it is wholly due to neither of them* John the eye of the
Lord affirms that the Saints have fellowship with God This fellowship is
entered into for that end, John 1.7.
that eternal blessedness may be obtained, thereby as it were gain. Not God
alone makes this Merchandise, nor man alone: That saying of Saint Austia is
well known: Qui fecit te sine te, non salvabit te sine te.
He truly which made thee without thee, will not save thee without th^e. God
bestows all the charges toward this tr fficke, For it is God which works
in us both to Will, and to do of his good pleasure. Philip. 2.13. Man brings
his industry only, what gain soever comes by this dealing, is to be divided
between God and man: God is contented only with the honor and glory,
whatsoever wealth or happiness there is, he assigns unto man. Let a good
division therefore be made: Let glory be to God in the highest, to man peace,
and the possession of all good things. He now that arrogates to himself, what
is due to God, deals most unjustly, and deserves to be turned out of this
fellowship, and deprived of all his goods. God Created all things for himself.
Prove. 16.4. This Great Maker of all things, requiring honor as it were Tribute
of all his Works. My glory, says he, will I not give to another. Esaias 42.8.
This revenue a Right Intention most truly paieth unto God, the very same vain
glory most unjustly takes from him. Can any man likewise endure another most
vainly boasting of that which he built, which yet never came out of his own
purse. Why braggest thou proud fellow, which bestowedst not so much as a stone
of thine own toward this Structure, Broughtest
any man may easily build at another man's costs In like manner why do we
poor wretches bost of our actions and good deserts, as it were of great
buildings? all the charges wherewith we build come from God, for our use, not
for our report. Most apparently Christ: Without me, says he, can ye do
nothing. Job 25.5. Why therefore do we brag? we are permitted to inhabit the
building, the honor which follows the fabric of the House, is only GODS.
Therefore, Take heed that ye do not your good works before men, to be seen
of them, otherwise ye shall have no reward of your father which is in Heaven.
Mat. 6.^,
And therefore Christ so solititously advises us, because this vice of
Cenodoxy, or vain glory, is both very subtle, and also very hurtful by this
her subtilty. Climachus: Cenodoxie, says he, has an hand in all devices. For
example, Do I fast? I take a pride in it. If I break off my fast, because I
would not have it known, again I am proud as it were of mine own policy, if
daintily apparelled, Peste
I am overcome of that disease. If I be poorly clad, again I take a pride in
it. If I speak, she vanquisheth me If I hold my tongue, again I am
vanquished. Bryer
Which way soever thou throwest this Bramble, it stands with the prickles
upward. Clim. Grad. 21 de Cenodox initio. But such a vain glorious man as
this, is a true worshipper of Idols, which seems indeed to worship and serve
God, whilst he studieth to please not GOD, but men.

I said before that this vice is most subtle, and even so it is. Glory is
despised ^^ry often, that it may be gotten, and from the very contem^t of glory
vain glory springs and sometimes assaileth those most strongly, which seem
to have cast off all glory long ago. I will determine nothing in this case out
of mine own judgment, A man of great repute, (...) Divine of our age,
discourses of this point as follows. Hieron. Bapt. de la Nuza. Tom 1. Tract.
2. part 2. de recto affectu in Deum. It fails one not seldom, that a gallant
Lady takes not so much delight in all the bravery of her Sex, or a Knight in
all his gorgeous attire, as a poor ragged Monk sitting close in a corner of
the meanest Monastery, pleases and applaudeth himself, in his sorry Cloths,
in his torn and mish^pen Hood, his naked Feet, in his empty Cell, Bare
and his very victory over all kind of Pomp. O wretch indeed, whom Vain Glory
was not able to deceive with honors, she deceives by humility it self. Thus
vain glory spares no body, it invadeth all sorts of men: but, as Saint Basil
says. It infecteth every good work softly, sweetly, pleasantly, insensibly,
and before it be seen, and spoyleth all the beauty thereof. Defaceth
Vain glory is a sweet kind of thing to the unskilful, a sweet robber of
Souls. Basil. de Constit. Mon. Cap. 11. Many do privily seek themselves in
the things which they do, and know it not. Kempis. l. 1 c. 14. v. 2. And
oftentimes, says Gregory, whilst the praise of men meets with a good work it
changes the mind of him that does it, which t^ough it were not sought for, yet
it delig^teth being ffered With the pleasure whereof when the mind of him that
performs well is let loose, it is quite dispersed from all vigor of the
innermost intention. For he which does good things, and hereby desires not to
please God, but men, turns the face of his intention downward. Greg l. 1.
Mo. c. ^9. For that cause the holiest men that we^e, have defended themselves
most vigilantly against it.

Laurentius ^urius reports, and, When as on a time, says he, Pachomius sat
among the Seniors of his Order, a Monk brought two Matts which he had made
that day, Scoreas
and set them over against the place where they sat, that they might easily
behold them for he hoped that he should have heard of Pachomius. Behold the
diligence of our Brother, which h^th doubled his daily task, and has finished
two Matts, whereas others make but one in a day. But on the contrary, Pachomius
expr^ssing great sorrow for his vain hunting after praise in this m^nner:
Fathers, says he, this our Brother has wrought very hard from break of day
to this time, but he has ded^cated all his labor to the Devil, for indeed
he has pref^rred humane praise before Divine. Therefore calling the man unto
him, and chiding him in grievous terms, When others, says he, go to
Prayers, take thou thy matts upon thy shoulders, and cry: I beseech you Fathers
and Brethren, entreat God for me miserable wretch, which have made more of two
Matts then Heaven. He did as he was commanded. Pachomius afterward gave
charge, that when others were called to Supper, this man that was more busy
then needed, should stand with his Matts supperlesse in the midst of the room.
Neither yet Pachomius thinking this to be satisfaction enough, he commanded
that the man should be shut up in his Cell, and sparingly fed five months
together only with Bread, Salt, and ^ater: and prohibited that any should go
to ask how he did all the time of his confinement. c. (Sur. Tom 3. Die. 14
Maij) With such e^gines as these vain glo y must be beaten down, Battered
a mischief otherwise almost invincible, and which grows out of ve^tue it
self. Rig tly Climachus: The sp^^it of d speration, s^ith he, rejoices when
it sees vi^e to be multiplied, but vain g^ory when it sees virtue to
increase. Perceive
Obse^ved diligently, and thou shall see that wicked blemish to follow thee
close even to thy death and grave. Clim. D. l. Grad. 21. d^ Cenodox. He says
moreover: He which grows p^oud of the natural part wherein he excels,
imagine apprehension cunning Reading, pronun^iation, wit, and all other things
which come unto us without our pains, he shall never enjoy the blessi gs which
are above nature, for he which is unfaithful in a little, will be unfaithful
also in much. And surely such is the servant of vain glory. Gregory said
excellently to this sense: Whosoever extolleth himself, for his beneficence to
another, incurreth a greater fault by boasting, then he obteineth a reward by
giving, and is made naked whilst he clothes the naked, and whilst he thinks
himself the better, becomes so much the worse. Forasmuch as he is less
poor which has no clothes, Minus inops est, qui vestem non habet, quam qui
humilitatem.
then he which has no humility. Greg. l. 21. Mor. c. 14. The Grecian and holy
Orator Chrysostom, Showed himself
who was most eloquent against this plague, and lashing very often at it in the
Chair: And how, says he, can it be other then extreme folly, to seek
after the praise of men, which are so corrupt in mind, and do all things
rashly? whereas we ought to have recourse to that eye, which ever waketh, Give
attendance
and to speak and do all things, with respect to the appointment of that. For
these although they commend, nevertheless can help us as good as nothing. But
he, if those things which we do, be pleasing unto him, makes us both of good
report and illustrious here, and in time to come bestows ineffable benefits
upon us. Chry. Hom. 12. in 1. Ep. ad Cor. Fine.
His also are these: wherefore if thou desire to obtain glory, refuse glory,
but if thou huntest after it, thou shall go without it. And if you please, let
us sift out this speech also in those which follow this promiscuous course of
life. For do we call any in question of their credit? Is it not those which
greatly desire it? Therefore they especially are the men which want it, as
those which suffer innumerable reproves, and are despised of all men. Again,
say I pray, do we respect or commend any? Is it not those that contemn and
account nothing of it? Therefore these are they which inherit glory. For even
as he is rich indeed, not which wants many things, but nothing: so he is
truly famous and honorable, not which burns with desire of glory, but
contemns and makes light of it. For this glory is but a shadow of glory. And
indeed no body which sees a piece of bread painted, will lay hold on the
Picture, To eat it.
although he be ready to starve a thousand times. After the same manner
therefore stir not thou at all in pursuit of a shadow, for to follow a shadow
is the part of one out of his senses. Wit
Chrysostom. Hom.29. in 2. ad. Cor. It is not possible, that any man can be Great,
Noble, and Valiant, which carries not himself free from vain glory, Grovell
but he must needs creep upon the ground, and bring much to ruin, whilst he
waits on this wicked Mistress, and more cruel then any Barbarian. For what I
pray can be more truculent then she, which then raves and rages most of all,
when she is most of all reverenced and observed? Not so much as Beasts are of
this disposition, but grow tame, by much gentle usage. Handling
But quite contrary vain glory, for she is quiet being contemned, but stark
mad when she is honored, and takes Arms against him which bears respect to
her. Chrysostom. ibid
He which is brought in bondage to vain glory, can neither see what is
profitable for others, nor yet for himself. And that Chrysostom may confirm
all this that he has spoken: Hom. 35. in Ep. ad Cor.
Vain glory, says he, is the Mother of Hell, and does exceedingly kindle
that fire, and feed that deadly Worm, and setting down the reason hereof,
Other vices, says he, are brought to an end by death, this obtains strength
in the dead also. Becomes of force
Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Romans Look upon a Tomb extraordinary sumptuous, and you
shall perceive with what a subtle blast it breathes forth vain glory, O
fool, what does so ambitiously desired memory profit thee? if where thou art,
tnou art reviled, and praised where thou art not.

No less elegantly Saint Valerian, Bishop of Massilia: It it a kind of folly,
says he, that when thou owe to another the benefit of life, thou should
ascribe to thy self the ornaments of virtue. Behold this man is puffed up with
honor, another flattereth himself in the proportion of his body; this man
imputes wealth to his labor, that man assigns his skill in learning to his
studies. O silly people, all humane industry staggereth, Fails
where Gods help is not sought for: It is our part to desire good, but Christ's
to bring it to perfection. He has lost all that ever he did, which has
ascribed the fruit of holiness to his own virtues. Valerian. Hom. 11. Fine hujus
sermon. The case stands even so, although thou have all the excellencies that
can be, Learning, Eloquence, Wit, Wisdom, Munificence, Fit for an Emperor
a countenance beseeming Majesty, if thou season so great things as these with
vain glory, as it were with Salt, thou may imagine drops of Honey to run out
of an invenomed pipe, to the end that all beauty, opinion, love of former
things might perish, by the only vanity of glory, as it were by a confection
made to poison one. Although thou be a good Singer, a good Scribe, a good
Painter, a good Champion, a good Poet, a good Orator etc. yet if thou be an
ill prizer of all these things, thou have spoiled all: but now he priseth
these things ill, which contaminates them with vain glory. And although vices
sometimes bewray themselves in that manner, that they cannot possibly be
denied, yet there is some color left, which we may daube over our credit; no
body in this case is so slow of utterance, but he can readily put out: that man
limpeth, stammereth, Awry
goes wrong, fails in sight more then I, is blacker. So we think our selves
beautiful Creatures, if we be not reckoned among the most deformed.

For all Honor and glory which men have bestowed upon them is wholly to be
returned to God, as to the first Author, and last end of it.
After the people of Israel were brought out of Egypt, they set up the Golden
Calfe which they had wickedly devised, to be worshipped for GOD, giving a shout
withal: These be thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee forth out of the land
of Egypt. Exo. 32.4. Not much otherwise do they, which look round upon
themselves with a stately brow as Masters of their own works, and whatsoever
they effect by Counsel, Art, or industry, they will have accounted as it were
for Gods. O Idolaters! To God only be honor and glory, proclaims Paul, 1 Timothy 1.17. To God only, only, only be honor and glory. The utility of good
works, is ours, the dignity Gods. Agasicles was driven into exile by the
people of Halicarnassus, Sparta.
because he did not Consecrate the three footed Stool which he won in their
games to God, Apollo.
but carried that gift home with him. Herodot. l. 1. All the glory of every
thing that is well done, is from God, and to be given to God only.

Dijs te^ minorem quod geris, imperas.
Huc omne principium, huc reser exitum. Horat. l. 3. ode 6.
Thou raign'st because thy deeds to God do yield.
Bring thy attempts, and Acts both to this field.
Notwithstanding we are more Baby-like then any Baby, for even as Children do
so verily take themselves for others in their new clothes, that they are
persuaded the best acquainted eyes be deceived by their fine apparel: So we
Children of fifty or an hundred years old, do put on ambition upon the most
trifling and vilest things that can be. That man boasts, because he knows
how to use neater Complements, another because he is a dainty Carver of meat,
this man because he goes more upright then others. There be infinite sorts
of ostentation. Nay we fall to d shonesty and shameful tricks, and take a
pride in our baseness: Malus numerat sceleste facta in gloriam. Vet. Iamb.
The wicked counts the story,
Of all his heinous facts a glory.


That man makes his brags that he only can carry most Wine of all the company,
another avoucheth himself to have excellent skill in all kind of play: Games
he professes himself a master of vilany. Infants indeed, Babyes
but most wicked ones, and which Sacrifice to Zabulus. Zabulus is reported to
have first found out the Dye. He did not only set up a stately Image in honor
of himself, in the lap whereof a pair of Tables was to be seen, but also
would have Sacrifice done to him by Dice-players, before they went to their
game. (Cyprianus de Aleatoribus) In that manner the ungodly, not only devise
how to work mischief with a cursed kind of industry, but triumph therein when
they have the way of it, And rejoice greatly to do evil. Prove. 2.14. Others
take themselves to be a little wiser, and offend with more modesty, out of
whose mouth you may hear these reports: This Counsel was mine, it had never
happened so well to those Block-heads. This was my providence, my earnest care:
Had it not bin for me, this business had never seen an end: they have reason
to thank me, I brought this to effect: this is a point of policy indeed; but
out of mine own head: I know, if any man else does, how to play my part, I
can tell very well, there is none like me in this kind: I am sure enough how
much need they have of my help. There is that cries with a loud voice: I
defy all that handle a Sword in this quarrel: That man, and I against all
Counselors: He, and I to all Doctors. This man, and I all knights that bear
Arms: Another, and I dare all workmen to the contrary. O vanity, O quantum
est, in rebus inque!
O idle dreams, O how much folly is in things! What is more vain, then the
love of vain glory? very well the Son of Sirach concerning these idle
boasters: The hopes, says he, of a man void of understanding are vain, and
false, and dreams lift up fools. Ecclesiast. 34 1. All the praise, favor,
grace, honor, commendation of men, what else is it, then wind, air, a blast,
a bubble, smoke, vanity, a mere dream? For if any man thinks that he is
something when he is nothing, he deceives himself. Gal. 6.3. When the honey is
to be taken out, Cum exiguntur mella, fumo abiguntur ape^.
the Bees are driven away with smoke. Vain glory is a smoke, which the Devil
overspreadeth, to carry away the dropping honey of good works, as Basil said
truly. The hate which Bees bear to smoke, signifies, that they which make
honey for God, are offended with nothing so much as the smoke of humane praises
Basil. in Ascet. To that purpose said Isidore: Pomp, and Pride, and Vain
Glory have no agreement with heavenly light. Isid peleusiot. Epist 197. At the
last day of all, these things not only shall not profit, but shall do very
much hurt to many. For thou will bless the righteous. Psalm. 56 13. Upon which
words Chrysostom: For what damage, says he, does he receive, if men despise
him, and all the people of the world, when the Lord of Angels commends and
extolleth him. Even as, if he bless not, though all that inhabit the Earth,
and Seas commend, it profits him nothing. For even holy Job, sitting upon the
Dunghill, and smitten all over with filthy sores, and flowing with whole
streams of Worms more then could be numbered, and enduring that reproachful
usage, as he that was spitted on by his Servants, and had snares laid for him
by his friends and enemies, and by his Wife, and was brought to that extreme
poverty and hunger, and despetate sickness, was the happiest man alive,
because God blessed him, saying, Job. 1.8.
A perfect and upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil. Chry.
Tom. 1. in Psalm 5. propius finem.

Divinam minime assequitur, qui humanae servit gloriae.
Esse quaeris gloriosus? gloriam omnem despice.
He gains not Gods report, which man's applies.
Will thou be glorious? glory quite despise.
It was not the custom with Christ our Lord, to provoke his Auditors to
laughter, and merry gesture, much less to persuade them to excess, yet
notwithstanding he permitted, nay he commanded, for privacy when men fasted,
to use Ointments after the fashion of the Country: Annoint thine head. Mat.
6.17. that with the sweet smell and pleasant countenance thy fasting may be
hid. That thou seem not unto men to fast. The Pharisees when they used to
fast, did interdict themselves all signs of cheerfulness, that they might
make it apparent to all, how they were despisers of pleasures, and applied
themselves to hard and severe fasting. Our Savior commands to the contrary,
that we should alter nothing in the ordinary course of our life, to show we
fast, but rather after the manner of the place be of a merry, cheerful,
pleasant countenance, Fasting
to conceal our abstinence, that we may receive the reward of a secret and
sincere work at GODS hands. That therefore others may not commend our
continency, let us rather use this outward alacrity: for it is better to be
anointed and appear beautiful, then to make a show of abstinence, Pretend
and desire to be seen, insomuch that many times to publish virtues Offices is
to spoil them. The praises of them that look on, are flatteries, they are not
praises. Pliny reciting amongst other wonders: We found, says he, a Vine and
a Pomegranate Tree, growing without leaves, which bare fruit upon the Stock,
not upon the boughs or branches. Plin. l. 17. Not. Hist. c. 25. Good men, and
devoted to humility do in this manner, they keep close their fruits, that
is, their pious deeds, and take special heed that the rumor of them run not
abroad, Spread
So their virtue is safer, and less obnoxious to the treachery of Devils, which
run desperately all in a Troop to the breaking up of wares. Will thou advance
thy virtues? bewray them not. Disclose
Live to thy self, and be far from desire of a great name. Vive tibi, and
long nomina magna fuge.


Travelers, that what Gold they carry they may keep, do they not sow it up
in their shoes, or hose, in their doublet, girdle, cap, or put it into a
hollow staff, nay after all use tricks to lay it up in their bellies, as the
Jews formerly did at the siege of Jerusalem? is there any need to hide such
precious metal in this manner? for this very reason it is never free from
enemies, because it is precious; that it may be kept, it is kept close:
Gregory: There is no other way, says he, for him which fears to be robbed
in his Journey, then to hide the wealth which he carries. (Greg. l. 8. Mor.
c. 30.) In the very same sort it is extreme dangerous to expose the pious
actions which one goes about, I will not say to other men's eyes or ears only,
but even to his own. So Ezechias the King of Judah, lost his treasures,
because he showed them. Hierome very excellently admonishes: and, Let every
man, says he, call his own heart to account, and he shall try by experience
all his life long, how rare it is to find a faithful soul, which does
nothing for desire of glory, and vain reports of men. Nor indeed does every
one that fasteth, presently fast for God, or that stretches out his hand to
the poor, lend to God, vices are at the next door to virtues. It is a hard
matter to be contented with God only for the Judge. Hier. Contra Lucif. c. 6.
With Hierome agrees Johan. Sarisberiensis, Bishop of Chartres, Exceedingly
a man extraordinary learned, who describing the pedigree of vain glory: If
vain glory, says he, set spurs to any man, he must needs run headlong
through most dangerous vices. This is that forsooth which is accounted a noble
vice, and does so flatter the frail disposition of men, that it is scarce a
stranger to generous minds, for it comes also of noble descent, and knows
not how her expenses go on, until she fall headlong from that height, which
she aimed at. For so vices proceed one of another. But now vain glory fastneth
her Original root in virtue it self, for wherein every one is more excellent
then others, therein, unless Grace sit Moderatour, he takes the more easy
occasion to be proud. Yet there is scarce any which insisteth not upon vain
glory, and coveteth not that praise, which is of men. Hereunto some take their
way by virtue, some by a show of virtue, others by the help of nature or
fortune. Sarisb. l. 8. Natures or Fortunes benefit
Polycrat. c. 2.

The ambition of glory, is the disease of men in prosperity.

That Light of the Church, Gregory the Great, lamented this disease privately
with himself, nor deploring the same without tears: Whilst I look exactly,
says he, upon the very root of mine intention, then I know thereby that my
desire is chiefly to please God. But with the same intention whereby I study to
please God, the intention of humane praise, by stealth I know not how,
intermixeth it self, which when not till afterward and slowly I perceive, I
find my self to do otherwise, that which I know I meant otherwise at first.
For so many times whilst our intention is rightly begun in the sight of God,
the intention of humane praise over-takes it, following close by undiscovered,
and as it were laying hands on it by the way. Even as meat is taken indeed for
necessity, but in the very eating, whiles greediness creeps upon us
unawares, a certain delight is joynd with our eating. Whereupon it falls out
for the most part, that the refection of body, which we received for healths
sake, we turn to gluttony for pleasures sake. Wherefore we must confess, that
our Right Intention which striveth to please God alone, an intention which is
less right does sometime accompany by subtilty, which out of Gods gifts,
endeavors to please men. So that if we be strictly examined from above
concerning these things, what place of salvation remains among the same,
forasmuch as our evils are pure evils, Goodness
and the good things which we believe our selves to have, cannot by any means
be purely good. Greg. l. 35. Mor. c. 16. et ult. Thou may object: Why
therefore did God give man a desire of glory, if all glory must be refused by
man? Why do men of great worth take such pains to obtain glory, if to
obtain her be a heinous offense? My friend, we condemn not all glory, but
that which is inordinate, and unlawful, which insinuates it self every where
with a pleasing, but thievish behavior, doing this, that the man which is
covetous of glory, may seek to get glory by the virtue which he wants, or by
any other thing, whereunto such a reward belongs not. As thou know; Glory
is the shadow of virtue, Gloria umbra virtutis est, invitos etiam comitatur.
and follows men whether they will or no. Senec. Epist. 79. Fine. But we
hunt after this shadow too carefully, and embrace too greedily we expect glory
not of God, bu^ of men, and convert the sam^ when it is gotten, not to God
honout, but our own. Seneca sai^ most truly: O how ignorant are m^ which
covet glory, What is it, how to be sought for? Senec. ^ 95. Fine. And tell I
pray, in wh^^ part of the world, and amo^^ what people desire of honor to be
found every way moderate A rare thing indeed -- and far rarer then a white
Crow. Corvo quoque rarior albo --
It easier utterly to refuse glory, th^^ to seek it rightly.

So this air has some tim^^ blown upon even the holiest m^^ and women, but
it has blow^ upon them only, not infecte^ or cast them to the ground. Sur^ly
Dominick, Familia
(that illustrious St of his most ample Order) d^ strive manfully against this
pest^lent air. For when at Tolouse h^ has turned many unto Christ yet he
rather settled his abode Carcosia. Being demanded the cause thereof: Because,
says h^ many honor me there, but here all contest with me. The holy man
believed that it was safer dwelling in the midst of peoples hate, then among
blandishments and fair reports, and had rather expose himself to be slain
with the darts of vexation, Wounded
then vain glory. ( Vita ipsius. l. 4. c. 10. The repulse of honor, is great
eminency of glory. It shows rare virtue, for a man to do great matters, and
not know himself great, that the sanctity which is manifest to all men, should
lie hid only from the Author. There is nothing harder then to spurn at all
glory. Yet for all that it has bin nobly triumphed over by women also.

Sarah a Prioresse of holy Virgins, being a maid of mavelous sanctity, was
assaulted thirteen years daily, by an unclean spirit, nor would Satan in
this lascivious humor be otherwise satisfied, then that she should confess
her self a woman, and yield to be sweetly wounded. But the Virgin most stoutly
resisted him, nor ever admitted the enemy within her doors, always keeping
saf^ the fortress of her chastity. The Devil therefore plotted to work his
purpose by another stratagem that whom he could not by lasc^viousnesse, he
might undermine a^ leastwise by vain glory. Nor di^ the crafty enemy doubt,
but t^ wound her mind not fearing thi^ weapon, with a stroke that she should
never feel. Therefore i^ was his pleasure after the manne^ of the Parthians to
attempt the Victory by flight, that whom b^ standing he could not, he might
overcome by running away. For that cause the Orcinian sprite appeared openly to
her, and as if now he purposed to be gone without hope of victory, began to
cry out with a horrible voice: Thou have overcome me Sarah, thou have overcome,
thou have overcome me. But the maid not ignorant how to avoid this weapon also:
Not I, says she, have overcome thee, but my Lord Jesus. This is true glory, to
transfer all glory to God, as a thing not belonging to us. No body romiseth
himself a booty from hence without offense.

The Hawke, as Fables tell, derided the Wren, that Bird which uses the water
side, that whereas it was not unlike him in color, yet had such a degenerous
stomach, that it had rather live upon Worms, and sorry victuals, then feed
upon the sweet flesh of other birds. To whom the Wren: There is no reason,
says he, that thou should so much as rejoice, my Brother, for the good
cheer which is none of thine own, and which thy unjust prolling gets thee. I
that am contented with meaner diet, enjoy greater peace then thou, and the time
will come perhaps, when you shall pay dear for your dainty belly, and shall
repent too late that ever you took up these hunting sports without right or
reason. This Bird might have seemed to be a Prophet. For not many days after,
the Hawke in the very midst of his game was taken by a Country man, whose
Pigeons he pursued, and hanged out at a high Tower in the manner of other
birds, for a terror to the rest. The Wren saw the Corpse hanging in the air a
great way off, and presently flying unto it, O my Brother, says he, how much
better had thou provided for thy life, to gather Worms for the meat as I
do, then to follow other men's Foul, and be made a laughing-stocke to all
birds. I^ thou would not have gone a hunting, thou might have been alive
still.

Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur.
O wretch, O vain Glory hunter! Change but the name and the Fable is told of
thee Thou art that Hawke: but why do thou hunt after flying reports and
rumors, why applauses and gratulations, why favor and credit, why flattering
speeches and commendations, why popular fame, and specious Titles? No Law
permits thee, O Hawke, to fly at this Game. This is not glory, which thou
seek, it is not; thou followest after shadows of Glory, and indeed false,
and that to thy destruction. How much happier were it for thee to imitate the
Wren, and to feed upon worms; I say, those, which thy Sepulcher, Grave
whither thou art ready to go, encloseth. Think thou of these worms, Let
these Worms fill up thy thoughts
and thou shall easily despise other folks birds, the praises of men. Most
remarkably Austin: It is better, says he, to thank God, but for a small gift,
then thy self by other courses for a great one. (Aust. Epist. 32. ad Paulinum)
Do thou hope for any thing truly great, or everlasting in this world? here
is no continual possession. Honor gotten by arms, by learning, by wealth, by
industry, by deceit, yea by virtue it self, vanishes sooner in a manner,
then thou can fully enjoy it. All the glory of man is but like the
Solstitiall Flower. Floris Solstitialis.
To what purpose do thou heap sweat upon sweat? so fugitive and inconstant
is all praise and favor; it is not held by the body, nor so much as by the
wing, and cannot likewise be stayed by force, no more then the swiftest To
rent. Why therefore do thou let fly thy thoughts upon credit and
commendations? know thou not that all things which mortals possess are
unstable, and how much the more thou have obtained, so much the more brittle
and dangerous thy estate is.

Vitam agit leporis quicunque vanus auceps gloriae est.
He lives in fear most like a Hare,
Which gapes to be vain glories Heir.
And although the event be answerable to thy wishes, and fortune put thee in
possession of the things thou hopest for; how great will these be, and for how
long? perhaps to morrow, perhaps to day, perhaps this very hour thou shall be
laid along for a tale to posterity, and a prey to worms. Pliny reports, that
on the utmost borders of Jndia there inhabit the people called Astomi, having
no mouth, their body all hairy, clothed with the soft down of Trees, Cotton
leaves
living only by breathing, and the smell which they draw at their nostrils.
Plin. 9. not. Hist. c. 2. propius finem. The Cenodoxall or people desirous of
vain glory, have no mouth, wherewith either to render due thanks to God, or
seriously to commend well deserving men, they are stark naked from the
ornaments of true honor, and have nothing besides hairs and leaves, that is,
the refuse of humane praises; they live only by breathing, even by the air of
a little vain glory, which they draw in at their nostrills, forasmuch as they
want a mouth, and never fare more daintily to their mind, then whilst they are
commended. Others which have a mouth and face, do then blush and show signs
of bashfulnesse most of all, when this air is set before them most abound^ntly
(...) their diet. Very well that truly religious Writer: He that desir^ (...),
says he, everlasting and true glory, cares not for temporal. And he which
seeks for temporal glory, or contemns it not in heart, is manifestly
proved to bear the less love to heavenly: That man enjoys great
tranquillity of mind, which regards neither praise nor dispraise. Tho. de
Kemp. l. 2. c. 6. n. 2.

Gloriae umbra, est parva magnis, pusillis maxima:
Si compendio ass qui vis gloriam; contemnito. Monost. Trochaic.
Great to the little, little to the great
That shadow seems, which waits on glories seat.
Will thou obtain all praise in one?
The most praise is, to covet none.
Thou art in an empty Theater, and that a very narrow one, why do thou expect
applause here? lift up thine eyes to that high and most ample Theater of
Heaven, and thou will scorn these extreme cold applauders.

Auctior redit, spreta in tempore gloria.
That glory grows to greater head,
Which under foot in time we tread.
Is it not? because as by rash judgment, so by vain testimonies men offend
very frequently, with whom this is a customary error, Solennis.
to dispraise things worthy to be commended, and to commend things worthy to
be dispraised. Thereupon the Christian wise man: I will not be praised, says
he, by them, whose praise is discredit, neither do I fear to be reprehended
by them, whose reproach is praise. Is it not? because many times we please them
least of of all, whom we hope to please most. Herodotus. (l. 6. ante finem)
relates the Story, how Agarista the daughter of Clisthenes, was desired in
marriage, by the sundry suites of many. There strove amongst the most
flourishig youth of Greece Hippoclides, the Son or Tisander, who, as he
persuaded himself, was second to none in the most skillful grace of dancing.
Therefore to obtain the Bride, he thought it necessary to spend all his Art
upon that exercise, and he expressed mavelous strange motions. He displeased
many, especially the Father of Agarista, who when the lesson was ended: O
Hippoclides, says he, thou have lost thy Wife by dancing. When in the mean
time the foolish young man took himself for the skilfullest of them all, and
that the maid was due to him only. So we silly Creatures, are very often
deceived with a credulous persuasion, when we believe we please others so
exceedingly, because we are so pleasing to our selves before, that every one
seems a miracle in his own eyes. Some Preacher or other supposes himself to
have spoken notably, and none was taken with it. A Musician imagines, that all
will applaude him, and no body praises him. A Painter is mightily pleased with
himself, for the curiousness of his work, and many find fault with it. A
Captain in war, expects Crowns and Triumphs, Garlands
and is scarce looked upon with favorable eyes. A Courtier dreameth mighty
favors from the Prince, and is at next door, to be turned out of the Court.
The master of a Play hops for I know not what applause, and the Spectators
show disdain. The Parasite, the Flatterer, the Iester thinks to make all
merry, and none so much as laugheth. Some Iopas with his curled hair, or
Hortensius tricked up to an inch, In the neatest fashion
promises himself admiration, and praises, and all scoff him. So silly
wretches we turn their stomachs oftentimes, whom we hoped to allure most of
all with our fopperies. We loose the Bride by dancing.

Demosthenes before he was famous for Greek Oratory, is said to have affected
the grace of curious apparel: for he knew that a lawyer is sold by his habit.
Purpura.
But after he had obtained the renown of eloquence, being contented with a
meaner Gown, he used to say, that he desired to be a glory to himself, by
himself rather, then by his cloths or exquisite attire. For whom his own
honor extolleth, other men's baseness presses not down, and whom his own
baseness throws to the ground, other men's honor lifts not up. That
commendation is begged, and no credit to any man, which is sent for altogether
abroad. Make proof hereof
This I seal up in Chrysostomes words: The glory of this present time is both
none, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in 1. Epist. ad Tim.
and also as uncertain as the waves: and if it continue for any space, is at
length suddenly extinguished.

Sequitur fugientes gloria, sequentes sugit. Monost. Trochai.
Glory follows them that fly her,
But flies them that would come nigh her.
But it is hard, thou say, not to love, not to follow glory, even this which
is vain and fruitless. All men have a strong opinion, and conceit of their
own worth, and there lives in the best men that can be the sting of I know
not what glory, which very seldom dies so fully, that no seeds remain
behind, which being nourished grow not up to bear leaves and fruit. Ah, how
often do we labor rather fot credit then conscience? Ah what a company have
overcome all kind of adversity, which were shamefully overcome by vain glory?
We return eftsoons unto our selves, and are resolved into our own credit.
Men put off the desire of glory last of all. And where I pray may thou find
them, which turn their backs to all Glory? All of us openly detest pride, yet
we hear Songs in our own praise without any wound in our ears. And our ears
are never wounded
The love of vain glory is approved by no body, when in the mean time this
sticks fast to all, which all are displeased with. And many times while we
forbid our selves to be praised, we silently invite, that he which began,
should not so quickly give over: It is a hard matter to abhor glory, to make no
account of praise, nor favor of him that praises, is hardest of all. No man
was ever refractory against his own glory. Herein yet farther Chrysostom
agrees to my mind: How therefore, says he, shall we be freed from this hard
servitude? If we shall affect another glory, namely that which is true glory.
For even as those that are led with fleshly desires, another fairer face being
seen, does separate from the former: so likewise those that are deeply in
love with this glory, that fair heavenly glory, if it be looked upon, can draw
away from this. A man covetous of vain glory, is like to them which endure
tempests, Are weather-beaten.
always trembling, always jearing, and waiting upon I know not how many
Masters. But he that is out of this slavery, is rightly compared to them, which
being set in the haven, do now enjoy their full liberty. But the other not so,
but to as many as he is known, so many Masters he has, being constrained to
serve them all. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Romans circa finem.

Vniversis singulisque servit servus gloriae.
He that waits on Glories Throne,
Serves all and every one.
Vetus Troch.
Amongst these one that was no small Lord in Court: (I name him not, but
Floresta, who writes of him) He met with a certain man of the Kings House, to
whom with a disdainefull countenance: Sirrah, quoth he, what speech of me in
the Court? The other blushing at it: None, quoth he, my Lord, neither which
makes to your praise, nor against it. This heard the man most greedy of glory,
which believed that every ones mouth was taken up with him, and scorning to be
noted by them that stood and looked on, presently began to Cudgel the fellow
thinking no hurt; after the blows, he commanded that fifty pieces of Gold
should be given him, Aureis.
whereunto he adds these words himself over and above: Now thou have matter
both of praise and d spraise; make use, and apply it in the Palace. Will thou
call this man Lord of himself? he serves a thousand masters, whosoever
glory. Nay, he is all men's servant, whosoever is glories. For: Gloriae servire,
mentis non nisi abjectissimae est:
Gloriae servus nihil recte inchoat, nil perficit.
To serve glory is the kind
Of no other then the basest mind.
Who on glory does attend,
Nothing begins, nor rightly brings to end.


Rightly, least the end should not be answerable to his beginning. One thing
therefore, says Chrysostom, let us have an eye unto only, to that let all our
intentions be directed even which way we may deserve to be praised at Gods
mouth. Does not that or that man praise thee? thou loosest nothing thereby: and
if any one discommend thee, thou art not a jot hurt: for whether it be praise
or dispraise, it receives gain or loss only from God. As for all humane
things, they are utterly vain. Truly, most vain. This was the mind, this the
Doctrine of our Savior Jesus Christ, whose learning when the Jews wondered at,
and said: How knows this man letters, having never learned? Hereunto the true
Master of Humility: My Doctrine, quoth he, is not mine, but his that sent me.
Ioh. 7.16. So when he wrought Miracles, and healed men of most desperate
infirmities, For the most part
he charged that they should tell no man. This was done for our instruction,
that If we would glory, we should glory in the Lord, for not he that
commends himself, is approved, but whom GOD commends. 2 Cor. 10.18.
Therefore, a Seneca very excellently has admonished, Let the conscience be
discharged, let us take no pains a^ all for Fame. And accordingl^ Annaeus
compelling himself here unto: Nihil opinionis causa, omnia conscientiae factam.
I will do nothing, says he for love of opinion, all things for conscience
sake. Sen. l. 3. de Ir: c. 41. et devit. beat. c. 20 Bernard confirming these
things i^ fuller terms: Our Intention says he, shall be pure, if in ever^
thing that we do, we seek either the honor of God, or the profit o^ our
Neighbor, or a good conscience God in times past decreed under pain of death,
a thing at first sight of small moment, that none should burn perfumes
appointed for the service of God in any profane use: Ordained
You shall not make to your selves according to the composition thereof. It
shall be unto thee holy for the Lord. Whosoever shall make like to that, to
smell thereunto, shall even be cut off from the people Exodus 30. ver. 3.9.38.
Glory is a precious perfume, but it is due to God, and to him only. What man
soever thou art, beware to touch these Odours, it is a matter of death: To God
only be all honor and glory. With a vigilant care therefore, says Gregory,
in all things that we do, we must weigh our intention, that it may aim at
nothing Temporal, in whatsoever it performs, but fix it self wholly upon
the solidity of Eternity, least if the building of our Actions have no
foundation to stay it, the earth may sink, and bring it to confusion. (Greg.
l. 28. Mor. c. 6. propius finem.) Whosoever loves a good intention, must needs
hate vain glory, or else he makes no great account of Heaven.

We have treated at large concerning this plague of a Right Intention. Rancour
But the malignity of this disease which is so obstinate and common every
where, requires that we discourse farther of the very same, in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. V. Finally what Vain Glory is, at how shamefully it murdereth a Right
Intention, unless it be prevented.
Vain Glory is a huge Rock, upon which there are scarcely any men, but either
suffer shipwreck, or at least damage. What Mariner is there so skillful,
which can take heed enough, not to split his Vessel upon this Rock? And look
how diverse vain glory is in her self, so many several names she has
obtained of ancient Writers. Basil: Let us beware, says he, of that sweet Spy
of spiritual Works, that pleasing enemy of our Souls, that moth of virtues,
that most fauning robber of good deeds, and that some paintresse of poison, in
a honey color. (Basil. de constit. Mon. c. 11.) Fit Titles for us to bestow.
The sweet Spy, says he, of spiritual Works, like to treacherous Delilah,
which with soothing blandishments bereaved Sampson of his strength, and
delivered him to his enemies. The Souls pleasing enemy, and kills the more
cruelly, the more it delights, and as Cyprian aptly: Whilst it lifts up,
Dum extollit, emollit; et puln git, cum ungit.
it pulls down; and wounds, when it heals. The Moth of Virtues, Vain
Glory. And withal as out of the more precious Garment, Salveth
is bred the stronger Worm, which tears and gnawes about her Parents, so out
of the nobler virtue, proceeds the vainer glory, and more pernicious, the
death of her mother. The most flattering robber of good works. She allureth,
and delights, she provokes, and persuades, that she may murder, and
despoile the soul of (...) goods. The Painter of Poison. Ah! what man is so
religious and holy, that he can espy and beware of all her treacheries?

But how audacious and hurtful this vice is above the rest, egregiously
Chrysostom: There is nothing, says he, secure from this enemy, which like a
contagious disease corrupts all things. Christ our Lord exhorted, that we
should lay up our treasures in heaven, whither neither Thief approaches, and
where the Moth makes no spoil. Nevertheless vain glory reaches up thither
and many times the things which one had treasured up in Heaven through the
fruit of good works one assault of vain glory destroys, consumes, and
utterly confounds. Chrysostom. Hom 72. in Mat In the very same man^er Basil. Vain
Glory, says he, is a crafty Deceiver, and even in the very closure of Heaven,
Contriver of plots
a placer of wiles against us. Basil. in Constitut. Mon. c. 11. Peter
Chrysologus no less eloquently of this mischief: It is says he, a subtle
evil, a secret poison, hidden venom, the stain of virtue, the moth of
Sanctity. All adverse things contend with their own strength, fight with their
own Weapons, impugn openly, whereby they are both as easily avoided, as
seen: but this by cruel Art heweth virtues asunder with the sword of virtues,
kills fasting with fasting, In pieces
emptieth the force of prayer by prayer, overthrows mercy with pity: this
vice of remedies creates diseases, and of medicine makes longer infirmities.

Eleazar the Hebrew, that jewel of Noble men, that he alone might overcome a
whole Army, took upon himself to slay the Kings Elephant, for He supposed
that the King was upon it. 1. Match. 6.43. Therefore taking his Dagger, he ran
most courageously under the Beast, and thrust him into the belly, where it is
softest, so that withal he fell down under the Elephant which he had slain,
and remained, as Ambrose speaks, buried in his own Triumph. Triumpho suo
sepultus,
A mavelous exployr! We also bestir our selves in Battle, but vices stand
and fight against us with diverse manner of assaults. Here the first and
greatest labor is to overthrow the Elephant of our flesh. But alas poor
wretches that we are, who^ many times the Victory it self oppresses and
destroys, whils^ we fall down under the enem^ which we overcome. We suppres^
the wantonizing flesh with fas^ings, watchings, and other rigorous courses, but
are overthrown and buried in this our very Tr^umph, being slain not by the
flesh, but by vain glory. To^ much self-conceit (and that (...) we have by
nature, of admirin^ and esteeming our selves and o^^ own things) cuts our
throats after we are Conquerours. A p^tifull exploit! Epictetus hee^ sweetly
producing a noble example: Even as the Sun, says he expects not prayers and
entre^ties, to make him rise, but present^^ shines, and is joyfully received
(...) all: So neither do thou expect applauses, nor stirs or praises, (...)
make thee do good, but do well (...) thine accord, and thou shall likewis^ be
as welcome as the Sun. Stobaeus de Magistrate.

The Ostritch, a notable emblem of folly, is a Bird for bulk of body not
incomparable to a Camel, in which respect it is also called a Camell-Ostritch,
Struthio Camelus.
but the head small, like a Ducks; it has large wings like an Hawk, but never
flies; in the manner of a foure-footed beast. It brings forth eggs in
mavelous abundance, yet preserve^^ not many of them, but leaves them in the
dust to be troad upon by Passengers. She loves the Chickens mightily when they
be hatched, but cruelly neglects the same. He that sueth for the praises of
men, is not inferior to the Ostrich in folly, it has wings very like a
Pelican. The wings of holy men wherewith they are advanced on high, are
prayers, almsdeeds, fastings, watchings, which those Ostriches want not, but
they are not lifted up on high with them, they cleave close to the earth, nor
covet any thing else, then To be seen. And although they bring forth young,
pious actions, which they love also themselves, and esteem very much, and
would have to be loved and esteemed of others, nevertheless they commit these
dear Children to places not covert, and without security, and expose the
things they do to open sight, They long to be public.
They love to pray standin^ in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, to be seen (...) men: They disfigure their faces that they may
appear to men t^ fast. (Matt. 6.5. and 16. Tha^ Caine by envy, Abiram by pride
Zambri by luxury, Iscariot by covetousness, the Purple-cloathe Glutton by
excess should ru^ headlong to Hell was no marvel: this is a marvel, and more
then a marvel, that there be no^ a few, which by prayers, abstinence,
almsdeeds, and mos^ worthy go to the Infernal Pit O most foolish Ostriches!
Therefore Let us not be desirous of vain^ glory. Gal. 5.26. Chrysostom: If thou
love glory, says he, rather love that which is from God. (Hom. 2. and 28.
in Johan.) How foolish is that Champion or Fencer, which has the King, and all
his Royal Train, to be Spectators of his Combat, and for his reward s^es a
Crown prepared all set with Jewels, he not withstanding asks a poor blind
Beggar, Played his part
whether he did well, and for the prize of his valor requires of him,
Scarabaeus
a shining Beetle, or a painted Bead. We also are within the listes, as many
as are alive, being made a Spectacle to the world, to Angels, and to men. (1
Cor. 4 9.) but fools and mad men, how well we have behaved our selves, we
enquire of them, which can no way perceive the Acts of hidden virtue, and also
greedily re eive a few cold praises at their hands in the place of a reward.
But is not this most egregious folly, to perform great matters, as Gregory
speaks, Greg. l. Supra cit. maxim l. 8. Moral.
and gape after the air of praise, with strong endeavor to attend the
heavenly precepts, and look for the reward of an earthly recompense? Whose
hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a Spiders Web. Job. 8.14. The
Spider runs about hither and thither, and marvellously wearieth her self, and
goes backward and forward six hundred times, draws threads o^ of her belly,
Scio alio: aliter sentire.
and makes a toil to ensnare the poorest little creatures, spreading it
abroad in the manner of a Net. This woave^ work of the Spider, is a thing o^
much labor and mavelous subtilty, but to bring this to utter confusion,
there is no need of Hammers or Axes, or Guns, a little stronger blast then
ordinary carries it all away. Look I pray upon the sweating and running
about of busy people, how they struggle, how they strive to the utmost, how
they go to it, Omnibus, ut decitur, ungulis.
and that with their whole body, and with all four, as they say! they break
and exhaust themselves with diverse businesses, go into shops, have recourse
to places of Justice, take notice o^ Schools, Offices
look into Princes Courts, and thou will wonder at the miserable industry of
many. So many months, and likewise so many years labors come to naught often
in a moment of time, for where a Right Intention is wanting, all labor
vanishes into wind, the air of humane favor carries away all things, And
his trust shall be as a Spiders Web:

He reports which gave credit to his eyes, That he saw an Earl of great
renown, Nobleman
who being very grievously offended by his Son, whereas he esteemed it not
fit, to take any revenge for the present, invented this kind of punishment.
Looking by chance upon his Sons Picture, he took it down from the wall, and
without delay tore it in pieces, making this the most favorable argument of a
fathers indignation. He desired his Son should have so much discretion, as
to confess at last of his own accord, that himself did owe the punishment,
which his picture paid. Hierom. Nuza. Tom. 1. Tract. 2. par. 2. They say also
that the Persians, when they are to punish a great man, do pluck off his
Robe, and the tyare from his head, Tiaram,
and hanging them up, do beat the same, as if it were the man himself.
Christ our Lord inflicted a judgment not much unlike this, upon such as are
desirous of vain glory. Our Savior saw in the way a Fig Tree full of leaves,
but bearing no fruit, therefore giving severe sentence against it and bereaving
it of all life: Let no fruit, says he, grow on thee henceforth for ever, and
presently the Fig Tree withered away Mat. 21.19 This Tree, so beautiful for
leaves, but empty of fruit, is a right resemblance of them, which serve for
outward show, but want a Right Intention. These that Christ might terrify,
whilst he spared them, pulled their picture in pieces with execrations, that
the displeasure which they had deserved, they might behold in their Image. We
wonder that our first parents of all, were so grievously punished for tasting
of but one Apple. For what Dioclesian or Phalaris, for a few Figgs, or two or
three little flowers, or only for an Apple, ever sent a thousand men to the
Gibbet? Why therefore did God condemn not a thousand men, but innumerable
millions of men to eternal death? not for plucking up one little Tree, but
despoyling it of an Apple, and that only one? That might have seemed, says
Theodoret, a childish Precept, and fit for Infants: Eat thou not of this Tree.
Why therefore is the transgression revenged with such continual severity?
Worthily without question, because this most easy charge, and not troublesome
for Children the First of mankind refused to perform. Protoplasti.
If God had commanded any great and difficult matters, they might have had some
excuse for their fault. But whereas most free liberty was granted them over all
the Trees of Paradise, one only excepted, it was an intolerable offense, and
worthy of so gre t a punishment, that they would not abstain their hands so
much as from that one, which was so seriously forbidden them. From hence then
it appears, how much also God detesteth those, which go about most unjustly
to fore-stall him of his glory, which he will have to be only due unto
himself: God hates all sinful people, but he also resists the proud and
arragant. (^am. 4.6) even them, whom this vice which is near kin to Idolatry
has infected. The truth it self stands for a witness: and, How, says he,
can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
which comes from God only, Ioh. 5.44. O wretches, a Theater is set up for
you in Heaven, and yet ye gather Spectators upon earth. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Romans Hom. 17. ante finem, ubi plura huc facientia licet videre.

Augustine struck at the rabble of old Philosophers, with the weapon which he
took from them, after this manner. They set up an Image of this fashion A
Queen, having neither attire nor countenance befitting that dignity, yet sat
in a high Chair of Estate, the Queens name was Pleasure. Close by her stood a
troop of noble Damsels, The Virtues, like Hand maids ready at every back of
their Mistress. These the wanton Lady tired with diverse commands, and now she
gave charge to Prudence, now to Fortitude, now to Temperance, what they should
perform in her service. Well, says Austin, did the Philosophers express,
what they pleased, in this picture, but plainly to prove the desire of Glory,
Praise
wherewith they themselves were exceedingly possessed. Therefore let us draw a
Table like to that before, but in the room of Pleasure let us place Vain
Glory, upon whose command the Virtues may wait in that manner, that Prudence
may provide nothing, Justice distribute nothing, Fortitude endure nothing,
Temperance moderate nothing, but what is enjoined by Vain Glory, and hoped
will please the eyes of others. And what I pray is more unreasonable then this
wicked Government? That the most filthy monster, that anticke shadow of true
Glory, should triumph thus over. Most Royal Queens, the virtues and make them
subject whether they will or no, to her full detestable power? even thus the
case stands, men live after this manner, in this sort they spend their
service, these are the spectacles of the world, these the miracles thereof very
weighty, I confess, and oftentimes of much sweat and trouble, but not hard to
the greedy appetite of praise, all things come flowing under the lovely
dominion of Vain Glory; Virtues themselves degenerate into this sweet
affection, and will not have their generous stoutnesse to be much assaulted in
this point, but readily yield to the pleasure of counterfeit Glory. But, Verily
I say unto you, they have their reward Math. 6.2.5.16. The Romans which were
Lords of the World, how bravely did they perform many things, how excellent
were they in peace and war? how praiseworthy their Justice, Notable
how exquisite their Prudence, how famous their Clemency, how invin^ible their
Fortitude, their Temperance how illustrious, how pure and impenetrable their
Chastity, how admirable their Constancy? But they had their reward. Augustine
being a most plentiful Witness: The honor and glory, says he, wherewith God
made the Romans most illustrious, was the wages of the good works they did,
nor have they any cause to complain of the Justice of the great and living God
Aug. l. 5. De Civit. c. 1^. Their works were singular, but they had a reward
fit for them. They were ambitious of glory, and surely they obtained it. The
bounds of the Roman Empire were, the compass of the earth, and the Ocean, so
that whatsoever was convenient or worthy to be won they overcame. Therefore
they made the East and West their borders, except a few places without access
or inhabitants, or else of no regard. They had their reward The most upright
God lets pass no vice, nor yet virtue without punishment or reward. Whereupon
to those better Actions, which yet his Will is not to endue with Heaven, he
assigns a recompense proportionable, and out of Heaven: they have their
revvard, Receive
but so that they may not have an eternal one. Ah, how much pains is taken
every where, but these pains are nothing to Heaven. I beseech you, let us but
look only into Princes Courts, of what a diverse kind are services here, of
what exact industry, of what fine patience, of what curious trust, of what
active policy? to stand whole days, and many times all ^^ll night, or to run
to and (...) weariness, to endure the envy of many, to be ready (...) all
points ^f service, is the daily use there And there are which p^^forme all
these things with m^st (...) of carri^^e, but they desire nothing else (...)
and favor. They have their reward For they took no thought how dear they
should be to God, but how dear to the (...). Others that are dep^^ed to busin^
^es and the subtilty of cares in Pr nces Courts, send forth most vigil^nt eyes
every way, that no detriment happen to the Kings Treasures or honors, but
often these good men, whilst they look to all things with most attentive
carfulness, they reckon not their own soul among the things to be cared
for; so they stuff their purses, so they lose not the Princes favor, they
think it lawful, in the mean while to be negligent of themselves and
Heaven, and scarce ever call themselves to account, they confer with their
own conscience very seldom, and no otherwise then by chance, they examine not
their intention in the things they go about: Of all other matters they know
how to confer sweetly, but very hardly endure to hear one discoursing for an
hour of Heaven. At a word, They use not to be present at home, and speak
with their own persons, being more faithful to all other than themselves. And
these likewise Have their reward, the air of humane favor, and gold a piece
of shining earth, alas an inheritance, that endures no longer then we stay
here. Therefore, Look to your selves (O Courtiers, O whatsoever others) that
ye loose not the things which you have wrought, but that ye may receive a
full reward. Ioh. 2. Epist. v. 8. Be ye industrious and diligent in your
places? this is well indeed: But because you will have notice taken of your
diligence, Be noted for
this now is ill: nay this now is worst of all, that many times ye take no
care how diligent and industrious you are, as how ye may seem to be. Look
therefore to your selves, least you also hear in time to come: Receberunt
mercedem suam.
They have their reward.

Iephthaes Daughter in times past went out to meet her Father returning from
War, to sing the praises of a most loving parent, and withal to congratulate
his victory and Triumph. Iephtha heard with what glorious terms the maid
extolled her Father, but yet for reward of her praises, he slew her that set
them forth, although against his own will. Judge. 11 39 A wonderful adventure,
and to be imitated of us as near as we can. We also are in War, and never
want enemies: should the Devil give over his fierce assaults, yet the flesh
alone which is never but refractory, Stirs up
wageth continual War: After we have behaved our selves like Conquerours in
this fight, this daughter of ours comes forth to meet us, with stately
Elogies in our commendation. This is, as Origin explaineth, Orig. Hom. 5. in
Ge^. ad s.
Vain Glory, which then appears most of all furnished with praises, when the
matter is carried happily and with good success: When thou have given means
to an Hospital, when thou have built a Church, when thou have been long at
prayers, when thou have endowed a poor maid, when thou have bestowed more
liberal alms, when observed a stricter fast, then that flattering daughter
presents her self by the way, with full mouth, commending whatsoever is done,
and like a sweet Song, ingeminating these or the like words: How excellently;
Sounding forth
how godly and laudably this; how religiously and holily that; what a good
example will this prove? a noble deed, who can deny it? the matter speaks,
thou have excelled thy self: so it was fitting, and would to God many would
imitate thee: thou have done bravely. In these terms the Conquerours
flattering daughter applaudeth him. What now is to be done? Course to be taken
Stern affection
Thou, if thou be a man, and desire thy labors should not be in vain, put
on here a grave disposition, and with a generous hand kill that soothing
Gossip, whatsoever thou have done, pass it wholly to God together with all the
glory, and stoutly resume the Right Intention, which thou tookest unto thee at
the first offer. Augustine giving encouragement hereunto: This desire, says
he, without doubt is better resisted, then suffered, (...) s^cu^quam faello est
lats de ^arere dum donegatur, (...) est ea non delectari, cum effertur.
For none perceives the force of this enemy, but he that stands at defyance
with it, because although to want praise be easy to any man, whilst it is
denied, it is hard not to be delighted therewith, when it is offered. Every one
is so much the more like to God, as he is freer from this pollution. Aug. l.
5. de Civit. c. 14. ipso initio. and Epist. 64. ad finem. But what man is he
which can sufficiently beware of all vain glory? Iephtha could hardly hinder
his daughter from coming forth to meet him, but he was able to make her not
sing, or finish her life sooner then her song, by taking away her voice and
breath together. So how religious and holy soever a man be, he can hardly
withstand, but that vain glory after many famous deeds will come to meet him,
but that she will begin to sing and tickle him in the ear, but he can, nay
ought to prohibit, that the Song should be sung out Therefore let him make no
delay to detest this meeting, to ruin away from the Charm of the praiser, to
kill the Enchantresse her self, this glory with a Right Intention, if he
desire to please GOD, rather then himself. Vain Glory murdereth all Right
Intention, if she be not prevented, and slain her self at the first approach.
Questionless Vain Glory as Chrysostom very rightly, is a cruel beast, Monster
an horible Devil, the plague of the whole earth, a venomous Viper, Chrysostom.
H. 12. in Epist. ad Romans 2.
for even as that beast teareth open the Dam^ belly with her nails, so
likewise this vice pulls the parent of i^ in pieces. And how worthily that
Author Thomas of Kempis: Without doubt, says he, Vain Glory is an evil
sickness, an exceeding great vanity, because it draws men away from the true
Glory, and despoileth them of heavenly Grace. For while a man wholly pleases
himself, he displeases thee. Whilst he coveteth humane praises, he is
deprived of true Virtues. Let the Jews seek that glory which comes from one
another, I will seek for that which comes from God. For all humane glory,
all temporal honor, all worldly pomp, being compared to thy eternal glory,
is very vanity and idleness. (Kemp. l. 3. c. 40. n. 4. et 6.) And if we give
credit to Climachus, Vain Glory is the consumption of labors, the destruction
of pains, the trapper of treasures, the child of false-hood, the forerunner
of pride, shipwreck in the Haven, an emmet in the Barn, which although it be
little, yet lays wait to steal all the pains and profits. The emmet lies
waiting till the Corn be brought in, but Cenodoxy whilst much wealth be heaped
up: she rejoices that she may play the Thief, but this the Destroyer. (Clim.
grad. 21. de Ceno^.) A laboring man, says the Son of Sirach, which is given
to drunkenness, shall not be rich, because whatsoever he earneth by honest
labor, he consumes vainly when he is drunk. Eccli. 19.1. But I fear that
many do not sufficiently understand these lessons. For now adays we love
these courses, that when any vice is sharply touched, you shall easily find
none, which will confess that he is troubled with it, neither can you draw a
sincere confession from him by a thousand witnesses. And who is it that will
confess himself stately, Acknowledge
and be sorry for it? When yet Augustine a very holy Bishop, in hi^ own
particular pronounces tha^ he was not wholly free from th^^ fault, for
elegantly accusing himself: Song
This is my daily Lesson says he, and yet skirmishi^^ strongly with the
adversary, ma^^ times I receive wounds from hi^ being not able clearly to
avoid t^^ delight of praise when it is offer^^ me. Aug. Epist. 64. ad Aure^
Episc. fine. We truly all condemn vain glory, not all contemn i^ There is no
body, but believes that he cleanlily concealeth thi^ sickness: many will
swear tha^ they are as sound as a Bell from this disease, when they are
mightily infected therewith, very like to those Drunkards, which the^ seem
most wise in their own conceit, and to be in right sense and do all passing
well, when their tongue and feet both trip So they that thirst after a little
vain glory, do then principally admire themselves for religious honest men,
when they are notably tipled with this sweet licour. To that purpose
Chrysostom: Vain Glory, says he, is an intolerable kind of drunkenness,
whatsoever it does, it does for other men's sake. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Ioh. For
that cause Christ so often repeateth that faithful premonition: Take heed,
that we should beware of vain glory with all diligence, as a most subtle and
cunning Thief in the Art of stealing. Therefore Take heed, All goodness
which is openly showed out of a desire of commendation, is enslaved to the
power of this lurking enemy, says Greg. l. 8. Mor. c. 30. Spoliari vult,
quisquis ab hominibus vult videri.
He desi^eth to be robbed of all, whosoever will be seen of men.

CHAP. VI. Certain Questions concerning a Right Intention.
TO Serve GOD, is agreeable not only to all Laws, and all reason, but also is
the most noble and best Office in the World, and a thing altogethe^ necessary
for the obtaining (...) Heaven. Moreover that sweetne^^ of solace, which many
feel^, th^^ do serve God, is honey from Heaven, and a thing very pret^ous.
Nevertheless to serve G^^ for that end to gain this swee^nesse of mind, is
little praise wo^thy, and this intention was a^waies accounted vicious by m^ of
a more holy judgment. S^ delicate a thing is Pure Intention and never but an
enemy to self^-love, which way soever it m^^ insinuate it self. But self-love
the friend of all delights, a^ even of them which are esteem in no wise
profane. Are in no profane estimation
And becau^^ God cannot otherwise choose b^ drop some of this honey from Heaven
for his more faithful se^vants, private love suddenly tak^ it up, and for this
very taste, profereth it self to be at greater se^vi^es. But this is not to
see^ God, but ones self, nor to ta^^ pains for the Givers, but the gif^ sake,
which is esteemed a thin^ not thoroughly free from sin, and indeed is no other,
then if a Manservant, or Maid should go into a Victualers service, because he
hops for tit bits either of gift, or by stealth, and relics more ordinary of
his Masters Dishes: or if one became bound to an Apothecary, or Comfit-seller,
or one that dresseth Feasts, that he may have sweet scraps to lick more
usually. This self-love works so privily, for it is a most subtle Artificer,
that sometimes so close an imposture, Can
may not be found out a great while even of a man that is very industrious.
Circumspect
Yet may it be found out, and then especially when prayers, and pains, when
whatsoever is virtuous, begins therefore to be in disdain, because that
honey fails. And if you should demand of such a one, why do thou not pray,
why do thou not labor, as thou did lately? he will answer, because it
relisheth not, I loath it, prayer is an unpleasant thing, I am weary of labor.
But now he that is of a sincere Intention, is nothing moved with the things:
although he be wearie^ labor, yet he holds out to (...) pains, although he
distaste p^^er, yet he cease not to pray; though troubles be heaped up him,
yet he endures them, (...) indeed he serves God not (...) Heaven, but for
God, And (...) is the property of a pure and ^^^cere intention, which seems
to be expounded more through therefore now we will propo^^ some short questions
concern^ this very point.

1. Brief question.
What can God require less more easy of us, then this ve^^ thing, a Right
Intention? T^ speak truly, he desires that (...) us, which no man of what
sta^^ order, or se^e soever, how po^^ or sick soever he be, can de^^ what can
a creditour demand le^^ of his debtor, then this partic^lar thing that he
should be willi^^ in earnest to pay the debt? G^^ asks the very same of us:
a^^ thou willing to pay what thou owe? thou have already paid the greatest
part, for with me but to be willing, is to do. And who has not free leave to
be Willing? this treasury of Will, every one that is sickest and poorest, this
he that is most afflicted has in his power. God in times past worthily
complains against them, which refused to perform but this most gentle
Charge: This Commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, neither is it far off, neither is it in Heaven, that thou should say?
Who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it
and do it. Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say: Who shall go
over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it.
But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou
may do it. Deuter. 30.11.13, 14. The very same may be said of a Right
Intention, It is very nigh thee, that Intention, is in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, but what is nearer unto thee the^ thy mouth and thy heart? A^ thou not
able to cloth a poo^ body? give two half penie^ add thereunto a mighty and
ea^nest desire of releeving all th^^ are in want for Gods sake, a^ thou have
clothed the poor. Is beyond thy strength, to po^^ forth long prayers? do wh^
thou art able, but withal add strong desire of praising God a^waies, and thou
have prayed (...) him as long as can be. I brin^ Chrysostom before thee for a
complete witness in this point, wh^ elegantly confirming the same These
things, says he, are no^ provided by cost, nor labor, no^ sweat; it is
enough to be willing and all things are discharged. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in
Epist. ^ Hebr. fine.

2. Brief Question.
Can a man exercise diverse good Actions at one and the same time? he can
absolutely, and with small trouble, only by intention. It is not easy indeed
for all men, to finish two white walls with one Tray of Mortar; to sees
diverse broths together in one Pipkin, to take several colors out of the same
Shell. But it is very easy for a good intention to over lay not only two, but
ten walls with the same Vessel of plaster. It is very commodious indeed, at
the beginning of every work, to set before one diverse ends or intentions. Let
this be for example: I go to Divine Service, and to the Church. 1. Out of
ob^dience to my Master, whom by place I ought to accompany, as the Court
Nobility her Prince. 2. I will have my respect to be sincere, I will not only
conduct my Master a long, as it is the fashion of some, presently they withdraw
themselves, and at the end stand before their Master again, as if they had
been always present: Such an hypocrite will I not play, 3. Out of obedience to
the Church, to which I owe this upon Sundays and Holydaies. 4. Out of a
grateful mind to God, that I may give him thanks for so many benefits
received. 5. Wher^as it is cold weather to day, a^ very sharp season, I will
exert patience. 6. Whereas they ^ not wanting that cruelly hate (...) J will
earnestly entreat the ^ mighty for these mine enemies 7 will trust in God;
Without cause
I might ind^ find business enough at home, (...) God will recompense this
abse^^ from home with a secret adv^^tage. Behold here seven Int^^tions at
once, or seven Acts Virtue, of double obedien^^ sincerity, a grateful mind,
P^^ence, Charity, Trust in GO^ There might be added so ma^^ more also: For
this verily is ^ Pillar of smoke perfumed w^ Myrrh, and Frankincense, t^ with
all Powders of the Mercha^^ Cant. 3.6. But thou will (...) perhaps: It is too
hard for (...) to multiply so many Acts, and it were with one breath to inte^
so many things in my mind. T^ Counsel therefore I give the^ good friend,
embrace the o^^ and only Will of God in the mind, and whatsoever thou do
always premit this For thy sake O Lord, I will perform both this, and that,
and the other, and all things. For thy sake O Lord, for thy honor, for thy
pleasure, for thee especially it is done, whatsoever is done of me. But he
which will follow the steps of those familiar men with God, has a Leader which
can show them the way, unto this more lofty wisdom. The most holy King David
undoubtedly joined these intentions together, in his actions, and the
government of such a mighty people, for those that were committed to the
tuition of his care and Scepter, Whom he received into etc.
he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by the
skilfulnesse of his hands. Psalm 78.72 What means this? have hands also
understanding? yes many ways, even such as David endued his hands with. For so
the most wise and virtuous King in his Actions, which he calls hands, did
combine diverse kinds of most excellent affections toward God, What else are
the sacred verses of this King, then the quintessence of most noble affections,
the treasure of most holy Intentions? What did King David more frequently
breathe in sighs then this: O that I might please thee Lord: that I might
rightly govern the people committed to my charge: that I might propagate thy
Worship over all the earth: would to God I might never but praise thee, would
to God all my members might become tongues to warble out thy praises. My lips
will be feign when I sing unto thee. Psalm. 71 20. My song shall be always of
the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 89.1. I refuse not to instruct the very
wicked, that they may return unto thee, O my God. Let me be the vilest and
most regardlesse, so I may be in thy House my Lord. Let the enemies of God,
let all them that hate God come to naught. But let it be^ well with the
Servants, well with the friends of God, well with all that love God.
Understanding
Lo what excellent skilfulnesse of hands is here! a thousand such things did
the soul of the Hebrew Monarch breathe forth! Truly, Mind
according to the skilfulnesse of his hands, he guided the people like Sheep,
he solicited Heaven with innumerable good intentions. This is that holy
violence to be offered valiantly unto Heaven. He takes Heaven by force, he
over-commeth God, which in this manner, so often assaulteth Heaven, and God
with desires.

3. Brief Question.
What does very much defile a Right Intention? Self-love. To speak in a word:
when one deriveth all things in a sweet current to himself, and makes this
all his thoughts. This pleases me, this agrees with my taste; this is for my
good, my benefit; this is done according to my fancy and liking; this is
pleasant and delightful to me, to conclude, this makes me a man. This
self-love is a Savage Bull, a filthy Monster, it pusheth against a Right
Intention with four Horns. The first is the Horn of honor, Titles,
greed^nesse of Praise, which holds th^^ in great estimation, to be eminen^ and
observed before other me^ The second Horn, is greedine^ of delight, which
teaches to receive meat and drink, not s^ much for necessity as pleasure nor
to sit down at meals, t^ assw^ge hunger, but to pacif^ the Gut. The same
course it keeps in other refections of the body. The third horn is
Gredinesse of wealth, which laye^ on many and grievous labou^ in that respect
only, that the Purse may swell bigger and beggar. The fourth Horn, is
Greediness of other men's hurt, the being furnished with manifo^^ deceit,
speaks and does the which may endamage others, ^ least which may prove a
troubl^ which an offense, which dista^^ to them: and yet does it not a^waies
endeavor the destruction of others by open assault, it many times it
practices evil s^ fin^ly, A loose off
and with such a compass that it may seem to desire nothing less, then to
hurt them whom it hates. A daily and pernicious mischief to Princes, with
whom they that are gracious, under pretense of ayding or giving advise, do
glut their envy, and sometimes highly extol them that are in the way of
favor, that afterward they may be more readily believed, when they bring
accusations. Thus Self-love is an horned Beast, which buts and throws down
all good intention with this fourfold horn; take heed. The desire of private
advantage, Pessimum very affectus venenum est, sua cuique utilitas.
is the deadly poison of all true affection. Therefore Self-love aims at
this, that every where it may be well in flesh, it feeds it self, looks to
it self, and does as he in times past, of whom Gellius reports. When one
that was corpulent, and shined with fat had a lean Horse that was nothing but
skin and bones, being demanded what might be the cause, that he looked far
better then his Horse? Showed
answered, it ought to seem no wonder, if he were in better pligh^ then his
Horse, forasmuch as he himself was his own keepe^ but his man Statius his
Horse Gell. l. 4. Noct. Attic. c. 2^ Even so Self love, whatsoever reputeth
not its own, that it other puts off to others, or ve^^ lightly regards: to
labor too^ and nail for priv^te gain, the ^t supposes its own duty.
Ass^redly; good intention goes ^ wrack so much the more lamentably, as
Self-love grows ^ greater prosperity.

4. Brief Question.
Why in the Sacred Leaves a^ so many things otherwise of ve^^ small ^cc^unt so
much aggrav^^ed? as the more unwary touching of the A^^e, ^t^^^s g^there^ on
the Sabbath day, the mult^^^^ of Subje^ts numbered, givin^ a ^up of cold water,
la^civio^^ look^ng upon a woman, etc. M^es (...) time proclaiming: A^ this is
the offering, says he, which ^^e had take of them, Go^d, a^^ Silver, and
Brass, and blew, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats hair,
etc. Exodus 25.3. That Gold and Silver should be reckoned among gifts is no
marvel. But of what value amongst these is Goats hair, a g^ft without all
dignity? Are such small and despicable things also dear to God? What a great
matter was an handful of meal, and a little Oil bestowed in courtesy upon
Eliah? 3 King. 17.12. What were the Widows two little pieces of money, did they
require so great commendations, as they obtained? As Christ was sitting and
intent (as it were) upon some serious sp^ctacle, he beheld the company which
east mighty gifts into the holy Treasury. Among so many wealthy people, a
certain poor Widow brought no more then two brazen mites, which make on
farthing, ^n whose praise Christ most li^erally pronouncing. Verily, s^^t^ he,
I say unto you, that this po^re Widow has cast in more then they all Luke
21.3. It was a small matter which that poor woman brought into the Treasury,
bu^ more she could not: and it came much more gratefully, Ready
which wa^ given with such an easy the^ with a full hand. For these gift^
consist not in the things, but it the very desire to do good. He gives very
much, which gives but a few things royally, and with his mind equalleth the
wealth of K^^gs, which contributes a little, but willingly. Which forgets
his own poverty, whilst he looks upon another, which thinks he
receives a benefit, when he bestows one. Which gives as not looking to
receive again, which both preventeth and seekeeth occasion to do good, this
man is the richest and most liberal of all, for his right intention. What
therefore, I pray, did so much commend those small Coins, what that little
meal, what the Goats hairs? Right Intention only and alone. This is it
which surmounteth all men's profits, store. Treasures, and all the brave Wealth
of Persia. Nothing is richer then Right Intention.

5. Brief Question.
Is it possible for one to sleep and pray at once? For so our Savior
earnestly requires, saying: That men ought always to pray and not faint. Luke
18.1. Can we therefore pray also when we are asleep? we can if we will, and
that in this manner: we must use prayer immediately before we go to rest, and
offer our rest it self to Gods S^rvice, in these or the like word^: I desire
my Go^, as often as I shall draw breath this night, so often all my
respiration; Breathing
may praise thee, as if I d d always pronounce that: Blessed be God for ever,
Blessed be God, Blessed etc. Or 1. with thy sleep^, my good le us which th^^
(...) t^ke on earth, I also unite ^^i^e, a d withal offer it to t^ee ^^e which
prepares himself to s^^pe (...) sort, ever prays. To which p^rpose he may
not imp^^^^ (...) suppose with himself, that he hears Christ speaking in
these words: When any one will repose himself to sleep, let him meditat^
somewhat of me, or confer wit^ me. For so although he sleep i^ body, yet
he shall watch in mind unto me. Yea let every one which (...) ready to close
his eyes desire, that I would receive every breath which he shall fetch that
night, as it we^^ to my exceeding praise, and ^ which cannot be wanting to the
holy wishes of a pious and loving soul, will fulfill his desire in truth.

Surely we seem not to understand sufficiently, how much advantage it
brings, to reduce all things in this manner to the honor of God. There is no
moment of time but we may be on the getting hand. And how sweet is this gain
of virtue to procure a reward in Heaven even by eating, drinking, and sleeping.
One may verily by intention only do more good in one day, then some other can
in a whole year. He came late into the Vineyard to work, which came about
the last hour of the day, yet he received a penny no less then they, which
traveled from day break until late evening. Math. 20.9. It is one thing to
bestow long pains, another that which is intent. God respects not so much
how long one labors, as how well. And it falls out often, that a very
mean and easy thing to be done, is of more worth, For the Right Intention
then any the most excellent action, but destitute of that intention. Whom
therefore may not that Art delight, which teaches the ingenious celerity of
growing rich? This is that Art, Discretion to grow rich with speed
the knowledge of Right Intention, this is that Rod of Midas, which turns
whatsoever it touches into Gold. Upon which motion, it may prove an apt advise
for all, to be deeply imprinted in their minds: Let all study to have a right
intention, not only about the general state of their lives, but also about
all particular things there in ever aiming sincerely at that, that they may
serve and please the divine goodness especially for it self.

6. Brief Question.
What deed is most acceptab^^ unto God? If we may be Iudge^ in this case, we
account that the most excellent of all, which abounds most with the love o^
God, or, which proceeds from a most fervent intention of pleasing God only.
Ludovicus Granata
One discoursin^ of this point: That work, sait^ he, is most acceptable to GOD
which being manifest to his eye only, is neither a profit, nor honor, nor
pleasure to him that performs it, but only in this kind, that it is done in
respect of God With how great desire many times of amplifying Gods hono^r are
the breasts of the Saints inflamed, though they should lay down their lives
ten, although an hundred times? These very desires of such a^ ardent affection
toward God, are to be recounted amongst the greatest works of virtue. There
be some Stage Players, which act a whole Comedy for one great man's sake only;
but that one pays the Box more liberally then a great many other of the
Spectators: So a man of a most sincere intention, offering himself daily to
the Service of God: My Lord, says he, I set forth a spectacle to thine eyes
only, I am an Actor for thee to loo^e upon, I care not for the eyes and ears
of other beholders: whatsoever they shall say or think of me, no way
disturbeth my thoughts, so that thy eyes, so thy ears may approve me, I make
light of all things else, and addict my self to thy Service, thine honor, my
God, I principally regard. It was a renowned saying among the ancient: Alter
alteri, satis magnum est theatrum vi^ probus.
One good man is a Theater wide enough for another. When Epicurus wrote to one
of the Professors of his own studies: These, says he, I not to many, but to
thee, for we are a Stage great enough for one another. Sen. Epist. 7. fine.
Exceeding large.
God is a Theater over and above large for a good man, and a man of a good
intention is a Theater also large enough for GOD. What excellent Theaters were
Abraham alone, and Paul alone for GOD who were of a most sincere int^^tion?

7. Brief Question.
How often is a right intenti^^ to be renewed? Saint Bernar^^ If any man, says
he, consume the day in that manner, that i^ does mix the heavy anger of G^
with all his Actions, at the en^ the day how many Hells has i^ deserved for
committing the so^ wickedness so often? But on t^ other side if one pass the
day ^ that in all his doings he exercise^ the sincere love of God, how hig^
seat in Heaven shall this man ^taine? For God is more ready ^ bestow rewards,
then to requi^ punishments. Thus the Counse^ of Bernard is, to revive a rig^^
intention very often in the da^ that which we have already demonstrated before.
Christ by t^^ mouth of Matthew: He wh^ receives a Prophet, says he, i^ the
name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward: and (...) that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's
reward. Math. 10.41. Christ will not only have entertainment afforded, but a
sure intention to be joined with it. For what great matter do thou, if thou
set open thy doors to a Stranger, and shuttest up thy heart? from whence
we may gather how profitable and necessary it is for one that earnestly
desires heavenly gain, commonly to revive a good intention, for to entertain
a Prophet is not so worthy of reward, as to have done it with an excellent
intention. But if any man desire to know the direct hour to renew intention, I
esteem it five times in the day especially to be observed. The First is after
our rest in the morning. The Second, at noone before meals, and after it. The
Third, before Prayers, but especially before divine Service. The Fourth, before
labor, or any businesses. The Fifth, before we go to sleep. At these set
times of the day chiefly, let the mind be at his own command, and betake it
self t^ it self; let it take breath as i^ were, to adore his Maker, an^ so
renew a right intention. N^ man is so full of business, but h^ may perform that
very easil^ and with convenience: all the matter ^s dispatched only i^ three
words. GOD has easi^ ways to come to him, and then is no minute of the night
or day that he denies free access. Le^ him therefore that is about to renew
his intention, repent some o^ these sayings with a ready mine^ Lord for thy
sake: for thy honor Lord: In regard of thee: To the glory: In thy Name: For
love t^ thee: For thee, my God I will do^ this, I will utter this, I will
endur^ this, for thee all things. It is wonderful to be sp^ken, how much thi^
commends our Actions, how much also it enricheth them. And the more often
recalled intention, will stop the passage against a great many vices, which
otherwise are ready grievously to assail us, and withal turns that vanity
to flight, which smoothly insinuates it self into all things, by the only
desire of pleasing God.

8. Brief Question.
How may an Elephant be made of a Fly? If sins otherwise of a lighter degree,
be committed with no lightly wicked intention. A most apparent witness hereof
was the hunter Esau, who was so greatly condemned for eating red pottage, as if
he had met with I know not what Apicius-like dainties. What hurt I pray is it
to sup the broth of lentles, especially when hunger so provokes? But Esau,
like an hound, did so greedily devour the boiled lentles, that Gluttony getting
the upper hand there was no place for reason, that for a sorry mess of Pottage
he sold his Birthright, and which is more reproachful, made little account
that he had sold it. Genes. 25.34. Even so the greedy appetite of some men
transgresses more in the meanest fare, then the temperance of other in the
most exquisite delicates and sometimes there lurketh more pride under the
course^ Coat, then under a gown o^ Gold. The mind and intention is herein
respected, not the victuals or Garment. And even as h^ prays with more
commendat^on, which prays in fewe^ words, but yet more fervently then he
which pours out most prolixe prayers, but without an^ fire: Devotion
So many times he offendet^ more grievously, which is set upon a thing although
of smal^ moment otherwise, yet wit^ mighty heat and violence, the^ he which
comes into the i^ society of a fault faintly, Within the compass
and a^ if his mind were about somewhat else.

9. Brief Question.
How manifold is the profit (...) a Right Intention? We have showed in diverse
places before, how pleasant, profitable, necessary a right intention is. In
this place briefly and summarily a sevenfold emolument comes into account.
The first is: By this means we endeavor as far as we are able to reconcile
our selves to God. We understand that pains and punishments are due to our
sins, and these one day to be certainly paid. These we help to avoid, as
often as we lead away our minds as it were by a good intention from transitory
things, and lift them up to God, looking with penitent eyes upon the time past,
and careful upon the time to come. Another: There comes a great improvement
to virtue, and a mighty increase of Grace, not only from the exercises of
piety, but also from the daily tenor of life. Course
A man of a Right Intention never l^boureth in vain, for whether he writes,
reads, hears; whether he buyeth, sells, travelleth, is about business;
whether he eats, drinks, sleeps, finally whatsoever he does, so long as
he determines upon the honor of God in all things, he always makes most
hone^^ gain. A sincere intention is verily the beginning of salvation.* The
third: A right intention adds mavelous force to o^^ prayers. For this is
that swee^ tongued Mediatresse, whi^^ knows how to pacify God and make him
yield to the Pet^tioners request. Incline
A right intention understands not only ho^ to pray, but also to prevail.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing i^ my Name: Ask, and ye shall receive. Ioh.
16.24. The main^ string of Prayers is Right Intention. Nervus.
They call diligence in he^ proper kind the most fruitful o^ all virtues, I
may worthily repor^ the same in a manner, or more o^ a right intention. A right
intention is both the most fruitful o^ all virtues, and best Orator before
God. The fourth, a good intention does knit man to Go^ in a mavelous union.
Hereo^ excellently Rusbrochius: A single intention, says he, is that, which
looks upon nothing but God, and all things in relation to God. She is the
end, beginning, glory, and ornament of all virtues. She drives away all
fiction, hypocrisy, and double dealing: helps, and collecteth the dispersed
powers of the soul in unity of spirit, And combineth the spirit it self unto
God. She presses down, and treads Nature under foot, and preserves all
virtues in safety, and gives peace, hope, and confidence in God, both here,
and at the day of Judgment, Wherefore thou ought to use diligence, that
thou retain and regard her in all thy actions (Rusbroch. in farrag. Instit.
apud L. Blos.) A right intention is a vast and endless treasure to an earnest
affection. The fifth: Him that earnestly desires
A right intention deriveth a perpetual current of grace from God to man, and
that appears then especially, when adversity is to be endured Good or bad
Leather sh^weth it self chiefly in rain; a good or evil man in adversity.
How patient and observant of God an upright man is, so impatient and stubborn
against God is a wicked man. Augustine declaring this exceeding well: How
comes it to pass, says he, that in the same ^ffliction, evil men detest
and blaspheme God; but good men pray and praise him? So much respect there is,
not what manner of things, but what manner of man every one suffers. For dirt
being stirred about no otherwise then balm sends forth an horrible stink,
and this a fragrant smell. Aug. l. 1. De civit. c. 8. ad finem. The sixth: A
right intention assaileth her enemies with a stratagem that never fails,
Warlike policy
and always carries away the victory. Whilst Moses upon the Rock lifted up
his hands toward Heaven, Israel prevailed, and put the Amalekites to flight by
a most memorable conquest. As long as intention stands upright toward God,
so long it falls before no enemies, it is invincible, inexpugnable: but when
it begins to be weary and look downward, presently she loses her strength,
and is taken Captive by her enemies. I cannot omit here that which may seem
strange. It falls out sometimes, that two contend before a Judge: each man
pleads his cause, he affirms, this denies, both of them alleges his
reasons, both desires equity of the Judge: If you consider the cause, both of
them cannot overcome; if the intention, both many times goes away Conqueror,
then especially when neither of them begins the controversy by evil fraud,
Intends
when neither will hate Justice for giving opposite sentence, being
indifferently resolved to win or loose the Suit, as it shall seem good to
Justice. So both of them overcome, They over come both
not by the cause, but by intention, which is very commendable in both. The
seventh: A right intention is a mighty comfort in all things, especially in
that hour which passes sentence upon all our years. For I suppose truly
that at the last time of this life, nothing will be more joyful to a dying
man, then to have done all things through his whole life before with a very
good intention. He truly shall dye most securely, which has lived most
sincerely. For if the goodness of God have decreed such liberal munif^cence
toward all, although the meanest actions, yet offered (...) him with a good
intention, wit^ what ample gifts will he crow^ the whole life with a sincere
m^^ ever devoted unto him? But who horror and trembling will posses^^ the
wretch, whose conscience she lay all the course of his life before him in
order: and cry out against him with a lamentable aggravation in this manner:
Thou has^ neither dealt sincerely with God, nor yet among men: thou have ma^^
times shamefully deceived others* thy self always: thou would^ seem one man,
and wast another thou had honesty in thy words, n^ in thy mind: how often
did the counterfeit friendship with the mouth and gesture, Deadly
being a capita^ enemy in heart? How often dids^ thou put a very beautiful
viz^ upon thy Actions, that therewith thou might hide a wicked intention?
thou did speak mu^se (...) mere honey, whiles thy enviou^ mind was whetting
a razour, tho^ did commonly vaunt thy self in (...) Peacocks painted Coat,
but did nourish a Kite and a Vulture in thy breast, being as fair without,
Keep
as foul within. But thou have deceived thy self, not GOD to whom all things
are manifest. Woe he to thee, woe be to all men, which many times with no
intention, commonly not pure, for the most part evil, dedicate their Actions
not to God, but to their own Genius, and themselves, and so utterly destroy
them.

At the last day of Judgment very many may be upbraided with that: Thy silver
is turned to dross: Suffered -- So frequently to be enticed with them
thy wine is mixed with water. Esa 1.22. Indeed thy Works did shine like the
purest Silver, but because they admitted such a frequent mixture of ill
intention, they are changed into base silver, yea even into dross. How
continually therefore must we cry: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, b^t to thy
name give the glory. It is the precept of Christ: Let your light so shine
before men, that they may glorify (not you, but) your Father which is in
Heaven. Math 5.17. Therefore, O all ye works of the Lord bless ye the Lord,
praise and exalt him above all for ever. Dan. 3.57. Let our works all wholly,
the le^st, the greatest bless the Lord for evermore.

CHAP. VII. What observations follow out of those things which have bin spoken
concerning a Right Intention: where it is treated more at large of Rash
Judgment.
THere are diverse beautiful Arts indeed, and of no vulgar account, but
because they make nothing to the Mill, and getting bread, therefore they are
not fought after by any great company. What does it profit say they, to know
these things, and be ready to starve? Many things are disputed among the
learned, many things also at Church in the Pulpit, whereof thou may truly
pronounce, It is nothing to the getting of bread, yea, it is nothing to the
gaining of Heaven. What good is it to any, most eloquently to recount the story
of times? what avails it to comprehend the number of the Stars? what does
it profit to know the motion of the heavenly Orbs, if thou know not the Art
which may advance thee above the Stars? How many shall obtain Heaven, although
they never heard any question made, whether Heaven stands still, or the earth
is turned round.

But now this Art, which teaches in what manner the Rule of all human Actions
is to be handled, how exceedingly does it make to the getting of bread, the
bread of Angels which we shall eat in the Kingdom of God! Luke 14.15. It is
an old Song in praise of Money, Et genus e^ formam regina (...)
Money royall^ bestows both beauty and dignity. Let us turn it, and we shall
sing ^righter, Regina Intentio.
Jntention royally bestows both beauty and dignity. Sincere Intention sets
an heavenly price upon all things without this all the noblest Actions that can
be lie without honor, and nothing worth. For the more complete understanding
of this Right Intention, it is very necessary to declare now what may aptly
follow upon it out of that which has been spoken. Therefore we will annexe
some consequences in order following.

1. Consequence.
He which erreth in intention, erreth in all things The whole matter is
apparent, and this one testimony surer then a thousand: But if thine eye be
evil, thy whole body shall be full of dar^nesse. Mat. 6.23. He which in his
journey wandereth out of the way, the f^rther he goes on, the more grievously
he erreth: so the more earnestly a thing is done, or how much nobler the matter
which is undertaken, it is made so much the worse, if a good intention ^e
wanting. Intention bestows the nobility upon all Actions, if this be ignoble,
and savou^eth of the flesh and earth, how shall ^t give that to other things
which i^ wants it self? He which applies himself to Learning only that he
may know, he which sueth to be of some religious Order, that he may not lack
bread, he which follows the Court that he may grow rich, or be advanced; he
which seeks a benefice that he may find a Ki^chin is quite out of his way:
because the eye of all these men is n^ught, their whole body is full of
d^rknesse. R g^tly Gregory: The light of the body t^eref^re is the eye, says
he, because the deserts of the action are illustrated by the rays of the
intent^on. And if thine eye be single, thy wh^le body shall be full of light.
Because if we intend rightly by singleness of thought, the work is made good,
alth ugh it seem otherwise of less^ go^dnesse. And if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness: because when even any right thing is done
with a perverse intention, although it seem to shine before men, it appears
dark upon examination of the inward Judge. Greg. l. 18. Mor. c. 6. propius
finem. He adds: Take heed therefore, least the light which is in thee be
darkness. If the light which is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? because if we da^ken that which we believe we do well, with an ill
intention, how great are the very evils, which we understand to be evil, even
when we do them?

2. Consequence.
A good wo^ke may be omitted, but not an evil committed, with a good
intention. Thomas of Kempis: We must do no evil, says he, for any worldly
thing, or for love of any man: but yet for the benefit of the needy, a good
work may sometimes be freely intermitted, or else exchanged for a better. Put
off
Kemp. l. 1. c. 15. n 1. Here many times we stumble grievously, Impingimus
and feel it not. Some have their set prayers for every day, they have
^ertaine devotions, as they call them; hereupon now and then they dwell so
stiffly, that they suffer others to perish with hunger and thirst, rather then
they will intermit any thing of their usual course. This I may call a godly
dishonesty, whereby many times we get reproach for our pains: we are touched
with no care of others, but are wise only for our own respects; whatsoever
may happen to others, we always prefer our own ends: here our devotions and
prayers give place to no body. But how much better were it to observe Christian
charity, then such obstinate piety, with how much greater advantage might such
things be omitted, or at le^st deferred. There were many among the ancient
Hermites most observant of fasting, yet there were found of these, which to
entertain Strangers could Dine six or seven times, and always have a
stomach. Among things concerning the souls good, it is very profitable for a
man to give over his own profits in time; and to have no regard of his own
commodities, is often the greatest commodity of all. Gregory very well to the
purpose: For commonly virtue, says he, is let go, Laid aside
when it is indiscreetly held, and is held the faster when it is for a time
discreetly let go. Greg. l. 28. Mor. c. 6. From hence it is fitly deduced.

3. Consequence.
The intention is thus much the purer, by how much less a man seeks
himself, and thus much the impurer, by how much more sensible and careful a
man is of his own matters. Abel the first Martyr, and virgin, being about to
Sacrifice unto God, did appoint all the best things for his Offering, being
ready to give better, if in his power it had been. Abel also brought of the
firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat thereof. Genesis 4.4. Chrysostom
observing here the wonderful free behavior of Abel toward God: He brought
not only, says he, of his Sheep, but of his firstlings, of his best and
choycest things, and of these he selected the very principal, and of the fat
he set apart all the fattest for the Altar. Caine did no such thing. But, it
came to pass in process of time, that Caine brought of the fruit of the
Ground an Offering unto the Lord, such as grew upon Trees, and all that came
next to hand he caught up for a Sacrifice. Ab^l theref^re provided as it were a
feast for God, Caine rudely set before him the latter end of a feast, Apples,
Nuts, Pears, Epiloguem
Plums, a clownish Present. H^reof notab^y Austin: Caine, says he, made no
right division, because like an ill liver, he g^ve God somewhat of his own,
but himself all to himself. D^uteronomy commends it in Moses: His eye was
not dim, nor h^^ natural force abated. Deuteronomy. 34.7. An old E^positor: The
look, says he, of his pious Intention did not wander from the right in a
cloud of wickedness: For Moses sought after God, not himself. Hereupon his
intention was so pure and strong. Bernard expounding that precept of the
Paschall Lamb: The Lord, says he, keeps all their bones. Psalm. 34.19. not
one of these shall be broken, because never is the purpose of their heart,
never is their sound intention broken, insomuch that they should give any
consent to itching concupiscence. Therefore let us keep our intention and
purpose of mind with that earnest care, Brethren, as we would keep the life
of our souls. Thy intention, O Christian, is therefore so much the more
sincere, by how much the less thy affection is to thy self.

4. Consequence.
In most things the intention only is rewarded, or punished. For example, when
ability is wanting, the Will receives the reward. In every kind Office, the
Will of the giver is greatly esteemed: He gave freely, which was willing to
give quickly; he bestowed very much, which was able to bestow no more. Plato
knew himself to be disdained of Dionysius the Sicilian King. Wherefore he
desired that he might be admitted, and have audience. Being brought in
presence, he began to speak in this manner: Most Potent KING, would thou
suffer him to go unpunished, whosoever should enter into Sicily with that
mind, to offer thee some great mischief, although by reason of some
impedim^nts he h^d committed no harm? H^reunto Dionysius: By no means, says
he, O Plato, for not only the wicked enterprises of enemies, but also their
Counsels and evil purposes are to be punished. Here Plato speaking on. But
if any man, says he, had come into Sicily, for your Majesty's honor and
benefit, would it be just, to let such a one go without all respect, with
disgrace and infamy? Who is there so, quoth the King? presently Plato:
Eschines, quoth he, a very upright man, as constant a follower of Socrates as
any other, and such a one as is able to make all those the better with whom he
is conversant. He has adventured himself a great way by Sea, for the general
good, and to make others partakers of his skill, yet hitherto he has bin
neglected. This short Apology did so incline King Dionysius to his part, that
he began to love Plato whom he hated before, Laert. l. 3.
and to deal bountifully with Aes^hines. Behold even men also do punish or
gratify the intention only, how much more God? If there be first a willing
mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has, and not according to that
he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12. What abound^nce of praise did God lay upon that
memorable fact of Abraham: Seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine
only Son from me. Genesis 22.12. Yet the Fathers sword did not touch his Son,
nor so much as hurt an hair of him. In Will Abraham spared not his Son, he
slew him in mind, he sacrificed him with intention. God accepting this for a
most p^rfit burnt Offering, Now, says he, I know that thou fear God, Thou
have not spared him for my command, but I have spared him for thine obedience:
It is enough to me, Abraham, that thou wast willing to do this, therefore I
will remunerate thine intention no less bountifully, then I would have
remunerated thy deed.

Noah was no sooner gone out of the Arc, but presently he built an Altar
after a confused manner, and taking of every clean Beast, and of every clean
Foul, he offered burnt Offerings upon the Altar. Genesis 8.20. being persuaded,
that his good will and intention of mind herein was very pleasing to God. And
the Lord smelled a sweet savor. Lo how intention made the very smell and
smoke of the acrifice delightful. God regarded not the Birds and foure-footed
Beasts, but he smelled somewhat in them that had a sweet savor, namely the
affection of Noah. Of what kind soever, says Chrysostom, our Sacrifice is,
whether we pray, whether we fast, or give alms, herein it must be the smell of
the Sacrifice which only pleases. To this sense said Saint Bernard: Sometimes
the good will alone suffi^eth, all the rest does no good, if that only be
wanting. The intention therefore serves for desert, Valet intentio ad meritum,
actio ad exemplum
the Action for example. If we should set an example of what we speak, before
our eyes. One sees a lamentable poor Beggar, who is not rich himself, he is
sorry for him in mind, he looks up to Heaven, and gives GOD thanks for
that which he enjoys, and O, says he with himself, that I were able fully
to relieve this beggars want, how gladly would I do it: Such a one as this
although he gives nothing, or but a little, being able to give no more, shall
receive a reward, as if he had given to his wish. In like manner, if a sick
man desire seriously and ardently, both to pour forth praye^s, and to afflict
himself outwardly, or to exercise other works of Piety, but is not able to
perform these for want of strength, he shall have God no less propitious
unto him, then if he had done all those things, which he wished to do, so his
mind deal thus with God: My God, how willingly would I execute this for thy
hono^r! but thou know Lord, that it is not in my power, therefore I most
submissively offer this my desire and will unto thee instead of the deed.
Hereupon Chrysostom affirming to the exceeding comfort of a great many: Give,
says he, to the needy, or if thou have it not, if thou give but a sigh, thou
have given all; for that ever waking eye sees thee to have given whatsoever
thou had. (Chry. Hom. 7. de p^^nit. ad finem. Hereupon also Gregory: In the
sight of God, says he, the hand is never empty of gifts, if the closet of the
heart be filled with good will. Greg. Hom. 5. in Evang. Therefore both the
poorest out of their mean estate, and the most diseased out of their miseries,
may offer as rich and excellent gifts to God, as the most wealthy and
healthful. This is not the proper business of riches or strength, it chiefly
concerns the Will, which if it be truly good, does parallel both riches,
and strength, and all things. As the very same sometimes is an eloquent man,
which holds his peace, the very same a strong man which has his hands bound or
kept down, the very same a good Mariner, which is on dry l^nd: so he is both
liberal, and painful, and obsequious, which desires only, and has no
other witness then himself, of this his desire. The Kingly Psalmist: ^n me
sunt Deus vota tua. ^eron.
Thy vows, says he, are in me O God, I will render praises unto thee.
Although, O God, I find nothing outwardly, which I can lay upon thine Altar,
yet I find somewhat in my self, to offer unto thee: there are things laid up
in my memory, in my understanding, but especially in my will, which being
presented unto thee, are never but accepted. Christ most exactly confirming all
this: Whosoever, says he, shall give to drink to one of these little ones, a
cup of cold water only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he
shall in no wise loose his reward. (Math. 10.42.) I know, it is not in all men's
power to give entertainment, and supply the wants of nature, therefore that
which every poor man is able, let him give a draught of cold water to the
thirsty, he shall not loose his reward No man therefore may utterly excuse
himself by poverty, from succouring those that belong to Christ, seeing such a
noble recompense is promised even for those benefits, which are of no value,
he shall not loose his reward. And that no body might complain of the charge
of wood in providing warm ^ater to wash their feet, let him give cold only,
nevertheless for such a slender and easy kindness, even for such a small
matter, he shall in no wise loose his reward. For in this kind of courtesy not
the rich liberality, but the godly will, and right intention is regarded. God
esteems works more out of the desire and endeavor, then by the greatness
of the thing, rather by the affection of the giver, then the price of the gift.
Hereupon even the very least and vilest thing given for Christ's honor, shall
not lose its reward. That we should take pains to no purpose in these meaner
things, is the thought of our pufillanimity, not understanding how greatly God
respects even the very meanes^ good turn, yet b^stowed with a good
intention. For this cause Augustine: God, says he, crowns the good will,
when he finds no power to perform. Aug. in Psalm 105. Bernard of the same
mind said: God undoubtedly imputes to good will, what was wanting to ability.
What more plain, then that our desire of a thing should be accounted for the
deed, where the deed is excluded by necessity? Bern. Epist. 77. Whosoever will,
may become a Martyr by intention. It is a generous thing indeed, to express
himself thus in mind to God: How glad, my God, would I be, did thy cause
require it, to drink a purple cup of my blood to thee: I am ready to lay down
my head, and my whole life for thy sake. Assuredly such a one as this, which is
not unprovided of will, but occasion to dye, shall not lose his reward, and
that a most ample reward. Many times but t^ attempt worthy things in wi^h, Sae
i^^ in magnis vel voluisse sat est.
is enough But there are slothful people, which carry continu^ll winter in
their breasts. If any among these be troubled with a little cough, or feel
their head ache, or if the wind blow any thing sharp, they use to t^ke up such
godly sp^eches as these: We are not fit to be at Church to day, therefore we
will tarry at home, God is so good he will reward our pious desires for the
deed it self. When ability is wanting, the will is sufficient. After the same
manner of speaking both the covetousness and sluggishnes of many cheareth it
self up. When the poor are to be releeved, we are not able, say they,
therefore it will be enough to have a mind to releeve them. When fasting ought
to be ^ept: infirmity hinders, we cannot endure hunger; therefore
fasting-dayes can challenge no power over us. When the difficulty of an hard
matter is generously to be broken through: Behold, say they, who is able to
do this? therefore let the will serve instead of the work. Of no Heavenly
race Frozen winter of a dyeing mind
O idle beasts not lo ne for Heaven! O the frozen condion of a soul dead in
sin! What leave have ye to exercise your s^oth in this manner, and to be
absent when you list from the service of God, and to omit all other things at
your pleasure? these words are no defense at all for your sluggishnesse. It is
one point, my friends, to assay a thing hardly and difficultly; another not to
assay at all. If we deny our ability in all things, which we can do very
hardly, what worthy or excellent matter I pray will there be, which we should
confess our selves able to perform? This saying therefore, (When there
wants ability, Cum deest facultas, supplet voluntas,
will serve the turn) does not one whit favor your cause: ye might be able,
so ye were willing. If whatsoever is not easily effected, might be freely
omitted, what famous or worthy thing I pray would ever be brought to
perfection? All these things have every one their difficulties, which he that
avoydeth, Seeks to avoid
loses his reward. The Pelican a bird fills her self with shellfish lying
on the shore, and after casts them up again, being concocted with the heat
of her stomach, and chooses out of these such as are fit to be eaten. Thus, O
drowsy Christians, if you would but swallow some labor and difficulty, you
shall find your selves by experience able to do very hard things. Qui nueleum
vult esse, nucem conf^^ngat oporet.
He which will eat the Kirnell, must first break the shell. He delayeth not to
fight, which loves victory: he fears not blows, nor refuses the combat,
which desires the Bays. But that which men deny themselves able to do, let
them be ready at least seriously to wish. But we must proceed.

5. Consequence. More especially of Rash Judgment.
It is very great rashness, to judge or condemn any man of wickedness, not
apparent, whereas the intention whereby we are all acquitted or condemned, is
known to God only. Moses an Abbat in times past was called to give Sentence
upon a Brother that had offended. He came therefore, but withal brought a Bag
full of Sand upon his shoulders. Being demanded what he meant by that sight?
They are my sins, says he, which I can neither sufficiently know, and am
scarce able to bear; how then shall I judge of another? Determine
It is an extreme audacious part indeed, and a vice most hateful of all to
God, to go about to search into the secrets of the heart, Rip up
and to dragge the very thoughts of others to the Bar, and pass Sentence
against them. Who art thou, that Iudgest another man's Servant? he stands or
falls to his own Master. Romans 14.4. His Master searches out his heart. If
he be approved of his own Master, why do thou thrust thy self into the
business? For which very thing thou art inexcusable, Romans 2.1.
O man, whosoever thou art that judge another, for wher^in thou judge
another thou condemnest thy self. How many Actions in all ages have seemed
very unjust, which nevertheless for the intentions sake, have bin not only no
ways evil, but also most worthy of commendation. Ambrose a very incorrupt man
went into a common Stews, but because he might avoid Ecclesiastical
dignities. Abraham the Hermit, changed his habit like an Apostate, but that
he might dissuade his Niece from her lewd courses. Pynuphius the Anchorite
took up his Inn with Thais the famous Harlot of Alexandria, but that he
might convert her from the Service of Venus. Who is there amongst us all, which
if he had seen any of them taking his way to these notorious corners, but
conjecturing very ill, had presently leapt out like a Judge with these words:
Started up
Look upon the unchaste varlet, which goes for lascivious delight to a
Brothel-house. It had bin very ready with us to Judge in this manner, but had
not this bin a most unjust Judgment? Therefore whatsoever men do, Intention
Judges them all. That which Bernard said truly: The purpose of intention
discerns betwix: good deserts and bad.

It is as clear as can be in Divine Scripture. Jacob the Son of Isaac, that
most worthy Grandchild to Abraham, deceived his Father by his Mothers policy,
beguiled his Brother of very grea hopes, and yet obtained a most gracious
blessing of his Father. For Jacob was howsoever of a very good intention, Plain
as he that had also this worthy commendation given him: And Jacob was a simple
man. Genesis 25.29. Phinees run two men at once through with a Iavelin, nor yet
was he tortured or adjudged to the Gibbet. His adventurous fact did wonderfully
please God: Then stood up Phinnees, and executed Judgment, and so the plague
was stayed, and that was counted unto him for righteousness. Psalm. 106.30.
Cain slew Abel, David Goliath, and Vriah, Ioab Abner, and Amasa, Great Herod
the Ascalonite the Infants at Bethleem, Herod Antipas John Baptist, Herod
Agrippa James, Peter Ananias and Sapphira: very murders, and committed either
by hand or command, but their intentions and causes were of a far different
condition. In like manner one Apostle and four Kings uttered that voice of
sorrowful men, Pecca^^
I have sinned. Pharaoh said this, and David said it, this said Saul in like
manner, King Manasses also, and Judas Iscariot said the very same, but alas
with how not like successed for as their intentions were altogether unlike, so
most different likewise the effects. That holds out hitherto most true:
Whatsoever men do, Intention is Judge of all. And what a company of actions
might seem most praiseworthy, if a wicked intention did not vilify them.
Cataline, that notorious disgrace to a Roman name, might have bin taken for an
Apostle by his work, not by his intention. He carried himself most patient of
heat, cold, hunger, thirst. These things, says Augustine, he underwent, that
he might accomplish most inhumane desi^es: The Apostles, that they might
suppress^, and compel them to bow to reason. (Aug. l. 2. de Mor. Manich.) The
Herodian Lineage expressed a most remarkable example of this thing. Herod the
Ascalonite: That I, says he, may come and worship him also. He would have come
surely, but brought home a bloody Dagger. Herod Antipas that parricide of the
Baptist, was glad indeed to see Christ, whom Pilate had sent unto him, but not
as Zacheua. Curiosity begot this gladness in him, he hoped to see a Miracle.
Herod Agrippa the murderer of James, played the Preacher, for He made a Sermon
to them. Oration
Act. 12.23. But not to instruct the people, but that he might show himself
in his Royal Apparel for a mirror, therefore he was smitten to death by an
Angel in the very Pulpit. Chair


Intention is the Judge to try,
What all men do indifferently.
Since God therefore regards not so much the deed, as the intent of the doer,
and the intention cannot be discryed but only by God, it is too too bold and
intolerable rashness, to Judge any man's Actions although they seem very evil.
For to do in this manner, is as much as to say: I see this man's thoughts, I
behold that man's intention, I am Christ, I try out the reins and hearts, I am
God. Such Judges as these complain out of hell: We fools accounted their
lives madness, and their end to be without honor: how are they reckoned among
the Children of God, and their lot is among the Saints. ( Wisd. 5.4, 5.) We
looked upon the outward parts, Outside Inside
and by these we judged of the inward, from thence sprang out so rash, and so
foolish error. Job in those his most grievous miseries, uttering wonderful
things, one while he desired to dispute with God, Argue Reason
another while to have his sins weighed and examined in the Balance; now he
said that he knew he had committed no wickedness, his friends took such kind
of words in an ill sense, and judged no otherwise, then that he was most
worthily punished of God as an heinous offender, when in the mean time he was
most dear to God. O rash and wicked Judges! And such as these, that they may
be known very well, being blind in their own matters, are most full of eyes
in other men's; like a Monster. They see not their own faults at home and near
hand, other men's they search out a great way off, even to the bones and marrow.
Moreover, they behold things in another which are not at all: they dart eyes
out of suspicion only into the faults of others, in whose praises they are
without eyes. If there be any darkness they see it, and discover night very
often in another man's sky, wherein the light sh^neth clearly, they behold that
in their own obscurest night there is day. Thus they find day in night, in
night day; by a prodigious error on all parts. The smallest f^ults in others,
are exceeding great with them, their own faults they account virtues. Whereby
it comes to pass, that they sl^de into most grievous errors, and no
marvel, they have eyes no way single, but heavy with envy and hate in other
folks matters, with self-love in their own. O the judgment not of
Areopagites, but the blindest that can be.

Hor. l. 1. Sat. 3.
Cur in amicorum vitijs tam cernis acutum,
Cum tua pervideas aculis male lippus inunctis?
Thy friends defaults why see thou so acute,
And bleare-ey'd art, when thine own come in suite?
Thou have mistaken, and wilt mistake herein a thousand times. Whatsoever men
do, intention judges them all.

In this manner the unruly humor of judging does shamefully infatuate the
whole World: Chrysostom said truly: Thou shall hardly find any man free from
this error. All men though they mount not the Chair of estate, though they
have no executioners, no racks, and fetters at their command, nevertheless
these very people also do judge them, whom they conceive to be offenders, in
their common talk, in their ordinary meetings, Giving their verdict
in delivering their conscience. Chry. Hom. 5. in c. 2. ad Romans ante med. And
Augustine: The greatest part, says he, of mankind, is proved to be ready and
forward to reprehend with indiscreet judgment, when in the mean time they
will not be so judged of others, as they will judge others themselves. Aug. de
temp. Sermon. 202. Right so it is; we lash one another continually with rash
judgments. Nor give Sentence only against those things which carry a show of
evil, but are unjust Judges likewise against those, which not only admit, but
also require a favorable interpretation. As much as old Rome was deceived in
her opinion of Fabius Maximus, so much and no less in Minutius. In him she
grievously mistook Rashness for Fortitude, and Prudence for Cowardice in the
other. But one hour proved, that it is the condition of the multitude, to have
no discretion, Common peoples condition
and to judge rashly, insomuch that they look for the issue, when there is
need of advice. But I omit profane testimonies, seeing we are bound with
Sacred. When Moses had taken an Ethiopian to his Wife, Number. 12.1.
presently his Sister construing this marriage ill, fastened a taunting censure
upon her Brother. Neither could the holy King David escape his Wives most
reviling Judgment. If any one ignorant of the fashion of the Country, or
lasciviously bent, had seen Jacob at the Well saluting Rachel with a kiss,
without doubt he would have drawn suspicion from thence of no chaste intent,
or Judged Jacob to be like himself, given to fond desires. Who that had beheld
Iudeth going so curiously attired into the Assyrian Captains Tent, would not
withal have surmised very ill of her? Far otherwise Joseph, that most
continent Husband of the most blessed Virgin. The Mother of our Lord, a maid
for ever, Appeared
was great with Child. Joseph, because he knew his Wife to be more like an
Angel then a woman, could not be drawn to that opinion, as to believe that
any thing was committed by her contrary to the law of Marriage So he freely
referred all the matter to the judgment of God. And although he had a most
strong argument before his eyes to move suspicion, yet he could by no means
endure to be Judge of this secret. And indeed Christ himself, being ready to
dye, when he could not deny the most villainous fact of them that crucified him,
excused their malice, and the abominable state of their wickedness, he called
in a mild term Ignorance. Thus all that are Christians indeed, when the fact
they can not, excuse the intention, and when the intention seems not
excusable, yet they take not upon them the authority of Judging, but transfer
it all to Christ the ^u^ge of all men. These know without doubt, how truly
that religious Author said: A man uses frivolous pains, many times mistaketh,
and easily transgresses in censuring others. Kemp. Lib. 1. de imit. c. 14. n.
1.

Anastasius the Sinaite relates, how there was one in a Monastery, religious
to see by his habit, but not commendable at all for his manners, as he which
had spent most of his life in ease and slothfulnes. He came to the last point,
and now being nigh unto death, nevertheless, showed no sign of fear or
terror. This amazed the standers by, which feared ill of the man, least he
should make no good conclusion of his life, which he never began to amend, One
of the Company therefore heartier then the rest: My Brother, says he, we know
very well, in how great idleness thou have led thy life hitherto, and for that
we marvel, how thou come to have this dangerous security: this time
requires groans and tears, not this unseasonable mirth. Hereunto the dying
party: So it is, Fathers, nor do I deny, says he, I have passed my days in
shameful negligence, neither can I speak now of any virtues. But, this very
hour the Angels brought me a Bill of all mine offenses, and withal demanded
of me, whether I would acknowledge them to be mine? To whom I: I acknowledge
them, plainly, and am sorry* yet there is one thing which promises the Judge
more favorable unto me. Since the time I put on a Monastical life, unless my
memory fail me, I never Judged any man, nor called any injury to remembrance.
I request therefore, Would remember
Let these words of the Lord protect me that am guilty, saying: Judge not, and
ye shall not be Judged: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. These as soon as
the Angels had heard they tore in pieces the handwriting of my sins. Hereupon
now I being joyful, and replenished with good hope, am ready to depart into
another world. No sooner had the dying man uttered these things with a failing
voice, but he yielded up the last breath of life most pleasingly. And that
thou may not question my credit in this matter, Reader, behold I give it thee
under authentic hands St. Anastasius in oratione de sacra ^ynaxi. Baronius
Tom. 8. and 599. n. 14. Of so great consequence it is, O Christians, of so
great consequence it is, to Will, and fulfill but this one thing only, To
Judge no body. He can do very much with Christ the Judge, whosoever cannot
Judge within himself. In his own person
Therefore Judge not, and ye shall not be Judged. Luke 6.37. whosoever is in
doubt to offend, let him be afraid to Judge.

But who is it that has a desire to avoid these errors? Hannah prayed in
times past, and mingled her ardent prayers with a flood of tears. Eli the
Priest saw her, and observed her mouth while she prayed, and supposing her to
be taken with drink: How long, says he, will thou be drunken? put away thy
Wine from thee. (1 Samuel 1.10. and fol) This suspicious old man struck the
excellent good woman with most unjust Judgment, who when she was in bitterness
of soul, prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. Now Hannah spoke in her heart,
only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard. The Priest noting this
carriage of her while she prayed, judged by the motion of her lips that she was
drunken, and muttered idle words. A Judgment as false as rash; and no less
such, then that which follows. David the King of Israel, sent to the Prince
of the Ammonites, those that in his name should condole the loss of his Father
lately deceased. He believed that they were sent unto him, not for kindness
sake, but to spy out all his wealth. Being drawn to this opinion, he shaved
off the messengers beards, contrary to the Law of Nations, and shamefully cut
off their garments in the middle. A mighty oversight, Rashness
and that which he carried not away unrevenged. For indeed he bereaved the
Messengers of their beards, but himself of his Kingdom. Go now and interpret
the purpose of a good mind ill. Daintily Gilbertus: Both a naughty intention
says he; and a perverse construction, are both an abuse, both full of Gall,
both false, having no agreement with a Dove-like nature. Nec falli volunt, nec
fallere norun^.
They are D^ves eyes, which will neither be deceived, nor know how to deceive.
Gilb. Sermon. 40. in Cant. fin. But Christ himself the most excellent pattern by
far of all our Actions, alas, how often and what unjust Judgments did he
undergo? The Pharisees those most carping Critics, most impudent Censours,
and most wicked Judges did continually stand upon their watch, to see if they
might lay hold upon any thing in the words and deeds of the Lord, Could
which they might tear in pieces with an envious tooth. Our Savior anon
invited himself to Feasts without bidding: Sometims
By and by the Pharisees cried with a loud voice: Behold a Prophet, a
Wine-bibber, a gluttonous man, a smell feast. When the Lo^d held that most
noble Discourse concerning the Shepherd and the Sheep, many of his Auditors did
not fear to say: He has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? Job. 10.20.
If Christ had healed any body on the Sabbath day, presently again did the
Pharisees burst out of their Watch Tower, and, Lo they cried, this man
breaks the Sabbath by plain impudency. Finally whatsoever Jesus had done or
^poken, the Pharisaicall Tribe lid instantly fasten a most male^olent
interpretation upon it. Nor were more favorable judgments pronounced against
the Disciples of the Lord, when being constrained by hunger they pulled the
ears of Corn, when they washed not their hands superstitiously, when they
fasted not in that manner as others did, presently they were marked with a
rigid censure. When in conclusion they were inspired with the Holy Ghost, and
declamed most eloquently and constantly likewise of the resurrection of Christ,
there were some which cavilling against this eloquence said like wicked
Critics: Why wonder ye, fluent Cups can do this: good men they have tippled
too much, and are full of new wine, this makes them speak so bravely.

There is no body which ca^ escape the benches of these rash Judges. If any go
in a little fine^ apparel then ordinary, presently we hale him to
Arraignement, and enquire after our manner, how comes this fellow by so much
money, that he can trick up himself thus after the best fashion? It is
credible that one Purse maintains him and his Master, and that which he
cheates his Master of, is laid out upon clothes. If any one be contented with
a meaner habit, and bestows all his care in reforming his life, Ordering
manners
presently we are upon him, and O covetous man, say we, how does he spare his
money, and likes base apparel and out of fashion best! If any one frequent
the Sacrament of the Communion, and other holy duties; presently censures and
calumnies follow him, and he wants not those that say: Look where dissembled
sanctity goes, he is no less wicked then others, but he faigneth himself the
man which he is not. If any one macerate himself with much abstinence,
presently he is hist, and pointed at; Behold an abstemious Pharisee, he is
ready to starve himself, that he may be praised. If any one by reason of his
weakness, and want of health, cannot observe a solemn Fast; presently again
hard speeches, and the black mark of condemnation passes upon him: Nigrum
theta.
Behold a Gluttonous man, and borne for his belly, which for one days
refraining fears death: If any one addicted to privacy and quietness,
withdraws himself from the affairs of the World, suddenly there starteth up
not one alone, to stone him with these speeches: This man desires ease and
good days, labor begins to be out of fashion with him, or desperation has
thrust him upon this course. If any one detesting ill company, endeavors to
observe an holier manner of life, here diverse and inconsiderate clamours
arise, those call him Flatterer, these Hypocrite, the other close Companion. A
man by himself
No body is safe from these flying Daggers, wherewith the name of many is
shamefully stabbed. If any go along overwhelmed with his thoughts, and
uncovereth not his head to a greater man then himself, To one of a good credit
forthwith the Judge starts up, and Lo cries he out; the pride of man, what
mighty state he takes upon him! If any one saluteth not his acquaintance by the
way, or carries himself somewhat strange, accusation and Judgment is at next
word: Behold, Set out their Mouths
they are in an uprore, how this fellow cannot choose but show his hate and
envious mind, see how he scorns to know his poor friends. Augustine tru^ly:
The ordinary course of seeing, is all the aim that a carnal man has of
Judging. Ah how rashly oftentimes, Spiritual Callings
are men in relig^ous degrees both Judged and condemned, as well of pride as
covetousness, and other vices? The more bold and nimble any one is with his
mouth, so much the more severe and inexorable Judge he is in pronouncing
definitive Sentence against them; he admits of no defense, hears no reasons,
believes no body but himself, and such as are like him. Truly, and we are a
company too apt to judge the worst. Et nos in vitium credulae turba sumus.
Hence come those thundering words of Judges: a Rope for this proud Prelate; to
the Dogs with that greedy Parson; to hell with that wicked Priest; or the like.
O mortals, how much punishment hangs over your heads for these Judgments?
Impudent whoredom, and rash censuring draw the whole world almost to
destruction: there men are mad within continency and lust, here they use
tyrannous state in Judging others faults. So subtle is the Devil, that whom
like holier people he cannot entice to the filthy pleasure of Beasts, these he
easily ensnareth with the custom of rash judgment There is none absolutely
which knows how to spare others in this point. What a company are to be found
which in all places carry Table Books about with them, like censours of all
men, and when they chance to see or hear any thing that dislikes them,
presently they give it the grace of their Table book.

But thou will say, if a very credible person declare any thing, if I see a
thing with mine own eyes, if I hear a thing with these very ears of mine,
nevertheless may I not presume to pass sentence? Thou may not presume my
friend, for so also thou may be deceived, and numbers before thee have been
deceived by the self same means. One of a religious society came to the
Priest their Governor, and desired that he would give him leave to depart out
of the Covent, for he would have no longer conversation with that Brother,
which bore such an ill report. To whom the Governor: Be not so hasty, says
he, to believe the harm which thou have heard He on the contrary, that he had
taken it upon relation of a very faithful man, and therefore pressed his
departure: Hereunto the Governor excellently: Jf he were a man of credit,
says he, he had never told thee so. Aptly noting the wickedness of
whisperers, and backbiters. But although thou shall hear and see a thing thy
self, yet thou, unless it be thy duty, may not be Judge over what thou
hear and see. Thou will say, if thou be wise: I know that this is done,
but with what mind, with what intention, upon what motions, for what causes it
is done, I know not. But imagine (which cannot be effected) that all things
were manifestly known unto thee, thou nevertheles restrain thy judgment, and
as Dorotheus admonishes. Sermon. 6. say with thy self, Woe is me, whereas he
has offended to day, it may be I shall to morrow. I seem in my conceit to
stand, and the next day perhaps shall fall, and happily he has already
repented him of his fact, which I cannot absolutely promise my self to do.
Bernard: Although, says he, thou find out a thing to be done otherwise then it
ought, neither so judge thy Neighbor, but excuse him rather. Excuse the
intention, if thou can not the deed: Suppose ignorance, suppose oversight,
suppose mishap. But if the certainty of the matter disclaim all reasonable
pretense, yet notwithstanding meditate thou with thy self, and say privately:
The temptation was too strong. What pass had I bin brought to, if it had
likewise obtained power over me. Bern. Sermon. 40. in Cant. fine. The Christian
Law not only commands; do thou not steal, do not commit adultery, but
also do not judge. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and
let not him that eats not judge him that eats. Romans 14.3. Wonderful,
thrice wonderful it is! we poor wretcches are not able to reach to the
abstrusest corners of our own hearts, and yet we boldly assay to break
through walls, and search out other men's secrets; we are of a dull and dead
sight in our own matters, and our eyes fail us even at hand ( For who can
understand his errors? Psalm. 19.13.) And yet we take upon us to see into the
closest of other men's breasts a great way off, and give Judgment of them. Here
I break forth with Chrysostom: O man, look diligently upon thine own life,
descend into thine own ^onscience. Beholdest thou
Why do thou see a note in thy Brothers eye, but pereivest not a beam in
thine own ye? Or how say thou to thy Brother, let me pull out the mote ^ut
of thine eye; and behold a huge ^eame, an horrible beam is in ^hine own eye:
Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then sha^t
thou see clearly to pull out the mote which is in thy Brothers eye. Matthew.
7.3. and Luke 6.41. Thou that wast so quicke-sighted, says he, in another
matters, as to mark even the smallest faults, how comes it to pass thou wast
so negligent in thine own, as to pass by even great faults. No otherwise then
if one that lies sick of a grievous Dropsy, or any other incurable disease,
should altogether neglect this, and blame him which regards not a little
swelling in any part of his body. If then it be evil, not to discern ones
own sins, it is surely double or treble hurt to judge others, and carry a
beam in his own eye without trouble. Chry. Tom. 5. orat. de provid. et Tom.
2. in 7. Math. Hom. 24. post init.) But thus we are wont, this is our fashion:
to over-slip our own faults negligently, and to insult unadvisedly upon other
men's. What do thou, O rash Judge? seeing thou can safely trust neither
thine own ears, nor yet thine eyes; nay if an Angel from Heaven declare unto
thee what another has done, neither so indeed can thou always give sentence
against another, forasmuch as an Angel himself cannot fully discover the
secrets of another man's heart. It is GOD only, The Lord that searches the
heart, and tries the reins. Ierem. 17.10. To him only are the intentions of
all men clearly known. Whereas now it depends upon the intention how guilty
or harmless every man is; what strange temerity is this we use, Innocent
to remove GOD from his Tribunal, nay thrust him out, Judgment Seat
and place our selves therein with incredible presumption: What strange
temerity I say, is this, and how worthy of revengefull flames, to usurp Gods
peculiar right, and pronounce Sentence against any body at our pleasure. Hence
is that vehement admonition of the Apostle James, He which speaks evil of
his Brother, and judges his Brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges
the Law. But who art thou that judge another? Iam. 4.11.12.

And indeed this is as Barbarous and cruel an offense, as common and usual.
The whole world is troubled with this deadly but sweet disease. Sick of
It is pleasing and delightful unto all for the most part, to be upon whose
back they list with a lawless censure. Thus there appears scarce any vice
more ordinary in this life, no grosser darkness over-whelmeth the mind of man
in any course, greater ignorance no way. For we affirm doubtful things for
certain, or if they be certain, yet certainly they belong not to us; or if
they do belong, we judge unknown things for apparent; or again if they be
apparent, yet with what mind they are done, we know not, nevertheless we
prosecute them as if they were done quite amiss. Contrary to all goodness
And many times we grow to that presumption, that with most unjust rashness for
one Traitor Judas, we condemn all the Apostles, and the whole College of
Christ; for some naughty Prelates, all Archbishops and Bishops; for some
exorbitant Scholars, all scholasticall Societies; for some Priests that carry
themselves ill, all Clergy men and Ministers; for some jarring Couples, all
married people; for some loose Virgins and Widows, all single life; for some
dishonest Merchants all dealing in wares; for some base Citizens and
Tradesmen, a whole City; for a few Senators or Consuls that are not good, a
whole Senate; Unworthy
for some discommendable Princes, Kings, Emperors, all degrees of state. Alas
we are too presumptuous in this case, and more rash then can be spoken, Rash
above measure
which make it nothing to prevent the everlasting Judge with our Judgment
Christ will come to Judge the world: whosoever comes before him, is not
Christ, but Antichrist. Magistrates are Gods Interpreters, and they, as divine
Oracles, may not pronounce of any man, Gather
but what they know by sure authority from God. If they do otherwise, and
follow their affections, Fancies
they also shall incur most severe Judgment. Men, as men, are forbidden to
Judge.

God ordained in the old Law, that the Priest should not give Judgment of the
Leprosy, before the Seventh day. It required so great deliberation to find out
a disease, Was a matter of so great respite to resolve upon
which yet was beheld with the eyes. How then will God in his goodness permit,
that one man should Judge another intention, which is manifest to no eye but
Gods. The men of Bethshewesh used no violence to the Arc of the Covenant, but
looked a little too curiously into it. And yet they were grievously punished for
this their curiousness, which might have seemed of no regard, if not pious.
For there fell of the people fifty thousand, and threescore and ten men at one
slaughter. 1 Samuel 6.10. How much more close, I pray is man's heart, then that
wodden Arc? and yet thou, whosoever thou art, do rashly dare to open that
chest of God not only with a curious eye, but also wicked Judgment: and to
set it abroad likewise to be gazed upon and derided by others. Chrysostom here
as freely every way as fully. If no other sin, says he, were committed by us,
there were cause over and enough that we should be cast into Hell for this
only. Forasmuch as we sit severe and most bitter Judges in other men's faults,
but see not the beams which stick in our own eyes. Who search even the least
matters that concern us not to the quick, and spend the whole time of our
life to Judge others: from which vice you can hardly find any Secular, or
Spiritual man free. Yea, and although so sharp a threatening counter-check it,
for the Word of God defines: With what judgment ye Judge, ye shall be
Judged also your selves. Seeing therefore so great a punishment is appointed
for this will, and in the mean time no pleasure or d^light can be gotten
thereby, as it uses in other sins, nevertheless all have run themselves
heedlesly and headlong under the yoke of this vice, as if they studied and
strove a purpose, Made a m^rch among themsel^^
who should come first of all to this mi^chiefe. Chrysostom. Tom 5. l. 1. de
compan^t cordis circa med.

Therefore as Seneca very excellently advises, Suspicion and conjecture must
be removed out of the mind, as most deceivable enticements. He saluted me
somewhat unkindly, he suddenly broke off the discourse, he invited me not to
supper, his countenance seemed a little coy. Suspicion will never want matter
to cavil at. There is eed of simplicity, and a favorable construction of
things Let us believe nothing, but what shall be manifest and clearly obvious
to the eyes: and as often as our suspicion shall appear vain, let us chide
this our credulity. For this reproof will bring us to a course, Sen. l. 1. de
^^a. c. 24.
not to believe easily. I add, and not to Judge rashly. Moreover they that
conceive ill of all men, and take whatsoever thou do in the worst sense, are
not unlike a cooping glass used by Physicians, which is made only for that
end, to draw out corrupt blood. Thus these rash Judges pass by all that is
good, but if there be any thing worthy of blame, among the vertu^s of others,
if there be any thing amiss which is not known they bring it, as they suppose,
to light, they shamefully confound all vices and virtues in each others
terms. A man of a lowly carriage, they call Sotte or dissembler; the simple
honest, fool; the sober, too austere; the abstinent, dotish; one that is
earnest against offenders, they term cruel; one that is given to discreet
quietness, sluggard; the provident, they name loyterer and coward; the saving,
they brand with the mark of covetousnes; the stout and magnanimous, is with
them contentious; the silent is accounted for illiterate; the modest is defamed
with the name of Mopus: But on the contrary they honor a flatterer for a
friend, and interpret flattery, friendship; rashness by them is set forth in the
title of fortitude; madness is commended under a color of mirth; the
fearful is taken for wary; the prodigal, for liberal; the base and churlish
for saving and frugall; the covetous bears the name of industrious; the
splenetick and furious, are made companions with the valorous; the ambitious
and insolent, are reckoned among the generous; the fraudulent obtain the grace
of prudent, the proud of constant; the talkative and wanton of affable;
Familiar Droanes
the most unprofitable slow-backs, are translated like Gods amongst the lovers
of peace. All things are turned upside down by such rash judgments as these,
whereby we offer God great injury, for we rudely arrogate that to our selves,
which belongs only to the Tribunal of God. And even as it turns to the
notable mischief of the Common wealth, if every one take upon him the
authority of a Judge, to decide controversies, which arise among people at his
own pleasure So it is extreme rashness of any man, to usurp, as he lists,
the office of Christ the Judge, which he has nothing to do with, to whom
alone it thoroughly appears, with what mind all things are done. There is one
Law giver and Judge, who is able to save and to destroy. But who art thou that
Iudgest another? Thou have a dead corpse at home, upon which thou may bestow
thy tears, and yet thou go to another house, to bewail the dead there. O
Wretch. Go, then, and learn to spend thy nights, ^ nunc, et noctes, disce
manner Domi. v. Elegi.
at home. First bewail thine own dead. The deep night of ignorance
overwhelmeth thee in discerning thine own matters, and do thou promise thy
self day in other men's? And what impudency is this which ye use, O Christians
Do ye take the person of God for a shadow, and do ye contend for God? Job.
13.8. And what more dishonest rashness can there be, then to Judge those hidden
things, such as the intention is, which can never be fully known to any man
besides the Author? Owner
For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in
him? 1 Cor. 2.11. Nay many things escape even the spirit of man it self, which
none but the spirit of God perceives, whereunto all the secrets of the hearts
are manifest. Man lo^keth on the outward appearance, but God looks on the
heart. 1 King. 16.7. One very fitly reclaimeth his companions eyes, F^^^^i^^us
Assis^^^ S^ra (...)
which were sent too boldly into another man's mind. As he was traveling, he
met a man by the way with a pitiful countenance, and almost naked. The holy
man deeply sighed at this spectacle, and was sorry that he had not a bountiful
alms to bestow. But his companion: Father, says he, why art thou so much
grieved? does this man want clothes, but perhaps he is full of ill desires.
The other hereunto with an earnest look: Is it so Brother, says he, that thou
Iudgest in this manner of others? Give him thine own Garment presently, and
withal go, and humbly kneel down before him, and ask pardon for thy words.
So thou shall learn hereafter not to give such rash Judgment. Excellently
done: The Lord looks upon the heart, not man.

Since man's eye therefore cannot possibly reach to these deeper things,
Executes revenge
he which judges rashly, inflicteth punishment upon men, not like man, but
GOD. Whereof Job complaining, Wherefore, says he, do ye persecute me as God?
Job. 19.22. Nay this punishment is not godly, but altogether devilish. For the
Devil running upon Job with an hasty censure. Does Job, says he, fear God
for naught? Job. 1.9. Behold, an unknown suspicion indeed, and false and
wicked judgment. For which cause God himself (as Gregory observes) whereby
he might restrain our unbridled rashness in judging, would not pronounce
sentence against the heinous and beastly crimes of the Sodomites, before he had
examined all things. Every way to a Tittle, therefore, I will go down, says
he, and see, whether they have done altogether according to the cry which is
come unto me; and if not, I will know. Genes. 18 21 In which form of speaking
God declared, that he calls not any to account by relation, or light
conjectures, but by full appearance of the matter. But we, not Gods, not
Angels, nor yet blessed, Saints
but most vain men, do not modestly go up into this Judgment Seat, but lay
hands impudently and leap into it; if any one resist, we thrust in by force,
and possess it. Thus we judge peremptorily of unknown matters, confidently of
uncertain, plainly of ambiguous, arrogantly of many things that belong not to
us, and in conclusion wickedly and unjustly of all. When we are most
favorable, we suspect the least thing that can be. Herein suspicion it self is
judgment, but somewhat doubtful, and relying upon slight conjectures. But
miserable inconveniences follow such a rash course of suspecting and judging.
Whosoever thou art that judge in this manner, be assured that a far heavier
judgment is ready to be laid upon thee, Come upon ^hee from
not by men only, but by God, For that thine own sins may be the more
diligently examined, says Chrysostom, thou have made a Law thy self first of
all, by judging too severely of the things wherein thy Neighbor offended.
Bernard also is a trusty Counselor in this case: Be thou says he, as mild in
other men's offenses, as in thine own, nor question any body more precisely
then thy self: Judge others so, as thou desire to be judged. Thine own Law
hindeth thee, the judgment which thou layest upon others, thou shall bear thy
self. Bern. de interior. domo. c. 45. With what judgment ye judge ye shall
be judged. Math. 7.1. The Pharisee which went together with the Publican into
the Temple, and contended as it were in prayer, was overcome and condemned, not
because he had given thanks to God for his benefits, but because he judged the
Publicane rashly, taking him to be wic^ed, whom repentance had before
justified. Purged
And as this presumptuous judgment did very much harm to the Pharisee
himself, so did it none at all to the Publican. Thus many times, says
Austine, the rashness of judging ^urte^h no man more, then the Judge himself.
Aug. l. 2. de Sermon. Domini. Abbas p^^tor.
in mont. c. 6. One said very fitly: There are some, that may hold their peace,
and not trouble their mouths, but because they are not quiet within, and
censure in he art, therefore their tongues run without ceasing, but they
benefit no body, and injure themselves very much. Pelagius. Libell. 10. n. 5 1.
And it comes to pass ordinarily, that we fall into the same things our selves,
which we condemned before in others, that at least by this means we may learn
to be ashamed of our folly. So that old Mechetes (as Cassian reports)
complaining against himself, said: I have found fault with my Brethren in
three things, and have grievously transgressed my self in the very same Cass.
l. 5. Instit. c. 30. But this is very common, that he which is such a
quick-sighted Judge in other men's faults, Lynx-like
is an Owl and a Mole in his own. He pulls out the least mote that sticks
in another eye with great care, but is so far from casting the beam out of
his own, that he does not so much as see it. This is the manner of rash
judgment, to spare no bode, to lay a censure on every one that comes in the
way, to suspect the worst that can be of others, to search out and examine all
men's intentions, not to know himself at all. Which Gregory deploring, Fools,
says he, do judge so much the more earnestly of others, as they are possessed
with greater ignorance in their own matters. (Greg. l. 14. Mor. c. 1.) Most
truly the Son of Sirach: A foolish man's foot, says he, is soon in his
Neighbors house. Eccles. 21.25. because he runs in and searches his
neighbors houses, Other men's
and looks not to his own. Hereunto it agrees very well which one spoke in
times past of the assemblies of the Athenians: Wise men and Learned propose
matters, but fools and ignorant men judge and determine. The case is all one
here: Modest and prudent people do indeed observe many things, but always
they repress and suspend their judgment; the foolish and rash understand few
things, and without delay give Sentence upon all. By this evident token, it is
very easy to distinguish men and women of sober discretion from fools. And
even as Bees, when the weather is raynie, and stormy clouds hover in the air,
betake themselves into their Hives to make honey: so men of a good mind, and no
venomous mouth, descend into themselves, they live privately within, and make
the honey of good thoughts, and fly not abroad at their peril, when as they
see the world all over surrounded with tempestuous clouds, just as the case
requires: for what is involved with thicker clouds, then the intention of man's
heart? We hear the words, we see the actions, but the intentions lie hid, nor
can any Lynx his eyes ever pierce into the same. Intention is the Judge to try,
whatsoever men do. To those that are troubled with the Iaundies, and general
overflowing of the Gall, all things seem to be of a waxy and yellow color,
for the cure of this disease the herb Salendine is put under the sole of the
foot. There is a Iaundise disease of the mind, which to all that are troubled
with this disease, represents all things not in their own, but in a false
color. He that desires to be recovered, let him begin the cure at his feet,
that is, at his affections. Let him bear a mind toward others not peevish,
not obdurate, not disdainefull, not odious, not inhumane, not hostile; but
rather gentle, courteous, facile, which may paste over all things with a milder
interpretation, which hates the sin, not the sinner, which says: His
intention may be otherwise, and better then his action: but has he done
amiss? perhaps he has already repeated of his error. This is a very
excellent kind of mercy, to show ones self benevolent toward another, not so
much by giving many things, as by Judging nothing. They that drink the juice
of Ophiusa, an herb growing in Aethiope, imagine that they see Serpents, and I
know not what terrible monsters. They that have swallowed the juice of pride,
ambition, envy, or hatred, will carpe at, and condemn all that they shall see
or hear, they will admire and extol themselves only, being so precious in
their own conceit, that they doubt not to say with the Pharisee: I am not as
other men. Luke 18.19. A very cruel disease in this respect, that for the most
part it despises all remedies.

And this is it which Saint Paul presses so strongly, this same is it, from
which he so earnestly disswadeth us, crying out? Therefore judge not, judge
not before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts. 1 Cor.
4.5 Why do ye judge too hastily, the matter is still depending, and lies in
the Judges hands. Whilst yet every secret counsel of the hearts is locktup in
Gods Exchequer, Among Gods Records
whereinto no man ^an enter; the day of hearing is not yet, nor the witnesses
yet produced, or the Causes pleaded. But let there be a time of giving
Judgment, yet this is not at your appointment, but Gods, God wilbring to light
the hidden things of darkness. In the mean time therefore, till the Judge of
all things come, forbear your censures. Christ himself utters the very
same, with a most earnest voice: Judge not, and ye shall not be Judged;
condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven. Therefore, Judge not, conster not wrong of doubtful words and
actions, neither aggravate small offenses, or make a common speech of faults,
although they be certain, or cast reproaches upon good deeds, or say
peremptorily of a delinquent that he will never be good, for this vice of
judging rashly is most ordinary with Pharisees, which pardon all things in
themselves, nothing in others Judge not, for whosoever is a curious, severe,
unjust censour of other men, shall find such censours also of his own life, as
he has bin of other men's. Judge not, otherwise ye shall undergo an exact,
severe, rigid Judgment in like manner at GODS hands. Judge not, for God is so
full of kindness, that he is ready to remunerate this very Negative will of
yours most liberally; this shall be your reward, Ye shall not be judged. At
the last day of all, the Judge of the world will speak courteously to you, not
as Malefactors to be cast into Hell, but as friends to be endowed with Heaven.
A certain Monk asked a question of Joseph an Abbot, to this purpose: I pray,
good Father, what shall I do? I have no alms to bestow; I endure so many
troubles very hardly, what course therefore d^est thou persuade me to take?
Hereunto Joseph: If thou be able, says he, to do none of these things, do
this at least, and Judge no body, he has done much, whosoever could perform
this. (Pelagius e Graeco Libeli. 10. n. 51.) But how many are there which will
not be able to do this, although it be very easy? Against whom Chrysostom
being worthily incensed, upon those words of the Lord, (Judge not) discourses
in this manner: If therefore not by one, but by all ways, as I may so say, and
by all passages we run and make have to take possession of Hell fire, we are
justly condemned of wrong dealing on both sides alike, not only for those
things which do seem to require some labor and stay, whereinto we cast our
selves headlong, but also for those which are easy, and have no necessity, nor
any allurement, or pleasure in them. For we are convinced by these small and
easy things, that we offend through our own negligence and idleness, in those
things also which seem to be full of trouble. For tell me what pains is in
that, that thou should not judge another, nor examine other men's faults, nor
condemn the neighbor? Nay rather in examining and searching out other men's
offenses there is great labor, and exceeding difficulty, to judge of another
mind. But who that hears this, will be brought to believe in any time, that
whereas we may keep the commandment without pains, we strive and take pains
that we may break it. If we should offend by idleness and neglect, they might
perhaps be some way excused, which were not able to take pains. But where men
take pains to offend, and endeavor, and earnestnes is used, to transgress
the commandment, who is it, that can hope to be forgiven for this wickedness?
For this is to contend against him which made the Statute, and to offer
violence to his Laws. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. l de compunct. cordis, circa med. Out of
the matter thus debated by Chrysostom, it appears how that rashness of
judging is therefore reckoned among the more heinous sort of sins, because it
wilfully over-throwes a Law which is most easy to be observed. Whosoever has
obtained that only desire of himself, I will not Judge, has fulfilled the
Law before hand. But if such a licentious humor of Judging do provoke thee,
here I pray the same Chrysostom counselling thee excellently in these words:
Will thou judge; judge thine own matters. No man accuses thee, if thou
condemn thy self: but he accuses if thou judge not; he accuses, if thou
reprove not thy self, he accuses thee of frozen ignorance. See thou any one
to be angry, to be in a rage, or to commit any other horrible or unfitting
thing? presently also do thou call to mind what thine own case likewise is,
and by this means thou will not so much condemn him, and wilt free thy self
from a number of sins. If we order our lives in this manner, if we carry them
thus, if we condemn our own selves, Lightly
we shall perhaps not commit many sins, but shall perform many good and
excellent matters, if we be mild and sober. Chrysostom. Hom. 21. fine in Ep. ad
Hebr. These things concerning rash judgment, were necessarily to be inserted
among the rest. And it is in a manner certain, that how much the less one
examineth his own, so much the more earnestly he judges other men's intention,
but to his own hurt, which for the most part is so much the greater, as it is
less felt.

CHAP. VIII. What the practice of a Right Intention is.
MAthematicians do account the round Figure most perfect of all, the end and
beginning whereof are both the same. All one
The worthiest Actions of men are they, which properly have both one beginning
and end, that is God, and his honor. He which does invest all his actions
with such pure and candid sincerity of heart, never but behaves himself in a
deserving manner, Highly deserving
and it is very easy for such a man as this to gain more true happiness in one
day, then another can in a whole year. Truly those things that we offer to
God (as Salvian speaks) are respected not according to the richnes, but the
affection. This is it which that Divine said notably: Phil. Bosq. par. 2. Acad.
conc. 14. n. 1. That Christians obtain Heaven not by Verbes; but by Adverbes,
seeing it is not so much to be regarded, that the action be good, as that it be
well done: and indeed to fast only, or to pray, and give alms, or to execute
any other worthy matter, does not procure Heaven, but to fast rightly, to pray
well, to give alms after a godly sort, to do all things religiously: there is
need of a double portion of Eliahs Spirit; of two Oxen to carry the Arc, of
two young pigeons to make a complete Sacrifice, that is to say, of a good
work, and a good intention. Furthermore it remains to express, that which
is chiefly to be observed in matters concerning the Soul and salvation, namely
that we should not take care so much, by what means we may understand wholesome
Precepts and commit them to memory, as which way we may bring the things we
hear to effect, and learn them in that manner, that those which were words,
may become deeds, and that we may make actual proof of our learning, ( Sen.
Epist. 20. initio) The Christian Law teaches to do, not to say. Now therefore
let us dispatch this, and declare how intention is to be coupled as it ought
indeed, with several actions.

At the happy return of the Day.
Therefore let us take our beginning at the Morning Spring. Let our first
cogitation of all every day have recourse to GOD. Excellently Laurentius
Justinian: Let the first word, says he, the first thought, the first desire
sound forth the divine praise, and bequeath it self thereunto with a sincere
heart. Laur. Just. l. de discipl. c. 10. And if we require words, they may be
these. O my most l^ving God, I devote all the actions of this day unto thee,
for thy honor and glory, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen. We may add. O good Jesus, I beseech thee by thy passion,
preserve me this day from all wicked intention And let the beginning of thy
rest be the very same. For we cannot be ignorant without offense, that the
Devil is most busy in this first part of the day and night, considering the
old Deceiver does what he can, that he may sweetly take up a man's mind
between sleeping and waking with evil imaginations, and sow in him the seeds
either of envy, or lust, or impatience, which by this means will grow up
mightily all the day after. This Orcinian Fox knows very well, that he has
dispatched h^lfe his business, when he begins so hand omely Therefore we
must watch as at the entrance of the d^y, so likewise at the end, for the
Devil has all the night beside at his pleasure, if he make the first part of
the night his own. At these times therefore especially the mind must be armed
with chaste cogitations, least the enemy be sound to have over come it, before
he was perceived t^ lay siege to it.

For every hour.
It is a most profitable exercise indeed, and of great moment, to commend ones
self every hour to God, and his gracious protection, to think upon the end
of his life, and so to revive a Right Intention. For which end it will be very
convenient, every hour with a fervent affection to repeat the Lords Prayer, or
some other sweet ejaculation of holy men exemplified in Divine Scripture. For
indeed how can God of his abundant goodness but grant that man a happy end of
his life, which has desired the same diverse years every hour? True it is,
GOD, who is no man's Debtor, can most justly deny this, if it be his pleasure,
although one had requested the same every hour for a thousand years together.
But, Think ye of the Lord with a good heart, or as some read it, in goodness.
Wisd. 1.^. Your heavenly Father shall give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him. Luke 11.13. All things, whatsoever we shall ask in Prayer, believing, we
shall receive Man. 21.22. He therefore that will obtain true happiness at the
last hour of his life, let him earnestly beg the same of God every hour. To
promote this most commodious piety, he shall do very well, Rightly
whosoever to that before shall adjoyne these th^^e short Petitions. Blessed be
God for ever. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy great compassion. O my
Lord, and my God, I offer my self unto thee, with respect to thy good pleasure
in every thing. This therefore is to be added* because the study of a good
intention is then especially renewed, when a man commits himself all wholly
to the pleasure of God. Lodovicus Blosius testifies, that a holy Virgin being
excited hereunto by inspiration, Saint Gertrudo
pronounced these words three hundred threescore and five times together: Not
mine, but thy will be done, O most loving Jesus. Blos. Monil. spirit. c. 11.
This may be imitated of every man, and that with praise, as the same Blosius
excellently: There is, says he, no better prayer, then for a man to ask, that
the good pleasure of GOD may be fulfilled, both in himself, and in all others
In Instit Spirit. c. 8. Who so uses no such exercise as this, with him hours
and days run on, with him weeks and months, and years pass away, wherein
there is seldom any remembrance of God, scarce is God ever thought upon, and
but very slenderly, which is not only an unchristian, and inhumane thing, but
also brutish. But if any man would willingly square all his actions by a
general intention, as it were by a Rule, this brief form we give him of the
best intention. Pattern
O my most gracious God, I entirely desire to conform my self and all that
belongs to me, to thy most holy Will in all thing. This one comprehends all
good intentions whatsoever, nor is there any thing that sooner brings a man
to true tranquillity and happiness, then in all things to will the same that God
wills. Whosoever comes to this perfection, is above all dangers, and in the
next place to Heaven.

Before Prayer either private, or public, examination of Conscience,
Communion.
He which is about to pray, let him determine thus in his mind. 1. I will pray,
that I may honor, worship, and magnify God. 2. That I may please God, and
offer a grateful Sacrifice unto him, and so keep my self in his favor. 3.
That I may give my God thanks, for his liberal and and innumerable benefits
toward me. 4. That I shay show contrition for mine offenses. 5. That I may
crave such things as are necessary both for body, and soul; Procure
strength, health, right understanding of mind, the knowledge of my self. 6.
That I may obtain increase of virtue in this life, and of glory in that which
is to come. 7. That I may unite my will more and more with the Will of God. He
which shall prepare himself thus seriously to prayer, shall not pray in vain.
Blosius commends this short Prayer to be said by a Minister before divine
Service, which may very well accord with the devotion of all men. Lord ^esu,
for thy honor sake I humbly desire to obey, and serve thee faithfully, and
sincerely to praise thee, without thee I can do nothing, as sist me by thy
grace. He that is about to examine his conscience, let him say thus before
hand. 1. I will call my conscience to account, Use these premises
that I may learn to know my self. 2. That I may obtain purity of
conscience. 3. That I may the more diligently avoid such often relapses into
former crimes. 4. That I may continue in favor with God, and thereby have my
doings accepted. 5. That by this means I may prepare my self to make
Confession of my sins. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his
lips, the King shall be his friend. Prove. 22.11. He which is about to confess
his sins, let him advise thus with himself. 1. I steadfastly purpose to lay
open my mind fully. 2. I will show submission by accusing my self. 3. I have a
longing to return in^o favor with God. 4. I would feign be freed from the
filthy burden of my sins. 5. I desire to obtain tranquillity of conscience,
and a more fervent spirit in holy duties. He that is about to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Eucharistian
let him meditate upon these things. 1. I will approach to this heavenly
Banquet, that I may stir up the remembrance of the Lords passion within me, as
Christ himself commanded: Do this in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. 2. That I
may be partaker of so great a Mystery, wherein I firmly believe, that the
Body and Blood of Christ is received verily and indeed of the faithful. 3.
That I may be very nearely knit to my Christ in the bond of love. 4. That I may
arm my self against all the temptations and treacheries of the Devil. 5.
That I may truly become most humble and obedient to God. 6. That I may obtain
all manner of grace, and increase of all virtues, especially of humility,
patience, and charity.

Before any virtuous Action whatsoever.
He that is about to do a good turn for another, especially that has not so
well deserved, let him consider thus with himself. 1. I will perform this
kindness O God, for this man, in respect of the singular love which I bear to
thee, and that I may imitate thee my Lord to the uttermost of my power, which
wast most kind to all, even thine enemies. 2. That I may grow in favor with
thee here, and attain thy promise of glory hereafter. 3. That I may be
obedient unto thee, which have so much commended, and commanded me to use
Charity toward all, even mine enemies. He which is about to give alms, let
him make these his ends. 1. I will deal bountifully with the poor, for the
greater glory of God, that I may show my self thankful for all his benefits.
2. That I may do to others, that which I desire should be done to me, and that
I may procure the benefit of the needy, and embrace them with Christian
charity. 3, That the most just Judge of the world may have mercy also upon me,
forasmuch as he himself has promised mercy to the merciful. Moreover it is
very expedient to direct one and the same action to God with diverse
intentions, for this gives a wonderful improvement to the love of God For when
the Acts be multiplied; the habit is increased. But now a Right Intention is
the act of love, the acts of love therefore being multiplied, needs must love
it self be marvellously augmented. Now that we may have more intentions as
were in a readiness, of all things which we do for the honor of Almighty God,
we will set a pattern underneath, whereunto we may conform all other actions.
Let this be for example. Is there any that would keep fasting days, besides
those that are commanded by the Law, now then that he may make this abstinence
from meat the better liked of God, let him use this short prayer before. O my
most loving God, I devote this fast unto thee. 1, For thy glory, and the honor
of Jesus Christ crucified. 2. So now I have determined to fast for love to
thee. 3. And that I may become more acceptable to thee. 4. And may give thee
more worthy thanks for thy innumerable benefits toward me. 5. and that I may
the sooner obtain those virtues which are necessary for me in this life. 6,
That I may express the greater sorrow for my sins. 7. That I may refrain the
immoderate desire of meat and drink. 8. That I may preserve Chastity befitting
my estate, undefiled. 9. That I may follow the steps of my Lord Christ, who
fasted, that he might be an example to me. O my God, I offer unto thee this
fasting, all my afflictions and miseries, and whatsoever I have suffered or
shall suffer hereafter in body or in mind, together with all my doings in every
respect, as well thoughts, as words and deeds, to thy honor, through the
merits of Christ Jesus my Lord, who lives and reigns with thee world without
end. Amen. At times of fasting enjoined by the Church, or our superiors in any
public respect, to those mentioned before, may be added this tenth intention.
That I may obey my superiors, and fulfill the Laws of the Church. This same
brief prayer, with a little alteration, may be used before any other virtuous
act^ons whatsoever. And that we may give a special instance of this matter:
There is some man perhaps, which would exercise an Heroical act, as they c^ll
it, a generous, difficult, painful act, and approve his chastity to God, let
him put forth this brief prayer as it were a Buckler. He shall
O most undefiled Jesus, I resolve with thy grace to keep my chastity
inviolable, and to resist all the blandishments of the flesh to the uttermost
of my power. 1. That the greater honor may accrue thereby to thy most holy
name. 2. That I may please thee more and more, and serve thee the more exactly.
3. That I may enjoy the sweet society of so many holy Virgins, so many other
most chaste persons, and of so many most pure Angels, and so prepare my self
for a more plentiful measure of thy gifts and graces. 4 That I may repress
the unbridled motions of lust, and all petulancy of the flesh, and so may avoid
my former offenses. 5. That I may obtain that singular, heavenly, eternal
reward promised to all that live chastely. Moreover there is some man, which
has to do with fretfull, stiff-necked, refractory people, that therefore he
may digest all contumely of words with Christian submission and gentleness, let
him arm himself before with these intentions, and oppose these brief p air.
O most mild Jesus, I utterly detest anger, and all bitterness of words, and
desire to deal gently and favorably with all men. 1. That I may amplify thy
glory. 2. That J may imitate thee my Master, which commendest this in a
special manner to all thy Disciples: Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart. Mat. 11.29. 3. That I may be a good example to all men, may hurt no
body, nor provoke any to anger or impatience. 4. That I may preserve
tranquillity of mind in my self, and with others friendship and peace. 5. That
at the last hour of my life I may find thee the more favorable Judge. 6. That
I may have thee my Lord for a Surety and Debtor, who have made thy promise to
the lowly. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Land. Mat. 5 4.
Namely that blessed land of the living. 7. That I may be advanced to the
highest happiness, I will gladly submit my self to all men, forasmuch as J know
it to be most certain: He that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Mat. 23.
12. There is some man, which may have a froward, severe, cruel Master, or
Mistress like him, or yet diverse not so much Masters as Kings, or civil
Tyrants in a sort. That therefore he may endure this proud and even imperious
Master with a generous obedience, he constrains himself to submission, with
these intentions: O my God, I bequeath my will unto thee, and determine to
yield respect to all those unto whom I am obliged, readily, truly, sincerely.
1. That while I serve man obediently. I may do according to thy will and
commandments, for I know by whom it is said to me: He which hears you,
hears me, and he which despises you, despises me. Luke 10.16. 2. That I
may avoid so many evils ready to fall upon the undutifull and rebellious, for
I know that also, who said: Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God.
Therefore he which resists resists the ordinance of God: and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13.1, 2. 2. That I may
triumph in the victory set before me, Rejoice it self
for neither am I ignorant of this injunction: Servants, obey your Masters,
with all fear, not only the good and gentle, but also the froward. For this
is thankeworthy, if a man for conscience toward G^d end^ri g^^ese, suff^^ing
wrongfully. 1. ^et. 2.18. 4. That I may not swarre from the foote-st^ps of my
Lord and Savior, who for me Was made obedient to the death, even the death of
the Cross Philip. 2.9. 5. That I may enjoy the great reward promised to
obedience, for I know how much God esteems this one virtue, For obedience is
better then sacrifice. 1 King. 15.22. And an obedient man shall speak for the
victory. Prove. 21.28

There is some one moreover which may find the flesh refr^ctory. That therefore
he may tame rhis wild beast, Keep it a bay
and make it come at a call, he sets upon it with sundry kind of Stratagems.
One while he beguileth it of meat, another while he oppresses it with thirst,
now he alters his daintier Diet into courses, then he teaches it to endure
hunger at a Table full of good cheer. One while he perplexeth it with
watchings, another while he vexes it with labors and studies; now he wearieth
it with troublesome journeys, (either for the composing of differences, or
other pious endeavou^s for vicinity sake,) and lastly he exposes it to many
other rigorous exercises fitting his condition, to cut off idleness and excess:
that all these things may be both pleasing to God, and wholesome for his soul,
he stirs himself up with the industry of these intentions. This myrrh of
repentance gathered from thy Cross, my good Jesus I present unto thee, this
violence I will offer to my self. 1. That I may dilate thine honor. 2. That I
may increase thy love toward me. 3. That I may suppress the wicked rebellion
of the flesh. 4. That I may condemn and take revenge of my self in a pious
manner.

For the right enduring of labors, or troubles likewise.
He which is going to work, or in hand with any business whatsoever, let him
use these considerations. 1. This business O God I offer unto th^e for thy
honor, which I will p^rforme with care, diligently, f^ithfully, and exactly.
2. That I may sustain my life to be bestowed in thy service. 3. That I may
inure my self to obedience (if the labor be prescribed or commanded) 4. That
I may show charity to others (if the business will profit others also.) 5.
That I may apply my mind to submission (if the work be base and ignoble.) 6.
That I may learn patience (if the matter be troublesome, difficult, and of
uncertain event.) 7. That with labor I may break and over-master the flesh,
which is prone to sloth and wantonness. When adversity comes upon us, when
troubles, perplexities, difficulties, afflictions, heavines oppress us, when
any thing happens that is grievous and hard to be borne then especially let a
Right Intention rouse it self. And forasmuch as there is scarce any man but
has an hundred occasions even in one day to exercise his patience, he must
have a most exact care of this, that all things be borne with such an intention
as is fit. You may find a great many, which sustain the loss both of health,
and means, and credit, and good name; which are sick, poor, despised, but
because they suffer nothing quietly, nothing patiently, nothing but in a
stubborn manner, because they bear all things no otherwise, then because they
are constrained to bear them, being never but impatient and complaining,
therefore they deserve nothing but pains and punishment due to untoward
people. For that which God sends unto them for a Medicine; this they turn into
poison. In this case therefore let a right intention do her endeavor, that
what men must needs bear, may be borne with profit and advantage, and a virtue
may be made of necessity. As often therefore as things fall out inconvenient
and harsh, grievous miserable, troublesome, he which will not be hurt, let him
arm himself with these intentions. 1. This, whatsoever it be, my God, I will
patiently suffer, that I may conform my will to thy most holy pleasure,
forasmuch as I know certainly, that this is sent upon me by thee, for my good.
2. This, Lord Jesus, I will willingly endure, for love of thee, and that I may
cleave close to thy footsteps, which have showed me the way before. 3. I will
both receive and suffer all afflictions gladly, that I may be corrected for my
former wicked life, and reap Gods favor, and the reward of glory hereafter.
It is the greatest art, to be able to bear all kind of evils well. And this
learned patience is withal the greatest advantage.

Before a man change his state to the Ministry, or any Ecclesiastical function.
There arose a controversy in times, amongst learned and religious men, what
Order of all was the strictest? Some delivered one thing concerning this
question, and some another. They concluded that the rigid Brethren of Saint
Bruno, these of St. Francis his Order, the other that others liv^d the most
austere life of all. At length one of them when he had heard all their
opinions. Sin, by your favor, says he, let me tell you: that for your
learning ye have judged not amiss, but very ill for your experience: There is
not an Order in all the world of a more strict obligement, Rigid Strict
then Marriage is: and that he began to confirm by diverse arguments. This man
seems to have spoken most truly of all, and especially if Matrimony be
contracted not with that intention as is fit. He which takes either Queen
Money, or Lady Beauty, or Madam Nobility for his Wife, involveth himself in a
world of miseries, he brings himself indeed into Order, but a most cruel
one: He marries a Wife, but he sells his liberty. Thus God uses very often
to punish a corrupt inten^ion (experience speaks) that he which sought for
pleasures and riches with a perverse intention, should find perpetual brawling
and dissentions. Alas, what misery like to this, then for a man so often to
utter this confession against his will. I can neither live with thee, nor
without thee. Nec possum recum vivere, nec fine te. Such a Marriage as this
perplexed with Civil wars, thou may not unfitly term a lively Protraict
of Hell, Where no order but eternal horror does inhabit. Ectyp^n.
Job 10.22. Look therefore you that think upon Wedlock, that ye undertake it
with a very good intention. You must not marry pedigree only, nor only
beauty, or money, good and upright manners are to be sought for. But especially
we must take heed of that, that the match be not unequal. For this in parity
cannot choose but be the Seminary of discord. Before all things the intention
of both man and wife ought to be right, that they come not together as Achab
and Iezabel. but as Tobias and Sara, as Ioachim and Susanna. For they which
take Marriage upon them in that mann^r that they shut ou^ God from them and
from their thoughts, and so addict themselves to their own lust, like to Horse
and Mule which have no understanding, the evil Spirit has power over them.
Tob. 6.17. According to Saint Ieroms Translation. Therefore let not a mutual
consent be plighted in Marriage, before a right intent. Tobias gives us this
brief form of the same intention: O Lord, thou know, that I take a Wife not
for concupisence, but only for love of posterity, wherein thy name may be
blessed for evermore. Tob. 8.9. according to St. Ierom. But I turn me unto
Clergy men. Here I would have sighs and groans to speak for me, Alas, I am
afraid, least happily there be found some, which come into the M^nistery, not
that they may obtain on holy Office, but more liberal maintenance, that they
may get all manner of provision, that they may furnish their Kitchen, that they
may fill their Coffers, I pass by worse things, which yet a naugh^y intention
is wont to suggest in wrong manner, even then when we are setting upon the
honestest courses. It is an old, but just complaint of the Priests. Malachi in
Gods stead cries out: Who is there even among you that would shut the doors
for naught? neither do ye kindle fire upon mine Altar for naught. J have no
pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an offering at
your hands. Malach. 1.10. Even as if he had said, although I would not have the
pains of my Ministers to be without wages wherewith they may maintain
themselves, yet I will not that they execute their Office, especially for so
base an end. Let them look to my service principally, and let them account
their own benefit, for an addition. Hereby it appears that it is a deadly
offense, to perform Divine Offices, and duties of this sort, chiefly with that
intention, that they may not lose their yearly profits and revenews. O
Clergymen (I appeal to you whomsoever an unsound intention puts upon this
course) this is to be quite out of the way to Heaven, and to offend not in one
thing, but in all. If you will needs go on in this way, ye go the ready way
to Hell, Tread
therefore choose another path, or change your naughty intention. To go this
way, and with this mind, is to come to destruction. Whosoever therefore is
desirous of a benefice, let him seek not his own honor, but Gods with a
sincere intention, let him be ready not to sheare or flay the Sheep, but to
feed them, let him think not upon a better living, but an holier life.
Wherefore O Ministers and spiritual men, consider, take heed; the business of
eternal salvation is not to be undertaken with a blind desire. There can be
no holy Guide hereunto, but only a right, sincere, pureintention. Whosoever
comes to a spiritual Office, or promotion with any other Conduct or
companion, then this good intention, must either return hence to his former
state of life, or here certainly he shall perish.

CHAP. IX. What the signs of a Right Intention are.
THe common People of Israel were for a great part rude and churlish, and of
such a dull understanding, that they would very hardly believe, what they did
not see with their eyes. That therefore they might behold with their own eyes
most apparently, what an evil and misguided intention is, it was Gods Will,
that the Manna which by direction they gathered for the Sabbath, should be
preserved whole, fresh, and incorrupted, but that which they gathered against
the Law for other days also, being either vitiously provident, or weary of
taking the same pains again, it was all presently corrupted, and began to
swarm with worms. Here neither the place, nor the Vessel wherein this
heavenly aliment was kept, nor the Manna it self was in fault, but only the
evil, and naughty intention, refusing to be obedient to the Law.

This God did set before the Israelites eyes in that manner, as if he had
proclaimed from Heaven: Behold ye at length O uncivil people; what the will
in man can do, what it is to be ready to obey or not, what a good or evil
intention brings forth? these worms are witnesses of your rebellion, these
fruits your headstrong will, and perverse intention produces. Look upon
these things with your eyes, handle them with your hands ye unbeleev^rs. God
deals with Ch^istians after so many Sermons of his Son, in another manner: he
proposes the signs of a good and evil intention to them also, but more
secret ones, and not to be discerned so much with the eyes as with the mind. If
a man consider the eyes of the body he shall find them to be of a very prating
disposition, Without ^oice
though they cannot speak, for by their prattling they commonly betray their
Master, f^^^smuch as it is very easy to perceive health and sickness, mirth and
sorrow, hatred and love by the eyes: the eyes divulge these hidden affections.
An Hog, for his inwards, being most like a man, bewrays his sickness to the
beholder by his tongue and eyes. If we should give judgment how sound a man's
action is, we must examine his inward eye, the intention: If thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. Behold, men learn by the eye,
what to pronounce of the whole body. But as it is no cunning to know, Sickness
that a Disease is perceived by the eyes, unless it be known withal by what
signs and symptoms it may be discovered. So it is not sufficient to know that
uprightnes of life is gathered by the intention, unless we know with all what
be the signs and tokens of an upright intention, whereof we are now to treat.
Therefore that every man may trust himself, and believe that he goes the
right way, we will reckon up Twelve Signs in order whereby it shall be easy
for every one to judge of his own intention.

The first Sign of a good Intention.
Not easily to be troubled, not heedlesly or hastily to set upon any thing.
Their wit is not good, which go about businesses with an inconsiderate
lightness, which do all things with violence, and come not on by degrees, but
are fiercely hurried upon matters; they fume, they throw their hands and feet
about, they pant for fear, as if there would be no time left to gain their
purposes: they ^un about in a rage, as though they would dispatch all things at
first dash. What need is there of this fuming and fretting? Make sl^w have,
Festinae lent.
my friend. There is need of counsel, not force, as Q^^ntus Curtius warns;
He which runs so fiercely at first, quickly gives over: he that travelleth
with a gentle, and stayed pace, goes forward still, and is less we^ried. He
that hastes with his seet, sins. Prove. 19.2. That saying of the Ancient
must be taken for a rule: Be thou a Snaile in thy advice, an Eagle in thy
doings. Sis inconsiliis cochlea, in factis Aquila Leasurely
Therefore at the beginning we must walk for the most part pleasantly, until
such time as strength increase by our very going. We know the words which are
taught in the imitation of Christ: That a man should not be importunate in
doing. Imit. Christ. l. 3. c. 39. And let thy actions be swayed by thee. He
which is of a sincere intention, even in the most troublesome businesses,
converseth thus in his mind: God has committed these businesses to my care, as
he will also give time and grace to accomplish them. I labor for God and his
honor, and I do what lies in my power: God in his goodness will supply the
rest. Therefore as the very Poets instruct: Permitto Divis caetera. I leave the
rest to God. Horat. l. 1. carm. ad Taliarch.

2. Sign of a Good Intention.
In every matter to be so affected as if one should demand, to what purpose are
these things? he should answer with all readiness, For the greater glory of
GOD. Why are those things? For this very end: why the other? for the very same.
As a Traveller being asked whither he takes his way, answers without delay,
To Ingolstad, or Vienna, or to Prague, or Rome. And if he understand himself
to be never so little out of his Journey, returns as soon as can be into the
Kings H^ghway. He which determines to walk abroad only for recreation sake,
many times carries neither bread, nor money with him, for indeed it is nor his
mind to turn into any place of repast. But they which are to go ^a long
Journey, take either money for the way, or victuals, as men commonly use from a
Country Town, and as soon as the belly begins to grumble, and the empty bulk
to complain, they draw their provision out of their Scrip, and cheer up their
barking stomach. Even so a man of Right Intention, which never but remembers
himself to be in a Pilgrim state, when he is wearied with travail, and begins
to seele the troubles of this life more heavily, presently renewing a R^ght
Intention with himself: And for whom do I these things, says he, for whom
do I labor, for whom do I read and write, for whom do I stand and run? Is
it not for God? do I not endure all these things for Gods sake? Therefore be
gone faint heart, be gone wearines; be gone ease and idleness, get thee far
enough impatience, be packing ye mischievous companions. If all these things
be done for God, as it is meet they should be done for him only, therefore I
will patiently, and readily, and willingly both do, and endure these things
every one. Thus I go forward, for thee Lord; all things are both easy and
pleasant to me, O Lord, for thy sake. They do otherwise which lead their
lives like a walking for recreation, which carry neither victuals nor money with
them; they want both a serious and sincere intention: silly men, prone to all
kind of entisements, whose soul was given them for Salt. Their course of life,
is to walk sor recreation sake, whither their feet carry them, whither their
affections run before. Not so those true Travelers, which have both victuals,
and money, not only a serious, but also a sincere intention.

3. Sign of a Good Intention.
Not to be vexed, nor disturbed in thoughts about doing matters, which may call
a man away from prayer, from the care of conscience, from the remembrance of
God. He which is of a sincere intention, bends himself to this, that he may
do according to his strength and ability. Chrysostom observes, that he was
as much commended of the good man in the Gospel, which received two Talents,
as he that received five. Chrysostom. Hom. 41. in Genesis But thou will say perhaps:
Why was like honor given to both of them? Because there was like diligence in
both, although about an unlike sum of money. This falls out very often, that
two employ their pains in the same matter, but altogether with unequal
effect, one being far exceeded by the other. Yet may it come to pass, that
both of them has gained an equal reward with God howsoever, who respects not
of what kind the work is, as from what kind of endeavor and industry it
proceeds. There be some that excel in strength, or wit, or understanding,
and those things which are exceeding hard to others, they do as it were in
sport. Others again there be, which either have sorry strength, or an
unhappy, gross, and dull apprehension, these although they sweat, and try all
their force, and spend all their endeavor in a business, yet at length a homely
Pitcher comes forth, a work without all grace and beauty. And whether of these
are worthy of the greater reward? many times those, whose work as it were too
devoid of skill, is despised of all men. Gods Judgments are exceeding
different from man's. And this may worthily cut off the wings of their pride;
which excel in quicknes of wit, or have the graces assisting them in all
things; and advance the other, Put in courage
and add courage to them, seeing it is a thing of no moment to please the eyes
of men, but exceeding great to please Gods. Worthily Thomas of Kempis: If God,
says he. were always the very intention of our desire, we should not be so
easily troubled for the thwarting of our senses, Crossenes
Kemp. l. 1. c. 14. n. 1.

4. Sign.
After the finishing of a work
When a Work is finished, not to run about, and keep a fishing after other
men's. Judgments. There be some which like Stage Players, when they have Acted
their parts enquire, How did we please? does no body applaud us? So these are
wont to enquire; What do great men think of me, and my work? have I given
satisfaction, what have I pleased them? why do they not speak? An evident
sign of a corrupt intention. For he which is of a sincere intention, says
thus with himself: I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. 2. Tim.
1.12. I truly have done what I was able, and that with a sincere mind for the
divine honor: whether commendation follow after or not, all is one to me, I
know how easy it is for one that is willing in earnest to serve and please God.

There was one that found a Iewel-ring of very great worth, which carrying
presently to the next Shoemaker: Tell me I pray, quoth he, good Sir, at what
price do you esteem this Ring with the stone in it? The Cobbler, which had
more skill in a piece of Leather then in Gold and Jewels: The curious show,
says he, may perchance make it richly worth three Florens. Which I pray was
the veriest fool of these two, whether he that asked the question of such a
one, or he that returned such an answer? Surely he that found the Ring in my
conceit won the fools ^auble, which carried a Jewel to be prized, to a Judge
that had no skill at all in Jewels. Deeds performed with a good intention, are
Jewels, of an invaluable price: but why do we ask men's ears and eyes
concerning them? these know less how to esteem of them, then a Cobbler of
Diamonds; especially seeing the intention, which gains worth to the deed, can
never be thoroughly known to any man. A Nut-shell and the Sky, Bebble
a drop and the Ocean, a little stone and the whole earth, admit of no
reasonable comparison one with the other: much less that which is done with a
good intention, suffers it self to be compared with that which is done with
an evil one. And how then can eyes be Judges in this case? why do we
foolishly contend before them about the dignity of our Pearls? It is God only
which knows how to value them, we must leave all to his judgment, to his we
must stand. By men virtues and vices are esteemed for the most part not
according to desert, Peoples fancy
but popular conceit. In this kind there is no end of error.

5. Sign.
Not to be troubled or daunted at the cross event of any matter or business,
seeing at whom our intention must aim, respects not so much what is
effected, as in what sort, with what intention, with what diligence any thing
is done. That great Apostle James, as they report, gained no more in all Spain
to the Christian faith, then eight Persons, so returning as it were after a
fruitless Journey to Jerusalem, he laid down his head under Herod's Sword.
Was beheaded
Was not God ready to give the same reward to James, as he did to other the
Apostles, which converted Kings and whole Kingdoms to Christ's Religion? The
same in every respect, and peradventure greater. For God did not give him
charge what he should effect, but what he should do. The Seed was to be sown
by the Apostle, the increase of the seed was in Gods hands. This a man of an
upright intention thoroughly considers, that it is his part to labor; and
Gods to prosper the work. Therefore when his Art fails him, when nothing
goes forward, when any thing turns to his ruin, when his hope is utterly
void, he is scarce a whit troubled, for this faith he, is not in my power, but
Gods. I have done what I was able, what I ought, what was fitting. Did the
matter fall out contrary? this is the condition of humane things. And this is
very necessary to be known, for it is not unusual, that even the greatest
pains may fail of their gains, and any worthy labor whatsoever may be to no
purpose. Shall a man therefore be tormented in mind? by no means. If he be of
a good intention, he will commit both fair and foul events, to Gods
disposing, not distrusting the divine providence. Christ himself in the last
four years of his life, how many did he win by his most divine Sermons? you
shall number not very many. The Apostles turned far more to the true religion.

In like manner he which enterpriseth nothing but with an holy intention,
although he be sensible of his wants in many things, although he find many
pravities and imperfections in himself, yet he does not presently loose his
courage, he is not astonished, he is not daunted, but as much as his own
misery depresseth him, so much the mercy of God lifts him up; neither do
things wind so ill at any time, that they are able to change his good
intention. In prosperity and adversity his heart is all one, that is always
bent upright to God. All other things he treads like the Clouds under his
feet, he sets his mind like the Firmament against all casualties and
incursians of fortune; he beholds all things with a contented and cheerful
eye. His mind is always equal, and such as goes on in a pleasant course, and
continues in a quiet state. Therefore he comes to that pass, as to obtain
that great and God-like disposition, Not to be shaken. No evil shall happen to
the just: or as some read it: Whatsoever can happen to the just, shall not
trouble him. Prove. 12.21.

6. Sign.
At the accomplishment of any thing, to shun vain glory, and all Fantastical
conceits. Who is he, and we will praise him, which never applaudes himself
privately, which esteems not highly of his own labor, which hears not
from his own mouth, well, bravely, excellently, who could have done better?
But this is nothing else then to make baskets whole weeks, and when all is
done, Sacrifice to Vulcan
to throw the work in the fire. They were vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart is darkened. Romans 1.21. There be some which praise their
own things only, other peoples they eondemne, and pass over with silence;
they receive their own praises with open mouth, even at the hands of the
unskilful, other men's they entertain with a dejected look, brow, eyes, and
when they cannot disprove them, yet they never like them. These people not
borne for God, but only for their own credit do hide mighty mountains of
pride under a modest brow. Nor does this pinching praise of other men's virtues
proceed from any thing else, then from a mind greedy of their own honor; he
which fears that his own commendations will be impaired by another, is very
wary that nothing slip from him, wherein another deserves to be commended: he
hates equals in the reign of glory. Annaeus Seneca here giving a touch to
the purpose: Keep that yet in mind, says he, which I told thee a little
before: It is no matter at all, Take notice of
how many know thy up rightnes. He which would have his virtues to be made a
common talk, labors not for virtue, but glory. Will thou not be just
without glory? but believe me thou ought to be just sometimes with infamy.
And thea, if thou be wise, an ill repart well gotten, is pleasi^g. Opinion Mala
o^inio been ^arta delectat.
Sen. E^ist. 113. fine. The Patriarch Jacob upon his death Bed: Dan, says he,
shall be a Serpent by the way, an Ad^er in the path, that biteth the Horse
heels, so that his Rider shall fall backwards. Genes. 49.17. The Adder, being
a Serpent of no great body, hides himself in the Sand, that he may bite the
Horse heels which passes that way, to make him cast his Rider in a furious
fit. The Devil most like an Adder, whilst we go in the narrower path of
virtue, covers himself in the dust of humane praise, that he may sting the
Horse heel, that is, a right intention, and so overthrow it under a color of
vain glory. He which is of a good intention does most warily avoid this Adder,
and in every place continually cries out: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us; but
to thy name give the praise. Psalm 115.1. To God only be glory: the Lord of
Hosts, he is the King of glory.

7. Sign.
Not to have the least touch of envy. He which studieth only for the honor of
God, little regards, although he have equals or yet superiors in skill and
knowledge. Arts and Sciences
He desires that nothing should be performed by him only, nor does he ever
wish, not to be excelled of another: he never envieth one that stands above
him; that which is great in others, he debaseth not, that his own things may
be extolled. Moses gave us a most worthy example of this point. There came a
young man to stir up his anger against others, for he accused them of strange
Prophesying. Rare
The Divine Scripture relates the matter thus: And there ran a young man, and
told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do Prophecy in the Camp. And Joshua the
Son of Nun, the servant of Moses answered, and said: My Lord Moses forbid them.
And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God all the Lords
people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. Numb.
11.27. etc. It falls out in Princes Courts, that an Ambassadors, or any
other duty is to be executed, and perchance one is chosen thereunto who was
least of all thought upon, he is left, who supposed that he should be chosen
before all men. Here he acts a great matter, which can abstain from envy.
The same comes to pass among Clergy men: there are diverse Offices among
them, of governing, of teaching, of Preaching, of looking to this or that. In
this case he is to be esteemed a man of great virtue, and a very good
intention, which can behold another governing, teaching, Preaching, looking to
this or that, with as much content as himself. But sometimes another
disposition bewrays it self. How often does it happen that we would a man's
poverty should be releeved, but of our selves, (because we would have both the
wealth and the credit;) that conscience should be taught, bu^ of our selves,
that vice should be corrected, but of our selves; that Confessions in some
cases should be received, but of our selves; that these or those should be
saluted in all humble sort, but of no body else then our selves; that Sermons
should be preached to the people, but not by others, when we distrust not that
we can perform it as well our selves or better. How few be the Moseses at
this day which will cry out in earnest, Would God all the Lords people were
Prophets? That all were his faithful Ambassadors, That all were fit to
Govern, to teach, to Preach; would God it were so. After the same manner when
some are more abundantly praised for their industry, for wit, for fidelity,
for learning, for other endowments of Nature, of mind and understanding, if a
man can hear these praises with indifferent ears, and not have the least
touch of envy within him, believe me, he also performs a great matter. But
whosoever is of a good intention will say heartily to all these things, Would
to God there were a thousand such, I envy not these nor the other. Would to
God, my Mstaer had as many praiseworthy Servants like thi^ as he desires; I
will discharge wh^ lies in me with a faithful ende^, vour, I will suffer my
self to bee^ celled by this or that men without e^vie. These good words are
common, and better then these. The fellow is not so trusty and diligent as he
is believed to be: Thi^ same man in troth has no great learning: He is one of
no suc^ great worth, as he is suppose^ This is to tear other men's praises with
an envious tooth, an^ then at length to admire himself for a brave fellow,
when he has all men in poor estimation beside himself. All which things are
quite contrary to a good intention. But O Envy, O mischievous beast! how many
Courts, how many, I may almost say, Religious Houses do thou either overthrow
or infect? O envy always the greatest enemy to other men's good! Hence is that
weariness, and tossing of a mind that never lies still, and sorrowful and
sick enduring of any rest. From thence comes heavines, and repining, and
hatred against other men's proceedings, and a thousand perturbations of a
wavering breast: from thence comes that disposition of men detesting their
own quietness, and complaining that they have nothing to do: that others are
promoted to honorable functions, and they neglected. A mind left to its own
swinge, and not sufficient for it self, beats upon these things. And who is
there, which if he have done any thing worthily, and the honor of the deed
redound also to another, will not presently utter with indignation: I made
these Verses, Ho^ ego versiculos feci, tulit aelter honore^.
and another carried away the grace. Others triumph in my victories, and I am
led like a Captive. But to be delighted with other men's harms, is not the
pleasure of a man, but of the Devil. To be vexed at other men's happiness, is
an eternal misery. These not rivolets, but whole streams of emulation and
envy, do flow from the fountain of a naughty intention, before a Right
Intention they are dried up.

8. Sign.
To be able to make no account of men's judgments, this is one of the greatest
and most necessary Arts that can be. He will never be a man, whosoever has not
learned exactly to perform this. This all wise men will cry out unto us upon
every side, that the Judgments of men are not to be feared. It is below the
dignity o^ a Christian to be tossed hither and thither with the Judgments of
men, and a mighty mischief indeed, to hang upon other men's opinions, as it
were by a thread. For what felicity is there so moderate, which can avoid hard
censures? Mean
It is a caveat of the Ancient: If thou will be blessed, think upon this
first of all, to make no account, and to be made no account of. Thou art not
yet happy, if the multitude have not yet disdeigned thee. But far more
excellently Thomas of Kempis: Rejoice thou thy heart, says he, firmly in the
Lord, and fear not the Judgment of men, as long as thine own conscience
assures thee to be godly and innocent. A good and blessed thing it is to
suffer in that manner, Kemp. l. 3. de imitat. c. 37. n. 21. If thou be praised
thou art never the holier, and if thou be dispraised thou art never the worser.
What thou art, thou art; neither can thou be termed greater, then thou art
by the witness of God. If thou considerest what thou art in thy self
inwardly, thou will not care what men speak of thee: man regards the deeds,
but God weighs the intentions. He which is of a sincere intention, therefore
dreadeth not these Judges, 1. Because he finds very well how grievously they
may be deceived in many things, and learneth this even from himself, who was
so often deceived in judgeing others. 2. He knows that nothing comes unto
him by these Judgments, is added
and nothing is taken away. Such every man is, as he is in Gods eyes, and no
more. Truly no more, although men lade him with commendations. 3. Because he
has his conscience for a witness, that he deals with a sincere purpose. 4. He
knows that no body ever can please all men, neither Peter, nor Paul, no nor
Christ himself. 5. He knows likewise, that it is exce^ding great virtue to
be able to digest these Judgments with Christian magnanimity, which Paul of
Tarsus could do indeed, who although he were made all things to all men, yet
he freely cried out: Protested
But with me, it is a very small thing to be Judged of you or of man's
Judgment. (1 Cor. 4, 3.) 6. Because God in time to come will Judge these
Judgments, by a certain Rule most exactly. These things whereas a man of a
good intention thoroughly underst ^ndeth, he easily contemns the Judgments
of men, as it were the barking of little Dogs, and never cares what he may
seem to others, but what he may seem to God and himself.

9 Sign.
In all things which do please the flesh, to be very temperate and continent,
but if otherwise, it is a sure token in a manner, that a man is too precious
and dear to himself. Self-love is most plaine-dealing, and most subtle
withal. When self-love gets the upper hand, it cares a jot neither for God
nor man, it has no consideration at all either of Heaven, or Hell. It draws
all things with a favorable interpretation to it self. It looks ever most
diligently to its own profit, pardons and pampereth it self freely in all
things, but especially it loves ease and daintiness, these two bits, it
casts both to Body and Soul, like a poisoned sop. It breeds all curious
conceits, that it may win the m^nd, it inviteth to all kind of pleasure, that
it may captivate the body, and has a special care of this, that nothing
troublesome or distasteful may offend so good a friend. But it is a most true
speech of St. Gregory, and with him of all good men: Even as when the body is
at ease, the spirit waxes feeble, so when that is troubled, Exercised
the spirit waxes strong. And as content does nourish the flesh, so
perturbations do raise up the Soul. For she is fed with delights, and this
is quickened with sorrows. Greg. Tom. 2. in 3. Psalm. poenit. The spirit waxes
feeble, when the flesh is at rest: for as the flesh is nourished with
pleasures, so the soul with pains. If any man therefore incline his mind to
ease and delicacy, he gives sign enough of himself that he has an impure
intention, wherewith he regards not the honor of God, but his own
advantage, as a Maid Servant which helps a Baker to work for white bread.
Hireth her self to
Such a one as this, as soon as he feels any trouble, draws back his
hand, and returns to his pleasure again, and chooses rather to lie like a
beast in his idle commodity, then to make way through valorous attempts to a
better estate; or if at any time he put forth his hand to difficult matters, he
extends his endeavor no farther, then whither the desire of honor, and his
own reputation enforces him. Bernard deciphering such a man as this, who
lies hid under a religious garb: He is courageous says he, in all things
that concern himself, but a very Drone in things that concern others; he
watches in his Bed, but sleeps in the open Assembly. Philautia
Even so self-love is most courageous in all things that concern it self,
and goes cheerfully about to procure, whatsoever she conceives fit for her
own turn. In this case a man of a good intention most earnestly restrains
himself, and continually repeats that lesson, Seek not
Look not after thy self, but God.

10. Sign.
To do any thing with as good a will in private as in public, and to labor
as diligently out of other men's sight, as if the eyes of all men were cast upon
him, nor yet to stand upon the number of them that hear him, look upon him,
praise him. There be some that shed tears to make a show, and keep their eyes
dry, as often as they want one to look on. There be some which labor tooth
and nail, as long as they are beheld, take away their witnesses and
Spectators, to labor in secret will please them no longer. Seneca very
worthily counselling a man that loves the open world too well, and desires to
be gazed upon: There is no reason, says he, why the glory of making thy wit
known, should bring thee forth, to the end thou may discourse or dispute
before people. Therefore, say thou, for whose sake have I learned these
things? Thou have no reason to fear, least thou should lose thy labor, if
thou have learned them only for thine own sake. But to show I have not
learned for mine own sake only at this present, I will relate unto thee three
excellent sayings which I have met with very near the same purpose (Observe
them I pray, especially you, whose whole desire is, to be seen and heard of a
great many. (Observe the same) Democritus says. One man is to me instead of
the People, and the people instead of one man, Well likewise he, Vnus mih^ pro
populo est, et populus pro uno.
whosoever it was, who when he was demanded, to what purpose he used so much
diligence about that skill which should come to the knowledge of very few:
Enough for me, says he, are a few, enough is one, enough is none. Worthily
this in the third place: Epicurus when on a time he wrote to one of his own
Sect: These, quoth he, I not to many, but to thee; for we are a The ^tre great
enough for one another. These things my Lucilius, are to be taken to heart,
that thou may learn to despise that pleasure, which comes from the
approbation of a multitude. Senec. Epist. 7. at the end. So many of us may say:
One Angel to me, my conscience only, God alone is instead of a City, instead
of a Kingdom, As much
instead of the whole World, instead of the eyes and ears of all men. It is
enough to me, if a few, enough if one, enough if none know, wh^t I h^ve
hitherto both done and endured. So every Christian unto Christ. We are a
Theater wide enough one for the other. O Christ, thou art a most spacious
Thea^re to me of Obedience, of Love, of Patience, and of all virtues: I am a
Theater to thee of a world of misery, and almost all kind of vices. This is a
sincere intention which labors only for the eyes of God, and endures all
things for the same; men's eyes it regards alike, whether they look on, or
off.

11. Sign.
Not to be put out of heart with dispraises, nor deterred from good proceedings
by others in a world of respects. It is well known what answer Bernard very
fitly retorted upon the Devil. The Devil had praised him exceedingly, and how
excellently do thou this, how admirably! when he was nothing moved, the
crafty Fox turned his style, and, to what purpose at all is this that thou
do, how foolishly, and how unhandsomely go thou about all things? leave
off for shame, thou buildest Houses for flies. Hereunto the holy man made this
answer only: I began not for thy pleasure, neither will I give ov^r for thy
pleasure. (The Acts of St. Bernard. The use of this saying, St. Ignatius
declares. l. Exercit. de. dignosc. Scrup.) This brief form of speaking a
good intention uses: I began not that I might be praised, neither will I give
over when I am discommended. But thou may say perhaps: if a Master, or
Mistress, or any body else, for whose sake a man takes pains, and of whom the
work deserves to be well accepted and approved, and yet he makes apparent
show that it very much disliketh him, who would not take that grievously?
Truly a man of a pure intention will not take it grievously, but will reason
thus with himself: I have done what I was able, and that with a very good
meaning, but that I have not given satisfaction to this man or the other, I
interpret it to be no great damage, so long as God and I be friends; here
unless I much mistake my self, I am not blameworthy. For a man to hope to
please all men, is most idle hope. Shall I therefore be ready to hang my self,
because I am not commended, because I have displeased? I began not for these
trifles, for these I will not make an end. God is to me both the reward of my
labor, and my praise, and all things. Thus a good intention discourses. And
he truly enjoys great tranquillity of heart, who cares neither for praises,
nor reproaches. Happy is he which deserves this report, Thou carest not for
any man, for thou regardest not the persons of men. Mat. 22.16. It is an old
saying and a true: Despite, Despectus, suspieto, and respectus aeverti^^r or^em.
Suspicion, and Respect overthrow the world. It ^s no part of honesty so to
respect others, as to forget thy self: Be ye harmless as Doves. Mat. 20.16.
Lots Wife cast back her eyes upon Sodom and the fire that rained down, and so
perished. Stephen ^^^ning away his countenance from the stony Hail looked up
to Christ, Stones thrown as thick as Hail
and so ended in a most godly manner. It is the saying of Christ: What is that
to thee? follow thou me. Ioh. 21.22. Whether others blame, or commend thee,
what is that to thee? Look upwards to Christ, follow him. Despise the
reproaches of others with a right intention. It is no fault to be dispraised,
but to do things worthy of dispraise.

12. Sign.
To be ever ready prepared for all assayes. Philip 3. King of Spain did
commonly use this Motto. Ad utrumque. Emblem Poesy Present
Against both. Or, For all assayes, which a Lion did express, who in his right
Paw held a Cross and an Olive branch, and a Soldiers Spear in his left. A
man of a good mind a d intention, is so provided against both, that he makes
almost no difference between adversity and prosperity, wealth and poverty,
honor and contempt, favor and neglect of himself, health and sickness, long
life and short: It is all one to su^ a man as this, to lead his life (...)
riches, or in want, in sickness, (...) soundnes, in a smiling or fro^ning
fortune; he is indifferent t^wards all these things, as it sha^ please God to
dispose from above He looks after God; whether he come to God by this way o^
that, is no matter to him, so h^ come to him. He that does an^ thing so
preparedly, Readily
there is r^ doubt but he does it willingly. (...) be longs to Mathematicians
to discourse of numbers, lines, dimensions, and circles, but whether they draw
their Mathematical figures in paper, or wood, i^ lead, or silver, or else in
the sand, they stick not upon that, whereas all their Disputation is employed
about abstracted quantity, as they ^earme it. So, as many as do give their
mind in earnest unto virtue, are bent upon God and his honor with their whole
intention: if now it be as expedient for them to attain to this mark, as well
by adversity, as prosperity, by sickness, as by health, by penury, as by
abundance, they make no question in the world, being contented with their lot,
and prepared For Both, every way tractable; for so they take all things that
happen in good part: there none of these but says even an hundred times in
oneday: My heart is ready O God, my heart is ready. Psalm. 57.8 and 108.1. I will
freely go on whither thy pleasure is. But if all kind of adversity, if
poverty, ignominy, sorrow, can show me a shorter and safer way to God, then
prosperity, then riches, honor, pleasure, here they are thoroughly resolved
before riches, honor, pleasures, to embrace poverty, ignominy, sorrow with
open arms, and not to complain at all of the difficulty of the way, seeing it
leads to such a joyful state of life, and that eternal life. Whosoever is
come to this understanding of ma^ters, has a full persuasion, that all things
which are in the World, are governed by God in the sit manner; he knows
that all these things which we sign at, which so much trouble us, are tributes
of Nature, from which we are nether to hope, nor to ask for immunity, whereas
these things do not happen, but are Decreed. An^ indeed by this means a man
of a right intention does ascend to that height, that he begins now to
wish, or hope for nothing, to desire nothing, to fear nothing but God, and
wickedness, him a the chiefest good, that as the greatest of all evils. Sin
If we should cast an account of all these signs, the total sum will be
this. 1. To set upon nothing turbulently. 2. To be lead with a continual love
to a good intention. 3. Not to be solicitous about the affairs of the world.
4. After things are done to take no care what other men think. 5. Not to be
troubled for the ^nh^ppy event of a matter. 6. By all means to avoid vain
glory. 7. To keep himself free from ^nvy. 8. To know how to con^emne the
Judgments of men. 9. To be very temperate in all things that are pleasing to
the flesh. 10. Not to sue for the open World, not for Spectators or Auditors.
Led away
11. Not to be seduced with opinions, nor dejected with dispraises. 12.
Touching every state of life, to be indifferent and prepared for all affaies.
Truly God is loving unto Israel, even unto such as are of a clean heart.
Psalm. 73.1. Such as labor only for this one thing, that they may find these
signs of salvation within them.

CHAP. X.
The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light. Mat. 6.22.
THe Ancient were of opinion that the principal beauty of man is in the eyes,
forasmuch as in these the comlines of face has taken up her chief seat. Look
For although the Symmetry or due proportion of the whole countenance be
required to form, yet there is no part in the face; whereby the mind and the
affections thereof do shine so clearly, as through the eyes. Surely by these
glassy Be^^des the heart appears, they are the interpreters of inward desires,
as Quintilian eloquently. O quam been quicquid volunt imitantur oculi! O how
well do the eyes imitate what they will: whereupon old Poets in their praises
of the beauty of Goddesses began at the eyes. Hom^ has his gray-eyed Minerva,
his black-eyed Juno, and his rolling-eyed Muses. This opinion of the Ancient,
that the fairest in man is in his eyes, is most certain of all, if we shall
speak of the inward Pulchritude of man. Si oculus tuus simplex fuerit, totum
^orpus lucidum erit. If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of
light, These eyes do procure man admired beauty; they make him all fair. By
the eye the intention of man is signified, as is to be seen by the drift of
our Saviors Discourse: If a man have a good meaning, it seasons all the rest
of his Actions with goodness. And how this stands in it self, we will
endeavor to show in some brief conclusions following, such as suite with the
consent of Divines about this matter. 1. Of every good work acceptable to God
there are three conditions, 1. That malice be absent. 2. That Grace be present.
3. That a right intention be not wanting. If any one of these be deficient, it
is a work without desert, neither grateful to God nor profitable to men. As
concerning the first condition, it excludes all works in respect of themselves,
or the Object (as they say) evil. Such are luxury, envy, anger, and the like.
We can never call that good Cloth, which has nere a good thread in it. The
next condition of a good work is, That the Author thereof be in favor with
God, which is the foundation of all worthy Offices: as long as a man is the
enemy of God, so long he does not that which is pleasing unto him. Cains
offering was not accepted, because sin lay at the door. And Saul's Sacrifice
wa^ rejected because he wanted o^edience which is better then Sac^ifice. And
the third condition is a good intent, for even us tho^^ five foolish Virgins
that slept we^ not to be admitted by the Spou^ without Oil, so neither o^
works are approved of GO^ without a right intention. W^ knock at Heaven with
va^wisnes, if the Oil of a good intention be wanting unto us. ^ thine eye be
evil, thy whole b^^ shall be full of darkness. Mat. 6.23

2. Conclusion. All indifferen^ works a Right Intention make through Gods
grace capable o^ eternal^ life. Indiff^rent work are those, which of
themselves b^ neither good nor evi^l, such a^ the necessary Offi^e^ of the bod^
and life, as to eat and drink, t^ writ^, to walk, to ^aint, to sleep^ to
lab^ur, to sell, to traffi^ke, o^ the like. For all these have nothing beyond
the power of Nature. But if a good intention be joined with them, they put on
a new dignity, and win an eternal reward, so that fountain of all merit the
Divine favor be not absent. So by dyning, by supping, by sleeping and the
like, our most bountiful God would have us amongst other things enabled to
attain Heaven, when as whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we do
it to his glory. For in such an Action as these, those three things which I
said meet together. 1. Malice is absent; for to eat, to drink, to sleep and
the like have no evil of themselves. 2. Grace is present, for this we admit.
3. A Right Intention is not wanting.

The third Conclusion is this: 1. An evil intention does so vitiate every
Action, although the most excellent, that it makes it of no worth at all. What
can a man attempt more generous, then to cast himself alive into the flames?
yet if the grace of God and a right intention be wanting, this enterprise has
no virtue, no praise. Most remarkably. St Paul. 1 Cor. 13.3. And though I
bestow ^ll my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burn^
and have not charity, it prof^^^ me nothing. 2. An evil intent^ makes every
indifferent wor^ whatsoever presently evil. For a bad intention corrupts ev^
good Action, yea the best of ^ with her contagion, how m^ more those that be
scarce goo^ A wicked intention is a most co^tagious plague; whatsoever ^
breathes upon, it kills. Where^^ to do or speak any thing ^^ thou may be
esteemed or pra^^ has no good in it, because ^ very fountain is naught, a
Pu^pose smelling of vain glory. S^ to buy, to sell, to exercise a^ Art, only
that thou may b^ rich; so to take meat and drink to enjoy rest, to give ones
self, discourse, to play, to sport, one^ because it is pleasant and
deligh^full, is of no value, and to be r^jected. 3. An evil intention jo^ned
with an evil action is wo^ of all, and a fair booty for a^ Devil. Isidore.
l. 3. Sent. c. (...) fine. Bonis male uti malum, sic n^ ^is male uti pessimum
est, To (...) good things ill (says he) is evil, so to use evil ill is worst
of all. Of this sort are, to steal that thou may have what to spend upon
play, upon gluttony, and unchaste desires. To excel in pride of cloths, that
thou may entice others to lasciviousnes; to take away another good name,
that thou may do him a mischief; to be high flowne in wine, that thou
may have the better courage to villainy; to be given to covetousnes, that
nothing may be wanting to pride, and the like. This is truly to run with both
feet, or as fast as can be to Hell.

4. Conclusion. An indifferent intention coupled with an indifferent work is
of no desert with God. It is the common saying of Divines, No work merely
natural is worthy of eternal life. As to exercise a mechanical Art for lucre
sake only. To abstain from eating but for better health, to fetch accustomed
walks, no otherwise then to deceive the time. These actions can never be
reckoned amongst virtuous Offices. And this also is pronounce^ out of the
Schools of Divinity Every work availeable to eternal life must of necessity
have something supernatural, which i^ acquires by a right intention t^ God.
The Divine Leaves do s^ much commend the sacred Bui^ding of Solomon: That
there was nothing in the Temple, which was not covered with Gold. Yea the whole
Altar of the Oracle he ove^ laid with Gold. 3. King. 6.2. Our cogitations, our
speeches, o^ deeds must be so clad with the gold of a good intention, the there
may be nothing in the min^ nothing in the mouth, nothin^ in the hand which
participates no of the nobility of this Gold. pray ye, say, what is the bod^
without the soul? it has no^ sense, nor form, nor motion, bu^ is a miserable
Trunk. What is ^ Tree without a root? What a House without her foundation and
building? such is an Actio^ without a Right Intention.

5. Conclusion. A man of a si^cere intention in all things remains one and the
same immutable, unshaken, and which one would wonder at, never erreth to his
own or another hurt. Solomon affirms this. Prove. 12.21. There shall no evil
happen to the just: but the wicked shall be filled with mischief. Those
accidents of life cannot be avoided, but that sometimes we shall be merry,
sometimes sorry, sometimes cheerful, sometimes dumpish, sensible now of
these, now of those alterations, but (as Thomas of Kempis speaks. Imit.
Christi. l. 3. c. 33. n. 1.) A wise man and well instructed in spirit stands
over these mutable things, not attending so much what he feels in himself, or
on what part the wind of instability blows, but that the whole drift of his
mind may make forward to the right and best end. For so he shall continue one
and the same, immovable, Immediately
when the eye of his intention being single, it keeps a right course through
so many various chances unto G^d. Straight
It is the part of folly and very slender wit, to measure things rather by
casual^y of fortune, the^ reason. It falls out on a sudden that diverse winds
struggle on^ against another, but if the Eas^ or West wind be highest, fair
weather and clear days hold out So in a man of a sincere intention, diverse
affections do striv^ among themselves. But he, the single eye of his
intention being immediately directed to God, passes safe and sound through mos^
contrary events, Different
and by how much his intent is more pure, b^ so much more constant is he amids
all storms, nor suffers himself to be drawn away from h mselfe, never but
thoroughly contented with whatsoever it please God to send. So he yields al^
things to change but his mind even as if one wears a Head piece to day, a Hat
to morrow the day following handles hi^ Spade, not long after his Pen, an^ now
lays himself to sleep on straw anon upon a Feathers. So change^ his Clothes,
or his Bed, not the cheer of his brow or mind. Suc^ is a man of a sincere
intention always like himself in this only respect: he composeth all things
to Gods greater glory: I s^y not, he feels not adversity, but over-comes it;
that is the part of marbl^, this of a man. If thou intendest and seek no
other thing (says the same Thomas of Kempis Imit. Ch 2. 4. 1.) then the
pleasure of God, and the profit of thy Neighbor, thou shall enj^y inward
freedom. If thy heart were right, then every creature should be a
Looking-glass of life to thee, and a Book of holy instruction. I add^d
before, that he can never go astray, who verily is of a right intention, who
looks with a single eye, because all things work toget^er for the best to
them that love God, Romans 8.28. And how can he err at any time from truth and
goodness, which in all things that he does, most g^adly embraces God in his
intention, the very truth and goodness? ^ ^ now the wisest men that a^e offend
in many things. I know there is no man so circumsp ct but his diligence
sometimes fails him, none so mature, whose judgment mishap drives not upon
some untimely fact. None so fearful of offenses, which falls not into them,
whilst he shuns them. So Seneca. lib. 3. de Ira. c. 14. But these politic
errors (so we may term them) prove many times a caution and document to the
party mistaking, nor less good to others. Those three wise men out of the East
were in an error, when they turned aside to Herod that most capital enemy of
the new King, yet because their intention was most right, this error was a
benefit as well to themselves, as to all Christians. It was better so to err,
that many might unlearne their own errors. No oftener will a good meaning man
slip (to speak in a politic way) otherwise then to his own and other men's
advantage. If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. Al^
things work together for the best, to them that love God.

6. Conclusion. The greatest enemy of a Right Intention, is the desire of
humane praise, and the father hereof Self-love, never but wickedly witty. We
men subtle in our own affairs, are most like to Catts, a Catt howsoever she
tumbles from an high place lights upon her feet, and falls at last to stand. So
in what manner soever God deals with us, whatsoever he threatens, whatsoever
he promises, we likewise f^l back to our own selves, and stand upon naughty
feet, and evil affections. Blandimenta carnis haec nostra sunt fulcimenta. The
blandishments of the flesh, these are our props, upon these pillars we insist.
What is sweet, what pleasing, what delightful to the flesh, this is most
greedily sought of us. It is most truly said of one. Kemp. 1. 3. C. 33.
In many things the eye of a pure intention is dim, for we presently look
back upon some delectable thing which comes in our way. Yea very seldom is
there found any one wholly free from the blemish of hi^ own inquisition. So the
Jews heretofore came into Bethany to Martha and Mary, not for Jesus sake
only, but that they might see Lazarus who was raised from the dead. Ioh. 12.9.
The eye of the mind is therefore to be cleared, that it may be simple and
right, and lifted up beyond all occurrences unto God. Whatsoever the matter be,
if any enquire why thou do so, thou will return no other answer then this:
Because it so pleases me, because it d^lights and is Honey to me, because it
agrees with my stomach, it is my meat; I am fed with it, my desire waits upon
it, it is my pleasure, and such like. In this manner we always favoring our
selves give order for our meals, thus we speak to have our clothes made, thus
we fashion our Houses, thus we affect Titles, thus we do all things with a
pleasing indulgence and gentle affection toward our selves. Yea we play the
part of Catts to a hair. Illud felium feliciter imitamur. They are sc^rce ever
so far transported from home, but they know how to return home again: So
we though we m^ke a discession from our selves for a while by a right
inten^ion, yet shortly we come back to our selves, and those profits,
delights, gain^s, and whatsoever we account of, we se^ke with the same
industry as before. No otherwise do we jumpe into the Proverb used by St.
James then Hypocrites, The D^g is tu^ned to his vomit again, and the Sow that
was washed, to her wallowing in the mi e. Iam 7.22. When all things dec^ive us,
w^ hold that fast in our teeth, so it pleases me* and so, many times are we
evil o our minds sake. But a faithful man w^o can find? Prove. 20 6. which
never seeks himself, but GOD in all things.

7. Conclusion. To lift up himself always with a right intention to God, to
bear all things with a contented mind, to aim at the will and honor of God
in all things, is Heaven out of heaven, or a heaven on earth, and that royal
Banqueting House of eternal bliss, wherein we drink healths of the highest
good. Augustine. Lib. 5. Hom
Whatsoever GOD gives thee otherwise (says he) is less then himself: Colis
non gratis, ut aliquid ab eo accipias: gratis cole, et ipsum accipies. Quod
enim dulcius a Deo praemium, quam Deus ipse? Thou servest him not freely, to
receive something of him; serve him freely, and thou shall receive him. For
what sweeter reward from God, then God himself? Does not the most munificent
God deal very lovingly with us, which thus invites us to his service? By how
much greater wages thou ask, the dearer servant thou art to me; but thou
can ask no more then my self, the chiefest good; this very thing I will not
deny thee, if so be thou dispose thy actions hereunto. How sweetly would it
allay our desires, if one would promise us five pieces of Gold for every hour,
so that every hour twice or thrice one would confess in earnest, that what he
does, he does it merely for the gold sake. O ye Christians, do we then at
length perceive this? every hour may we earne not five pieces of gold, but the
chiefest, but all, but infinite good, so that what we do every hour, we refer
to the honor of the highest good, but with one only brief cogitation of this
sort. My God, I do this for thy honor, Lord for thee all things. Whilst we
follow the warfare of this life, we must continually cry, For the Lord, and for
Gedeon. Judge. 7.18. To God, and his divine glory. To God, and his heavenly
Will. So much briefly for your quick discerning of a single eye, or Right
Intention in 9. conclusions going before. Now a word or two to men of all
sorts, for the better influx or drawing light into the body thereby.

CHAP. XI. An Exhortation to the Clergy, to Courtiers, to all sorts of people,
for the exercising of a Right Intention.
To the Clergy.
WHereas a Right Intention is the Rule of all humane Actions whatsoever, there
is nothing more to be taken heed of, then that it be not thrust awry. For it
falls out for the most part, that the more delicate a thing is, so much the
sooner it is infected; the more tender, so much the more easily hurt; the more
excellent, so much the more grievously im^ugned. A Right intention when she is
in her perfect kind is most deli^ate ev^ry way, most tender, and excellent,
hereupon she is so quickly infe ted, so easily hurt, and so grievously
impugned. Religion indeed her self teaches them that wait upon her charge to
perform all things with right intention, but alas how easily and prone a thing
it is to go out of the right way, and nothing for the most part asks less
trouble then to deceive ones self. Ugly
In this case let no man trust his habit, but let him search deeper into
himself, and look to his intention with most vigilant eyes. There is nothing
more usual with the Stygian Lion, then to cover his terrible maine with a holy
garment. There be 3. things of a lurking disposition, says Bernard, unl^wfull
dealing, a deceitful intention, and in unchaste affection. Bern. in Ser. b ev.
Sermon. 2. Although thou avoyd^st unlawful dealing, and an unchaste affection,
thou can not so easily beware of a deceitful intention, which knows how to
conveigh it self at a thousand doors into the closest receptacles of the
heart. And mark I beseech you, with what encroaching policy a false intention
wandereth all about. What is more commendable in a religious man, then to be
always in action, and to be exercised one while in teaching the ignorant, an
other while in comforting such as are troubled in mind, sometimes in making
Sermons, then in admonishing the sick. But with what secret malignity does a
wrong intention insinuate it self into these very actions that are most
religious. For oftentimes we desire nothing more then to be doing, but not so
much that we may do, as that we may rouse our selves a little We desire to
become public, not that we may p^ofit many, but b^c use we have not learned
how to be private. We seek for diverse employments, not that we may avoid
idleness but that we may come into peoples knowledge. It is not only a p^infull,
but also a religious thing to preach, but ^o measure all the fruit of a Sermon
not by the endeavor, but the event, to despise a small number of hearers, or
such as are poor, simple, and rusticall, to let fly their endeavors at more
eminent chaires though not in apparent pursuit, yet to make way thereunto by
secret courses, and to discourse of those things in the Pulpit, which are more
for admiration then instruction, which may make the auditors more learned, not
more holy, is a plain argument of a corrupt intention. Of the same kind it is;
to disdain to visit mean people, or at leastwise not to be so ready, as when
there is occasion to visit men and women of high degree. It tends to the same
purpose, to teach in the Schools not without pomp and lofty strains, to show
himself excellent in Sciences, to look big upon others as it were out of a
Chair of Estate, to set all their care upon this, that none or very few may
carry the victory and praise away from them: moreover to take most things in
hand rashly, lightly, and unadvisedly, and to do almost all things for
applause, nor to think any music sweeter, then to hear, this is that most
eloquent Rhetorician, this is that great Preacher, that acute philosopher, that
profoundly learned Divine. O ye that wait upon Religion, O Ministe^s of God,
this is to sell most transcendent wares at a very low rate, nay to cast them
into the fire. Observe you whose manners Chrysostom deploreth in these very
words: So now likewise it is grown common in the Church: The fire devoureth
all things. We seek for honors of men, and are enflamed with the love of
glory. We have let go God, and are become the servants of honor. We can no
longer reprehend those that are governed by us, when we our selves also are
taken with the same disease, we want Physic likewise our selves whom God has
appointed to cure others. But what hope of recovery is there now left, when
they themselves that are Physicians, do want other men's help. Chrysostom. Hom. 10.
in Ep. ad. Ephesians. Moses twice dissolved the Rock into a fountain, and
commanded whole streams to issue out of the hard flint, by the stroke of his
Scipio, but he did not please th Divine Power in his fact at bo^ times. And
what caused the difference? for in both places there w^ a mighty Miracle, in
both places ^ struck the Rock at Gods comman^ in both places he wounded the
st^ny rock so that rivers gushed ou^ The reason of the difference was this. In
that first Miracle, whilst Moses laid his Rod upon the rock he fastened his
eyes most intentive^ on God. For God promised, sayin^ I will stand there before
thee, upon t^ Rock in Horeb, and thou shall smi^ the Rock, and there shall come
wat^ out of it, that the people may drink Exodus 17.5. But in the second
Miracle, th^s self same Moses had hi^ eyes fixed, not upon God only, bu^ upon
the people of Israel. For, Hear^ now, says he, ye Rebels and unbeleevers,
must we fetch you water o^^ of this rock? Moses did not pl a e in this, as
before. The Lord was incensed against him and Aaron, s^ying: Because ye
believed me not, t^ sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel,
therefore ye shall not bring this cong egati^n into the Land, which I have
given them. Numb. 20.10. and 12. So much it concerns, when we do any thing,
whether we turn our countenance toward God, or any other way omen of the
Church, you indeed do smite the rock with a Rod, when ye wear out your
bodies, with fasti^g, watching, and other religious exercises, bu^ unles ye
fix your eyes upon God with continual attention, you do not please.
Ungrateful, vain are all Services, which a Right Intention commends not.
Therefore wh lst your hand is upon the work, let your eye be settled upon God.
It was the custom in the Greek Church heretofore, that when bread was brought
to the Altar to be consecrated in the presence of the Congregation, he that
Ministered at the Altar went up into the Pulpit and admonished the people in
these words. Sancta Sancte, Let holy things be holily performed. By this he
signified, that they should go about an holy matter with a full desire of
holiness. So God in times past comm^nded: That which is just, shall thou follow
justly: or as we read it: That which is altogether just shall thou follow,
that thou may liv^ Deuteronomy. 16.20. The same course is o^ be kept in all other
actions, the that which is good may be execute^ likewise with a good intention,
the which is excellent, with an excelle^ intention also. Let every
Ecclesiastcall person thoroughly aim even i^ this in all actions whatsoever,
the holy things may be holily perfo^med, and that he himself also man imitate
the most holy King, an^ say: I have set the Lord always before me. Psalm. 16.9.

To Courtiers.
Torment
If punishment did make a Martyr and not the cause, I might scars^ doubt to
speak unto many that follow the Court, as unto most holy Martyrs. Many things
are to be endured of religious persons, yet often times no less of Courtiers,
to whom a certain spiritual man said very well, Ye see our crosses, but ye
see not our annointings. But now our discourse is of the miseries of Courtiers,
we may change the note, and sing: We see their annointings, but we do not so
well see their Crosses. They have diverse kinds of Ointment from Pleasure, but
they have no less diverse kinds of vexation from one cause or other, and
oftentimes such as can receive little help by those ointments and unctions.
How great is that one torment alone, to be troubled with his own, or the envy
of other men! it is a mighty cross, as well to be an Agent, as a Patient in
this kind. Chrysostom bestows her Titles upon envy, when he calls her the
Devils weapon, the root of murder, unworthy of all pardon and excuse, the
only hurter of her self, and the envious man's punishment, and mother of all
mischief. They say that envy is bred and brought up in Princes Courts, I know
not whether I may not say also that she waxes old there. This is a grievous
mischief, and easily finds no remedy, because there is ha^d^y none but it
despises. Nor does the plague of envy alone, which is almost incurable,
afflict many in Princes Courts. Other things also are not wanting, which can be
no better overcome, then by patient enduring. It was the famous speech of him,
which grew old in the service of Kings. When one asked him how he came to the
grace of old age, a very rare thing in Court? By taking injuries, says he and
returnin^ thanks. Senec. L. 2. de. Ira. c. 33 For the injuries of great men
are t^ be borne not only patiently, b^t wit^ a cheerful ^ountenance It is
man tim^s so necessary to vind^cate an injury, that there is need not so much ^
to confess it. Therefore although go^^ Fortune, golden Fortune, may seem to
have taken her way into Prince Courts, with all her mighty Tr^in^ yet unles
patience likewise be called i^ to company, there is no felicity of lo^
continuance in Princes Courts. Ev^ in the fairest Palaces and Castles ^ Kings,
there is need of patience, a^ that often, and many times such as more then
people commonly use. If m^ want the art of suffering here, the^ will be a world
of complaints on a^ sides. Scarce any will confess, that ^ has full
fatisfaction given him; no^ will believe that he is sufficiently v^lued at his
own rate; all will say, the hoped for greater matters, or obtain^ less then
their deserts. The most S^veraigne Antidote against all the mischiefs is a
Right intention Wit^out this vanity of vanities, all is va^^ty, whatsoever
pains is bestowed in the service of Kings, surely God repayeth them with a
reward most fit for such, which corrupt all their industry with a naughty
intention. There be some that serve only the eyes and ears of Princes, so
they fill the one, and take up the other, this is all that they desire: they
are little troubled about the directing of a right intention continually to
God. As they d spise not the favor of God, so truly they neither sue for it,
nor do they live any otherwise, then if they said plainly, Who will give us
money from Heaven? The golden hands of Kings do stuff our pu^ses; let him
expect gold^n showers from heaven that will, we receive this wealthy rain out
of the Court. The favor of Kings is these men's greatest felicity, and then at
length they account themselves blessed, when they have Princes eyes most
propitious and favorable unto them. God I say, is ready to deal with these
people, according as they have deserved of him, sometimes all things fall out
otherwise with them then they hoped, they begin to displease those very eyes,
to which they were most devoted, and find them now ^e more so open and
courteous, Tractable
as in times past. Here they make Heaven a^^ earth ring with complaints, that
n^thing is repayed worthy of their se^vice, that they deserved better, and the
help of man be wanting, that G^ will be the revenger of their wron^s And why
now, O good sits, do ye al^ God to take your parts? ye wait upon the
Princes eyes, not the Lord All the intention of your labors inc^^ned to the
Court, not to Heaven. D^ ye now without shame hope for assi^ance from Heaven
which ye ne^^ sought; for help from God, whom y^ never served. Where are the
Gods i^ whom ye trusted, which did eat the fat of your Sacrifices, and drank
the wine of your drink offerings? ^ them rise up and help you, and ^ your
protection in time of nee^ Deuteronomy. 32.37. This is a very fit rewa^ for them, that
have wrested a rig^ intention which they did owe to G^ only, awry upon men. At
length bei^ most justly farsaken of men and Go^ they are left to themselves for
destr^ction So great a matter it is to alter^ right intention, which we all owe
(...) God, by wicked cousenage into the slavery of men: So great a matter it
is, carelessly to turn away the intent of all their pains unto men's eyes, from
Gods. You therefore, whosoever follow Princes Courts, I desire you, as ye
tender your own safety, that you would be of this mind at leastwise, namely
not to cast away your pains, for indeed nothing is more profitable, then to
procure your own profit in this manner. Let virtue please you, and before all
things a right intention, not because it delights, but let it therefore
delight you, because it is pleasing. You must perform the least and greatest
matters by the advice of right intention. The manner of doing is oftentimes
more acceptable to God, then the deed it self, although never so excellent.
Even as meat daintily seasoned is sweeter sometimes then other which is far
dearer, if it be seasoned ill. Vile
What more base then David's dancing before the Arc? and yet the affection and
worthy intent therein was wonderful pleasing. That cannot displease God, which
proceeds from a right intention. A right intention can sweetly salve many
sores of P^inces Courts, if it be embraced. There be f^und in Princes Courts,
besides those that we sp ke of not a few, which though they carry smiling
countenan^^s, yet they a^^ heavy in heart, and ^lw^ies grievin^ with whom there
is no cause b^^ serves to complain of, troubled people, and never but repining,
for whom a shower of Gold would not be enough, to stop their mouths. An unhappy
kind of men, whom nothin^ pleases, but what they do themselves, to whom
whatsoever is give^ is less then they desired ^r looke^ for. O heavy soul^s!
but all long ^ your selves, that which ye complain of the Court, the same is
found every where els^. Sets all things on Gods Score
Therefore think often with your selves, that there no felici^y so good,
whereof we m^ not complain in some kind. B^ whosoever is of a right intention ^
all things, is contented with himse^ and his own conscience f^r a w^nes, with
the witness of God as Heaven. He calls God the d^bts of all things, which are
not answ^rable to his deservings. There be others in Princes Courts, not much
unlike those before, whom it delights not to do w^ll, but to be s^ene to
have done well: which being ad^icted to glory, do put on a stately show upon
all that they do, which s ll boasting and vain glorious work t the eyes or
ears of Princ^s, c^ring for a right intention the least of all things. As some
fruits are pleasant to the eye, not to the taste, and as some Jewels of a darker
c^lour, do sometimes receive a lust^r l ke to the b^st, from the ra^e
wo^kmanship and Gold which is put about them, so their services m^ke a fair
show by the borrowed rays of glozing poli^y. Of these men Gregory truly: When
they covet to set themselves forth to other men's eyes, they condemn that which
they do. Greg. l. 8. mo^. c. 30. Most idle are these men's labou^s, and
directly none, because they are dest t^te of a right intention. But if they
will not be weaned in vain, let them mix a right intention with all their
actions, and learn to plu^k off all proud show from their duty, let them learn
to do much, and to speak very little of themselves. But there are other^ also
that follow the Court, who forasmuch as their greatest care is how to obtain
grace and favor, do stand in fear continually, that the dignity may turn up
her heels, an pleasures chang countenance and b^ gone. These men lead an Hars
life, always out of quiet and quiking, and at every little blast dreaming of
dangers, one care turmoyleth them after another, who if the would settle their
mind with arigh^ intention, they might live witho^ this fear and trembling,
relying upon God, and not the favors of me^

Moreover what shall we think ^ them, which can least of all endure that which
they do themselves, the is to envy and strive to surpass others. It seems
an intolerabl^ thing to them, when they are shot ^ by other men's envy, but they
quie^ly pass over their own envy to others with a favorable conceit o^
themselves. We have already give Sentence against these before. He^ a right
intentions enemy, whosoeve^ is such a friend to envy. But why do ye take so
much pains to mischief every one himself? This is the part of unskilful men,
which while they purpose to strike their enemy, turn back the weapon and run
themselves through. No body envieth another never so little, but he hurts
himself very much.

Scorn envy with thy heart: it scapes his head,
At whom it aims, and strikes the owner dead. Or hurt where it was bred

Endeavor therefore, whosoever thou art, to macerate thy adversaries with thy
patience, a d well doing; so thou overcommest them. Thou know how well
Phaeton used his Chariot, or Icarus his wings. If thou will needs advance thy
self above others, thou must fall. Nor yet are there some wanting in Princes
Courts, whom the bewitching custom^ of bodily pleasures, and forgetfulness of
piety as a superfluous thing, do bring to that strange p^sse that they only
are in estimation with themselves, they look down upon others as it were from
on high, and make nothing of them in comparison of themselves; they oppress
their underlings, and can endure not so much as the shadow of an injury. But
virtue is so gracious, that the very wicked have this quality, to like that
which is good. Which of them is there that would not seem an upright dealer?
that in the midst of wickedness and injurious courses, affects not an opinion
of goodness? that casts not some show of honesty, upon those things which he^
does most unjustly? and would seem likewise to have bestowed a good turn upon
them, whom he has hurt. And therefore they take it well to have thanks given
by those, whom they afflicted; and feign themselves honest and liberal,
because they never mean to be good indeed. But a right intention will teach
these very men, (if they will be ruled at all) to look upon the course of
their life, and to contemplate the variable condition of fortune, they shall
learn not to be forgetful of man's frail estate, nor ^o be puffed up with too
much trust in themselves to use gentleness toward their inferiors, Too good an
opinion of
reverence to their bette^s, to cast off those kind of careless and hateful
manners, to do all things without stubbornnes in that manner, that there shall
be no difficulty in hearing, no delay in answering, and they, when need is,
shall be ready to go about all things that are to be done, with quietness. And
a Right Intention teaches that moreover. If he be weaker that did thee wrong,
spare him; if mightier, hold thy peace, and carry thy fortune, whatsoever it
be, in a reverent manner. Thou know what was wisely spoken: whilst I was in
an high st^te, I was never but in an horible dread. Sen. Thyest. Act. 3.

A mighty fortune wants not mighty fear,
Nor glorious state from danger goes free:
What ere is high, long stays not in that sphere,
But will by envy; or time ruind be. (Apollod.
Trust not too much unto thy self, nay even nothing at all, whosoever thou art,
And carefully pluck in the Sail: Pro^osirique m^mor, contrane v^la tui. Ovid.
lib. 3. Trist.

Of that, which with thy mind prevails.


The end of an aspiring life has usually bin, to fall. Let him which fears a
fall take a right intention for his Guide, he which wants this, profits
neither himself, nor others. He bestows not a kindness, which does good with
an evil mind. He seeks his own ruin, which graceth not his actions with an
upright end: he labors in vain, which aims not at God in his labor. Of
all Servants he is the most wretched, that wants a right intention. Sow not
therefore O Lord Palatines, O what Courtiers soever ye be, Sow not among
thorres ( Ierem. 4.3.) Mix not so much baseness with your deserts, as to
defraud them of an heavenly reward. Perform I beseech you, not for ambition,
not for fame, or outward sight, whatsoever the conditions of your charge lead
you unto; and whatsoever in conclusion comes to be undergone, undergo not
for favor and affection, not for money and riches, not for ostentation and
glory, but for God, to whom no man ever approved himself otherwise, then by a
right intention.

To all Estates of men.
Diogenes seems to me to have spoken excellently, who s^yed: That men seek
with greatest diligence after those things which belong to life, but those
things which conduce to good living, they neglect and nothing esteem. Stob.
Ser. 2 Even so it is, we all take this course, to do our own business, but how
well, or with what intent we do it, few there are which use a serious mind
about that. O Christians, not only what we do, but with what mind we do it,
is of exceeding moment. Hereup^n that Apocalypticall Angel St. John against
the Prelate of the Church of Sard s. Revel 3.2. was commanded thus grievously
to complain. I know (says he) thy works, how thou have a name that thou
live, and art dead For I have not found thy wo^kes perfect before God. The
works of this Bishop did indeed seem complete and rare unto men, but they
were not such before God, which looks upon the inward meaning of man,
therefore they are accused as altogether empty and vain, for they took their
aim amiss. And even for this cause is the same Elder of the Church of Sardis
pronounced dead, though by others he were reckoned among the living. O how
great a number of such dead men, is to be believed, live in the world. Which
have a name that they live, and yet are dead, whose works indeed may seem
perfect, but because they be destitute of a Right Intention, are altogether
fruitless, and like a pipt Nut, very night, and mere darkness inwrap all
things, wheresoever the light of a right intention shines not. No body without
this eye is fair, none with it foul. Lucerna corporis tui est oculus tuus,
The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole b^dy shall
be full of darkness. We h^ve said before: To do well only that thou may
escape Hell, is the p^rt of a Slave; to obtain Heaven, the part of a greedy
Merchant: to please God, this alone the part of a loving Son. A good man out
of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things, and an evil man
out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things. Mat.
12.35. The drift of the thoughts is verily the treasure of the heart. It is the
intention says St. Austine, lib. 2. de Sermon. Dom. c. 21. whereby we do,
whatsoever we do, which if it be pure and upright, considering that which is
to be considered, all our works which we work according to that, must needs
be good. In which respect, it skilleth not so much what we give, what we do,
or what we endure, as with what mind, and intent. For virtue consists not in
that which is give^, which is done, or endured, but in the very mind and
intention of the Giver, Doer, or Sufferer. Wherein we must weigh (says Greg.
l. 1. 1. in Ezech. Hom. 4.) that every good which is done be lifted up by a
Right Intention to heavenly ends. It is the intention which extolls small
matters, illustrates poor, but debaseth such as are great, and had in
reputation, even as she her self is right or wrong. Slight
The things which are desired have neither nature, nor of good, nor of evil:
The matter is, whither the intention draws them, for this gives things their
form. All virtues fall to the ground without a Right intention, which is the
life of virtues, and source of all deserving actions. St Bernard upon those
words of the Lord (But when thou fastest, annoint thine head and wash thy face)
By this says he, that he bids thee wash thy face, he inst^ucteth us to keep
a right meaning: Pure
because as the beauty of the body is in the face, so the grace of the Souls
operation consists wholly in the intention. Bernard. in Sentent. The heavenly
King commending his Spouse for her height, This thy stature, says he, is like
to a Palm Tree. Cant. 7.7. In this Encomium does he most fitly decipher the
uprightness of a good intention, which advances her self always constant
and directly toward God, which is proper to the Palm Tree, namely to shoot
her branches upward, and to be eminent amongst Trees. The Spouse so praised,
least she should be of an ungrateful mind replies, All manner of fruits both
new and old I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved. I yield my self, and all
mine to thy most holy Will. Wholly I do consecrate my self to thy honor.
Mine eyes shut to all other things, I only open to thee. To thee alone I lift
them up. Yea all my member^, I apply to thy service only. Furthermore how cu^
members are to be employed in Gods service, notably St. Chrysostom: He made,
says he, thine eye for thee, offer thine eye to his use, not to the Devils.
But how shall thou offer thine eye to him? if seeing his Creatures thou shall
glorify him, and withdraw thy sight from the looks of women He made thee
h^nds; keep these for thy self, not for the D^vell, exercising and stretching
them forth not to theft and covetousnes, but to his command and pleasure, as
also to continual prayer, and to help such as h^ve need. He made thee ears;
lend these to him, not to obscaene Tales, to lascivious Songs; but let all thy
meditation be in the Law of the most H gh. He made thy mouth, let this do
none of those things which are displeasing to him, but sing Psalms, and
Hymns; and spiritual Odes. He made thee feet, not to run to mischief, but to
such things as be good. He made thy belly, not that thou should bu^st ^t
with meats, but play the Philosopher. He gave us clothes to put on, not for
vain ostentation, or to wear much gold, and Christ be starved for cold. He
gave thee house, money, and crop, not to possess them alone, but to bestow upon
other, and especially the poor. Chrysostom. in moral. Hom. 10. et 11. All these
things does a right intention teach, which elevates all humane actions to God,
and has nothing corrupt in her, always of a good conscience, infatigable,
exposed to all men, for never are all things shut up in that manner, but there
is a place left for good intention. Never is a right intention vexed, nor
hateful to her self, nor changes a jot, because it ever follows the best,
only God, only good. Thither therefore it ascends, from whence no force can
pluck it, where there is no entrance, neither for grief, nor hope, nor fear.
Not yet for any thing, which may loose the embracements of the chiefest good. A
right intention bears, whatsoever adversity happens, not only patient, but
willing, and joyful, and confesses every difficulty of times to be the law of
Nature. A right intention is the best sauce for the worst fortune that can be.
And as a good Soldier dreads not his wounds, numbers his scarres, and
run-through with weapons, loves the Gen^rall to his death, for whom he falls:
so a Right Intention takes that old precept for a Rule, Follow God. And cleaves
to God always with all her strength: refuses nothing at any time to be done
for Gods sake. Most willingly embraces the sharpest troubles for God, judges
it the greatest liberty to obey God in all things; accounts it the sweetest
clause of felicity to dye for GOD. By this means a right intention is never
without gains, whithersoever she moves her self never so lightly she is on
the getting side. She assaies nothing in vain, she depends not upon the event
of things, all things fall out to her wish, nor can she^ any way be hindered.
And although she be not yet in her Kingdom, yet she knows her self to be
borne to a Kingdom, and that an heavenly one. Most qu^ck sighted is a Right
Inten^i^n, yea she ^s all eye, but that which rem^^n^s con inually sixth upon
God. Whosoever therefore you are of a right intention, imagine that God says
to you, what is ^here, wherein you that have bin ple^sed with the truth, can
complain of me? others snatch at seeming goods, and carry away vain minds, as
deceived with a d^e^me after long sleep. Those are adorned with gold, with
silver, and tisskewe, within have no good, These whom ye look upon for happy,
if ye shall see them not wh^re they appear, but where they lie h^d, are
wretched, beastly, filthy, Trimmed
b^ing outwardly p^inted in the manner of their walls. Not solid and sound
felicity is this, shalow it is, and thin indeed. Whiles therefore they may
stand, or vaunt themselves at pleasure, they make a fair show and coosen; when
any thing happens that disturbs and detects, then appears how much gross
and very filth a false brightness covered. To you I have given sure and enduring
riches, by how much more you shall turn and wind them, so much better and
greater shall they be. To you I have granted, to contemn fearful things, to
scorn desirable things, you glitter not outwardly: your goods meet you within.
Your happiness is, not to w^nt happiness. But many things fall out grievous,
fearful, hard ^o be endured; because by those I would not withdraw you from
your own good, I h^ve armed your minds against all those things. Bear up
stou^ly, and renew in your selves a Right Intention daily, like the fire of the
continual Sacrifice. Therefore, O Christians, in you, and in your pleasure it
lies, to err never or ever; whether you will be deserving seldom or all
ways. No man suffers the want of a right intention, but he that will,
forasmuch as the first and greatest part thereof is To be Willing. Whosoever
sincerely desires all things for God, he studieth all virtues in a Compendium.
For as of all other virtues, so of this the whole Benefit returns unto the
soul.

CHAP. XII. The conclusion of those things which have been spoken of a Right
Intention.
TAke heed to thy self: or be circumspect in all things: was very fitly
spoken to Tobit and Timothy, Tob. 4.14. 1 Timothy 4.16.
for virtues p^eservation. It sets open the door to all vices, not To take
heed to ones self, to be seldom at home, not to be his own man, to let the
mind run whither it list, to meddle with many matters, to send the desires a
gadding, to think upon nothing before hand, to labor in frivolous things, or
such as belong not to us; to do much and nothing, to look upon all things
with a distemperd mind and roving eyes. A single eye is most commendable.

Cyrus the mighty King of Persia, as Zenophon storieth, although he held
Tigranes King of Armenia whom he vanquished in Battle, together with his Wife
in captive Bands, yet he would not be forgetful of humanity, but wisely
remembered that himself also was a m^n. When therefore he h^d deeply weighed
and considered with himself the variable fortune of Princes, Descended into a
deep and weighty consideration of etc.
he admitted those two royal Consorts, not only into conference with him, but
also to his Table, he like a man of entertainment, and Master of the Feast,
being diversely pleasant while they were at their cheer, and merry not without
laughter. At length to try the mind of his Guests: Tell me, I pray thee
Tigranes, says he, what price will thou give me to redeem thy Wife? To whom
Tigranes readily: Believe me, I would give my Kingdom for a ransom, if thy
fortune had not envied me the same. Now whereas I am destitute of a Kingdom, I
will freely lay down my Head for her deliverance. Cyrus being wonderfully
delighted with such sincere love, did willingly condescend to a pitiful
affection, Put on a compassiona^ affection
and yielded them both their liberties again together with their State,
Tigranes now restored to himself and his Kingdom, shortly after asked his
Wife, what she thought of the wisdom and magnanimity, what of the beauty of
Cyrus? Whereunto the discreet Queen: O my dear Husband, quoth she, I cast
mine eyes not upon Cyrus, but upon him, which proffered to redeem my liberty
with the loss of his life, him alone did I behold, whilst we lived among the
Persians. A most prudent saying: That the eyes do of right belong to him, to
whom thou can not deny thy life.

Wherefore especially, good Christian, Take heed to thy self, and deny him not
thine eyes, to whom thou owe even thy life. Thou know that thou art not
thine own, thou understandest who gave thee thy life by dying for thee: and
why shall not thine eye, thine intention go after this thy Deliverer only?
Thou live in vain, unless thou spend thy time especially in the
contemplation of him. For by this only means thou art present with thy self,
when thou make this convoy to thy Maker and Savior. Alas how often are we
from home, and depart out of our selves? Who almost is so happy as to possess
himself? Observe me an angry man, and thou shall hear how he confesses
freely, that he is not his own man by reason of vexation, for he has nothing
less at command then himself, and his passion. Look upon a man given to
fleshly desires; he has lost his eyes and understanding in another
countenance: he is not himself, he has nothing to do with a single eye.
Take notice of a covetous man, he is never in his right mind, Many has stole
it away from him. And who can say, that an envious man is his own master? he
never has an eye to himself, but to those whose destruction he studieth.
Behold a gluttonous man, he is of a sottish disposition, he is wholly bu^ied
in good cheer, or cups. All vices whatsoever, all errou^s have this for their
beginning, Not to take heed, to be scarce ever in his own presence. Hoc se
quisque modo sugit -- Lucret. l. 3. In this manner every one runs away from
himself. Thus also an imp^tient man quite departs from himself, liverh
altogether out of himself, and hereby i^ made the subject of most deplorabl^
follies. Driv^nas last to most frivolous t^mplaints
He which retains any part of himself and a sound understanding, enters into
this private dispure: What do I? I shall not alter my estate from worse to
better by playing the fool. If I have endure^ any hurt, it will increase by
thi^ madness; if I should go about to d^ any, I am attended with an hea^ strong
minister, Fury. Whatsoever shall take in hand, I shall sooner brin^ to an ill
end by this giddines, then can well set upon it, and there is ^ other gain to
be expected thereby but sudden and unprofitable repentance. To speak the
truth, that which a man's nail is on a boy^e, the ve^ same is impatience in
every action. (...) which would have his affl ction to be exasperat^d, let him
take it impatently. Why therefore do I not lea^^ off raging, and keep in my
complaints? I bark but to the wind, to no end and purpose, but that as many as
shall hear me, may throw stones at me, like a Dog. Therefore I will take heed
to my self, and that state which I should confound by outrageous dealing, I
will restore by patient bearing. Tranquillity will supply, what fury would
bereave me of. Thucydides said truly, That there are two things very contrary
to a right mind, Rashness, and anger. For that cause see that thou be able to
moderate anger, and let not every distaste transport to rash words. This is the
expostulation of a man that departs not out of himself, this single eye
beholds far more, then those eyes that are manifold. But even as those
before, so he that is heedlesse and hasty in giving counsel, or passing
sentence, unless he put himself continually in mind of that: Attend tibi:
or, Take heed to thy self, such overhasty and hot determinations, do not
unusually draw great repentance after them. There be some which rush out with
such fiercenes upon the execution of things, that they seem to have played
their parts, before they knew what they were about, which do not go upon
businesses, but run headlong as if a man were enforced out of his house by a
sudden fire, which spreads and consume^ all round about it. All these m^n
counsel ^s as it were in the midst or fl^mes. Advice
They know not how t^ d^l b^rate, and ^all not so much a the domestic Sen^te
of their own heart into consultation. To have done is with them to ^^ve
deliber^ted; and to have finished the matter, is as much as to have we^ghed it
before h^^d. They proceed not to things, but bu^st out at once; or more
properly fly upon them: as if a man should forcibly bound himself ^t one leap
from some exceeding steep pl^ce, not p^tient of that d^l^y which he sees must
be bestowed upon a prudent and gentle d^s^ent. The first adv^ce I will not say,
but the first onset occasioned by what fortune soever stands wi h them for a
full determination, whether it will bring dis-advantage, or otherwise, they do
not ^o much ^s think^, so that ^hey l^^e rather by chance then Counsel;
perhaps things will fall out well, perhaps ^ll, they are ^eady to take the
chance of the Dice. Scribanij superior rel g. l. 1. c. 14. Here we must cry out
with a loud voice: Take heed to thy self, whosoever thou art, and put a bridle
not only upon thy judgment, but likewise upon thy tongue. He will perish a
thousand times, Suffer a thousand mischiefs
whosoever will not refrain his tongue.

Above all things, see that before War thou provide weapons: in this case
especially Take heed to thy self, Exposea naked side
that thou go not unarmed against thine enemy. Use this ^ourse, to prepare a
medicine for all things by musing thereon before hand. The premeditation of all
those evils, which thou fore-seest long before they come, does lightten their
coming, and it is the part of a wise man to premeditate, that whatsoever can
happen to man, must be patiently borne. Christ to arm his followers against
all kind of injuries and vexations: These t^ings, says he, have I told you,
that when the time shall come, you ^ay remember that I told you of them. Job.
16.4. As if he had said ^o his Disciples: ye shall endure all things the more
easily, if ye look for them to be endured. This provision of mind is
exceeding necessary for the due ordering of our lives. Therefore the Son of
Sirach gives earnest charge: and, My Son, says he, if thou come to serve
the Lord behave thy self with reverence and fear, and prepare thine heart for
temptation Ecclesiastic. 2.1. Prepare thy self, forasmuch as the preparations
of the heart are in man. Prove. 16.1. A Buckler of Adamant against all
adversity, is the serious premeditation thereof: whatsoever thou fore-seest,
hurts not with so much force. Nam praevisa min^ tela ferire solent.

For Arrows noted while they fly,
Less wound the body then the eye.
All things that come unexpected, seem the more grievous, and very eesily
overthrow us, which run upon with a sudden assault One of the Roman Sages,
discoursing like an excellent Mo^^llist: It is the safest course, says he, to
make trial of fortune very seldom, but to think of her always, and to put
no confidence at all in her goodness. I shall take a journey by Sea, unless
somewhat happen in the mean space: I shall be made Praetor, unless so mething
hinder it: and Trading shall fall out to my mind, unless something cross it.
This is the cause why we say, that nothing befalls a wise man contrary to his
expectation. Ne have not excepted him from the chances, Opinion
but from the errors of men: neither do all things happen to him as he would,
but as he thoug^t But first of all he thought that something might be able to
resist his d^signes. And indeed, the grief of a dispointed desire must needs
come the lighter to thy heart, whereunto thou promised^^ no absolute success.
Senec. de tranqu l. He which in this case takes not heed to himself, if any
thing happen contrary to what he determined, fretreth, and is outrageous, which
he would have taken patiently, had before-seene it. So Zeno of Citium when he
had heard that all his riches were drowned in the Sea: O Fortune, says he, I
comm^nd thy fact, which bring us to a short Coat, and a little House, now
thou command me to play the Philosopher more diligently. He saw this
stroke, before hand, therefore he took it contentedly. Things that are
unexpected come the more heavily. The strangenes thereof adds weight to
calamities. We must send the mind before into all things, and think^ upon not
whatsoever is wont, but whatsoever can come to pass. No time is excepted from
a bitter event, in very pleasuret spring up the causes of grief. War arises
in the midst of peace, and the succors wherein we trust are turned into
fear. Of a friend is made a foe, an enemy of a companion. Many times we suffer
invasion without an enemy; and too much felicity finds out causes of
destruction for her self, if other things he wanting. Sickness lays hold
upon the most temperate, a Consumption the most able, punishment the most
innocent, trouble the most private livers. Senec. Epist 91. post init. et Ep.
107 paucis mutatis. But those things for the most part do exceedingly grieve
us, which we wonder at as never thought of, and unusual and enquire, what is
the reason of this? how comes it about? who would have imagined it? Therefore
take heed to thy self, let none of those things which thou suffer be
strange, none unexpected to thee. To be offended with these things is as
ridiculous as to complain, that thou art dashed in the high way, or daubed in
the dirt. The manner of our life is the same as it is of a Bath, throng, or
journey: some things will be enforced, some will fall out of themselves. To live
in the world, is no delicate matter. Thou art entered into a long way; Have
taken a long Journey
and thou must needs trip, and be weary, and fall. In one place thou shall
leave thy companion, in another place thou shall be feign to bear, in another
thou shall fear. Take heed to thy self. By such displeasures as these this
troublesome Journey must be measured. Therefore let the mind be prepared
against all things. Let a man know that he is come where he must endure
thunderclaps, let him know that he is come, where Luctus and ultrices
posuerecubilia curae,
^allentesque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus.
Grief and revengefull cares have made their nest,
And pale Diseases dwell, and age oppressed.


In this Mansion we must lead our lives. These things avoid thou can not,
thou may foresee, thou may lightly account; but thou shall lightly account
them, if thou shall often think upon, and presume that they will come. No man
ever but came more courageously to that, for which he had a long time fitted
himself, and bore up stoutly against adversity, if he considered it before.
But on the contrary the smallest things have made him shake, that was
unprepared. We must order the matter so, that nothing may be sudden unto us:
and because all things are more grievous for their strangenes, this daily
cogitation will bring to pass, that we shall be novices to no inconvenience.
Let us wonder at none of those things whereunto we are borne, which therefore
must be taken in ill part of none, because they are alike to all men;
whats^ever thou can speak, has happened unto many, and shall hereafter
happen. So I say, they are alike. For even that which one escapes, it was
possible for him to suffer. But it is an equal Law, not which all men have
undergone, Condition
but which was made for all men. Let the mind be enjoined equity, and let us
p^y the tributes of mortality without complaining. Winter brings sharp
frosts, we must be cold. Summer produces heat, we must sweat. The
untemperatenes of the air troubles our health, we must be sick. And a wild
beast will meet us in some place, and man more pernicious then all beasts, Take
heed to thy self. Some thing the water, another thing the fire will bereave us
of. This condition of things we are not able to alter: that we are able, to
take a good courage, and befitting a Christian man, wherewith we may endure
chances valiantly. It is the best to suffer what thou can not help, and to
go along with God without murmuring, by whose providence all things fall out.
He is an ill Soldier which follows his Captain crying, This is a courageous
spirit, which has resigned it self up to God: but on the contrary he is faint
hearted and degenerous, which keeps a struggling, and thinks ill of the
government of the world, and had rather amend all things then himself. Let us
freely bequeath our selves to God, and fix the single eye of our intention
upon GOD only. Let us so live, so speak. Let Gods most holy Will find us
always prepared and ready to follow him.

Epictetus most worthily confirming this very point: Consider first says he,
the beginning and end of every thing, and so set upon it. Otherwise thou will
indeed set upon it eagerly, as considering none of those things which follow.
But afterward when any troubles or difficulties shall offer themselves, thou will desist with shame. Prize in wrestling, etc.
Desire thou to win the Olympic Games? Consider what goes before and
follows; and so if it be for thy purpose, address thy self to the business.
Thou must observe a strict Order, belly-cheare is to be abstained, thy body
must be exercised though it be irksome, and that at the hour appointed, in hot
weather, in cold. Thou must drink no water, nor yet wine sometimes. Lastly
thou must yield thy self to the Fencers Discipline, as it were to a Physician.
Afterward it happens the body to be rent in conflict, the hand to be hurt,
the loins wrenched, much dust swallowed, to be grievously lashed, and together
with all these sometimes to be overcome. These things considered, if thou
please, enter the combat. But if not, be sure that thou will do after the
manner of Children, which one while play the Wrestlers, another the Fencers;
now they sound the Trumpet, then they Act Stage Plays, when they have seen
these things before, and wondered at them. So thou in like manner wilt be now a
Wrestler, then a Fencer, by and by a Philosopher, afterward an Orator, but
with thy whole heart nothing: but shall mitate, whatsoever thou see, like an
Ape. So that one thing will please thee after another, and still what thou
usest will grow into displeasure. For indeed thou have taken nothing in hand
considerately, nor have searched or examined the whole business, but put upon it
rashly and with a cold desire. Epictet. l. 3. dissert. c. 15. Therefore
hereafter Take heed to thy self. Diogenes being asked what he had learned in
Philosophy? Answered: To foresee misfortunes, and when they came, to bear
them patiently. He knows nothing, whosoever has not learned this. Those
things which are made easy to some by long enduring, a wise man makes easy
by long considering. Sen. l. de Tranquil, c. 11. In such a great revolution of
things turning up and down, if thou accountest not that whatsoever can, will
come to pass, thou give adversity power against thee, which he has weakened,
whosoever saw it before. Sen. l. 6. qq. natural. Question 3. The Basiliske, as
they say, kills a man by seeing him first; but if he be first seen of a man,
he is put to flight. The same happens to us, if calamity be quicker then our
thoughts, And rush upon us in security
it quite over-throwes us with little trouble. But if we harden our minds
against it, and behold it coming with that single eye, it is void of strength,
and shall but lightly assail us when we are already provided, and that to our
profit and advantage. Therefore, Take heed to thy self, and be prepared to
entertain the hardest fortune whatsoever. When Anaxagoras was inbonds among
the Athenians two messengers were brought to him in one day into the prison.
The first signified unto him that his death was decreed. To whom Anaxagoras
with a constant look: Nature, says he, has long ago given sentence, as well
against me, as those that condemn me. Moreover the other declared, that his
two Sons were dead. And to him without changing his countenance, he answered:
Sciebam memortales genuisse.
I knew that I begat mortal men. Behold darts here so long foreseen, that
they do no hurt. Sevetus the Emperor being wont to meditate likewise upon
death, as he did upon other things before hand, had a Coffin by his Bed side,
which he used to speak unto in these words: Tu virum ca^ies, quem orbis non
po^est.
Thou shall contain the man whom the World cannot. Ulysses having spent 20.
years in the travailes of war, when he came whom saluted his wife Penelope
as she wept with dry eyes; but shed tears for a little Dog madly frisking to
see his Master, and suddenly dead. Plut. de tranquil. animi. For he sympathiz'd
his Wives tears before, and gave them a full regreet in mind, but a sudden and
unexpected thing enforced him upon that weeping. So all adverse things must he
anticipated in m^nd, and they will be borne far the more quietly. For even as
he that puts himself into a throng can expect no other, then to be violently
driven, thrust, and trod upon: so he which is about to travel, let him not
hope, but for cloudy, boisterous, windy, rainy weather, hideous tempests, most
inconvenient lodgings, and yet such as exact no mean charges. Then let him
consider wrong ways, the falling of Horses, the overthrowing of his Coach,
diverse mischances, as the usual appendixes of Iou^nies, that when these
things happen, he may say: I foresaw the same. Most shameful speeches are
those: I hoped better, I did not think it would have fallen out so with me: I
expected not such troubles: I knew not that fortune was a step mother to me:
who had believed, that this would ever have bin? who could have suspected such
an envious mind in this man? who would ever have looked after all these things.
So there is a great company of men, which being ready to satle never think of a
tempest. But this is not the part of a wise man. if thou will be wise for thy
advantage, Take heed to thy self, and send forth a provident mind into all
things, that thou may say with Anaxagoras: I foresaw these, I knew these
other, I thought upon those things long before. Have I lost my money? I knew
that it might be taken away. Am I out of favor? I ^new that I possessed an
inconstant benefit. Am I fallen into poverty? I was confident before, that this
is free, merry, safe, if a p^oee man be not vicious. Do men speak ill of me?
they do^, not that which I deserve, but what they are wont, as some Dogs which
have that quality by nature, that they bark not so much out of ^urstnes as
custom. Does sickness trouble me? I know I am obnoxious both to discases and to
death, but there is occasion of virtue give a upon the Deathbed. Have I cruel
enemies? I have read before hand in Chrysostom, Neminem laedi, nisi a soipso.
that no man is hurt but of himself. Do envy, trouble, pensivenes oppress me?
neither does this fall out contrary to expectation. Lamentation, sorrow, fear,
are not punishments so much, as tributes of our present life. H^th death taken
away our children, parents, kinsfolk, friends? wh^t new or strange thing is
this? they ^re dead which must one day have dyed: my turn is next, I have
alre^dy learned that the death of mortal men is not to be bewailed extremely.
If any one shall take this to heart, and shall so look upon all other men's
harms, whereof there is a huge company d^ily, as if they had a free pass^ge to
him also, he will arm himself long before they come on. Therefore, Take heed
to thy self, and perform this li^ewise with the fame prowess, that none of
these things which h^ppen, may be sudden unto thee. For by looking as it were
for that to come, whatsoever can come to pass, will abate the force of all
evils. The mind is instructed to the patient be^ring of dangers too late
afterward. Take heed to thy self.

But in all other things also, I put thee in mind of the same continually. Take
heed to thy self. We are led by little and little to irrecoverable
down-falls. And even so from slender beginnings we descend to endless
inconveniences. There is no reason, when once affection is brought in, and has
any leave afforded it by our will. It will do afterward as much as it lists,
not as much as thou sh^lt permit. The enemy, I say, is to be driven away in the
very frontiers, for when he is entered, and has brought himself within the
Gates, he takes no limitation from the Captives. Sen. l. 1. de ira. c. 7. and
8. The affections obey but in stubborn manner. There is no vice without its
p^tronage, none but has a modest and exorable addres, but for this it spreads
the fa^ther. Thou sh^lt not entreat it to m^ke an and, if thou permittest it to
begin. Therefore, Take heed to thy self, and resist the first attempt. The way
must be stopped against vices at the beginning, by a right intention. If
wickedness once t^ke root, and grow old, like a disease come to the full it
will be hardly removed. It is more easy to keep out pernicious things then to
rule them, and not to admit, then to restrain them when they are admitted. For
when once they have put themselves in possession, they are more master then the
Landlord, and suffer not themselves to be thrust out or diminished. Moreover
reason it self, to whom the reins are committed, is so long in power, as it is
severed fron the affections: but if it have mixed and contaminated it self
therewith, it cannot contain them, whom it might have kept out of place. For
the mind being once in a commotion and combustion submits to that, of which it
is assaulted. The beginnings of some things are in our power: if they go any
farther, they carry us away with their force, and hardly leave any possibility
to return. As bodies violently thrown downward have no command of themselves,
and cannot give back nor tarry when they are cast headlong, but an
irrevocable precipitation cuts of al advice and repentance, and they cannot but
come thither, whither they were not able to go. So the mind if it dissolutely
cast it self into anger, lust, and other passions, will hardly repres the
force, the proclive nature of vices, will carry it away, and throw it to the
very bottom. Therefore let us resist vices at the threshold; because they are,
as I said, more easily not let in, then they go out afterward. Nature has
commanded us a care of our selves, but when thou give too much respect to
this, it is vice. So from a beginning, which is not evil we go on to the
flesh, and the commodities of the body, and whatsoever bordret^ upon them.
Excellently Isidore: The Devil, says he, is a slippery Serpent, whose head
that is, his first suggestion if men resist not, he glides wholly into the
very bottom of the heart, and is never felt. Isid. ^.3 de sum. bon. c. 5.
Therefore, Take heed to thy self, and withstand the first beginnings by a
right intention continually renewed, otherwise thou will commonly ^un head long
into errors scarce ever to be recovered.

Next of a^l ^ve must take heed, that we strive not in frivolous matters, or
such as belong not to us, that is, that we neither desire those things which we
cannot obtain, or having gotten our purpose, Sped
understand the vanity of our desires too late, and after a great deal of
shame. Or yet that our labor be not in vain and without effect, or the
effect be unworthy of our labor. For commonly sorrow follows upon these
courses, if either the matter have not succeeded, or the success be shameful.
We must weane our selves from running about, says Seneca, such as a great many
people use, which go up and down to houses, and plays, and markets. They put
themselves forward upon other folks businesses, Hang their noses over etc.
like those that have always somewhat to do. If you shall ask any of these,
when they are going out a doors, whither now, what intend you? he will answer
thee. I know not very well: but I will go see some or other, I will do
somewhat. When they come home again wearied with frivolous business, Occasions
they swear they know not themselves, wherefore they went out, where they have
bin, being ready the next day to tread the very same maze. Without purpose
So they wander hither and thither to no purpose, seeking after business: and
they do not the thing they determined, but which they ran into by chance. They
use a vain and inconsiderate course, such as Emets creeping up and down
amongst trees, which run madly up to the top, and by and by to the bottom.
Diverse lead a life like to these, whose one may not usually term an unquiet
idleness, which love business more then do any. Let all labors therefore be
referred to some end, let it aim at some mark, and never let it want a sound
intention. Upon that naughty custom does wait this mischievous vice, listening
after news, enquiring into private and public affairs, the knowledge of
many matters, which are neither told, nor safely heard. How often do we put
our hands into other men's matters, and neglect our own, or are busy about
unnecessary things, and omit those that be necessary and profitable, nor
compose any thing with a holier care for the most part, then that which
belongs not to us. Why do we learn vain, why unprofitable, or harmefull
things? Let us learn to increase continency, to restrain luxury, to temper
our belly, to assuage anger, to look upon poverty with contented eyes, to
follow frugality. Isaiah in time past complaining: Wherefore, says he, do ye
spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not. Isa. 55.2. What can thou think of that man, which being now
ready to starve, yet carries all that little money which he has left, to the
Merchant, and buyeth a feather to trim his Cap? Many commit folly not unlike
to this, whom a strong sottishnes possesses, who do all things besides those,
which belong to their soul and salvation. They wear out themselves many ways
with labou^s and cares, but they grace the^r cares and labors with none, or
not a right intention. They sue for money or favor, or both, bu^ they are never
troubled with looking after heaven: they reckon it among their gains to stir
till they be weary in all other things. Against these St. Paul worthily cries
out: Have ye suffered so many things in vain? Gal. 3.4. There be some which
measure the Seas, go through all Countries, compass the world about. There be
which do search almost all Authors, and draw what news soever is in any place
into their ears; of these thou may say truly: Such people as these do meet
with none in the world more hardly at home, then themselves, they are always
out of themselves, and straggle wh^re they have nothing to do, and that which
follows hereupon, they are known to no body less then to themselves. A
miserable kind of men, which shall freely confess at the latter end of their
life: We have labored all night, and have taken nothing. Luke 5 5. Therefore,
Ta^e heed to thy felf, and be occup^ed about thine own business; let thy mind
stick to it self, let it look to it self, and not meddle with other folks
matters. All ve t^es are tender at the beginning, in time they grow strong and
hardy. At first therefore the mind must be gently enforced, that it may
continue vigilant in this attention, and carefully insist upon those things
which it does, least it be rapt hither and thither into contrary opinions with
an heedles instability; but so soon as it has bin suffered to take breath
even a very little, it may retire it self into the bosom of aff^cted prayer,
although performed in few words. The mind which is thus present with it self,
not only runs not abroad to other men's matters, but is wary also in its own,
that nothing go beyond the bounds.

Lastly a continual respect of ones self, does govern ^ll affairs rightly.
In this point especially Take heed to thy self, and never undert^ke businesses
so, but that from thence thou may have a free regresse to God. For indeed the
mind is frequently to be recalled from all external things unto it self, and
ever and anon, as in dangerous time of sailing turn thou into the Haven, nor
tarry until things let thee go, but break from them of thine own accord,
and come home to thy self as soon as lies in thy power. To take the air
Accustom to walk abroad even in the midst of earnest businesses, and with
fighes fetched ordinarily from the bottom of thy heart, to go unto the common
father of all things, and withal revive a right intention. Be mindful of
Eternity at hand, and fly up with a fervent spirit unto God, as often as
occasion will permit. Make God always thine aim, in whom thine eyes may never
but be bounded. So thou shall do all things as diligently, and as
circumspectly, as a faithful and upright man uses to keep his charge. So
thou shall not be terrified at hard matters, nor withdraw thy foot fearfully,
but being above all invasive forces, shall attempt nothing rashly, valiantly
many things: so thou shall look with an equ^ll ^ye both upon profit and
displeasures. Thou know that he is accounted the wi^est man; which bo^roweth
advice of himself, not of another. This in this case is not only laudable,
but necessary. Fetch the soul and life of all thy actions, not from other men's
eyes and ears, but from thy self and thine own intention. This is true
wisdom, these are the safest Counsels, before all our actions, the least, the
greatest, ever to place a right intention, and never to deflect the eyes from
God. Here we may take occasion to grow into words of d^sdaine, Distaste
and most worthily to be incensed against the idleness of men. We are all
for the most part careful in small matters, but negligent in the greatest: We
do not only neglect a right intention in many passages of our lives, but also
too commonly mix a wrong one with our actions. Jacob in times past
reprehending his Sons: Why do ye look one upon another, says he, go
down, and buy for us, that we may live. Genes. 42.2. The same here may I cry
out, Why do ye look one upon another O mortal men, why do ye follow most
vain courses, why do ye take pains to no purpose, and let pass necessary
things: I may not unfitly ^ay of the vain and idle endeavors of a great many,
that which one said of his own Studies and his companions: We learn all
things, says he, Omnia discimus praeter necessaria.
besides those that are needful. After the very same manner thou must find not
a few, which learn all things, know all things, besides those that make for
the gaining of Heaven. Who so knows only to do, he truly knows nothing,
unless he know also how to do well, and to join a Right Intention with all
his doings. Alas how many things do we, and corrupt our deeds with a naughty
intention, and so we burn our own fields our selves, and cut down our own
Vine-yards. We pray, but because we may be accounted lovers of Prayer. We
give same-what to the poor, but that we may avoid the name of miser, and be
called beneficial. We fast, but therefore only sometimes, that we may devour
the more afterward. We take pains, but ^nly for gain, but for show, but for
praise ^ut for necessity, but for nothing but ^urpurse. We frequent the Church,
but because we may be seen, or at least that we may see things not then to be
looked upon. We are present at divine Service, but often but of mere custom,
or to pass away the time. We hear Sermons, but drawn by curiosity, that we
may become more learned, not the better. We are ready in all acts of devotion,
but that we may be thought to perform no less then others. We come to the
heavenly Banquet, but neither do we forsake our selves here, nor here many
times look after any thing but sweetness. We go a great way to Church hither
and thither, but only that we may recreate our spirits, and shake off the
weariness of our Houses. We invite to good cheer, not the poor, but those
that may invite us again. We give, that it may likewise be given to us. We
bestow kindness, that it may be bestowed upon us also. We praise others, that
we may be also praised our selves. We speak Honey and Roses when we see our
time, but that we may be affably spoken to again, that we may be esteemed
courteous, or that we may deceive the more sweetly. We eat and drink, not
only because we are not hungry and thirsty, for so does a Mole also in the
field, but because to eat and drink, relisheth daintily with us, and does
wonderfully please our appetite. We heap up wealth, not that we may help
the poor, but that we may be rich our selves. We talk, we walk, we
sport, we sleep, not that we may refresh a weary mind or body, but that we
may sacrifice to our Genius, and do that which most contenteth or delights.
How often do we bow down our selves even to the lowest pitch of humility,
but that we may rise up, and ascend the higher: How often do we observe some
very slight things with mighty religion, but make no account of mighty sins:
How often do we endure bitter cold, strait Garments, pinching Shoes, and I
know not what, but because pride has persuaded us to it? We take reprehension
also silently, being instructed thereunto not by modesty, but obstinacy.
Sullennes
Alas we do a thousand such things. Thus we fill our lives with innumerable
errors, and that which is most miserable of all, we know not that we
transgress, or at least never mark it. So we hoord up treasures, but of
chafe, or base money.

In the year one thousand and sixteen after the birth of Christ, as Ditmarus
remembers, Ditmar. l. 7. the Saracens invaded the Coasts of Italy with a
barbarous fierceness. Pope Benedict the eight thinking it fit to meet with the
enemy in the utmost borders, having gathered a well accomplished Fleet, carried
the matters so happily, that he utterly extinguished the adverse forces, and
put the Saracen King to flight. The Queen being less experienced in the
manner of flying, was taken and beheaded. The King being wonderfully enraged
with the punishment and death of his Wife, and the destruction of his people,
began to give out terrible threatenings, and to provide means of revenge. And
first that he might put Italy in fear, before he assaies the chance of Wa^re,
he sent an huge Sack full of Chest-nuts to the chi^fe Bishop, and withal
commanded the messenger to let him know: That the next Summer there should come
as many Soldiers to destroy Italy, as he could number Chest-nuts in that
Sack. Pope Benedict that he might fit an Answer to such Barbarous menaces as
these, sent back a large Bag full of wheat, Milium.
and charged it should be told him again: That if he came, he should find so
many armed men in Italy, as there were grains of Corn contained in that Bag.
( Baronius relates the same. Tom. 11. Anno 1016.) This Sack, and this Bag
being thrust full, not of Saffron, not Pepper, or Gold, but ordinary ware, does
excellently represent the ridiculous vanities of man's life. By what means
Christ has taught us after what manner we should lay up treasures in Heaven.
Matthew. 6.19. But we contented with our own homely Cottages, hord up Chestnuts
and Melium for our Treasure. A kind of our landish Wheat
We heap a number of deeds one upon another, but such as are little worth, as
being destitute of a Right Intention. Thus we are rich in Melium, and
Chest-nuts, at length, as Gregory speaks ( l. 1. Dial. c. 9.) The end of the
work will prove, that the intent of the doer was not sound. Current
When death therefore shall knock at our doors, when it shall fling her fatal
Dart at us, when it shall command us to be packing out of this World into
another, what Treasures shall we carry with us from hence? Bags full of Melium,
and Sacks stuffed with Chest-nuts, Actions wanting a pure intention: alas wares
that willyeeld nothing in Heaven! Therefore as Bernard has most rightly
admonished. There is the greatest need of purity of intention, whereby our mind
may both covet to please, and be able to cleave to God only. (Bern. Sermon. 7.
in Cant.) Whatsoever we can do, will not be a right Action, unless the Will
be right, or the intention; for from this the Action proceeds. Seneca very
well to the purpose: Virtue, says he, has proved thankful to every man,
both alive and dead, if so he has followed her in good earnest, Bona fide
if he have not trickt and set forth himself in glozing colors, but
continued ever the same. Senec. Epist. 79. fine. Behold, I pray, not so much as
Seneca thinks it enough to follow Virtue, unless one follow her in good
earnest, which what other thing is it, than with a good intention.

She truly suffers no man to be so trickt and painted by his own cunning,
that his doings should not as well be, as seem to be good: all those fair
shows and glosses a Right Intention hates extremely: She commands us to
follow virtue, but that we follow her in good earnest, not allured with vain
hope, not driven by fear, but for love of virtue her self. Austin expressing
this very daintily: Thou shall fulfill that, says he, by love, which by fear
thou could not. For he which does not evil by fearing, had rather do so,
if he might. Therefore the Will is kept, although leave be not given. I do
not say, thou say. Wherefore? Because I fear, thou do not yet love
righteousness (thou do not yet love sobriety, not yet Chastity) thou art a
Servant still, become a Son. But of a good Servant is made a good Son. In
the mean space do it not by fearing, and thou shall fear also not to do it
by loving. August. Tom. 8. in Psalm 32. The same most holy Bishop enveigheth
against the too wrong intention of a covetous man in this manner: Why gapest
thou O covetous man after Heaven and Earth? Better is he which made Heaven and
Earth, thou shall see him, thou shall have him. Thou desire that that Farm
may be thine, and passing by it thou say, Blessed is he, which enjoys
this possession. This a great many say which pass by it: and yet when they
have said and passed by it, they may beat their brains, and long for it, but
do they possess it ear the sooner? Thy words sound of greediness, thy words
found of iniquity: But thou may not covet thy Neighbors goods. Happy
Blessed is he which owneth this Farm, which owneth this House, which owneth
this Field. Refrain to utter iniquity, and hear the truth. A blessed
Generation whose is, what? ye know already what I am about to speak.
Therefore desire that ye may have it, then at length ye shall be happy. And
this only ye shall be blessed, ye shall be the better, and with a better
thing then you your selves are. God I say, is better then thee, which made
thee. Aug. in conc. 2. Eiusdem Psalm 31. post med. Lift up thy self to him,
and what sight soever thou have, convert it only upon him. What eyes soever
thou have in thy head


What therefore Tigranes his Wife did in Persia, this must thou do in every
place, continually, through thy whole life: She fastneth her eyes upon him
only, which offered to lay down his head for her: the same in all right is
required of thee, that thou fix thine eyes only upon him, which gave both his
eyes, and head, and himself wholly, and thy self therewithal to thee. Which
not only was ready to offer his life, and his blood to redeem thee, but
offered it indeed. But it is a small matter to imitate Tigranes his royal
Consort: we are pressed with more holy examples. Whosoever thou art that
delightest in a good intention^, emulate the Kingly Psalmist of Almighty God,
and Set the Lord always before thy face. Psalm. 16.8. Let thine eye wait upon
him only, but let it wait simple and right, let thine intention be directed
to him only, but see that it be directed pure and sincere; nor must we look
upon any other thing, but through him alone, or in him. Therefore which I
admonish thee in the last place, Take heeed to thy self.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, thou art entreated in the perusal of this Book, that if
thou meet with any literal faults to amend them, which by reason of the
Authors absence from the Press, and the oversight of the Printer, thou will
charitably pass over, knowing that faults are incident to all.

Farewell.
Imprimatur:

Thomas Weeks.
February 15. 1640.

