The dreadful danger of SACRILEGE held forth in this one Proposition, namely
The withholding of Tithes from a Minister that labors in the Word and
Doctrine, or denying those accustomed rates upon houses, which have been paid
to the Ministers successively time out of mind, is a great and grievous sin,
highly displeasing to Almighty God, as appears by these Reasons.

1. Reas. BEcause it is a direct breach of the eighth Commandment, which
says, Thou shall not steal; and directly contrary to the Rule of the Apostle,
Romans 13. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, Custom to whom Custom, etc.

Yea Tithes are due to the Minister by the Law of the Land, and the Minister
has as legal a right to the Rates set upon houses, as the Landlord has to his
Rent; Therefore to deprive the Minister of them, is a breach, not only of God's
Law, but also of man's Law, and who so breaks this hedge, a Serpent shall bite
him, Eccles. 10. 8.

1. Object. But Tithes are Antichristian, and therefore not to be paid any
longer.

Answer. This is a false opinion, as appears by this Argument: That which our
Savior enjoined, is not Antichristian. But our Savior enjoined Tithes, Luke
11. 42. Ye tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, and pass over
Judgment and the Love of God, These ought ye to have done; that is, ye ought
to pay Tithes, Therefore they are not Antichristian.

2 Object. But we do not come to hear him, why then should we pay him, since we
have no benefit by his Ministry?

Answ. If thou live in a Parish where a godly Minister is seated, thou art
bound to hear him, for he works the work of the Lord, as well as those of
greater parts, See 1 Cor. 16. 10. If thou do not hear him, nor pay him, thou
addest sin to sin; for, first it is a sin to withdraw thy presence, and then it
is another, yea a greater sin to withdraw his maintenance.

3. Object. But the Minister will not give us our Due in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, therefore we may justly deny him his due.

Answ. 1. The Sacrament is not due to all, but only to those that come in a
Regular way, according to the order of the Gospel; for all things must be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Now the order of the Gospel is this, That
the power of examining those that are admitted to the Lords Supper belongs not
to the Minister alone, nor to the Minister with the whole Congregation, but to
the Minister and Ruling Elders as is undeniably proved by that singular
Treatise set forth by the Provincial Assembly, called The Vindication of the
Presbyterian Government, page 70, 71. Secondly, the Sacrament is not due to
those that live in any scandalous sin; But theft, or robbing of God is a
scandalous sin.

2. Reas. It is a sin of a high nature, because it affronts God himself, Mal.
3. 8. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we
robbed thee? in Tithes and Offerings. To rob a man by the highway, does
deserve death: To rob a King of his Plate and Jewels, deserves a tormenting
death; but to rob the King of glory, deserves the fire of hell.

3. Reas. It is a complicated sin, wherein fraud or cheating is added to Theft:
for the Landlord lets his house to the Tenant at a lower rate, upon this
account, namely, that he shall pay the duties to the Minister; as fore example,
If the house be worth 21. l. per annum, The Landlord lets it for 20. l. per
annum, on purpose that the Tenant may pay (perhaps) twenty shillings a year to
the Minister. The Tenant notwithstanding pays nothing, but keeps it back from
the Minister by fraud, and puts the Landlords money in his own pocket. Here is
fraud with a witness.

4. Reas. It is a sin, whereby godly Ministers are discouraged in their work,
their hands weakened, and their spirits broken, so that they cannot go on in
their Ministry with Joy, but with grief; This is directly contrary to the
practice of that godly King Hezekiah, (whose example is written for our
learning, Romans 15. 4.) for it is testified of him, 2 Chronicles, 31. 4. That he
commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the
Priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

5. Reas. It is a sin, wherein and whereby the Defrauder robs his own soul of
that spiritual benefit and advantage which he might get by such a man's
Ministry; for it is just with God to say to such a man* Thou withdrawest
maintenance from my servant, and I will withdraw my blessing from my own
Ordinance, so that the Word preached (by whomsoever it be dispensed,) shall do
thee no good at all, but rather it shall be a savor of death to thy own
condemnation. Thy soul shall never thrive or prosper by any Sermon that thou
hear.

6. Reas. It is a sin that provokes God to curse a man in his outward estate
and trading, as appears by that forenamed place, Mal. 3. 9. Ye are cursed with
a Curse, for ye have robbed me; it is usual with God to pay sinners with their
own coin; They rob God in Tithes, and God robs them of their trade and
livelihood; They grudge the Ministers a maintenance, and God grudgeth them even
bread for their families, so that they usually turn bankrupts, or are so much
in debt, that they are ashamed to show their faces.

7. Reas. It is a sin against the Gospel, because it hinders the progress and
success of it, for such men do as much as in them lies to extinguish the
light, by taking away the oil that feeds it. It is observed in that excellent
book. Vindication Presb. Gov. page 81. that Julian the Apostate, that cursed
enemy of Christ and his Gospel, did by taking away Tithes do more mischief to
the Church of God, then all the persecuting Emperors that were before him: for
the Persecutors took away only the Ministers (and their blood was the seed of
the Church) but taking away Tithes, took away the Ministry it self.

8. Reas. It is a sin that will not be pardoned upon repentance, unless there
be a restitution as well as repentance, according to that of Augustine, Non
remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, Thy sin shall not be pardoned,
unless that which thou with-holdest unjustly, be restored.

9. Reas. It is a sin that will cry for vengeance, when the sinner on his
deathbed is crying for mercy; as appears by that remarkable Scripture, James
5. 3, 4. Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were with fire; Ye have
heaped treasure (that is, of wrath) together for the last days. Behold the
hire of the Laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud, cries* and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Now if the hire of the Laborers in men's
Vineyard, kept back by fraud, cries; How dreadful will the cry be of the hire
of Gods Laborers in Gods Vineyard, kept back by robbers and defrauders? I
tremble to think of it.

Consider what has been presented unto you in this paper, and the Lord give ye
understanding in all things.


