A Plain AND FAITHFVLL DISCOVERY OF A BEAM In Master EDWARDS his Eye. OR A
MODERATE ANSWER to the substance of the first and second part of Gangrena.
Especially to his Prophecy; Wherein some of his stories are refuted; The
manner of his coming by them questioned. His double dealing detected. Capt.
Paul Hobson with some others, Vindicated. Mr. Josiah Rycraft Examined. Mr.
Edwards unparraleld partiallity is impartially declared, And his Prophecy
truly reflected

By EDWARD DRAPES.

JER. 5.30, 31, A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land.

The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means,
and my People love to have it so: And what will ye do in the end thereof?

Matthew. 7.3, 4, 5, And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thy eye,
and behold, a beam is in thine own eye?

Thou hipocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye: And then shall
thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

Printed. And are to be sold by William Larner, at his shop, at the sign of
the Blackmore in Bishops-gate-streete 1646.

To the Impartial Reader.
HAD not truth been more engaged in this following discourse then my self, I
should have rejoiced in the continuing of my accustomed silence. But seeing
Master Edwards Goliath like, coming forth, defying the Hoasts of the living
God, licentiously assuming to stamp the Superscription of truth upon those many
Apocryphal stories, feigned tales, and forged relations, contained in his
Gangrena strengthening the hands of the wicked, and sadning the hearts of the
Godly, and yet notwithstanding crying out with great zeal the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord. For Sions sake, I could ^o longer hold my peace,
but was constrained within me, to present this ensuing search, of a Pharisaical
spirit, and an infectious Gangrena, that is so much justified by her Children,
to thy serious perusal, and judicious consideration; that if thy judgment
has been captivated, to give credit to it, it may at length be rectified. Or
if thou art yet in doubt, not daring like a wise man) to pass cens^re, before
thou have heard what the accused can say for th^msevles I hope (through the
blessing of God) what I have written, will prove satisfactory to thee, and be a
light to regulate thy judgment, by whose information (according to my own
knowledge is my endeavor which I have prosecuted, not with words to delight thy
ear, but to profit thy inward man: I love to please no man beyond, and yet all
so far as may tend to their edification.

Plain dealing without the least flattery, is the true language of a faithful
friend, that is like the oil, that does not make, but heal wounds. The
derision and reproaches of unreasonable men, is my expectation: However I doubt
not, but that truth which commands me to write, will secure me, and cause thee
to accept it, though rejected by others, and me patiently to undergo any thing
for it, and learn me to bless them that curse me, and pray for them that
dispitefully use me.

It was not my thoughts to answer all his stories, being a work impossible for
any one man, except he had the knowledge of the whole proceedings of every one
of them, from the beginning to the ending of them, but rather to show the
untruth of those stories I had knowledge of, and the strange pharasaical
oversight of Mr. Edwards, his dwelling so much a broad, and so little at home
that so by some fruits, thou may the better judge of the whole Tree.

Some things M. Edwards charge Captain Hobson with concerning his doctrine,
which I have not particularly replied to, because I hear it will be abroad
before long, to speak for it self.

Reader, one thing I crave at thy hands, that thou will read seriously, judge
faithfully, not with a critical eye, but with a judicious heart, and reprove
me, wherein I do a miss charitably, so shall thou truly engage him to thee,
that loves thee in the truth, and the truth as it is in Jesus.

Edward Drapes

A Plain and faithful discovery of A BEAM IN Master Edwards his Eye.
IT is very remarkable, that when the woman was in the wilderness, the Serpent
cast out of his mouthwater, as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her
to be carried away of the flood, Rev. 12.14, 15. The condition of the Saints in
this world, is most commonly very low: for while they are here, they are not at
home, but wandering up and down seeking an honorable Country, dignifyed with
immutable glory; but in the time of ^hi their voyage to that eternal Canaan,
Satan through his inveterate hatred, casts out of his mouth floods of water,
viz. reviling accusations, oprobious scandals, horrid reproaches, and scorching
persecutions that (if possible) he may destroy them. For the end of all his
motions, whether secret or more open, is, the Saints ruin; For the effecting
of which Design, he has many instruments, great Pollititians, instilling into
them Lessons full of blood, that when they seem most to smile, then is the
greatest mischief by them intended, when Satan transformes himself into an
Angel of Light, then is most danger; when he intended to deceive our first
Parents, he told them that they should be wise, even like unto God, when he
persuades men to kill the Saints, he tells them they shall do God good service,
he suits his actions to the Saints conditions; if they appear to be but few,
weak, or fearful, he sets upon them in the open field, withal his might and
power, to suppress them; if he finds them too strong for him in the
mountains, he will assault them in the valleys; if open force prevail not. he
will take another course, he will disguise himelfe; The Woolfe does most harm
when in sheep clothing, Satan hurts most, when he comes under the veil of
piety, Learning and rich rewards to ensnare pore men; the Snake lies hid
oft-times in the grass, Satan, Antichrist, that man of si^, oftenlye lurking
many in Books, Pulpits, Sermons, Fasts, legal conformityes, and so are
^onveyed into the hearts and spirits of men, like poison in a Cup of wine,
since my eyes was through the power of God, a little opened, I have discerned
something of the Mystery of iniquity yet working, and that in many men's
writings; but I can trul^ say, I never saw more in any one, then in M. Edwards
his Gangren^, both first and second part, the Streams of which are surely
Wormwood, all the waters thereof bitter, and the Fountain I fear Gall; The
whole Discourse foames forth big swelling words, and proud waves, threatening
the sudden and inevitable ruin of many Saints, veiled with the name of
Schismat qu s, Sectaryes, H retiques, and Blasphemers, (reproachful terms as
old as Antichrist, w^o was the first author and inventer of them, and is the
continuer of them against those that have seen his nakedness, and departed from
him)

There are two things endeavored to be effected by those Book; The one, to
render all those whom M. Edwards styles Independants, Anabaptists, Separatists,
odious in the eyes of the Magist^ate and People.

The other, to ex^lt himself, and his Presbyterian Brethren; in which he so
inordinately g^^ryes That this Design of his may be effected the stronger, and
hastened the sooner, he prophesies the certain downfall, ruin, and destruction,
of all those, he calls, Independants, Anabaptists, Separatists, (...). lust
like the Prophets that endeavored to deter^e N h^miah, from the work of the
Lord in his hands, Nehemiah 6.12, 13.14. Are not all the Letters in his
Gangrenous Books. written by the Copy of Rebum's the Chancellor, and Sh ^sh^s
the S^ribe, to the King to hinder the advancement of the Temple of the Lord,
Ezzra 4.12. to the end of the ^6 verse; saying, Be it known unto thee O Kings
unto you O Parliament,, that th^se People have been a rebellous People, if you
suffer them to incre^se, or to l ve at peace amongst you, they will be Kings
themselve, rebel, pay you no Toll nor Tribute, for they are a heady People,
nemyes to Government, to Magistracy* therefore suppress them, command them to
desist and to preach no more, lest England be filled with their Doctrines, and
we lose our Names, our Livings, our Tithes, and Offerings, and then what will
become of us, for no man will buy our Merchandise any more, Rev, 18.11.

I earnestly desire, that no man whom God has called to work* may be
discouraged by this Prophecy, and that the Magistrates might not so listen to
those stories, letters, and bloody accusations, preferred against a generation
of just men, as to command them to forbear the building, repayring and
adorning the Temple of God, with new and living Stones, built upon a sure
foundation, b lieving all things which their enemies accuse them of, so as to
slight, disregard, discountenance, and destroy them as enemies, who have
hitherto approved themselves, in all their Straits, their closest friends; But
that they, and all people, would seriously weigh* from whence this prophecy
came, whether from a vision or divine revelation, or whether the ground of it
is not An I would have (...) so, I desire it may be so, and long till it is so,
I shall never be contented til then, they stand in my light, and keep the
Sun of preferment from shining on me. As for the eight Symptoms laid own by
him, and applied to those that in his dialect are Independ^nts, Anabaptists,
Sectaryes, etc. They are to me the clearest discovery of his, and his
Bretherens nakedness, that can be, and were they impartially reflected, they
would conf^sse it, and if they are infallible signs of ruin, they would
acknowledge their own at hand; I shall briefly rehearse the substance of them
all in order as they are set down, and faithfully reflect them, that M. Edwards
and his Brethren may see, and be ashamed.

1. The first Symptom (as M. Edwards says, of the Independants ruin) is their
horrible pride, insolency, and arrogance, extolling themselves to the heavens,
despising all others, trampling upon them, yea, upon Kings, and Parliaments,
the Kingdom of Scotland, Assembly of Divines, and the Common Council of ^he
City of London, which p^a^ of theirs appears in their writing, Speeches,
gestures and actions, in endeavoring to break all, that will not da^ce after
their P^pe; from which he conclude^ this, their Prid^ having gone before, their
destruction will follow suddenly after. Here is a high accusation, foul crimes
laid to the charge of all those whom he stil^s Independants, had he as truly
proved them as boldly affi^med them, I had never dared to have app^ared for
them, neither do I seek the vindication of any man's pride or arrogancy,
though he may be va^^ed with the name of an Independent, etc.

But that M. Edwards should charge the crimes of one or two, upon all that are
called Independants, seems to me to be both uncharitable and unr^^sonable: did
I not k^ow that envy makes wise men to forget themselves, to do they kno^ not
what, and run they know not whether, from one extreme into another: I should
scarcely have b^n ^nduced to believe, that M. Edwards had forgotten the old
rule, ex particulari non est concludendum, as I now see and know he has if
himself knows what his Pen has written. If one be proud, insolent and
arrogant, must all be so too? If one be a Heretic must all be Heretics? If
Judas one of the twelve, veiled with the name of a Disciple, be a Devil, must
all the eleven be Devils too? I^ one Professor be a Simon Magus, a D^mas
Hymeneus or Philetus, must all the Professors of Christ be such? If one that is
styled by M Edwards or himsele, to be an Independent, Anabaptist, or the l^ke?
should be in the g^ll of bitterness, must all be so too, that go under that
name? I desire M Edwards would tell me what consequence this is, whether it be
good reasoning, whether the grounds of it flows from Religion or reason, from
a plain demonstration, or from a reasonable supposition: surely all these
reject and abhor it as spurious, contradicting the laws of God and man. I am
very confident if one should sc^ape off the filth, soil, and dirt, that is to
be found amidst the refuse of their Congregations, and throw it in his own
face* and the face of the rest of his Brethren that abhorrs their Egyptian
darkness; he would be very angry, cry out of persecution: I^ he shall hereafter
say, he accused not all but some: then surely he has dealt very maliciously
and hipocritically, to make the world believe one thing in his Books, and
himelfe to intend another* Is not this equivocation? and Mental reservation?
But if he sti^k to his principles, to con^emn all he had done well to have
named more, for as yet he has named but few, and some of them are never the
worse, for being named b^ him, their holiness, integrity and honesty, standing
still unshaken and unmovable; some of them being so far from pride,
arrogance, and seeking his or hi^ bretherens ruin, desolation and destruction,
that I know would rejoice to become his and their s^rvants in the Lord Christ,
though not in Antichrist.

Had but M. Edwards taken such a strict survey, and made such a through
inquisition into the Parochial assemblyes, yea, into the very Angels and
M^nister o^ t^em as it seems by h^s Epistle to his G^ngrena he has done into
the INDEPENDENTS and their Assembl^es, he would have found a task hard enough,
an inco^nter sharp enough to have rooted out the pride, arrogance, and
insolency that is between the Presbyterian Church walls, before he had so
desperately adventured to charge the guiltless in the open field, had he looked
well before he had leapt he had saved himself much labor; my soul desires
his instruction, not his destruction; Therefore I desire he would sit down a
little while, and consider, what the Words of our Savior means, and
faithfully apply the same, Math 7. ver. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. and see whether there is
not spiritual abominations set up in high places amongst them? Whether there
is not darkness that may be felt amongst them? Whether a spirit of Pride and
Prelacy, rules not even in them, who love the name, (oh that they had the
nature) of Di^ines; Who extols themselves more then the Presbyterians? Who
makes so much ^oast of their wit, wisdom, pyety, learning, reading, writing,
reasoning, as they, esteeming all Idiots, Dunces and Fools but themselves, as
if, with, and in them, and not in Jesus, was the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge centred.

If this be not true, let some man (if he can) tell me what the meaning is, of
their strange Petitions, invective Sermons, rancorus Discourses, mal^ciou^
Tre^tises, bitter threats, and endeavors to silence the mouths of Lay men (as
they term them) from declaring the sweet enjoyments of the transcendant
excellencies of their beloved, of their God, of their King and of their Jesus,
communicated to them, railing against them, with reviling, villifying speeches,
calling them disgracefully illiterate, mechanicke, Tailors, Pedlers, Tinkers
Cobblers, and the like, carnally supposing (so far as I am able to spell their
meaning) the gifts of the spirit to be centred in, and confined to the members
of an Vn^versity, to humane learning, natural education, acquired parts, and
the like, forgetting that it is the usual method of God, to invite the simple
into Wisdoms Palaces, and to cause the weak and despised things of this
world, to confound the wise, even shutting it out of their thoughts, or at
least out of their mouths, that God has chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and
things which are d^spised, and things which are not, to bring to naught things
that are: that no flesh should glory in his presence; 1. Cor. 1.25, 26, 27, 28
29. Surely did they consider it, they would not so glory in the flesh as they
do, in their parts, learning, and abilities, but rather in the Lord.

Who can see their spirits, and not see arrogance in its height? Who
endeavors, plots, and studies, to be reverenced of all, to have the chief
place at Feasts, the highest place in their Churches, and to be called Rabbis,
Doctors, Divines, like unto them? If a spirit of pride may be seen, in
endeavoring to b^ing all People, high and low, rich and pore, Rulers and
ruled, under the yokes of their own opinions, in pain of Anathema Maranatha,
savours of Pride, how will they free themselves from such a spirit? If they
imagine they can, let them tell me what they mean by prescribing Laws,
Ordinances, Censures, for them, over whom Christ has given them no power? What
do they intend by their pronouncing judgment and vengeance upon those that
dissent from them? By their exclaiming upon the Parliament, for not heati^g a
furnace seven times with hot scorching persecution, to destroy many of Christ's
tender L^mbes? For not being their executioners? If to incense a Parliament
against an honest People, their tried Servants, if to be jealous of, speak
against, and cunningly insinuate a disaffection in many against a Parliament,
and the faithful instruments of Englands present deliverance. If to sit down
in the throne of Christ, if to take his Scepter out out of his hands, his Crown
off his head: If to despise, trample upon, and abase his membe^s, savours of
pride and arroggancy, (and pride and arrogance is a certain symptom of present
distinction) as M. Edwards says, Oh then what a condition are ^he
Pre^by^erians in! But I pass to his second Symptom.

2. The second Symp ome of the Sectaryes ruin and destruction, (for so he
fears not to call the worcester shippers of the living ^od) is their v olent
presecution of their ways and causes.

What he may mean by their ways and causes, it is very ambiguous. If by ways
and causes, he mean their constant endeavors of subduing the Kingdoms Enemies,
(In which Cause he makes the world believe so many of them are interested,)
then I confess they have made haste, though not more haste then good speed,
and through the power of God, have done that in a few Months, which others
have not done in years: Now if their violence in promoting the Kingdoms
peace, in purchasing the liberty of free born Subjects, in hasting an end to
the wars, and heavy taxes, that for the present are necessarily imposed upon
the Kingdom, be the violence he means, which portends their destruction; then
am I verily persuaded, there is some cunning underhand plotting, contriving,
and conspiring, their speedy ruin, which himself is an agent or factor in,
which he assumes to himself as the ground of his Prophesy. But is there no
remedy but they must dye, who, under God, have been the instruments, that he
and his brethren live? Pore soldiers! that have adventured their lives, lest
their estates, hazarded their utter ruin for them, even to the expense of much
treasure and the loss of much precious blood; when they might justly expect to
be received and entertained in great triumph, M. Edwards himself singing
before them, and blessing God for them, they can hope for little else, then a
bloody reward of all their labors.

Or if he mean their Cause to be, their contending for the speedy solemnization
of a happy marriage between Truth and Peace, that these Kingdoms may be
blessed in their sweet embraceings each of other, and their praying for it,
their preach ng, writing, and contending for it, by no other Sword, then that
of the Spirit, to be their violence; I acknowledge such a cause, and such a
violence, I am willing to own, who ever condemns me for it*

But if he mean by their ways, error, Heresy, schism, as it is probable,
and by their violence, their constant endeavors to prosec^te their errors,
etc. I will not deny, but some may stand up for error, in stead of truth, but
that he should charge all thus, is unreasonable; I wish he would deal
ingeniously, and tell me, whether he believes they know those things to be
error, heresy, and schism which they prosecute, or not; if they do not, will
nothing expiate a crime of ignorance, but by the absolute ruin of the
offender? If it be so, who could remain alive? If the Independants are guilty
of their thousand errors, sure I am the Presbyters are guilty of their ten
thousands; and for the manner of he prosecution of these ways, if the
Independants use Wh ps, I am sure the Pr sbyterians use Scorpions* I could tell
the world of many ways and designs of heirs, of their great huge, vast
endeavors to set themselves on high; I could tell how l ke Diotrephes, they
seek pre-eminence above their Brethren; I could als decla e how violently
they carry on this their Design, like Iehu they d v^f rio^sly, wi h a seeming
show of great zeal, trampling upon all that stand in their wa^ gnashing their
teeth, to think a pore Mordecai will not bow to t^ m, and endeavoring to
hang him on a Gall^wes fifty Cubits high O the ^ol^ce of these men! O the
uncharitablne! O the hand heartednes! O the cruelty f these men! How many
Sermons have they preached? How many Papers ha they presented? How many
Petitions, Epistles have they written and preferred, to the Parliament, stufft
full with accusation, against a company of pore men, that stand in their light;
desiring the Parliament may be the executioners, to cut the Independants off,
in the mean while, I challenge all the world to name any Independants that have
preferred one Petition to the Parliament, for th r^in of the Presbyterians:
Have they not rather sat still, and in all their Petitions desired to be ruled
by the Parliament in all civil things, then to rule ov^r them, at the other
have done? How violent is M Edwards and his Brethren against all those that
submit not to uniformity, which few knows, (scarce themselves, that a e the
greatest sticklers for it) what it is, and none knows what it may be* If to
desire the Timber that is in the houses of those that wake not as they do, may
be pulled down, that Gallows may be made of it, at their own d^es, to h^ng them
on; if to say, they h^te the Independants as Toads, yea with a deadly hatred,
and the l k, sav^urs of violence? Two great Champions of the rs, Mr. Byfield
and Mr. Ry^ra^t, to name no more, will evidently prove their violence to be of
a scarlet die, and if violence presage ruin to the violent, let M Edwards and
his ^eth ten look about them. Violence was the practice and the ruin of their
Fathers the B sho^s, and when the Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, it is no
wonder if the childrens teeth beset on edge.

I come to the third Symptom, which M. Edwards says; is, the Independants
great prosperity, strange success in their ways, and opinions, every wind
favoring them If by their prosperity in their way^s, he means the great
successes God has given them, in manageing any trust reposed in them? I am
sorry he should so far malign the Kingdoms happin sse* but if he means
their prosperity in their ways, to be their increase in number? M e think^ he
should not think that strange success, since in another place he says, they
are bu an it considerable Party. If he intends by their success, the
toleration of them in this Kingdom, let him consider, whether he and his
brethren are not tolerated also, was there ever any Ordinance passed for the
establishment of Independency, is there has been for Presbytery, their number
is greater, a national Church ^s^ of them, every Parish Church is frequented
by them; who are esteemed like them? the Church Doors, the Pulpit doors are
open for them, 200 l. or 300 l. or 400 l. and more, per annum attends them,
large benefices, g e^ store; what (if they were contented) could they desire,
that they have not?) Will nothing satisfy them till they have Naboths Vineyard,
until they have taken away the Independants Inheritances from them? It seems
all their successes are nothing, so long as Mordecay does not homage to them.

But he says Scotland has been afflicted with Sword and pestilence, If so, I
desire M Edwards would cease to judge of persons and thing, by common event,
for his own words confess his brethren, the Presbyterians, even the Scots
themselves, may be subject to the Pestilence; and would not wonder that two of
M Goodwins children dyed of the plague; thus, if success s and prosperity fore
tell ruin, it is high time for him and his brethren to repent, for they sit as
Queens, and the world wonders after them; But I come to the fourth Symptom of
ruin

Which M. Edwards says, is the great plotting of the Sectaryes, (forsomust all
Independants in Mr. EDWARDS Dialect be called, though let me tell him, it had
been much better for him solidly to have (if he could) first proved them so,
and not so unadvisedly to have cried out, VENI, VIDI* VICI, but this is a
cunning plot, whose foundation is laid in the bottomless Pit, to render many
Saints odious) He tells us in the general of plotting, but what those plots
are, he knows not how to describe: like some of his brethren, that in the
frontispiece of their Books, write a confutation of diverse errors, and in the
body of their discourse, scarce lay open what the errors are, they would (if
they could) confute. But if he means the Independants rising up early, sitting
up late, riding, running, fighting, studying, by all honest ways, just
endeavors, to make these Kingdoms exceed their former beauty, in the enjoyment
of Peace and pyety, this is a matter of thanks and joy, not of murmring,
repining, and sorrow; Oh that he would cease to blame that generation of men,
upon whose reputation he cannot fasten one stain* It remains for him; or any
else, when they can, to prove that ever any of those that are styled
Independants, were guilty of one plot against this Kingdom, or that they ever
falsified any trust reposed in them; if be or any of his brethren can show it,
let them bring forth their evidences, let them declare the time when the Plot
was, the place where, the manner how: and when they have proved them guilty, I
believe none will refuse to suffer; and till then, let them cease to make the
world believe so. But if plotting, contriving, Machiavilian, Jesuiticall
courses and ways prognosticates desolation, I should rejoice if they could
exempt themselves from it. If they say they can, I demand of them, what means
their Syon College Plots, their multiplied Petitions and Papers, their
Remonstrances, their subtle insinuations into Magistrates, and People, against
the Independants, poss ssing them that they are an heriticall, schismatic
People, a People enemies to government, to Caesar, that would live under no
Laws, crying out crucify them, crucify them, away with them, away with them,
they are unfit to live. D d Machiavill ever more cunningly seek to entrap and
destroy his opposers, then M Edwards as his Gangreous Epistle testifyes, by his
Going, Writing, Eaves dropping, his sending his Spies, Emisaries, Agents and
factors abroad, to pry into the haltings, failings, infirmityes, and nakedness
of his brethren, and having discovered any, exposing them to a public sale,
to the view of all men, even to his own sh^me. Thus may M. Edwards if his eyes
be opened, see his own Picture, lively delineated by his own Pen, even to be
such a Picture, that I think will not e^sily be found among them he intended
it for.

But I proceed to examine his fifth Symptom of the ruin of those he calls
Independents, Annabaptists, etc. Whih he says is this, that Independency is a
faction, which he ass^yes to prove thus* as:

1. It is not carried on in Gods way, as a matter of Religion, but with policy,
tricks and the like. If ^o plead Christ, the Apostles, and the Scriptures for
their practice, be to manage it with tricks; he says true, else how he will
vindicate the truth of that which he has said, as yet appears not unto m^*
but I des^ he and his brethren would look at home, and consider what way of
God it is for poor decevable men, to make Canons, Laws and Ordinances, as Iron
bonds, to bind the consciences of those that differ from there in, what is
their Ordination by Bishops, is that the way of God? They will tell us their
Ordination is good, because they received it not from the Bishops as Bishops,
but as Presbyters, who shifts now? What mental reservation, evasion, and
equivocation is this? Is not this a trick of tricks? The Ordination by the
Pope, by the same argument may be pleaded for, he is a Presbyter too. What is
their maintenance by Tithes, Oblations, and Obventions, forced from all sorts
of men, the way of God? Is this Jure divino? If they say so, I desire they
would prove it; if they plead Jure humano, as that seems to be their strongest
staff, then it is but man's way. What say they to their Parochial, Classical,
Provincial, and National Assemblies, be those Jure divino? Is thus to manage
their presbytery man's way, or Gods way? Surely these are not the ways of God,
but of man, like Nebuchadnezzas lovely Image, excellent for brightness,
terible for form, whose head is gold, whose breast and arms Silver, his belly
and thighs of brass, his legs of Iron, his feet, part of Iron, and part of
clay, is not their government a mere composition, of gold, silver, brass,
Iron and clay? But see the event of the Image, Dan. 2.35, 39. When will the
Assembly answer the Questions propounded by the Parliament? I fear some
tricks, and shifts now.

2. He says many that know not what Independency is* are sticklers for it, and
would not be tied to it. Oh when will he see the beam in Presbyteries eye? Let
him but reflect, look back, and seriously ask his own soul the question,
whether Presbytery is not guilty, and that in a higher degree, of that which he
charge Independency? Let him look into his large Church, I mean the
National, the Mother, or into the Parochial, her Daughters, and see whether
he will not find ignorance, darkness, gross ignorance, darkness that may be
felt, among many of their assemblies; do they all know what Presbytery is? (if
they do, I think they know more then their teachers) how often have many of
them compl^ined of the ignorance of their parishioners? But to dishonor the
Independents, they are made Saints, wise men in a moment; how many amongst them
have their Religion yet to choose, waiting for the knowledge of what Religion
the Assembly has, or will set up. Which when they shall do if they adheare to
their principles, and excommunicate all the profane, and gross ignorant among
them, they will fill the Kingdom with combustion, and people will shortly as
ill endure their Tyranicall Judic^tures and sensures, as they did the High
Commission and Sar-chamber of late.

3. He affirms Independency to be a faction, in that all other errors and
Sectaries are suffered, pleaded for, dealt gently with, are freely suffered to
grow and increase, no way taken to suppress them, their Books. Licensed* I am
sorry to see so much envy, hatred and malice, appear against the Parliament,
as does in this and many other passages, of the Gangrena, and all because they
cannot fulfill a malignant humor, that is so much predominate in his Spirit,
even to the destruction of those whose conversations, parts, piety, and sound
judgments, are not inferior to any. He that runs may read envy in his spirit,
how angry is he that any are Licensed to speaks their own defense, to wipe
of that dirt, he has endeavored to besmear their faces withal (a privilege
that Heathens allow) as the Priests would not let the Scriptures be in English,
lest the people sh uld understand their wickedness, so many Presbyterians, now
are extreme unwilling that the press should be open for all, le^t their folly
should be laid open, and their mouths stopped, and so not only their craft
should be in danger to be set at naught, but also that their Temple of the
great goddess Diana, should be d s^ised, and her magnifence be distroyed, whom
the world wonders after, and worships.

If M. Edwards or his brethren could once monopolize Printing and Licensing
into their own hands, that nothing might be Licensed, nor Printed, but that
which may tend to the advancement of their pomp; then might all those tales
and stories, lies and libells, forgeries, quaint fictions, and bold malicious
inventions, of which the Gangrena is compounded, pass for current coin in the
Presbyterian judgment, and that by the Authority of Imprimatur James Cranford.
will they never be contented that others should have the same privilege as
they themselves have? Are not the Presbyterians suffered? Erastians, Ridged
Presbyterians and the like? When will they be contented to obey and be Subjects
will nothing content them but Rule, Dominion and Lord ship? Had the Prelaticall
nature as well as name been suppressed, we had not had this day any such
spirit in the Kingdom.

4 He says that it appears to be a faction, in that these sorts of men come
into it.

1 Needy and broken men. 2. Guilty and suspicious men. 3. Some who have
business depending, that they may be sooner dispatched. 4. Ambitious, proud,
covetous men. 5. Libertines, loose persons. 6. All wanton, wicked, unstable
Heretics and 7. Such as would not have peace; loose Offi es etc. 8. And Many
discontented in their Churches.

If the confluence of all these will prove Independency a faction, much more
will it prove Presbytery one, for first it appears, their Church is
compounded of such, and that by his own words, that say they come from them.

2. All these sorts of persons are yet with them; how many men broken and needy
are with them? and it may be honest men too for all that. How many guilty
amongst them, witness. Hunscot and others. Is there none in their third place,
that has business depending, who are with them? Even those that one while was
for Prelaticall, are they not now for Presbyteriall government? Surely they
they cannot yet forget, who had, and has a fine design, that went from Oxford
to them, 4. I have already showed there are ambitious proud men amongst them;
and who more covetous then they? Do they not make it an ordinary thing to
forsake one, a second, yea a third, leaving two for a greater? Do they not
preach for lucre sake? what savor has ten shillings, twenty shillings, for a
Wedding, Christning, Funeral Sermon? surely covetousness in a high degree.
Have they not heard of the great Presbyterian Minister, at Ri^hmond that when a
dead corpse was buried in his parish, because the man that had formerly relation
to it, gave the Clerk but five shillings, the Minister said it should be taken
up again, and so accordingly it was; if Mr. Edwards can parallel this amongst
all his stories of the Independents, them let him brand them with abominable
covetousness. Is their no Libertines amongst them? and,

6. Whereas he says all wanton witted persons, come to the Independents. I
desire his pen may not here after, so hastily out run the truth: Have they not
one wanton witted man, unstable man amongst them? If so why do any come from
them, but contradictions in his discourse is so common, that he scarce thinks
of them. Is there n^ loose persons, no libertines among them, not one
heretic, that is strange? But surely if lacivious, effeminate, scurrilous
passages, carriages, deportments, and expressions, will manifest they have; I
am confident hundreds of instances would soon be produced for the proof of
it, and not one of them of the Independents.

7. This he says, Such as have no mind to peace, and are afraid to loose
offices and places, come to the Independents. This charge is bitter; does, he
not insinuate into the Kingdom, that the Independents, in the Army, do
endeavor to prorogue the war, being afraid to loose their places; Whether
this be true or no, let their work, have, success, endeavors, winter and
summer engagements, all crowned from Heaven with unparaleld success, speak;
there is a cloud of witnesses; I will hold my peace.

But that these sorts of persons are among them, let the former delays of the
Army, witness, that cruel and inveterate Spirit, among Ministers, Officers,
and people, at the reduced Army, that God has made famous by not doing their
work negligently, calling them the new Noddle, green headed boys and the
like; if they be not enemies to peace, why are they so violent for the
Magistrate to sheath his sword in the blood of the Independents?

8. He says the Independents are discontented persons; but are they so? I pray
at what? it is because they find nothing among or in their Churches fit
subjects, or objects for divine contentments, but certainly there is few others
among them, from the talest Cedar in the Assembly, to the lowest sh ub in their
parish-churches: I will declare what they are discontented at very briefly,
that Mr. Edwards if possible, might see by his own candle,

1 At God, that fire comes not down from Heaven, to distroy a generation of
men that deserve better things at their hands, like Jonah, peevishly
discontented, not only that the Ninevites, an ignorant heathenish people, but
that the Independents, whom I believe their conscience tells them are many of
them honest, perish not.

2 They are discontented at the Parliament; let their expressions, papers,
petitions, secret charges, open accusations against them, because their hands
are not embrued in the blood of their friends and servants, that God has
honored, even in their blood, who have been at all times willing to sacrifice
it freely for them, witness this truth,

3. At the people that hear them, entertain them, or give them any lodging,
house or harbor, witness Mr Prinnes late Chatechisme, Mr. Edwards Gangrena,
such uncharitable men, are they even so far void of good nature, as to suffer
those to famish for want, that under God, have been instruments to keep them
alive.

4. At the Independents, to see them prosper, increase, to be entrusted in any
place military or civil, to hear any speak for them, or see any to smile upon
them, Oh how it grieves, vexes, discontents, and troubles them! as their late
Remonstrance declares: is it possible for them to sleep for anger?

5. At themselves, that their own lusts, inordinate desires are not satisfied;
that they have not been industrious enough, that they have not sat up longer,
and risen earlyer, to have invented some means to root out the Independents
etc. If such a society and combination of persons make up a faction, and are
sufficient alone, how Mr. Edwards can clear Presbytery from being a faction I
know not: What will any one say, if I show them many more and many worse in
their Presbyterian Assemblyes, I shall name but two more.

1. They are a bloody people, who thirst after blood, who have bound themselves
with an oath, yea they have made the Protestation and Covenant to become bloody
unto them, through their strained and forced sense of it, falsely surmising, it
binds them to endeavor the taking away of liberties, estates, and lives, of all
that are in their judgments heretics, etc. But surely this was not the true
intent of it, thus to set the Kingdom by the ears, for there is the same
parity of reason, that the Independents should endeavor the Presbyterians
destructions as on the contrary, judgeing them erroneous; but if Mr. Edwards
tells me they have covenanted to extirpate error, heresy and schism, I demand
whether there is no way to banish error and heresy out of the Church, except
the persons of them that hold it be banished out of the world? though he cannot
let them live in the Church with him, cannot he be contented to let them alone
in the world? O that he would tell me what means the Parable of suffering the
tares and wheat to grow together in the field till harvest? he must either say
the tares be hipocrites as some, or profane persons as others, but he cannot
say they are hipocrites, for these are such as may be known to be tares,
therefore they must be persons known to be contrary to sound godliness,
either in judgment or practice. Now the question is, where these persons are
to be suffered, and what is meant by the field, which is either the Church or
the world; Because Col. Washington after M. Edwards had ended his Sermon in
Christ-Church, opposed his exposition of this Parable, a warrant was sent for
him from the Lord Major, and he bound to answer this (marvelous contempt) at
the Sessions.
but not the Church, for the mouths of of heretics must be stopped, and
heresy and profaneness cast forth, therefore it must be in the world, if so,
let not Mr. Edwards deceive himself and others any longer, by telling them
they must be cast out of all the christian world; except he think there is none
of the world in England, Scotland, France, Ireland, Spain, Germany, Italy, and
the like: Had he had but so much patience, a to have given the Parliament leave
to have given their own interpretation of their own words, he and his brethren
would not so rashly have accused them for breach of Covenant. But it is
apparent their own words being the interpretation, they have taken an oath, and
made it bloody unto them And,

2. They are a profane people What is the matter of their National Church,
living stones, or dead rubbish? Or is it not a strange composition of dea h and
life, hell and Heaven, light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, good and evil?
How are their National, how are their parochial Churches constituted, but by
being borne in such a Kingdom, or such a piece of ground which we know
naturally brings forth nothing but thist^es and evil weeds? I confess could I
see a Kingdom or a parish so clean as to bring forth nothing but holy fruit,
could I see men borne Saints, and the Kingdom of Earth convert men as soon as
they are in it, or could I hear a voice from Heaven saying, Oh England, or the
like, I take thee and all persons in theeto be a peculiar nation to my self,
above all people, all that are borne in thee shall be holy, I would plead for a
National Church too, but in the mean time they cannot excuse their Temples from
being founded upon an ill foundation, built up with rotten timber, and adorned
with a fading glory; their garden from being sown with il seed, and bringing
forth evil fruit, if all these sorts of people can but prove a faction, sure I
am they are the greatest in England; and let them not cry out the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, while their hands are
full of blood, let them not proclaim a feast to take away Naboths Vinyard. But
if he and his brethren shall say I wrong them, by laying this to their charge,
that their Church is a mere composition of light and darkness, of bloody and
profane men and the like, let them but answer me in these things.

1. Whether or no, all that live in their parish, and frequent their
assemblies, having been christened (as they term it) when they were infants, be
not members of their Church? If he say not, I demand when they were excluded?
if he says they were never of it, I desire he would not plead for a National
Church, nor power to suspend and excommunicate, for the Church has nothing to
do to judge those that are without, seeing there is so many in the Kingdom
that were never of it.

2. Whether or no all that are of their assemblyes, are such that in their
consciences they can believe all partake of the divine nature, that they are
all Saints? Or whether or no there are not among them profane, gross,
Ignorant, covetous, superstitious, and blood-thirsty people, yea even Athests,
men of no Religion at all, Caviliers, murderers etc?

3. Whether or no I have said truth or not, in saying the matter of their
Church is not purely christian, but antichristian? Of these Questions I expect
an answer from Mr. Edwards.

Thus it appears clearly if these sorts of people prove a faction, and a
faction preceds sudden desolation; then it is high time for the Presbyterians
to repent, weep and lament, for their destruction is at hand: But I come to
his 6. Symtome that preaches ruin to them he styles Independets, Anababtists
etc. which he says is.

6. There reaching after, and meddling with all kind of persons and things,
grasping of all at once, laboring to engrosse all offices, and places of power
into their hands, slighting and abusing all that stand in their way: Will Mr.
Edwards never cease thus subtly to incense the Magistrate against faithful
subjects, endeavoring to make them believe, they would wrest the sword out of
their hands, and set up another King, Oh what a bitter incendiary appears here!
even ready if he can to set the world on fire. But I to hasten, must turn the
glass to himself, and his brethren, that by a direct reflection they may
know themselves in their proper colors. Who meddles with all kind of persons
and things like them? With Kings and Parliaments like them? With Towns,
Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms like them? Who endeavors to get more power into
their hands then they? Who complain^s so much for want of power as they? All
their books, petitions, pamphlets, and Remonstrances, declare them to be the
most impatient people under the sun, till they have a sword put into their
hands, till the Parliament become their servants (I had almost said their
vassals) thy care not who they discontent so they please themselves, whether it
be Parliament, Army, or Kingdoms; M. Edwards has given the world a full
account of such a spirit, in that infectious Machiavilian Epistle to his
Vlcerous Treatise, where he incites them to petition and petition again, never
to lie from the Parliament doors petitioning, what ever comes of it. If this be
a Symtome of destruction I fear it will be woe days with them. But I come to
the 7. Symtome of their ruin which;

M Edwards says is the Sectaries great sins and wickedness etc. That there
are great sins among Sectaries I deny not, but that he has proved all those he
styles Independents Anabaptists etc. to be Heretics, and Schismatiques, I
deny it, and it remains for him to prove, when he knows how, which I am
confident will not be in this age. But he goes on largely to innumerate
several, filthy and abominable practices, and many untruthes, and fathers them
upon the Independents, without any distinction. I shall chiefly speak to two,
the first is blood guiltiness in destroying, the lives of many by dipping,
weakly and ancient persons in Rivers in cold seasons. If Mr. Edwards can prove
what he says, it will save him from being reputed the father of this untruth,
surely if he had known the persons that had killed any, or the persons that
was killed, the world should have heard of it long before now, he wants neither
will nor malice to declare any thing that may render them odious. To prove his
general conclusion he produces a particular of a story of one Oats, that
dipped a young woman who swelled with the water, she received into her, which
water some report was found in her after she was dead, others say Oats
drowned her: O miracle! O wonder! O prodigy! A woman drowned, living twenty
days after she came forth of the water. If M. Edwards says she, came by her
death by it, that is as monstrus to me as the other, she was as well nine
days after she had been in the water, as she had been a great while before.
But he says it is reported, she confessed it to be the cause of her death. O,
what will not envy say, if her clearing the man and the water from being the
cause of her death, can by any Logic or Sophistry be said to accuse them,
then the report is true, otherwise it is but a winter story, and false report,
besides the young woman's own mother came to London to clear the man; for the
truth is, the woman dyed of a Dropsy, the water of which was found within her
after her death* But if any shall conceive this to be water she received into
her when she was in the water, it being twenty days after, I cannot choose,
but judge such a man's intellectualls scarce sound, and whereas he reports the
Justices sent him to the Jail, the truth is (as I am informed) the Justices
would not meddle with it, But the Coroner sent him thither by his own warrant,
if Mr. Edwards says he does not affirm it to be a truth, that either Oats or
the water killed her, which is his best course, since they cannot prove Oats
baptized her, but is only a report and cannot prove such a thing, ever let him
repent of his untruths and possitive affirmations of some to be so killed, for
page 188. of the second part of Gangrena, he boldly charges them with bloody
guiltiness in that particular, let him not vent hearesayes for oracles any
more.

But suppose one that had been dipped should have dyed, soon after in much
less space then twenty days, must the water necessarily have killed her. For
my part I can conceive no reason for it, but let him and his brethren of the
Tribe of Levi look back and consider how many poor Infants without there
consent they have sprinkled being sick and well nigh half dead in peoples
estimation, but would they take it well, if any should endict them for killing
their infants? Surely they would be esteemed ridiculous, yet for such a
practice is there as much ground to frame an ^ndictment, and more then for the
other; Let M. Edwards bring better proofs hereafter for his accusations, or
else let all his friend^ that love him, persuade him to leave glorying in his
shame for the future.

2. The second Article material is [he saith] they use all ways and means in
their power, to engage the two Nat^ons in a War, one against the other; Let
M. Edwards now bring forth his witnesses, and make good his Charge if he know
how: Had he but half so much color to charge the Independants, etc. to be
inc^ndiaries between the two Kingdoms, as I have against him, he had some
proof for what he has written.

H^s second part of his Gangrena tells me, that he has either received
information, that the Scots are resolved to engage themselves against a party
at least of this K^^gdome, and that a considerable one, or he would have it so,
else what means that expression of his page 193. viz. God will honor our
brethren of Scotland, to make them a great means of their failing, [speaking
of the Independants] and they shall fa^l before the Scots, as the Prelatical
and Popish party did, mark, how did they fall before the Scots; they came in a
hostile manner, and was so ^p^sed. See if all you that take notice of his
expressions, cannot easily view his spirit, painted in great red letters; he
says further, page 194 God will make th^^ come (v z.) the Sectaries,
Anabaptists, Independants, that whole Faction, and wo^sh^p before their feet
(viz) the Scots, that is, they shall overc^m, and triumph over these Sectaryes;
a little after in the same page, speaking still of the Scots, he says, thou
shall have victory over thy enemies, and thou shall enrich thy self with their
spoils, he tells the world that the Scots shall be notable Plunderers, and have
the Pillage of the field: will the Scots thank him for this? To all which I
shall only reply thus much; He may be deceived, for God frustrateth the token
of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad, and turns wisemen backward, Esaias
44.25. But he goes on and says, they are guilty of profaneness, loosenes of
life, carnal confidence, and the l^ke; I have already declar d what
profaneness is amongst the Presbyterian-Chur^h members, not withstanding J have
not yet heard of one excommunicated since the Bishops times, but whereas he
blames for carnal confidence, J wonder he blushes not to say so, let me tell
him of their carnal confidence, it is so great, that for ought J can see most
of them have no other; how do they cry out for a sword of Steel to be their
help) they call upon Prisons, Fines, Banishments, Confiscation, of Goods, Fire
and Faggot to help them, or they are undone, when these that he terms
Independants, having Truth on their side, they knowing truth defends them, dare
appear in the midst of Wolves, Lions and Bears, without an arm of flesh;
and the other shrouds themselves under Monarchy, secular Authority, and will go
no further then they will accompany them. If great sins and wickedness is a
forerunner of sudden destruction, it is time for the Presbyterians to look
about them; but I come to his eighth and last symptom.

8. Which he says is, their not being moved to repentance, when God has
testified against them, and spit in their faces, as by laying open their
nakedness, and fully discovering their ways, by some Books written, by
stirring up the City of LONDON against them, but rather blaspheme the more, and
not been humbled.

Has God dealt thus with them, and they made these returns to him? J cannot
believe it, but I see the main thing is, when God has discovered any infirmity
to them, they have not testified their humility and repentance to him and his
brethren; is there no confession but auricular? Is there no humiliation but in
their presence? But this is an usual thing in his dialect to speak what comes
uppermost; I advise him seriously to examine his own heart, and the truth of
what I have declared and manifested, and let him tell me whether their nakedness
is not great, and the covering of it but Fig leaves; it may be he will once
speak truth, and confess their sins and evil ways, appears as Sodom and
Gomorah; but yet he has a salve to apply to his sore, a hole to creep out at,
he may perhaps say, they keep days for fasting and humiliation for their
sinful nakedness, and spiritual and carnal abominations: But if he can thus
blind the eyes of men, yet the Al-seeing God, sees that great hypocrisy that
lurkes under their Fasts, are they the more humble because they abstain from
bread? Do they think that God is well pleased with their fasting, when they
fast for strife and debate, and their hearts and hands are full of blood? Is
this their humiliation, is this Evangellicall Repentance? Is this the Fast that
God has chosen; The proclayming of a Fast will not excuse Ahabs taking away
Naboths Vineyard, and his life too. He says God has discovered the
Independents nakedness, surely, M. Edwards much forgot himself when he wrote
this, God has discovered their Covering rather, has not God made it manifest
in the eyes of all People, that they are clothed with so much honesty,
inocency, integrity, pyety, and courage, in all their undertakings, that it is
impossible for him to uncover them, though he endeavors it all he can.

Surely, Gods dealing has been so plain, that if their eyes were not shut,
they would see God going before them, by a cloud by day, and a pillar by night,
honoring them before the People, giving them favor, notwithstanding his and
his brethrens constant endeavors to destroy them, the more they have
en^eavoured to destroy them, the more they have increased, though they, like
cruel taske-masters have end^avoured to make their work, their bondage and
misery greater, and their strength and help less, yet God has the more
multiplied them, crowning their enterprises with success, and that great and
wonderful. Me thinks M. Edwards should do well seriously to consider, how God
has made his and his bretherens wrath to praise him, and the remainder of
their wrath he has restrained; while they have endeavored to swallow them up
all greedily, with a Petition, a Remonstrance, gangrenous Discourse, and
virulent Sermon, God has turned all into good for them, and they are yet
delivered: And M. Edwards is angry* peevish, and much discontented; thus,
though God has discovered themselves to themselves, and showed them their
vanity in fighting against God, they shut their eyes and will not see: have
they been humbled? have they repented for this evil, of persecuting amd
cursing whom God blesses, even of their fighting against God? Surely no: but
they blaspheme the more, their throats are even scorched with great heat,
thirsting after the blood of the Saints, and the Prophets, but they repent not,
to give God the glory, though the Kingdom is full of darkness, yet they repent
not of their evil deeds. Rev. 16.9, 10, 11. They are envious at the prosperity
of the Righteous, there is not one victory, one mercy, one priveledge bestowed
upon the Independants, but they murmur at it and seek to turn it about to
their destruction, and this is tho fruit of Gods dispensation. Tell me, after
their fastings thus many years, which of them is more meek and humble then
they were before they began? Oh ^ow many of them fast for strife and debate,
and smite with the Fist of wickedness! Thus now, if continuing in sin, not
repentting at the discovery of their nakedness, be a sign of ruin, or if any
other of all his Symptoms, have prophesied desolation, all wise men may see to
what pass they are brought, in what a sad, woeful deplorable, and lamentable
condition the Presbyterians are in.

But least M. Edwards Prophesy should fail him, he has discovered a sound
reserve, when he was in the Front of his Prophesy, not infallibly knowing
whether the words he had spoke would come to pass, he says his Prophecy is
true, if ever God spoke by him; The great question being yet unresolved to me,
and I believe many more, whether evre God spoke by him or not? Thus he thinks
to excuse himself from being esteemed as, and adjudged for,, (whether he has
uttered a truth or a lie) a false Prophet; but I shall follow him a little
further, and consider something of his other Corallaryes.

In the third Corallary, he proceeds thus, Hence then from all these error,
heresies, blasphemies, and practices of the Sectaryes, we may see what a great
evil and sin Separation is, from the communion of the Reformed Churches, and
how highly displeasing to God, for men to make a schism and rent in the
Churches of God, in a time of Reformation, God punishing the schism and
separation of our times, with so many Heresies, Blasphemies, and wicked
practices, etc. It pityes me to see how the man through a mistake, or something
worse, has wound himself into a labyrinth; how he builds upon a rotten and
slippery foundation; he charges the Independents with the guilt of schism,
when it is yet to prove, that thirs is a true Church; could he prove their
National or Parrochiall Churches, Gospel Temples, true spiritual houses,
built upon a right foundation, in a right Gospel form, by a Gospel
Ministry, then had he a ground for his charge, but if he cannot prove them
such, (Jure d vino) by the balance of the Sanctuary, and yet can prove them
true Churches, and the Independents guilty of schism erit mihi magnus Apollo;
If they cannot prove themselves true Churches, will not their leaving of them
be a plain discovery of their true obedience in harkening to the Spirits call,
to come forth of Babylon? If he says, though for the present they are not as
they desire, and as they hope they shall be, but they are now reforming, I
answer, it is true, he speakt much, and writes much, of Reformation of their
Church, and the like; o how it grieves my heart to see his Head full of gray
hairs, and yet he knows it not, they have more need to look to their
foundation, then to talk of Reformation, for if that be not firm, the building
connot be right; the truth is, it is the height, depth, breadth, and length of
folly, to be at much pains and cost, to beautify the out side, when the
inn-side is full of corruption of dead men's bones; this is but healing a wound
at the top, when it is festered and full of corruption within, all the
Reformation of their Church, without a sequestration, without a new ^^undation,
is but as if a man that was sick at heart ready to dye, should send for a
Surgeon to take away some Warts from his hands: or like an unwise man that
lays a foundation of glass, hay or stubble, and erects a very fair specious,
and beautiful palace upon it, which presently falls down for want of a good
foundation, and the builders labor, care and treasure is but lost; such a
foundation every one has just cause to fear theirs is, and like to it will be
their Reformation. How long therefore will it be before Mr. Edwards and his
brethren cease to call evil good and good evil, light darkness and darkness
light; O the consideration of the former Symptoms, as they are faithfully
applied, clear the Independents from the guilt which M. Edwards r pen casts
upon them, and ads a luster to their practice, it commends it, it proclaims
them most happy that are come forth from their confused assemblyes, as being
come into a City of refuge. All the dirt that he throws in the faces of them
whom he accuses of Schism, will never stick, but be like a drop of cold water
powered on a straw, that falls from it without leaving the least impression
behind it: If he and all his Brethren severally or assembled together, should
plot, study, conspire, and endeavor to prove them guilty of Schism from a
true Church, because from them, though they should fill the world with Tractate
after Tractate, Sermon after Sermon Petition after Petition, Gangrena after
Gangrena* and Volume after Volvme, they would never be able to do it; a third,
nay a fourth Gangrena will not effect it.

Thus may those who through the Spirit discern the deep things of God, see
how dangerous it is to abide with them, where there is such a stupidity, such
an unity, and such a harmony, in darkness, that it may be justly suspected
truth is fallen in, or excomunicated out of their Churches.

But he further tells us of many judgments of God against those whom in his
mouth are Schismatiques etc. as separation from God; his words need
explanation, or it may be well judged he is Armin us his friend: But my thinks
he should have been silent in this, that a little before said their Brethren
even their Brethren of Scotland have been afflicted with sword and pestilence,
Thus Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdin.

For fear of coming nigh the Independents, he stumbles so often being out of
his way, that it is to be feared he will fall suddenly. I could tell of many heavy
judgments in their Congregations. A horrible and wicked thing, the Priests
prophecy lies, and the people love to have it so, go into their Congregations,
from person to person, and see whether a worse then Egyptian darkness, has
not covered many nay most of their faces, enquire of them whether they have
left their former Superstition? Have they forgotten their bowing at the Altars,
at the name of Jesus, Their hoods and Surplices, their crosses in their
Christenings, the common prayer and the like? Oh the unbelief! Oh the
stupidity that has seized upon them*

He says Schism fom them has Cains mark upon it, of a Fugitive and a
Vagabond; But I am sure the very character of Ephraim is stamped upon them,
they are full of gray hairs, and know it not, or like Isachar, couch down
under the burden of ignorance, pride and prophannesse, being Brethen nearly
allied to Simeon and Levy. But I pass to his.

4. Coroll. Which is full of high accusations against the Parliament in
general* and many worthy members in particular, for sleeping while the Devil
sowes heresy; surely never was there more subtilty used, to incense an
Honorable Parliament against a loyal and honest people, and the people
against the Parliament then in his books, or else what means his publishing
them to the world, even to their friends and enemies, to be careless dreamers,
sleepers, that while they should like Mastives, have given warning of Thieves
approaching, they have been dumb, drunk, of fast a sleep. Taxing many of
them, for endeavoring all they can to hinder the establishment of Religion,
threatening them with heavy judgments.

Will he and his Brethren never be contented till the Parliament become their
servants, and slaves, to execute their Mandates, to propagate their designs,
their private interests, though the Kingdom perishes? God has hitherto
blessed his people under them; I hope he will do so still, by filling them
with the spirit of wisdom, counsel, understanding, and the fear of the Lord,
that they may judge not according to Mr. Edwards, but according to truth.

He says their Ministers have been asleep, I think now he speaks the truth,
he might have added, and are a sleep still, else they could not choose but see
whence their pedigree is derived, even as far as Rome, where their plots are
laid, even in the botomlesse pit of darkness, and thither they all tend, even
in the end to their own ruin; and tbat their parochial Churches have
lineally descended not from Christ, but from Antichrist, and their maintenance
by Tithes to be an appendix to the Leviticall Priesthood, abolished by the
death of Ghrist.

He says the people have been a sleep too, it seems even so; or why are they
still deluded with their specious pretenses of piety, learning and the like,
when others can discern wolves under sheep clothing? or why do they take
their words for oracl^s, their examples for presidents, their canons and laws
for Scripture? but that their eyes are closed, they are even fast a sleep, but
I proceed to his 5. Corollary.

5. He ascend, to a strong exhortation, to all those that have separated from
them to return to them, with two subtle insinuations.

1. says he, some have been only deceived, but are honest, and for-sook us for
more pure preaching; one while he says Independency is a faction, and makes
them all seem to appear to be Schismatiques, and Heretics, but lo, to
advance his own end* they are honest men, I suppose he remembered his
expressions in the sixth Reason of his book against toleration page 29. where he
says, In many if not in most Towns and Parishes it cannot be helped, but that
there are and will be for many years men of no great popular gifts for
preaching; who also according to their principles, not having been brought up
to it, cannot so comply with their people, Now many that live in these parishes
(seeing they may keep there houses and places of abode) upon the news af a
toleration, will for the benefit of more powerful, practical and zealous
preaching, betake themselves to go to their Churches, and so will fall to their
principles, and so we shall have upon this ground swarms of them.

He confesses, for more pure preaching they forsook them, and yet blushes not
to exhort them to return back again Be these your Gospel exhortations, O it,
much pities me to see how people are deluded by them, have they all been at
Vniversityes? are great scholars, Orthodox* Divines, and good churchmen? now
therefore they think the world must needs wonder after them, and then in the
next place, he insinuates that diverse have been regained, as Johannes Denkins,
Obbo. Philppus etc, us. If this may be a ground to believe more will return to
them, it may more strongly be turned upon them, as aground to believe more will
come from them, that have been long deluded by them, because some eminent among
them, are come from them, and cannot by any means be deluded to return to
them, yea some of the Priests are become obedient to the faith, which is a
wonder; but he inforces his exhortations yet more violently, and says.

1. Stay no longer in the way of Schism, lest God let thee go further, thus
he takes that for granted (viz) that the Independents are in the Schism,
though as it is apparent before, he cannot prove it, so that the strength of
this exhortation falls with his former discourse; But seeing they cannot acquit
themselves from Schism from Christ, from the Gospel and Ordinances of Chtist,
I desire all may see whether they are going, and into what they are falen, and
repent and come forth of Babylon.

2. He says the Independent Church way, is a way of error and confusion that
God never blessed with edification, oneness of heart. The falsehood af this is
truly and often declared by many members of separated Churches, who bless God
for their edification by and in the communion each with other, in the Father
and the Son.

But are they all of one mind amongst them? that's strange if they be, is it not
the combynation of Ephrim and Manassah, to be both against Judah? To Scandalize
Justones?

But what edification is there amongst them? Do they build up one another in
faith, love, me^knesse, gentleness, long-suffering forgiving and forbearing?
If they did, their spirit would not be so violent, they build; its true, but
what? A bloody superstructure, under the name of zeal upon a slippery
foundation.

3. He advances yet further saying, Come out of her, lest you partake of their
sins and plagues. It is concluded by him, that the Independents must be
banished the Christian world (I would he would tell me what he means by it)
The greatest sin, and the greatest plague, that I can or may desire any to come
forth from, is darkness, which darkness walks round about their high places
at noone day, O therefore I say now to them all that shall come forth, come
forth stay no longer hoodwinked, let no man beguile you and deceive you, what
though you loose credit and esteem in the world and the like, care not: God is
all things in one, and one thing in all things, yea he is that one that is all
things; I long till you be made partakers of the glorious light of the Lord
Jesus, that in his light, and not in another you may see light. I now come to
his.

6. And last Coroll. where he tells us there is a great difference between his
Brethren the Scots and the Independents, I could tell of much difference
between them indeed, but I forbear, because I love peace. He says,

the Scots have been trve to their principles, wherein he accuses the
Independents that they have not been true to th^i^s; But let Mr. Edwads tell
me, have not the Independents been true to their principles? Speaks he in
earnest? In what have the Independents been false to their principles in all
the engagements of their dearest lives, their principles being the Kingdoms
peace, knowing that Salus Populi is SUPREMA LEX, they have adhered to them, as
their actions and success declares. They are a people that in despite of envy,
have and will appear, (I am confident) in faithfulness, integrity, courage
and constancy to the Parliament to have exceeded many, but come behind none.

1. he says, the Scots have improved and made use of all victories, successes,
and advantages, for the good of both Kingdoms, but he says (in a passion
surely) that the Independents have not, but have spoken against the Scots: Oh
that he did but remember that saying, Qui alterum incusat furti ipsum se
intueri oportet.

He condemns the Independents for speaking against the Scots; but when will he
condemn himself, and his Brethren for speaking against the Independents* I
could tell what use some have made of their victories when they have had any,
but I had rather heal then make differencs: But have not the Independents made
use of their victories for the good of the State? the good use they have made
of their victories, appears.

1. In that they have improved every victory, not delaying but prosecuting it
to the utmost, they were not like Pompey that knew how only to conquer, but not
to make use of a victory, but as God has made them famous in conquering, so in
pursuing every victory; I might evidence this from the battle at Nasby to this
day, had all done so it had been well; and I am confident many groans, sighs
and tears had been spared.

2. In their mercifulness and kindness to the Country, being victoris in that
they did not pillage, pl^nder and destroy, and would lie no longer in any place
then necessity constrained them, and all because they would not be burdensome.

3. They have made this use of their victories, to say in seeing, and see in
saiing God has gone out before them, crowning their indevours, a^ his
instruments, with continued success, as many victories testify* and in all
these, they have desired God might be gloryfied, whose glory will shine in and
by them, when M. Edwards honor is buried in the grave.

2. He says our Brethren the Scots have borne with much patience, infinite
reproaches in City and in Country: If so, let M Edwards examine the reason, let
him lend an ear as far as Yorkshire; loosers will often times speak: But have
not the Independents (whether his Brethren or not it matters not much)
undergone more reproaches, and with much more patience? Have they not been
called by the Presbyterians* yea by the leading men of them, Villains,
Heretics, Schismatiques, Blasphemers and the like? Have they not cried out to
the Magistrate to suppress them, and in the meanetime I know them whom he
calls Independents, Anabaptists, Heretics and the like, have been praying for
them, and have never yet put up one Petition to the Parliament to ruin them.
But,

3. He says, the Scots have been forward moving for peace and settlement for
the Chuch: Whenzeale and knowledge walk hand in hand, and ttuth leads them in
the straight path of love, we shall be free from jealousies.

Mr. Edwards and his Brethren, have condemned the Independents for being
forward to settle the Church, and commends the Scots for it: I hope guiles,
dawbing and dissembling, will not thus always pass for current coin;
certainly the superscription of dissimulation, is stamped upon these
expressions: But have not the Independents been forward to settle the Church?
certainly then they do ill to rail against them for making too much have.
Have they not been forward for peace? Oh strange! When Envy, Pride, Avarice,
malice and discontent drive men they must need^ run: Why have the Independents
fought thus long made such have, sacrificed so much blood, exposed themselves
to so much hardship, if not for peace? Let the effect of their work, let that
peace the Kingdom enjoyes within little more then twelve months last past,
more then in many years before, speak for them, for I may well hold my peace:
These strange expressions make me much incline to believe one blood runs in his
and his Bretherens veins, that run in theirs who said of the victory at
Marston Moore, berter we had had no victory, then the Independents should have
obtained it, and the glory of it,

Thus having in general examined and impartially reflected his prophecy
wherein is the substance of both books contained, I shall proceed a little
further to examine something more paricularly. As,

1. The story of Captain Hobson, wherein is many charges drawn up against him,
especially concerning his preaching at Newport-Paganell* In the second edition
of the first part of Gangrena Mr. Edwards says;

Paul Hobson Preached in Newport-Paganell and thereabouts, in contempt of the
Ordinance of Parliament made last April, after he was once taken and questioned
for it, and let go, be comes again and does it the second time, in contempt of
the Governor of Newport Paganell that then was, and misbehaved himself. If
one may judge of the rest of his stories by this one passage, I possitively
affirm them all false, for to my own knowledge, after he was questioned for
Preaching, when he returned he did not Preach again, neither did he come back
in contempt of the Governor, but for some arms taken from a Gentleman with
him, and left at Newport, where he stayed but a little while; therefore when Mr.
Edwards affirms this for truth; it is no wonder though he is not ashamed to
call light darkness, and darkness light, he Quotes M. Pryns fresh discovery of
new lights to prove his story, I have searched that, and find no such
expression in it: Surely Mr. Edwards has a quick invention: But it may be he
will think to put off this well enough (as he has done many things else) by
saying that's but circumstantiall, if he says so, let me tell him, he that
fears not to vent Circumstances out of a malicious brain, which are evidently
false, will not stick at telling substantial untruthes: But* for my part what
ever he thinks, I know it to be as substantial an untruth as ever was
declared, and many more know it as well as I: But Mr. Edwards further (speaking
still of Captain Paul Hobson and some with him, says,

Also when apprehended, uttering many bold and seditious speeches, that they
would acquaint their friends in the House of Commons, of their bad usage: That
they were resolved to make this business, the leading case of the Kingdom,
for all the godly party; adding, that if the godly and well affected party, were
thus persecuted, they should be forced to make a worse breach then was yet,
when they had done with the Kings party, and saying when they had made an end
with the Caviliers, they should be forced to raise a new war, to fight with
them Oh, what will not the Father of lies persuade some men to utter, and
others to believe! the whole charge is compbonded of most notorious unjust,
injurious and malicious flanders: But for the Readers further satisfaction* I
shall give the world a full account of the story, not varying a hairs breadth
from the truth.

Captain Hobson, with another Captain going to Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army;
through Newport-Paganell, being in their way, they called there to see some of
their former acquaintance, who earnestly solicited them to stay a while with
them, and desired Captain Hobson to declare what God had caused him to enjoy
of himself (a harmless pactice, not long since commended by the
Presbyterians) which he accordingly did, and that without any molestation, or
tumult; none opposing or questioning him, for what he had done. His exercise
being finished, the Captain peaceably departed out of the Town, and went to
the Army; having dispatched their business there, they returned, and called at
Newport, as they came back; where Captain Hobson was importuned to stay
awhile, and accordingly he did, where some of his friends came to him, and
desired that they might spend some time together, in blessing God for that
great victory God had given to Sir Thomas at Nas^bye: This was on the Saturday,
the next day (being the first day of the week) they were unwilling to meet in
the Town, for fear of disturbance, so they went to Lathbury, where they ^de
both civily and religiously. In the afternoon come some scattering Soldiers
and others, that made a great disturbance, by their fearful swearing, horrid
blasphemies, horrible cursing, holding up a hound by the ears, to the window of
the house, where the people met, and bringing a pack of hounds full cry about
the house, even in so much that Captain Hobson and some others went out to
them, and asked them by what warrant they made that disturbance, they said they
had none, but would go fetch one from the then Governor of Newport, to that
Captain Hobson replied, he would be ready to obey any order from him, and told
him where he should be in the evening, ready to answer any thing that should be
objected against him, the Soldiers were something pacified to hear him say so,
but presently after comes one Ensign Fish with aguard of Musquetieres to
apprehend them all, and carry them to the main Guard, saying the Governor
sent him, the Captain desired to see his warrant, the Ensign told him, it was
not the Governor himself but the Major that sent him. But the Captain and
the rest of the company, went peaceably along with the Guard, to the maine
Guard, being shamefully abused by the way, yet reviling none, when they came to
the main Guard, they abode there peaceably, A while after a Lieutenant came
and told the company they might depart, but the Captain desired a warrant from
the Governer, for their peaceable departure, that they might not be molested by
the rude multitude, but presently came Lieutenant Colonel Cockaine, and Mr.
Ba^ber, one of the Committee, and said they came from the Governor, to
testify they had liberty to depart, saying they were sorry that such Gentlemen
should be so abused, being contrary to the Governors knowledge; so the
prisoners were set at liberty and departed from the maine Guard: But a while
after the Captains being with the Governor, they humbly desired his honor to
certify them whether he gave any warrant for the practice of them that had so
abused them, for if they did it contrary to his knowledge, they desired
Justice, He returned them this answer, he would do them Justice, for he would
send them with his Marshall to Sir Thomas Fairfax, for he told them, they had
run from their Colors, upon that, one of the Captains produced his discharge,
under Sir Thomas his own hand, which though the Governor would not read, yet
Lieutenant Colonll Cockaine did and said it was very authentirk, but Sir Samuel
Luke the Governor said they were lying fellows, and he would not believe them
whatsoever they said, so he sent them to the Army, by the Marshall, Ensign
Fish and two Soldiers, and a friend of theirs, one that had been an eye and
ear witness to the whole proceedings, accompanying them, and when they came
thither, the Noble General examined the business by a Council of War, and
it being faithfully reported to him, He wrote to Sir Samuel Luke to this effect;

SIR,
I Have had the business concerning those Gentlemen you sent to me, (Captain
Hobson and Captain B.) examined, and I find that they have been discharged of
their Commands, at their own importunity; the one by my self, and the other
by the Colonel of that Regiment, the which if it had appeared to you (as they
informed me they desired to do) I conceive it might have prevented any further
trouble, either to you, or to my self in that business.

It seems their usage, by those who come a long withthem, has been very
uncivil, and dishonorable unto Gentlemen, that have carried themselves with
fid lity and courage in this cause, and have been members of this Army, And
truly I can do no less (without encouragement to such ill carriages for the
future, and for the satisfaction of those Gentlemen) then desire you to see
full reparations made them by the Marshall and the Ensign, and that you c s^re
them from their employments.

Your assured friend and Servant, THOMAS FAIRFAX.


Presently after, the Captains returned to Newport again for their arms,
which the Marshall most abusively had taken away (not in contempt, as Master
Edwards would have it) imediatly after their coming, Sir Samuel L^k^ sent for
them, and when they came to him, he told them if he could not have Justice in
the Army he would have it else where; and asked them how long they intended to
stay in Town, they replied, they would be gone presently; he told them he
would send one along with them; they desired to know whether he would send them
as prisoners or not, he said, not as prisoners; so they departed from him to a
private house in Town, where Captain Oxford came to them to know if they were
ready to go, they told him yes, only desired so much liberty as to have the
company of one with them to London, who might if there should be occasion (from
his own knowledge) witness the truth of things; but this being denied them by
the Governor, Captain Hobson said, it seemed strange to him, that their
witnesses might not be permitted to bear them company, saying these doings
might possibly hinder a design that he had undertaken for the good of the
State; But least any should wrest his words, he desired special notice might
be taken of his expressions, which was so done, so Captain Oxford departed,
saying God bless you Gentlemen; and the Captains presently departed; not
staying to Preach, as Mr Edwards untruly, groundlesly, and unjustly affirms;
Neither did they utter any such mutinous, and seditious words, as are charged
upon them. The truth of all which I have declared, is beyond and above all
contradiction.

Their Christian meekness and peaceable carriage, when they were first
disturbed by the rude multitude, like them that compassed Jasons house; by
their horrid, hellish bloody, and insolent, railing, swearing and cursing, with
the abominable practices of them that apprehended them at Lathbury is attested
by Seventeene witnesses, subscribed with their own hands.

The certainty of their peaceable behavior and demeanor at Newport, when,
Captain Oxford was with them, the vnjustnesse, untrunesse, and abominable
falsity, of those mutinous, seditious expressions Registered by Mr. Edwards and
M. Pryn is attested by diverse that were ear witnesses to the whole discourse,
that past between Captain Hobson and Captain Oxford (at that time, when those
expressions were falsely fathered on him) even by just persons, fearing God, and
of good report, and that under their own hands.

To ad one word more, there came nine witnesses to London, to have attested the
truth of the premises, who earnestly desired that they might have been heard,
but through some extraordinary occasion could not.

All those writings subscribed with their own hands, I had published at large,
but that I would not be too tedious: Thus have I impartially related the story.
But lest Mr. Edwards should think to creep out of this hole, by saying Captain
Oxford and Robert Ratford witnessed it before the Parliament, and therefore
should stamp the superscription of truth upon it, because out of the mouth of
those two men, I shall present a brief, yet full and true discovery of what the
witnesses are, and then let all honest men judge, whether they are persons sit
to be believed. First for Captain Oxford, he is,

1. One that is eminently known and noted, for his great ability to invent and
publish untruths, among all that know him, and have the face of honesty; his
ingenuity and audacity, appears in this, more then in any thing else, two or
three untruthes at one time, were most boldly, and maliciously vented by him,
before a cloud of witnesses, in a Captains house at Newport; So that through
his custom in this trade, ^e was at length famous (or rather imfamous) through
his proverb (when a thing sounded void of sense, reason, truth and equity)
This is one of Oxfords lies.

2. He is one that then neither feared God nor man (it would be the joy of my
soul to hear he does now) It is well known, he was not only drinking, but
fighting at a Tavern, after nine a c^ock at night, and was not long since put
out of his Place to the joy of all there, that are faithful friends to the
Kingdom.

3- He is one very malicious, envious, and full of hatred; Who reported
speaking of Captain Hobson, and another, that he could as willingly sheath his
sword in their guts, as in the Cavaliers: Much more could I say, but I forbear.

If any one notwithstanding, thinks I speak as one possessed with prejudice
against him, and so wrong him; Let him go to Newport-Paganell, and inquire of
all the Presbyterians, that have but the face of godliness; And of all the
Independents, whether I have wronged him or no? If Mr. Edwards faith be so
large as to believe him; I am confident he may believe any thing.

2 As for Robert Ratford, that he is a common notorious liar, swearer, curser
and profane fellow, is attested by good hands; The testimony of a woman that
was then, and is for ought I know still a hearer in the Public Assemblies of
England; I will relate, who affirms that this Robert Ratford came to the house
of T. R. cursing, swearing, jeering, scoffing, villifying all that was there
(viz.) in that house, where the Captain with some others were apprehended) like
a mad man, running up and down the house, into the several rooms, pushing
under the beds, yet he was not satisfied, but his rage was so great, that when
all the Soldiers and prisoners were gone, for the space of one hour, he came
back again, and said to her, You base whore, I could find in my heart, to pull
your bastard out of your arms, and kick it to pieces, swearing he could find
in his heart to kick her, which he did, she having her little child sucking at
her breast: All this is attested under her hand: And this that he did and said
at his return, the Lady A. living in the same town, being by, can witness
it. A little while after, the same Robert Ratford, speaking of one that was
with Captain Hobson when they were at Lathbury, said, If ever I catch him
Preaching, this sword of mine shall cut him in pieces, and further said, now
the roundheads shall be hanged without any Law. There is a cloud of witnesses,
to prove the abominable blasphemy and profaneness of him: Let Mr. Edwards
send, write, or go to Newport-Paganell, and fifth out the truth of what I have
said, and print what he hears and no more; and I am confident in this, he and
I shall agree.

There was one other witness that appeared at London against the Captains who
in my hearing, affirmed he never saw men carry themselves more civilly,
discreetly and orderly, in his life, and further affirmed to me in the Country,
that he could witness nothing against them, but blessed God he was with them,
and when some broched most notorious untruths, he himself said they were lies;
this man was a Presbyterian.

Another witness one Andrews of Olney was summoned up to be one of Sir Samuel
Lukes witness, but he having declared he could not speak any thing, but to
clear them, was sent out of the town, without giving any evidence at all This
particular, is worth serious consideration.

Having sufficiently cleared this business; I shall proceed to examine some
particulers in Mr, Josiah Rycrafts letter to Mr. Edwards; And concerning Mr.
Edwards testimony of him.

1. For the letter it self, it says;

1. Mr. Kiffen, and some other, upon their dispute with Dr. Featly, Mr Calamy
and some others, gave out to their members that they had the better, and Mr.
Calamy durst not dispute with them. This Mr. Kiffen denies: Till Mr. Rycraft,
has proved it, it will be judged but his say* so.

2. That Kiffen was left out of that Disputation, which was held, and to be
held with Mr. Calamy. Mr. Rycrafts head is got in, needs must his body follow
after; This is manifestly false: I call upon him to prove it: Mr. Kiffen
desired exemption, but it was not assented to,

3. That Mr. Kiffen was put to do the drudgery, to fetch up members scattered
to and fro the Country. This is allied to the former relations* Mr. Kiffen went
not into the Country at all to fetch up any.

4. He says that not only Kiffen, but others also did the like good service
(as Hobson the Tailor) in their places) This to my knowledge is an untruth. For
Captain Hobson stayed in the Town, to attend the dispute.

5. He says. That one Palmer, should report Physicians left her, as they found
her. An emphaticall untruth, For she used no Physician at all.

6. He tells a story of a woman to be rebaptized: Surely he that durst to
affirm that, durst affirm any thing, even the most horrible untruth in the
world. But will any be so unwise to believe it, because Mr. Edwards says it?
His say-so, is no oracle to me; If it be, it is a false one, that speaks
seldom any thing but is either doubtful, or an indubitable untruth.

That which confi^mes my thoughts, and causes me to judge the man is not only
guilty of those untruths, but that his conscience tells him so; is because in
his late Nosegay, he does not so much as offer to prove one of these
perticulers, which were all denied before, by Mr. John Goodwin, Surely it
argues fainthartednesse, and a bad cause: What that valiant Mr. Rycraft, that
threatens to open the works of darkness, should be found bound in darkness;
bound with such chains, that neither wit, nor honesty can break^! Is it
possible? who would have thought it? Instead of answering them, behold a
man-like spirit! he falls a railing against Mr. Goodwin, in a strange
distempered method; One would have thought the unhappiness of the man in
stumbling so often before, in so few lines, should have made him more cautious
for the time to come, lest in his next writing, he should have quite fallen.
But it is true, Naturam expellas surca tamen usque recurrit.

Convince him of one, he will presently tell two more. Mr. Edwards great boasts
of M. Rycrafts, is come to just nothing.

Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus. But to come to Mr. Edwards testimony
of the man to be Religious and cordially affected to the Pa^liament. If I knew
what Mr. Edwards meant by Religion, I should be able to say the more: But if he
be Religious, light and love must declare it.

But how that light or love may be seen in his spirit, that wrote that false,
malicious dark Letter, I cannot possibly see; its true (as I hear) the man
has some formality, a certain kind of profession (which is but very little)
so has the Kingdom, but they are never the more Christians for that.
Profession is not possession, formality is not Religion. H^ken to the testimony
of Saint James, chap. 1. ver. 26. If any man among you seem to be religious,
and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart; this man's Religion is
in vain. It has been Mr. Josiah Ricrafts unhappiness in a superlative
degree, to have an unbridled tongue, and to be trading in the works of
darkness. He theatens a discovery of more deeds of darkness; I confess that
he may soon do, for yet I never saw any thing come under his hand, but had
the impression of darkness upon it; and if he goes on in this ill course, the
further the worse.

As for his cordial affection to the Parliament, when he has disproved the
Letter printed in Mr. Goodwins books, he may probably appear so. But if any man
thinks he has, in his Nosegay, I assure them, I can smell no such savor in
it. To speak the best of his Nosegay, its but a vain glorious gloss put upon
a foul matter, but a sheeps skin drawn upon a Wolves back. But to discover
it is no other, let all men consider with me a little what his Nosegay says.
Speaking of Mr. John Goodwin, he says.

1. The man sets his w t; on the tenter-hookes, how to be spatter Mr. Edwards
or my self, with his tainted lies, And to that end has got a letter written
to him, by an Anabaptisticall Apprentice. Had Mr. Rycraft walked by the candle
of truth when he wrote this, he had never thus desperately stumbled; certainly
this beginning, presages a bad cause, and as little strength; The thing he
speaks is diametrically opposite to truth. The Letter was written to Mr.
Kiffen, not to Mr. Goodwin, except Mr. Rycraft or Mr. Edwards, have so much
Sophistry as to prove Mr. Kiffen to be Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Rycrafts story will
fall for want of of a prop. Neither did Mr. Goodwin get it written, but it came
accidentally to him.

2. He says (speaking of the Author of the Letter to Mr. Kiffen) he professes
in the said Letter, to have more then ordinary acquaintance with me, which is
well known to be as false as the Author of falsehood can invent. To whom is it
well known that he has not more then ordinary acquaintance with him? Is it to
them in the same Family? Do they know it is false? They know no such thing;
Who are the persons that know it so well, I cannot imagine. Is it possible that
he could live nigh four years together in one family with him, and not have
more then ordinary acquaintance with him? Believe it who can; I have not faith
to do i^.

3. He says, I will not deny, but that many times he has intruded himself
into my company, my self knowing well enough, he was an abusive fellow. It is
no great matter to be called abusive fellow, by him that cares not who he
abuses, neither fears whom he slanders. But I am sorry to see so much pride,
in so few expressions.

4. He further proceeds to manifest his insolency, and arrogance, as if he
scorned any should exceed or equalize him, saying;

I have declared by my carriage, that I cared not for his company. Was this
carriage, this declaration, suitable to a Gospel Spirit, let wise men judge.
Haman scorned a poor Mordecay, by his lofty proud carriage; Yet was Mordecay
not the worse, nor Haman the better.

5. He goes on saying, He says in the said lying Letter, that I concealed a
Colonel that came from the Kings Army, which Colonel would have taken away the
life of one Mr. Roberts, a worthy Minister, and says if Mr. Roberts had known
where he had been, he would endeavored the hanging of him.

Is not this true? No, says Mr. Rycraft, he asked Mr. Roberts, whether he knew
of any such Colonel, who answered him he knew no such, neither did he know
what the fellow means by naming such a man as he never knew nor saw, Surely
Mr. Rycraft knew not what he wrote, when he wrote this. ask Mr. Rycraft whether
he did not use to call him Colonel? Whether he did not receive the Kings P
ct^re from him, and said it would secure him when the King came to London. But
the man thinks to evade it; for he says he knew no such man. Though he knew
not such a man as Colonel, yet he called him so. But the truth is (as I am
credibly informed) he is a Lieutenant Colonel, his name is Anthony Diet: Can
he deny this? Is he not his cozen? Surely it is true, it will be proved to his
face. And for Mr. Roberts his testimony; such equivocation will not serve him,
he knew him by the name of Lieutenant Colonel Anthony Diet at Brummingham. And
can he deny but that this Anthony Diet sought his life? Surely not without
blushing. This vapouring will not excuse Mr. Rycraft. Neither can Mr. Rycrafts
letter to Mr. Edwards, be any plea for him. None accused Mr. Roberts, of
knowing he was in Town. And let Mr. Roberts if he can, deny that ^e would have
endeavored the hanging of him? But to proceed, Mr. Rycraft advances yet
further saying.

6. And for his third lie, where he says. I sent money to one, to go to
Oxford, the said party nominated came lately to* London, who affirmed to the
lyeing Author his face, that I never lent him money for such end, or at any
such time. I am sorry to see men's writings composed with such un-tempred
mortar. Let Mr. Rycraft deny if he can, that he knew he intended to go to
Oxford, and that he lent him money, and desired to be remembered to some in
Oxford. These things considered, see whether it amounts not to as much as was
written of him. As for the other things he charge the Author of that Letter,
with as the distemper of his head, I leave that and his own distemper of head,
heart and hand, to wise men that know them both, to judge of.

And for the particular abuses he says was offered to him, and proved by oath,
he had done well to have printed them, but it may be the man was ashamed, The
truth is, I have the Articles that he was accused of by Mr. Rycraft, One, is
for kicking a stool from under him, as he sat by the fire, the other for
molesting him when he was cutting his beard, to the indangering his throat,
which was never proved, but denied to his face: And others are so frivolous,
and so old. that they are not worth the recital. As for his two warrants they
add just as much to his fidelity, as the picture before his book, to his piety.

Thus may all men see what Mr Rycraft is, how religious, how well-affected to
the Parliament; what credit may be given to his testimony and to his stories? I
shall only say thus much more of him. His malice against those he calls
Independents (if there were no more) might be a sufficient ground to suspect
all the accusations he brings against them: He blushes not to say he hates the
Independents, worse then he hates toades, and values them no more, then the
dirt under his feet. Rogue and Rascal, Brazen-face, and Billings-gate slut,
being as good languge as he can afford them.

Thus having impartially declared (being constrained there to) what some of the
witnesses are of Mr. Edwards stories (not questioning but that others can do
as much of many others) I shall consider some few of his expressions, and see
whether these his witnesses, and his expressions run parrallell. For he fearing
his witnesses might be suspected, if not himself, to have given in false
evidence, thinks to remove all cause of jealousies; and to prove the truth of
all that is contained in his Gangrena, page 5. 6, by saying as follows.

For diverse of the errors and practices related, they are notoriously known
to thousands, I demand of Mr. Edwards whether thousands, nay tens, nay any one
man can witness the accusations against Captain Hobson, and the truth of
Josiah Rycrafts Letter?

2. He says, many errors and blasphemies contained in his books, have been
complained off, by sufficient persons to the Parliament, and Committees of
Parliament. I desire him to tell me whether or no, he thinks those witnesses I
have examined, sufficient persons to be credited, and whether he means not by
sufficient persons, the aforesaid Captain Oxford and Robert Ratford, that
complained against Captain Hobson, for the unjust things laid to his charge, or
who else?

3. He affirms* some of the errors, blasphemies are proved in the narration
of the stories I desire to know what story has proved the truth of those
particulers I have examined.

4. He says, He himself and some other persons, of good note and quality,
have been eye and ear witnesses of the errors, blasphemies, and practices he
relates. I entreat him to declare to all the world, whether he, or any person
of good quality, was an ear witness to what Captain Hobson is charged of, and
whether any of these good persons saw the woman Mr. Rycraft tells a tale of, and
if they did, let them name the persons, and conceal them no longer.

5. He says, others of these errors and opinions, are in diverse printed
books either of the Sectaries themselves, or of persons of note for their
learning and piety. I desire to know what books of the Sectaries or others
upon their own certain knowledge, say that either Captain Hobson, or his
confederates, boasted of working miracles, and casting devils out of men
possessed with them.

6. He proceeds saying, For any of the errors, balsphemies, put in this
following Catalogue, which have come to my knowledge, by none of the former
five ways above specified (which yet are not many) I have had the relation of
them from godly Ministers, and understanding conscientious Christians, with
many circumstances of names, places, conditions, time and confident
observations of the certainty of them, and so delivered as there can be no
reason in the world to think they should be false, but much every way to
believe them true. And he further declares ( that the reader may the more
build upon the truth of all things delivered in this book. (to his shame) how
he went and sent, and enquired by himself and others, prompting them lessons
beforehand, that they might get w them ithout book etc. Now I desire ^he
solution of these questions.

1. Whether or no, the story of Captain Hobson, before related; and Mr. Rycrafts
stories came to him any of these ways? And if of any, then of which? If none
of these ways, as I am confident they did not. Then secondly.

2. Whether Mr. Edwards is not guilty of apparent false-hood in saying all his
relations came thus to him, when I have discovered two or three that did not?
And,

3. Whether it may not easily be suspected Mr. Edwards came as ill by many of
the other stories, as these. And whether these may not be a president to judge
of the rest?

4. Whether Mr. Edwards, has not dealt very uncharitably (to say no worse of
it) in taking such a Machivillian course, to screw out the failings of his
Brethren, and to put them to sale.

5. If one should take the same course as he has done, whether he might not
find far greater, and more abominations among the Presbyterans, then is
contained in his Gangrena.

6. Thus having spoken to the most material substantial things in his books
and hoping I have sufficiently cleared the guitlesse; I shall a little reason
with Mr; Edwards, and speak mildly to him.

Master Edwards, how long will you give up your self to scandalize the Saints,
and to fight against the members of Christ? When will you cease to reprove
passion with passion? Do you think the Lord Christ takes it well at your
hands, that you should slander just ones, that you should print the testimonies
of vain men against the Saints of the most high God, and so boldly stamp the
superscription of truth, upon their forged relations? Did not you think it
unjust, that the testimony of a profane lying Apparator should be received
against you, and yet will you receive the testimony of as bad against your
Brethren? When will you learn to do as you would be done by? How long will
you dote on your p ivate interest? Will you never cease the adventuring the
ruin of the whole, to set up your self? will nothing but Naboths Vinyard, his
inheritance and life satisfy you? When will you cease to incense the
Magistrate against a faithful people? Think not on Sacrifice, while you
neglect Mercy. Good Sir. what is the reason you are so violent against those
you call Independents? are you a fraid you shall loose your credit, livings,
Tithes, Offerings, honor and respect? If these come falsely to you, they are
better lost then found. When will you be contented that others shall enjoy the
same liberty as your self? The Parliament has established Presbytery by an
Ordinance, you like it not, would you be contented to be forced to it? Do you
not expect a Toleration your self? And shall not your Brethen be suffered as
well as you? When will you cease to cry up the Magistrates power in Religion,
so long as you think they will establish your desires no longer? Why do some
of your Brethren, strict Presbyterians, say the Parliament is a swarm of
Sectaries, and not the Parliament that was first chosen? Why do any of you
give out such threatening speeches what the Common Council will do before
long? When will you be contented with the assistance of the truth of the most
high to declare it self by? Is there never a wise man among you? never a good
Soldier that can endure hardness, that can fight the good fight of faith,
which is only able to root out error, even by the sword of the Spirit. I
desire you may see, you are not at Dothan, but at Samariah. When will you cease
Nero like to kindle a fire in the Kingdom, and say the Independents have done
it? when will you cease like Ahab, to say Elijah is the troubler of Israel,
when it is your self and your Fathers house.

All your bitter threats, accusations, slanders, imprecations, nicknames,
unjust dealing, Machivillian plotting, moves me not: I desire your happiness;
and that you may acknowledge your evil doing, and be ashamed, and do no more
so wickedly. I desi e with all my heart, that you may speedily unwrite that
which you have either falsely or maliciously written in your books, and write
so no more, then am I persuaded your volumnes will be much less, a great deal
cheaper and abundance better,

Yo tell us your books will be believed in after ages; If you prevail according
to your prophecy, it is probable. So would Oxford Au^ cusses had the Kings
prevailed but they will be never the t^er, because believed by your own party.
That you may testify unto all the world your desi es that nothing but truth
may be credited. Bind up this with all the other answers to your books, that
you intend to record for posterity. Triumph not because al your stories be not
suddenly answered: Consider you have agents al over the Kingdom, many may not
hear of your stories, others may not have leisure at present; others think it
not worth the while, being persuaded you are resolved to have the last word,
right or wrong, and so they envy you it not. What I have written, is in
vindication of truth, in discovery of errors, of your partiallity which if you
shall see, and acknowledge, that God may be gloryfied, I have gained my end.

You that are the freeborn People of England, take heed whom ye believe, and
what you believe, you see your Ministers themselves are subject to errors,
listen not to them, neither to op^ose the Parliament, or those that God has
made famous; in suffering so much opposition and contradiction for you, lest
you bring your selves into that lamentable slavery, as you had like to have
done, by harkening to the Bishops: Sacrifice not your liberties, lively-hoods,
servants and Brethen, which have sacrificed their estates and blood for you,
upon the lust, fury, pride, avarice, or ambition of any whatsoever.

You that are called to be Saints, be not dismayed nor discouraged, think it
not strange to be reviled slandered and persecuted, for this has been the
portion of the Saints in all ages: Elijah was slandered by Ahab, to be the
troubler of Israel. Amos by Amaziah. The Priest of Bethel was accused for
conspiring against the King of Israel, Amos 7.10. Thus did Haman slander the
Jews, saying they did not observe the Kings Laws. Hester 3.8. Thus did false
witnesses rise up against David, laying things to his charge that he knew not
of. Psalm, 27, 12. Psalm, 35.11. Thus was two men, sons of Belial, set before
honest Naboth, ^eca^se he would not part with his birthright, to bear false
witness against him, s^ying thou did blaspheme God and the King. Thus was
Stephen by suborned men, charged and accused falsely, and suffered Martyrdom.
Thus were the Apostles called seducers, heretics, deceivers, enemies to
Caesar and the like. Oh be not you troubled, for your Lord and Master the great
Lord Jesus, s^ffered the contradicti n of sinners; The Jews accused him
falsely, and put him to death, through the false suggestion, and slanderous
accusation of Caiaphas the high Priest, for blasphemy. Follow your Master,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that
dispighfully use you, and persecute you; Render not Jeere for Jeere, taunt for
taunt, answer not folly with folly, passion with p ssion; But as much as in you
lies, live peaceably with all men* and the God of Peace shall be with you, and
Satan the Prince of darkness, shall shortly be trampled under your feet And the
Lord Jesus shall be advanced, and you though despised here, shall at his
coming, apeare with him in glory.

FINIS.

