A DISCOVERY of the false Grounds the Bavarian party have laid, to settle
their own Faction, and shake the Peace of the EMPIRE.

Considered, In the Case of the Deteinure of the Prince Elector PALATINE his
Dignities and Dominions.

With a Discourse upon the Interest of ENGLAND in that Cause.

By CALYBUTE DOWNING, LL.D. Pastor of Hackney.

Seen, and Allowed.

LONDON, Printed by RIC. HEARN, and are to be sold by Thomas Bates, at his shop
in the Old Bailey. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE, THE KNIGHTS, CITISENS, AND BVRGESSES, NOW ASSEMBLED IN THE
HOUSE OF COMMONS.

The Preface.
WEre it not that those braving Bavarians and Imperial Instruments, who
pretend piety, justice, and devotion in all their actions, are still most
peremptory and insolent, in making Manifestors to the Christian world, of the
legality and equity of their course continued against the Prince Elector
Palatine; we would never have dared to touch so tender and shy a subject: only
have left it to the sword to decide. But seeing this novel College and
Council, mixed of Jesuits, de facto, and in voto, have given themselves
commission, Ex Officio, unheard to determine what may and must ^ed^ne In
ordine, to the practical principles of their modern Monkery: The desire that
we have to see a safe peace settled in Christendom, has moved so far, that
we cannot contentedly sit still in silence; for if out of a suffering modesty
may be given to active ambition, to surprise and supplant, and that these
pernicious Politiques may still advance and prosper in their way, it will be
impossible, that the state of the Western World should ever draw near to any
degree of Union, though it be but in a mutual toleration. They have not Beati
Pacifici in all their Regular Liturgy, but are most bitter against all
negotiations for moderation. And therefore wise and respective men and States,
who ordinarily fear and fly practique questions, and public quarrels, have
reason to come on one step out of their reservednesse, and declare their
opinions; otherwise they may get a knock, as standers by in neutrality; when as
if they would but speak out, they might discover more than the gamesters, and
show how the Check was given. These absolute enemies of states and Churches,
who neither regard Prince nor people, but in relation to their own interests,
will I hope before long be discovered, and so discarded, as the common Enemies
of the peace, liberties, and laws of Nations.

A DISCOVERY OF the false grounds the BAVARIAN Party have laid, to settle
their own Faction, and shake the peace of the EMPIRE.
Considered in the Case of the detainure of the Prince Elector Palatine his
Dignity and Dominions.
THough I should be loath to do these Ministers of Usurpation so much wrong, as
to disable or disparage them in their reputation for action, by not co^ceiving
that they have bin the Projectors of all the perfidious and cruel practices,
that have bin exercised for these last twenty years upon Germany: yet I will
hold off from relating any of them. For if I should resolve to represent them
in their true Catholic colors, I could not tell what Ink to use, whether
black, or red; being I should never get black enough, though made of the
bitterest galls, to shadow out the dismal darkness of their designs; and if
I should take red, to express the bloudinesse of so long lasting a massacre,
they may conceit that I applaud the action: for they use so to register
victorious, successeful villainies, with a Rubricke in their new Gregorian
Calendar. I omit them therefore, and choose to fall upon a survey, of the false
foundations which they have laid, destructive to the good of Christendom.

These most active Engineers have concluded it as a maine masterpiece of their
groundwork, for their fast footing in the Empire, to be able still to hold out
the Prince Elector Palatine, having the casting voice in all causes, both of
liberty and Religion: having falsely procured, that their devoted Protector, the
Bavarian, may for a turn at least, be possessed of his Royal rights, that so
they being distributed to a dependant for the present, the House of Austria may
with more ease and speed, appropriate and incorporate them into their own
inheritance; and I know not but these Projectors may delude the old Duke their
new Master, and only shuffle with him, upon subtle, yet shallow principles,
of his succeeding security, using him as a divertive fontinel, to turn a humor,
though as yet it be an hard matter to distinguish the designs of the
Spaniards, Imperialists and Bavarians; who seem but Diversi, though they be
Divisi. Now to make this ground good, they have cast about to devise and
divulge, not the causes, but some colors for detaining the Palatinate, and the
Electorall dignity appendant to it, as they have ptetended arguments to raise a
question, to make it a controversy, and then by sequestration got present
possession, and so by time and reputation of prospering, raise a title.

But they dare not proclaim, nor profess the true reasons, which are
Ambition, and Usurpation, to the suppressing of liberties and Religion:
therefore they well and wisely, to divert and distract, ventured to vent and
publish some accidental occurrences which fell in with the course of affairs,
grounding all upon the events of their prevailings, and upon such slender
proposals seem to plead plausibly; when as if they would deal ingeniously,
and take a true view of the entire business, they are too able (not to stand
upon their honesty) to be deluded by any such overtures. For they know full
well, that the original of the War in Bohemia, about the translation,
transposition, and elective tradition of that Crown, was set on foot by the
Emperors practice, and party, not by the Princes. But I will not drive the
cause so high, as to discuss or discover the spring of that fearful flood,
neither will I mention the right of the Nobility and Commons of Bohemia in
electing; but I will (if it be but to please and pacify them) suppose all true,
which they know to be most falsely suggested, and consider whether the
practical deductions, which they have drawn from such principles, be clear,
concluding, and of fundamental force, to detain or discontinue the Prince
Elector Palatine from his undoubted roialties and dominions. Let it go then
for granted, that all Prince Frederick did in the business of Bohemia, Les
Conditions de la Restitut. entiere du Palate. and Electorat.
is no further right, than the Jesuits will have it so; yet it will not
fairly follow, upon free consequent, that all which the Emperor has been
pleased to make him suffer, as correspondent to his carriage, is so far from
wrong, as they would make it; neither do I believe that the Emperor himself
did so conceive it; but he was cast upon that course by the current necessity
and excursion of the War. And therefore what stands now determined, grounded
merely upon point of fact, which was full of scruple, scandal, and casual,
not deliberatly intended, can have no strength of right, though since, more
reasons are invented for the total justification and ratification of the
proceedings, than did at first persuade the practice, or can arise from the
natural naked interpretation of the action. For though the Jesuits answers and
counsels are like the Oracles, not of Delos, but of Delphos, all for their own
advantage; yet the actions of Emperors, (especially in Arms) must not be like
a Delphique sword, to cut off on all sides, as occasion shall serve, both in
retraits, truces, and times of treaty: and though the Imperial Majesty (as
powerful Princes use to do, whose Confessors have no certain rule of
conscience) raised and enlarged his pretensions, according to the prosperity of
his proceedings; invading, possessing, deposing, and disposing, of the
undoubted dominions of the Prince, translating his Electorall Dignity, upon a
contempt, after a sentence of Proscription, grounding as many Titles as they
could devise, to that which they knew they had never a good one: non obstante
all this, and much more, which passed in solemn significant forms and
ceremonies, of personal banishment, dismembring his Dominions, triumphant
Confirmations, and Congratulations, of the Duke of Bavaria, his personal
Administratorship, of the Dignity Electorall: The present Prince Charles has a
true title of right, to require the restitution, the investiture, and actual
possession of all those Dominions and Dignities Electorall, in an individual,
sole, and supreme way.

Now let us see what the Jesuits can say, for the present detaining of these
Rights; which they must ground upon the Emperors right to dispose of them: and
all that we can suppose in that way may be reduced to right of Arms, and right
of Forfeiture. But neither of these are so clear, or of such validity, as to
exclude the House of Palatine, or to prejudice the present prince. To consider
first, the title from his Arms, they were offensive, aggressive, and by way of
revenge: Now to make that Title hold on perpetually, to prejudice a Royal
Family, it must be supposed first, that the Emperor had injury offered him by
Prince Frederick. Secondly, That the damage is not yet satisfied. Thirdly,
That the possession by Arms was solemnly obtained according to the right of
War. None of which particulars are so clear, as they ought to be in so
capital a cause.

First it may be averred, and not without good ground, that the Emperor was
not directly injured, being the contention was not betwixt them as he was
Emperor, but as one of the Archdukes of Austria, about the Crown of Bohemia, a
feud of the Empire, then depending undecided: in which cause, if Ferdinand had
then been Emperor (as he was not) and rei, vel personae, non existentis, nulla
sunt nomina qualitatis vel operationis, he might have bin supreme, though not
sole Judge, if the cause had not been his own. But if the prince did after in
the course of the war, offer any indignity to his Imperial Majesty, (as they
urge it) then I desire to know upon what consideration the Emperor took up
arms against the Prince Elector, to the possessing of the Palatinate, after
that Frederick had in a public way renounced his right in Bohemia; whether as
against a foreign enemy, or against a domestique subject: none will say against
a Forreiner; then as against a subject, who was conceived a rebel and a
Traitor; otherwise no war, but praedatory proceedings; and he could not
lawfully make an offensive war upon him: for an Elector that has royal
Dominions in a successive way, is not such a simple subject, that he can be a
Rebel or a Traitor to the Emperor of Germany, with any prejudice to his
princely Family; and if he be such an ordinary subject, then it is as to the
ancient Kings of Alemany, or to the now Roman Emperor; (which distinction is
admitted by many able Historians and Civilians.) Pancerolus, Com. Occident.
Imper. cap. 90.
Now such subjection cannot be pleaded for as due to the Roman Emperor, for
those absolute principalities (especially the Palatinate) are more ancient by
hundreds of years than the Empire in great Germany: Et Princeps non potest
novo Imperio subjici, Grotius Apologet. ca. 9.
nisi eipso consentiente: without they were such new titular Lords of Ferdinand
the seconds, who created more in these late twenty years, than were made in
all the time betwixt him and Charles the Great. Bullatos Codicallares,
diplomatatios, titulu* sed non vitulum habent, eques sine equo.
Sure 'twas upon design, to dash, disparage, and indistinguish the old
Dignities. And before they could not be subject; for the Roman Empire did never
reach over the Reine, into the largeness of Oriental Germany; as we know
Charles the Great was very careful to limit the bounds of his new acquired
Roman Empire, Schafnaburg. 209.
that his Francks in great Germany might still be free, Molin. de Consuet.
Paris. number 8.
Jure Francorum, seu lege Salica. And sure the subjection that they owe as to
the Kings of Almany, is limited, too short and too weak to uphold the claim
the Jesuits clamor for; being every Prince was anciently most absolute in
their own dominions: Wesenber. Cons. 27. number. 29.
Quemlibet in suo territorio, perhiberi Imperatorem; and nil nisi ambitu
minoris circuli, ab Imperatore differ. So that all that we may grant, without
prejudice to these Royal Rights, is, Decisio Pedemont. 29. number. 4.
That they owe the Emperor, not simple subjection, but respective homage;
Officeum pactum, non obsequium: and so are supreme in their own territories;
especially seeing the secular ^lectors are certain successors, and the
Emperor but elective Administrator, in relation to the Feuds of the Empire,
though most absolute as Archduke of Austria.

Even as the ancient lay-Peers of France were not simply subject to so absolute
a Monarch as the most Christian King: Lupan. de Magistrate. Gall, lib. 1.
for the Kings of England, the Dukes of Burgondy, and the Earls of Flanders,
acknowledged no such sovereignty. Sure if they had been more de jure, under the
Emperor, Menoch. consil. 92. number. 32.
Charles the fifth would never de facto have professed, That in other of his
Kingdoms he ruled over servants and subjects, but in Germany over Kings. Which
was suitable to the school divinity of those days (as that cautious Cardinal in
the case) Principes Imperii sunt perfect domini, Cajet. in secunda secundae
quest. 40. art. 1.
licet habent superiorem Imperatorem, non simpliciter, sed secundum quid. And
indeed their holding their rights and royalties of the Empire, does not deny
nor diminish the independent supremacy of their authority (as judicious
Grotius) Obligatio feudalis (maxim apud Germanos) non demit jussummi Imperii,
as it is notoriously known, that they have plentitude of power to make, alter,
repeal laws, and change the forms of judicature in their own Dominions,
without the knowledge of the Emperor, wage and proclaim war and peace in their
own names and power; all which appears by such authentic antiquity, both in
laws and proceedings, that the Archbishop of Mentz, in Council at Frank ford
affirmed, That the government of Germany was Aristocraticall; Clapmarius. de
Arcanis Reipub. lib. 5. ca. 20.
giving the Emperor only the pre-eminence to be President in the extraordinary
Imperial Assemblies. So that if the power and privileges of Bulla aurea,
morgaged in the hands of the Electors, Sleid, in fine Philip. Com. inej pa. 200.
were duly observed as they would, Si non post dira, and diuturna bella, duris,
and extortis pactienibus, adempta sint: then I conceive that the Prince
Elector, a Comes Palatinus, as Major domus Imperialis, as Provisor,
Supplimentum ^bbatis Vrspurgens. page 274. Curacius partit on li. 1. tit. 32
and Vicarius Imperii, qui cognitionem habet in gravatoriis, contraipsum
Imperatorem, and sententia ejus Imperialis; is more absolute, than to be
criminally condemned by the Emperor, especially for business that passed and
had the rise in an Inter-Regnum. And this that we plead for is not without
president, in the case of absolute Princes, possessed of Feuds, and condemned
as Delinquents. Robert King of Naples was cleared from treason against the
Emperor, Capycius novis decisionibus Neapol. 142.
Quia non subditus erat ratione originis, sed solum ratione Feudi. And if this
would have held, the French kings had as good ground to take up arms against
the Kings of England, as their rebels, if they offended them, during the time
they held the Dukedomes of Aquitaine and Normandy, as a Feudall Inheritance. Or
the Emperor may as well war upon the French King as a Rebel, being his
Delphinate is a feud of the Empire. So in like manner he may come upon the
Kings of Poland and Denmark; or upon his grand Cousin of Spain (if he dare)
for Millain, and other of his Dominions, held as he is a Feudatary to the
Empire. But sure they may be secured at an easy rate: as Charles the fourth,
for one dinner near Avygnion, Avent. Anal. lib. 7.
gave up the acknowledgement due Arelatense regno, as Aventine the Bavarian
relates it. Therefore this ground of war was doubtful, if not unlawful, being
unusual, antiquated, and suppressed, by the consent of the Nations of
Christian Europe.

Secondly, It is concluded by wise, moderate, and indifferent States, That
satisfaction for the supposed injury has been taken to the full, before this
time; and the revenge and reparation of a real wrong ought not to be driven
to the utter ruin, especially of otherwise well deserving subjects, or weak
neighbors: lest it truly seem only a color, to exercise cruelty, tyranny,
avarice, and ambition As serious Seneca; Sen. de Clement. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Crudeles illos ego vocabo, qui puniendi causam habent, modum non habent Enough
sure it is conceived by all the world, except the Iesuited party, that Bohemia
is fully possessed, all the parts of the Palatinate so long detained, as a
desperate Depositum, under various colors, of sequestration, and morgage to
the Emperors use, for the payment of the Duke of Bavaria, the King of Spain,
and the Archduke of Austria, as Auxiliaries, in the execution of the sentence
against Prince Frederick, with the dignity Electorall administered by the
Emperors absolute order; not to mention the great confiscations. So as I
believe, some of the Jesuits so pity the satisfaction that has bin taken
(especially considering the Royal Mothers depriving of her Iointure) that if
the Prince will but change his faith, these will soon help him to change his
fortune. And what ever is now pretended and practiced, the Emperor could not
intend to continue the possesssion, or the disposure of the dignity Electorall,
any longer than the Prince Elector Palatine should be at age to receive them:
as is plain, not only in the second condition of restitution, tendered by his
Imperial Majesty to the king of Great Britain; but also by the limited
investiture, Les Conditions de la Restitution entiere du Palatinat. and del
Electorat. 1623. Aurea Bulla apud Schafnaburg. 279.
that Bavaria seemed contented to take it withal, which was according to the
authentic ordinances of the Empire. For Electoris secularis jus, vox, and
potestas Electionis, ad haeredes masculos pertinent, cum ad annos octodecim
venerint. So that this second ground is no firm foundation for the continuing
of the present possession and proceedings.

Thirdly, we may as easily discover that the line in which those Armies marched
and mastered, was not direct and legal, according to the solemn right of
waging war: this fact might with more ease and certainty be considered of,
than the point of right that entered it; even as there is more confidence in
judging of Mathematical engines, than of moral actions. Many manifest
passages, of praedatory and perfidious ambition, were apparent in the manner
and time of avancing those Armies toward the Palatinate, which well weighed,
may amount to a nullitie of the right pretended from their proceedings. For
what solemn justifiable war was ever yet made upon a neighbor, at least in
a vindictive way, without a legation to treat of injuries; and then an
indiction, and due denuntiation or diffidation, (as Baldus.) But this invasion
was, while a treaty was tendered, and accepted from the King of Great Britain,
in full, significant, and extraordinary ways of Embassy; and ye^ in the
interim, the Countries surprised, and possessed, in abuse of Treaty, before the
face, and against the protestations of the present Ambassador, and so by the
Law of Nations is to be restored in integrum. As for indiction, it may be the
Jesuits, who (innovate in all things) have taken to themselves a Faecialique
faculty, either to antiquate, or dispense with it; or it may be have passed an
Inquisition upon Tullus Martial Laws, Tullus, disciplinam omnem militarem
condidit. Flor. hist. l. 1. cap. 3.
especially meeting with them in Tullies Latin, which is Language too plain
for such foul carriages to brook: viz. Belli jure, nullum bellum justum est,
nisi quod rebus repetitis geratur, Cicer. de offic. lib. 1.
and denunciatum, and indictum.

But sure these confident aequivocal creatures, are far fitter to be bold
Heralds to proclaim arms, or insinuating explorators of Councels, Lonigus
Aphor. 14.
than faithful Faeciales, to judge and determine of causes, and just
proceedings of war: And so I submit these supposed grounds to their judgment,
who choose to measure titles by the line of equity, and not by the laist of
ambition.

It remains then in the next place, that we consider the Emperors power and
right, to dispose of the Palatinate, and the dignity Electorall, by virtue of
forfeiture and seizure, as escheated and confiscate to his Imperial Crown. But
before I go any farther, I must crave pardon (by these Ecclesiasticke Statists
good leave) to believe, That though the Prince Elector Palatine may for a time
be delayed, upon this title of proscription; yet the president is so unpleasing
and pernicious to the Princes of Germany and Italy, and so strangely disguised,
that it will never be digested as a Law, though it pass the Inquisition: for
if there were such a way opened, to ambitious Pretenders, they would with
facility fashion and frame new titles, according to their turns. How easy a
matter were it for the Emperor, or any such Potentate, to pick a Turkish
quarrel with a Feudatary, and then by provoking, dishonorable, destructive,
demands, proceed plausibly to the possessing of their Dominions? So that we
must conceive, that these Dominationum provisores, these Purveyors for
Usurpation, our modern state Empericks, did not in good earnest produce this
sublimated Spanish Speculation, thus prepared, to be used in ordinary cases;
but only to try this cruel conclusion: or else they were cast upon this
fancy, of their faction, fuming from Saltpeter, out of necessity, having
nothing better to pretend. For we must not be so simple as once to dream,
that these prodigious Politics, who have the eyes of all the world upon them,
in a monstrous admiration; and have their eyes upon all the world, in a vast
ambition: we must not surmise, that they could be so much mistaken, as
deliberately to deliver in determination, that this Title should have any
ground of true perpetual policy in it. So that were they not foiled with the
fatal foulness of the cause, they are men so absolutely and insolently able,
not confined nor controlled within the compass and commission of their
conscience, so solely versed in the varieties of refined wickednesses,
Creatures so daily devoted to the affairs of this world, and that with such
secular solicitude as if they believed there were not another: were they not
fascinated, or under an ill unpleasing Planet, or rather Comet of Combustion,
they would be able to invent a better title, or in judgment not depend upon
this. Sure the snccesse they have had, the confidence of their own Reputation,
and the undervaluing others; has made them forget or forsake both Law and
Reason, in urging so vain a title for so main a matter; so that nothing can be
affirmed with less truth greater impudence, and more danger.

But to come close to discuss this Title; I must not admit that, which
pleases some, and is presumed by others; That the titles of absolute Princes
are to be tried by the Roman Civil Laws, but according to the Laws of
Nations: without it be in such places where the Civil Law is so received by
many Nations; or in such cases as the particular customs and constitutions of
a Country do not extend to determine them. Feud. lib. 2. tit.
Nam etsi leges Romanae non adeo vim suam extendant, ut usus vincant, aut
mores, peritus tamen legum, sicubi casus emerserit, qui consuetudine Feudi non
sit comprehensus, Lege scripta uti potest. Now if this be true in general,
then sure it holds harder, for the favorable restitution of an ancient
successive Prince, unto his suspended rights; than for the justifying of an
odious and feigned forfeiture, as a title for an elective Emperor (who is
only Administrator, as chief in trust) to transfer his feudall dignities
and dominions to any other. Especially considering, the Prince Elector Palatine
was no way accessory to the crime pretended, as the ground of his fathers
proscription; being then in minority, and since tendering himself in humble
manner to his Imperial Majesty for Investiture. And this course, free and
magnanimous Emperors, when by Law they might have done otherwise, have used
royally to consider and restore the noble heirs of proscribed Princes; yea,
even where they had right to possess ad placitum. As the proud, and otherwise
peremptory Persian Monarchs, Brissonius, de regno Persic. lib. 2.
never admitted any total confiscations: and Julius Caesar, Suet. in Caes.
cap. 41.
revocavit and admisit ad honores, proscriptorum liberos; especially if the
Heirs were many, the clemency (a virtue as well of policy as piety in a
Prince) has an influence upon the good of the best of mankind. And it was
that cruel illiterate Dictator Sylla, Sylla libertatis hosts, and saevissimus
mortalium proscriptionis tabulam (novi generis edictum) primus posuit, Flor.
lib. 3. cap. 21.
that first made Laws, utterly to exclude the children of banished Senators;
whereby he forfeited his discretion, and proscribed his own fortune, by losing
many means of mounting to an absolute settled Monarchy, and was devoured of
vermin, as a monster in nature. And let it be remembered, how moderately the
Emperor dealt with the Prince of Anhalt, who was the author and Counselor of
Prince Fredericks proceedings. Sure there was something in that Princes fortune
that was worth the pulling for; Delictum praetextus erat, divitiae, and
dignitates, veracausa. To take away life or liberty to obtain great men's
livelihoods, is a practice evil and ancient. Just Trajan expressed his spleen
well against such confiscations; and Justinian absolutely prohibits them. C. de
Bonis Proscripto^.
But I intend not to take so much liberty in the shaking off this title of
forfeiture, as to raise arguments from the nature of the cause, in relation to
the reason, and Laws of Nations; but am contented to submit my self to the
Civil and Canon Laws, with the feudall Constitutions of the Empire, with good
assurance, that they admit not of any such damming deportations, to the
prejudice of princely posterity.

And now if Dominick de Jesus Maria, that sang Mass before Prague, when it was
taken; or Hyacinthus the Capuchin; or Caraffa the Nuntio, that begged the
Library of Hidelberg, or any of that factious fraternity, who have been the
grand sticklers in the stir, and storms of Germany; if they would assure me,
as they are the Ministers and minions of Spain, that the Catholic King, as
the elder House of Austria, will not take it as an indignity, to hold, that the
Fends which he has from the Empire, are in danger of forfeiture, upon supposed
misdemeanor and ingratitude: then we would more easily yield, that the Prince
Elector Palatine is something in the same condition; Coua^u^. in relec. c.
peccatum, de potest. temporal. n. 9. Bannes, secunda secundae quest. 40. art. 1.
But I shall hardly believe, that the mighty Majesty of Spain will ever brook
any such formal debasements, (as Philip the second, his great Lawyer and
Schoolma^ster cleeres the case:) For either the King of Spain might actually
alter his Feuds, into proprieties and proper inheritances, when he was Charles
the fifth, and Emperor, Sleid. in fine Phil. Comin. p. 147.
as he got off that light subjection due to the French King, as he was Earl of
Flanders, and a Peer of France, making that independent, when he had his Lord
Francis the first his prisoner. Or else the right might be antiquated and
extinguished, or relinquished by non-claime, and so left as in the original;
only there may be still on foot some empty forms of investiture, nothing to
the hurt or hinderance of a free, full, and final possession, in right of
patrimony. Decifio Rotae Romanae 59. n. 3.4. and 5.
Sure I am that the Council of Spain has concluded so, against the right of
the Church of Rome, in the Case of the Kingdom of Naples: and it may be
probably presumed (if we needed such proof) that the Palatinate was made free
upon the same grounds, when Rupertus Prince Elector Palatine was Emperor.

But to fall upon the bare business; were I better instructed in the Novell,
and therefore suspected form, of the sentence of this particular proscription,
than I am; I would not cavil at words, so as to ground exceptions against the
effectual execution of it: And yet the alteration of forms works
mischievously into the matter, when they are extravagant, and extrajudicially
procured. But I need not stand upon that; for there are many fundamental and
principal arguments essentially in it, that laid together, will manifestly
amount to a most notorious nullity, and afford matter for a just protestation.
As to instance, the incompetencie of the Judge, the falsitie of allegations,
the defect of judicial proceedings.

The first cause of nullity is, The incompetencie of the Judge, not only in
respect of his person, past and present interests, a party, Parsons in Doleman.
pars 1 ^.^.
an enemy for his utmost ends; but also in regard of his power: for the Emperor
has been in effect both Judge and party; which is no where legal, especially
in the Empire of Germany, and in such a case where Ferdinand was to proceed but
as a private person, if then he had been Emperor; being the contention betwixt
him and Prince Frederick was about an Imperial Feud, neither of their
Inheritances. And indeed he is not so sole and supreme in rebus arduis, as to
do any extraordinary Imperial action, without the convocating, consulting, and
consenting the States of Germany, in a Diet: As it was his Majesty's answer to
the English Ambassador, That he could not restore the Prince Elector without
their consent. And if not show favor without them, then much less capitally
condemn any of the supreme College of the sacred Empire, to the prejudice of
the royal successors, without the same representation of the Empire. But it is
more the probable, that the cause was never freely opened, nor faithfully
proposed; but either there was Impedimentum Culposum, or Collusorium, Conventus
Malhus. 1619.
that held them off from considering it; or else they did never clearly and
concludingly consent to it; nor were solemnly required, More majorum,
collegiatliter, and particulariter; but singly surprised, with promises of
spoils, proposals of owning their pretensions, provoking them as the Princes
enemies, or over-awing them as obnoxious: and so took them in, only as a
pompous presence, to countenance that in public assembly, which was concluded
of, and packt in private way at Court. Otherwise they would wisely, as men
awake and aware, have jointly opposed, to prevent the president; not knowing
how soon it might be their own cause, which they could not but conceive to be
a great part of the design. And that they did so may be reasonably
conjectured, not only because the contrary is not expressed, but also by
reason it is the course and custom of that Imperial Council, (especially in
tender cases, of such considerable consequence) only to canvase the cause, and
defer the decision, till the next meeting. As Aeneas Sylvius, who was used to
such Assemblies, and blames the injury of his office, being Secretary to
Frederick the 3. and so conjured silence; yet he speaks out thus much of them:
Silvius epist. l. 1. epist. 72.
Foecundae sunt omnes Diaetae, quaelibet in ventre alteram habet. Diaeta non
est, quae non Diaetam pariat: or else they were so cautious, as not to suffer
the sentence to pass simpliciter, sed provisionaliter. Yea, many of them were
so unsatisfied, that they protested against it; as appears by the several
protestations made by the Ambassadors of the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of
Brandenburg, with the whole house of Palatine, as well Roman reformed
Catholics, except the Duke of Bavaria, before whom there were near twenty in
succession, that had right to the dominions and dignity electorall. Yea
further, it was generally permitted, by inserting a promissory oath, that the
act should not prejudice posterity: all that they were wrought to was, to send
some monitory Mandates, which the Emperor had concluded without them; neither
to cite, prejudge, nor condemn, but only ad paenitentiam: which they still
admitted with this clause, Saving the constitutions of the Empire. Of which the
Emperor accepted.

So that what they did, collectively considered as a representation of the
Empire, excluded not Prince Frederick from his legal remedies of appeal (if
the sentence had not been void without one) of revision or restitution in
integrum. Yea, it may very well be conceived, that they had a respect unto the
relaxation or tacit expiration of the penalty, in relation to his person:
especially being he was not concluded contumacious, not only because he could
not apprehend any assurance of safe conduct, though he had submitted to the
proposed conditions, with loss of honor; but also by reason that sentence
began to be executed some months time before the declaration of it. Et in re
dubia poenam excludi oportet, maxim in causa nobilissimi principis.

The second cause of nullitie is, the falsehood of allegations: for, sententia
ex falsis allegationibus falsis instrumentis vel falsis testimoniis
appellatione nulla est. But this cause fundamentally alleged for the
pronouncing and executing this sentence, especially in relation to the present
Prince Elector, is full of feigned and frivolous uncertainties at the best,
when as in such capital causes the evidence ought to be clear and certain. Now
the ground of this sharp sentence put on so hard, to the perpetual prejudice
of the house of Palatine, was, That Frederick was guilty of treason against the
Emperor; and so by virtue of an Imperial Bull banished, and upon proscription,
his Regal rights forfeited for ever, begged, translated, and distributed, to
the Duke of Bavaria and other Auxiliaries. Now do but consider the fraudulent
suggestions and false inferences, weaved and wound up in this plausible
allegation, all which are as new and as false as a Jesuit: so that what they
take as clear principles, not needing any proof, we take as gross impudent
errors, which need no confutation. First, it is surmised as a fiction in Law,
to ground an Inquisition and proceeding Ex Officio, against a Royal person,
That his father was guilty of rebellion against the Emperor; which is far from
a true accusation, being not only improbable, but also politically impossible:
yea pregnantly and apparently otherwise; considering the person, the Fact, and
the Crime. It was not probable, that a weaker Prince, not ambitious, should
rebelliously rise up against one, from whose power and purpose he could expect
nothing but utter ruin. Something sure there was, that put him necessarily, and
therefore warrantably, upon that course he took: certainly he never resolved
nor reckoned to come within the compass of being but called a Traitor. And
indeed it was not legally possible that he should; Carolus Molin. Tom. 1.
Council. 42. number. 12.
for Nemo dici potest reus criminis rebellionis, vel laesae-Majestatis, nisi
fit proprie subjectus, supremi Principis, and in quantum est subjectus. But the
Prince Elector Palatine was no such subject, especially at that time, when
there was an Inter-Regnum, and himself supreme. Neither was the fact
Rebellion, and that according to the Germane interpretation of such actions, so
circumstanced: for after their usages, such enterprises, of free, absolute,
successive, Imperial Princes, that are purely, or but pregnantly pretended,
for the propugnation and defense of the liberties and Laws of the Empire,
Waremundus de foederibus part. 2. ca. 7.
though they cross and control the proceedings of incroaching Emperors, are
esteemed as free and as far from the suspicion of rebellion, as that Elective
Emperor is from tyranny. and this is evident out of the domestique leagues,
Molanus, de Fide servanda rebel. l. 4. c. 5.
and treaties of the fraternities and families royal of Germany; wherein they
distinguish even in an exclusive way, betwixt the right and good of the Empire,
and the personal interests of the Emperor. But the proceedings of that
proscribed Prince were of this nature, fairly for the prosperity, those
blessed benefits of the peace and liberties, of the sacred Empire; not for a
dissolute popular licentiousness, but for political liberties, essential to
the well-being of the Empire, which he was bound to maintain both by oath and
Office, as Supremus Dux Belli, ex Officio; and as his dominions were
Fundamentaliter Feuda militaria. As to instance; The cause he undertook, was
not only to take short the Austrian tyranny, but also to turn off the design,
of delivering up the Crown of Bohemia to the Turk; as the Nobility professed
they would do, if such a friend as Frederick would not take it, and defend them.

The second subsequent false inference is, that Prince Frederick being
proscribed, upon those conjectured collected crimes, his Dominions, with the
dignity Electorall, are forfeit for ever, to the prejudice of his royal Family.

One would think, That the Emperor in point of honor, or at least out of
clemency, should after so long a banishment have called home that Prince, and
so have wrought him to himself by royal favors, restoring to him his rights
and jurisdictions. His princely predecessors were not wont to be so roughly
handled in Germany, even when they ventured upon questionable quarrels: As
when Frederick Prince Elector palatine two hundred years since, had the
Archbishop of Mentz, the Marquess of Baden, Aeneas Silv. Epist. 395. li.
and the Earl of Wittenberg prisoners, then the Emperor Frederick the second
was contented to use the mediation of his Secretary, Pope Pius the second, and
Philip Duke of Burgondie, to compose the business.

Yea, the proceedings of Charles the fifth were so fair and friendly with the
Prince Elector Palatine, when he fell foul and sadly upon other Princes of
Germany, insomuch that the Duke of Bavaria repined at it: Ducem Bavar. Thuan.
hist. lib. 2.
aegerrime tulisse ferunt quod omnibus bonis and pristinae dignitati restitutus
fuit: quia spe obtinendi Septem viratus Caesarianas parts secu^us est. And
sure it might now have as well been expected, considering the honesty of the
cause he undertook. Sen. de Clem. li. 2. ca. 7.
Et clementia hosts dimittit salvos, aliquando laudatos, si honestis causis,
pro fide, profaedere, vel pro liberate, in bellum procincti sint. So that I
believe, the relations and reports of Historians and Lawyers, who respect
right, and the Emperors honor, will differ as much from theirs, that reflect
only upon point of fact, and the fortunate felicity that attended their fraud
and force; as they do that so severely set down the dealings and deservings,
Guifan. in vita Justin. and Belizar. p. 41. and 47.
that passed betwixt Justinian and Bellizarius the brave Germane, who was
accused of treason against the Emperor, because the Kingdom of the Goths was
tendered him by the Nobility, and then he falsely reported to be discarded and
ruined (as may be seen in Zetzes and Crinitus, answered by Alciat.) So strange
would it seem to wise men, that proceed upon safe and substantial principles,
of policy and piety.

Frederick King of Naples got much honor by a contrary course; when willing to
express and assure his favor and forgiveness, Paul. Iov. de Vir. Iilustr.
vita Fred.
to the false Factionists of the House of Anjou, bare as an Impresse, a Bankers
book, figured, 1485 crossed, and cast into the fire, with this Motto, Recedant
vetera: signifying, That he freely and fully pardoned all passed injuries, as
it were by an Athenian (...). But since Prince Frederick the father has had
such trial of Austrian mercy, his posterity have no reason to trust to it,
being hitherto handled as if they had been borne heirs of the hatred cast upon
their father.

And now we have discovered, that it is no easy matter to conceive, how the
father should forfeit his Countries and Electoral dignity, in respect of his
own personal right; therefore much harder to conclude, how his act should
disable his heirs; for the Dominions, with the Dignities annexed, are either
an absolute, patrimoniall propriety; or a feudall successive possession. If an
hereditary propriety, then not to be forfeit, because not held of the
Emperor; if a feud, then either purely and properly so, or mixed; and if mixed,
then the service is not so exact, and set, especially if the lord and feudatory
are Peers, in other respects, such a feud is granted, Par in parem non habet
Imperium.
either for fealty and observance, or charged with an annual pension, or some
such tributary, trivial acknowledgement; now if it be granted upon such an
acknowledgement, then it cannot be forfeit, Hotoman. Illust. g. 34.
Quia fidem non servat Feudatarius, nam obligatur od reditum, non ad fidem. And
there are many circumstances, of extraordinary concurrency, that must fall in,
to make such a feud forfeit, especially if it consist, not in Agris and
Praediis, but in Iuribus and Honoribus; and if so, in petty rights and
jurisdictions; then sure much rather, for the security of those feudall
Dominions, that have royal, imperial prerogatives, Feud. lib. 4. tit. 56.
quae sint Regalia.
successively annexed to them, by primitive investitures, in a fundamental
way. I will conclude nothing upon this, but leave it to active, and rational
men to assume, infer, and consider, L. 2. C. ad L. Iul. de Vi.
what in these premises is proposed; remembering that Transitoria tantum bona,
quae ad haeredes extraneos veniunt, in publicationem veniunt, and fiscus est
loco haeredis extranci. But how ever it fared with the father, yet the present
Prince has so much right to present possession, that if he be long delayed,
or deludingly discontinued from investiture, it may amount to a wrong
sufficient, to cause the Emperor to lose his Imperial right, in that feud, (as
the most free Feudists) Ex omni Felonia, qua vasallus feudo privatur, Laud. in
li. 2. Feud. tit. 47. Qualiter Domini.
Dominus proprietate privetur; especially being but Administratour,
Fidei-Commissarius Imperii, non d^recte and immediate Dominus: and what may
then follow, I leave to them to conjecture, who are the present possessours and
perswaders of the deteinure; when as it is daily and duly demanded, by those
that have power to command it. If the Prince Elector Palatine were not an
essential member of the Empire, but a pure poor vassal, under the power and
pride of the Lording Longobards (who were the first authors of pure feudal
titles, and granted all dominions Ad been placitum:) Or if he had been a simple
subject of the Lombards Conqueror Charles the Great (as he was indeed one of
his Assistants, Aug. de Ancon. de potest. Eccles. Q. 36. art. 4.
and holds some of Rights from that service) then there might have been some
reason of a perpetual forfeiture. Maxim si Feudum fuisset novum, vel privatae
personae. But the Elector being an absolute Prince, and the Feud Antiquum,
Regale, masculinum, militare, perpetuum, pactionatum, and successivum; there
must be more done than is yet devised, to make this forfeiture firm to the
Occupant; the Emperor being neither a Conqueror, nor an hereditary successor.
Nam Feuda Regalia, fortissime, De^^no Sen. Pedemont. 29.11.5. f. 8.40.
praescriptione, and pacto acquiruntur, privative quoad investientem. So that
this is not only according to the laws of Germany, which were enough for the
security of the cause; but also suitable to the modern, moderate
interpretations, of the ordinances of more absolute States, as it is practiced
law, in the Kingdom of Naples and other Dominions of Italy: Caesar. Vrsel.
Decis. Neap. 282. n. 20.
That Delictum patratum contra person im Domini direct, etiamsi sit crimen
Laesae Majestatis, Feudum ad liberos masculos derivatur, si sit antiquum, ex
pacto, and providentia concessum. Decisio Pedemont. 29. n. 20.
Thus it is also amongst the Savoyers. If the dominions or the dignities were
an English, Scottish, or French Feud, which are consuetudinary hereditary, and
may be alienated, bequeathed, and forfeited, as the estates of all the lay
Peers of France, where the Crown is only a masculine Feud, not forfeitable
from that Royal Family: Tillius de rebus Gal. ca. 4.
Were they such a Feud, and barely such, then they might have bin lost, by the
default or defeat of a Father, if they were had and held as an heir, or
descended in contemplation of the Fathers acquiring. But in Germany they are
not clearly hereditary estates, though none are capable of them but heirs
masculine, especially of those Royal, more than titular territories and
principalities: and they must be, not common heirs, but feudall; Molin, in
causa Phil. Lan. Hessiae, Consil. 1. n. 3.
Haeredes feudales sanguinis, vel Haeredes Feudales militares; non Haeredes
simpliciter patrimoniales: and so what they enjoy is by right of consanguinity,
not as heirs or successors: Vltimi possessoris, Decius Cons. 18. n. 4.
sed primi acquirentis. Now such successors cannot be put by, but with the
injury and prejudice of the primitive Investiture, which was the foundation of
that Feud. Neither does any sentence pronounced against the Possessor, dash or
diminish what duly descends to that Family; Franc. Curt. Iun. Consil. 48. n. 3.
(as Curtius) Sententia lata contra Patrem, Filiis non nocet, in Feudali
successione. And great reason, because such a son does not succeed by right
of inheritance, but by right of Contract, betwixt that Royal House and the
Empire; and so the fathers fact, nor fortune, does not help nor hinder him:
(as the Pragmatiques of Italy) Feuda ex pacto concessa, pro descendentibus de
certa familia, Senate. Pedemont. decisio. 139. n. 15.
non possunt ad supremum dominum transferri, in prejudicium proximorum
agnatorum. And they give good reason for it: Quia quae venit a genere, Math. de
Aff. Decis. Neap. 282. n. 19.
semper remanent, and feuda, quae quis, a Patre non habet, habentur ac si pater
non esset. And thus (I conceive) was the course of the Law of England, in the
Case of Lands entailed, by Contract from the Crown. And there is still some
footing for this, in the Tenure of our Gavel-kinde lands, which are not
forfeited; but the father goes to the bough, the tree of execution; the son
to the Plough and possession. And if this be Law and reason in a private man's
case, much more will it hold for a supreme Prince, an integral member of the
Empire, who succeeds to his Imperial dignity and Dominions by right of most
solemn sacred investiture, according to the most ancient confirmed Customs,
Contracts, Conventions, Transactions, and Clauses conservative, of the most
princely Fraternities and Liberties of Germany. And therefore they are not to
be detained from him upon supposition of any delinquency or default of his
father (as that judicious resolute Molineus, Council. 3. in cause. Phil. n. 9.
in the case of the famous Philip Landtgrave of Hesse resolves) Patre moriente
moriente naturaliter, vel civiliter, filius ejus locum ingrediatur, non jure
communi, sed jure prerogato, and principali, id est, Lege Imperiali, seu
simultaniae investiturae; and sententia contra hujusmodi investituras lata, non
nocet successori, sed statim locum ei aperiat.

Now to reduce all to a conclusion: The last cause of nullity is, The defect of
judicial proceedings in Substantialibus: and that not only by a dangerous
contradiction, in prosecuting a Prince for treason, upon inference, to the
breaking of the undoubted fundamental Laws of the sacred Empire; but also in
respect of the formal proceedings, in the sentence of his Proscription. For
was it not great injustice, to question, and capitally to condemn a Prince,
that was never cited? Which is essential to legal proceedings: Quia Citatio
est species defensionis: Panor. in Col.
Especially where they could not pretend notoriety of the crime; of which we
must be tender, considering that many great States and Princes sent their
letters of congratulation, and so of approbation; and yet in the next place,
unheard; unexamined, to be so determined of. So that if we should grant, that
the Emperor might judge in his own cause, yet not without judicial
proceedings.

The time limited to the Prince also was not competent (being but four weeks
to perform all) though the proposalls had been reasonable. But all this form,
that was omitted upon design, was not so much as the extending the execution
of the sentence, to the prejudice of the Prince; in minority, unheard,
unaccused. So that tho the ingratitude (or what else was pretended against the
father, which was to be proved pregnantly by five of his Peers) had been a
ground for such a sentence; yet it being Sententia hominis, Feud. lib. 4. tit.
57. quot testes.
and not Iuris; it expired with Ferdinand and Frederick, and could never be
intended by any true interpretation, to reach to posterity.

So that I much marvel, That the Bavarian Proctors of Ingulstadt, should
plead and persuade the Duke to persist in his possession, (especially of the
Electoral dignity) when as in so doing, they put the Emperor upon an action of
more insolent example, upon no just ground, than the Schoolmen or Canonists
permit the Pope upon any occasion, (for their Tenent is, Papa non potest
Electores Almaniae mutare, Aug. de Ancon. de potest. Papae. Q. 35. Art. 3.
(inter alia) quia est materia scandali, and schismatis) One would think that
they should something regard Scandalum magnatum, fear Faction, sedition, and
disturbance in the Empire, as a strong reason to restrain the ambition of
their Master, and cease to urge the Emperor, against his Oath to the Electors
at his Imperial Election; and to the Pope at his Confirmation and Coronation.
Vegetius, de Re militari, li. 1. prefat.
Let them remember that of Vegetius to Valentinian, Nil recte inchoatur, nisi
post Deum, fa^erit Imperator.


