A DISCOVRSIVE CONIECTVRE UPON THE REASONS THAT produce a desired event of the
present troubles of GREAT BRITAIN, different from those of Lower GERMANY.
Considered in the maine passages that seem parallel, but upon a further survey
are discovered to be otherwise. BY CALYBVTE DOWNING, L.L.D. Pastor of Hackney.

TACIT. HIST. LIB. 1. Rara Temporum foelicitas, ubi sentire quae velis, and
dicere quae sentias licet; quando Nerva Imperium, and Libertatem, res olim
insociabiles miscuisset.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD HEARNE for John Partridge, and are to be sold at
Purse Court, in the Old Change. MDCXLI.

A DISCOVRSIVE Conjecture upon the Reasons that produce a desired event of the
present troubles of Great Britain, different from those of Lower Germany.
THE Hope that these sad and destructive distempers, may now have a more
desired end, than the world of wise men could lately believe, puts us on beyond
our fears to produce pregnant grounds, to make good what we have laid in about
this business; as it is now transacting in happy hands. Which Work (in all
Politic probability) will give a great advance to his Majesty's honor, and
render Him considerable abroad, and like Himself at home; the blessed
Fountain of justice, peace, and plenty; that His ROSES and LILLIES may not
grow, or rather be blasted in his Peoples blood.

We do not adventure to run up this discourse so high, as the original causes
of these troubles, either in respect of the States principles, or divine
providence; that I hold hard, and high work, wherein latitude, and liberty of
Divination is as dangerous, as difficult, and so leave it to time, and those
that shall be trusted to draw up, and Commentary these three years affairs in
an Heroical history, for his Majesty's honor and use both in the State
Ecclesiastique, and Civil: and I cannot but conclude it the choicest piece in
a practique way, that has ever passed the Press, Pancerol. de Reb. Invent.
122.
since the Sword-man devised Printing, or the Gown-man conjured up Gunning.

It is not to be denied, but that there is so much similitude betwixt these
British troubles, and the beginnings of the stirs and storms of the Belgique
Provinces, (before they settled into a solemn War) that we had great ground to
fear the same cruel Calamities, had not God graciously supplied his Majesty
with these present Counsels. Yet now we believe, that not only out of a fond
facility, because we wish it, that there is no such reason to fix the same
infelicity, as a fatal period, the remedy being proper, powerful, and not
Posthumum. Now to make this come hot to honest hearts, with great and growing
comfort; Let us consider the occasions that cast the Low Countries into
confusion, and allow how far we are gone in those ways, and then truly take
up, and see with what variety of better circumstances we may qualify our
fears, and quicken our hopes of a more happy event.

My design is but to point at those passages that may be discovered in a
Transit, without pretending to reach the reason of State in the
non-communicable conveyances and negotiations of either side; supposing them
fundamentally of force to produce a difference falling in with my proposal.
Before we pitch any particular, the general consideration of the cursed
consequences, of the Belgique confusions, must needs work strongly with all
wise men, especially upon his Majesty, who is highliest interested, causing him
to cast his provident eye upon the seat of those civil cruel wars, as an
example of caution; as a Rock covered, with the remains of a wrecked Spanish
Carrack, floating about it, sinking a whole Navy, to save that which was
scarcely considerable, if wise men had had the valuing of it, who use to rule
by remitting, when Subjects cannot obey with subsisting; Alas, that poor patch
and spot of his patrimony is turned into a common Golgotha, to bury all Spanish
greatness of a Fever In spiritualibus, which every Spring is ill Physic for
an old State to graft a new Monarchy upon, and all this by Ecclesiastical
Order, and solemn Procession, as they are the Heralds and Masters of his
Ceremonies. This were Item enough (too dearly bought) for us to steer another
course, and not to trust shifting Sands, with Caesar, and all our fortunes.

But to come close to the bare business, the first consideration we shall
propose in this work, is the Time and Manner of the rising of these Troubles
in both States. Now though Belgia began first to feel these growing
Distempers, upon King Philip the Second his personal taking Possession of that
government, by solemn investiture, upon his father Charles the fifth his
Resignation: and the present Troubles of Scotland first appeared upon his
Maties making his Royal residence and Actual assumption in his sacred
Inauguration; yet this holds but lightly, with Wise men, either in morals or
Politiques, to produce the same event, if duly considered. For indeed there is
a vast and operative distance, in the concurrent circumstances of their royal
journies: because K. Philip came into Belgia, not as K. of England, but K. in
England, or only the Queens husband (as he complained to his Father, Strada,
de Bell. Belg. Lib. 1.
that the English called him, which was one argument, to obtain a resignation
of something) who dying in his absence, he remained only the bare Dominus, not
Rex Belgiae, and seeing all his other Dominions, both hereditary, and Feudall
past and possessed in a monarchique way, this temper of government, in his other
territories, tempted him to try conclusions, against his trust, even to trouble
those provinces, and his own conscience, by attempting to turn them into a
Kingdom, contrary to his oath so lately taken; which desire though Charles the
fifth had in his heart, Lud. Guic. Comment. de Belgi, 1554.
yet his well tempered head, held him from driving it to a point. Knowing full
well, how ill it would work, being always under several Lords and Laws,
pitched into Provinces, Grot. Apol. C. 1.2.
under particular Proceres, who had more than a mere Simulachrum potestatis,
especially being that Flanders was but lately coldly relinquisht by the French
King Francis the first, Sleid. de-reb. Illustr. Gal.
upon an unequal Treaty, when Charles had him prisoner at Madrid: and so this
could not come well from Philip In novo, nutanti, and quasi praecario Domino:
Thus was his way. When as his Majesty came into Scotland sole and supreme
Potentate, of all British Dominions, not to turn a Republique, or an
Aristocracie, into a Monarchy, but took solemn possession of an unquestioned
Crown, and his Nobles of England were welcome Witnesses, and Attendants of
this royal Work, without any interruption from any supposed Inter-Regnum, or
pretensions of diminusion whatsoever. So that the nature of the business and
the ends of the Princes being so diverse, must needs produce various events;
and it were a wonder in government if they should not; especially if in the
next place you consider the proceedings issuing from these Royal Presences,
and you will find them conclusive for his Majesty's honor, and the public
peace.

I will not deny, but there was something proposed, and put on by some, that in
good time may have little thanks for their pains; which in the State
Ecclesiastique drive to a change; but that was not his Majesty's design, but
as it was represented to him as a National question, to be determined by his
Wisdom. But Philip raised the question, and was warm in the Work; as see it
in a particular: The first offense given and taken in both States, was about
fourteen Bishops, with their Canons, the one of Trent, with Regal
limitations; and the other of England, with mitigating variations; the
Inquisition to execute the one, and the High Commission the other, but in far
different ways. Meteran. hist. Belg. li. 2.
For Philip did erect de novo 14 Bishops, out of Abbots ruins and revenues, and
in a Republike, against an express privilege in terms, with the scandal of
the Nobility, who well understood, that so cautious a Prince would never so
provoke such jealous Peers; but that he conceived the creating of these new
Ministers an assured means to tie them short, and silent in all their
State-assemblies, as overawed by their presence, and so in event reduce the
force of such freedom into form, that they might wax weary, and be content
to want them, and so he work his will; especially considering, how this
notorious Innovation was transacted at Rome, by a Bull of Faculty from Paul the
fourth; Thuanus hist. lib. 33.
which must needs be carried with great power, and privacy, because Philip was
at odds, and odious to the Pope about the present business of Naples: It was
to be believed, that some great matters were to be managed by this new engine,
procured with so much care and cost, both of time and treasure, with such a
dash of reputation, and danger of rebellion, and the States being not so
sleepy, as to suffer themselves to be supplanted by a cunning consequent of a
pernicious and unpleasing President, could not but stir. Now take up these
circumstances, and they quite change the case; for it is one thing to erect 14.
new Bishops, thereby laying the foundation, for settling of a Faction, and
shaking the present Government, by mixing instruments distributed into all
Provinces, as dependants at absolute devotion; one thing (I say) to erect 14
new Bishops, another to protect 14 old Episcopal Sees; represented to his
Majesty as a necessary, ancient, useful State in that kingdom: and the manner
of composing the question, falls in much with the maine, Inchoavere sibi annum
ultimum, Reipub. prope supremum, Tacit. hist. lib. 1.
Philip maintaining those modern Prelates beyond all moderation: his Majesty
relinquishing these, as not standing with the present State of affairs. For
though he has done much for them, yet he will not undo his State Civil, to
support the Ecclesiastical in accidentals. So that in Politic possibility we
may hope a correspondent event to the real difference of these proceedings.

And now we have seen a difference in the design, and the maine means to
compass it; in the next place let us consider the instruments, how they were
called, or thrust themselves into the affairs of the State; and with what
success they fell in with their Masters Counsels, or furthered their own upon
his greatness and goodness. Now you shall find Philip the second, for
atchieving of his end forenamed, chose himself instruments fit for usurpation
of absolute dominion, and without doubt was the leader of these Ministers,
especially at the first. For Archbishop Cardinal Grandvell was trusted in
traverse work, by Charles the fifth, not taken for an ambitious piece of
aerie, aspiring timber; but this Austrian Eagle, proposed such glorious objects
to these Harpies, as pleased his eyes, and cared not, if it burnt their
feathers. Yea, he was so radically resolved, that when his prudent sister,
Thuan. hist. lib. 38.
Margaret of Parma, moderatrix of Belgia, proposed ways of moderation; his
nature, seconded and set on by his ends, boldly broke through all her
mediation, and some of his own promises and protestations which were wrought
out of him by present importunity, and impossibility to proceed. True, he went
several ways, but always to the same ends, which was to make an end of all
those Provinces, rather than he would miss of his mind, though he found it
Durissimam Provinciam: therefore concluded her removal, and to send the daring
Duke of Alva in her place. Now there is an infinite distance, and must needs
have success in suitable way, for a Master upon ill ends to employ bad
servants, and uphold, and hold them to it, as his business, upon judgment;
and for a prudent Prince, not used to vicious ways, and so not jealous, to be
misinformed by Ministers that thrust themselves upon odious unwarranted
actions, supposing that his Majesty must own them and their proceedings; it is
true, that such a gracious Master merited to have better servants, or by this
time to have made them so: but this case will infallibly afford a more blessed
conclusion, both in the judgment of God, and man, than where indifferent
instruments were driven to degenerate, to serve one man's will, and lay the
foundation of all men's misery.

And it were not amiss to make this evident by the several carriages of these
Princes toward their Ministers; as to instance only in two grand Creatures of
King Philips, compared with the ambitious imbracers of his Majesty's affairs,
(so far as they are disturbed) not to speak of their Collateral auxiliaries of
State. Take Archbishop Grandvell a forreiner, yet making an imbracement of all
the business of Belgia, first, or last all touched upon him; and join to him
the Duke of Alva, a great Commander in the conquered kingdom of Naples, and
compare them with whom you see cause, and then take a view how their Masters
dealt with them; and it will be the shortest and the surest rule of the uses
they meant to make of them. Few without an Italians cunning, and a Spanish
Iesuited conscience, could ever have gotten leave of themselves to put in
practice such false and fatal Counsels as Bishop Grandvell executed; for
grant, that as a great Church man, of vast desires, and designs, he had
over-acted in the proposal of the project of fourteen new Bishops, supported
with the new Inquisition and Canons: sure he would never have set himself to
make good his mistake by so much mischief, as a Civil war, if King Philip had
not put him on, to assure his fraud by force, in the promise of Alva his Army
(as you find these two men shifting interests, and crushing all opposites by
Combination) sure these Dominationum Provisores (as Tacitus) Purveyors of
Tyranny, that proceeded against the Law of Nations, Arms, and Leagues; whose
truces, Treaties, Pacifications, had all Treachery under them, had in reason of
state (in which King Philip seldom erred) been discarded as destructive
disturbers, if they had not bin much wrought, and upon mere motion first
warranted for their humorous undertakings: without doubt this Prelate, the
chief Augur of Austrian Tyranny, that had more of the Diviner than the Divine
in him, had been soon banished as a mischievous State-Mountebanke, and not
been trusted as a faithful Foecialis, if there had not been some disorders
to be acted In Ordine ad Spiritualia, thereby to serve his Masters Temporal
turn. Else would Philip never have withstood so many Complaints of the whole
State, with the aggravating letters of humble Information, from the chief of
the Nobility, against this odious instrument, that the Prince of Orange (whom
the cunning Prelate called Taciturnus) should so speak out, to such a Prince,
and yet Philip own him, sure there was more in it than ever saw day, or can
endure it: especially when the Governesse, his wise wel-tempered sister,
signified the same, and desired his displacing; yea and some of the Nobility of
Spain at home, Strada li. 2.
that were not of the Cabinet Council, fully voted to displace him: only Alva
stuck close to his Ecclesiastique friend: and when by universal hatred he
began to totter, the king did not then remit him to the state, for the trial
of his pretended integrity; only cast a jealous eye upon him, not as one
grossly evil, but as too great, too able, absolute, and something insolent an
Instrument; suspecting and supposing his own supreme abilities eclipsed by his
so near, so high advancing: so that all he did with him, was to lay him by
for a time, lodged under a cloud of personal displeasure, to make him pass
lower, and come less in the worlds esteem; not that he had any disposition
of doting indulgence, beyond reason of state, to reverence his office or order,
being he immediately cast him upon hard, rough, and rocky work, cut out of
purpose to break him, or that he might break the wild, Thnan. hist. lib. 1.
unbackt, unbitted Neapolitan Courser, which Tolitomus had heated into a
sedition, by seeking to hamper and halter them with Inquisition. Sure the most
the King disliked in him, was a busy boldness to over-do the business; as
when he was his Viceroy of Naples, he presently fell foul with the Bishop,
possessed his temporalls, and cast him into prison. Wise Princes long relish
not those Ministers, that will needs be not only executioners, but Authors of
their Masters Counsels; being they love to serve their own wills with their own
wits; and instruments must know no more of business, than they think good to
reveal, especially if it be such as will not endure the light: rightly
concluding, that all openings are weakenings both in buildings and in
business, as well in Factions as in Fabrickes: therefore this Prelate being
privy to so much, Philip did wisely, not to change his fortune by dis-favour,
lest he should change his faith to his disadvantage; holding this false
Principle, not to permit the most pernicious Minister to sink or suffer; and
therefore gave an express to the Governesse, Strada li. 5.
that she should never call an universal Assembly of the States; and when,
upon an exigent, by private instruction she assembled a Senate, it was with a
design to dissolve it; being not intended so much to have their advice and
assistance, but to feel their Pulse, and find by their affections, whether
the work was a possible pull; Thuanus hist. lib. 40.
exploring their strength, or rather their weakness, putting them into passion
in provoking ways, that there might be more color, to embrace, or crush the
greatest, as they saw occasion. Now what needed all this shifting, and
shuffling, if the dealing had been fair, and above-board, in the view of the
body of the Council of State And that his Majesty goes no such ways to
shelter his mischievous Ministers, let the present proceeding discover; though
more might be said in excuse of our Ecclesiastical instruments, being not
beaten to business of State, to consider consequences in long winded works,
good only at quick turns, hints, fits, starts, and onsets of actions, out of
ambition, envy, and humorous interests, being subtle, yet shallow, concealing
a bottom not worth the owning, wanting both patience, and experience, heated
with passion into a Calenture; whose power wiser, yet worser men, Iesuited
Statists, have abused to do more mischief than they ever meant. But further
let us consider, how Philip dealt with his second Minister, the great Duke of
Alva; and see his Majesty's carriages toward the like man, of prodigious pride
and parts. When Philip called Alva out of Italy, into Belgia, having no mind
either to go himself, or make good the pacification; and pretended only the
distemper of a tertian Ague, as a fit divertive, to deny his Royal presence;
though he was assured by good hands, that an Emplaster applied by any other
hand, would be taken for a cutting Corrasive, Strada li. 5.
and breed ill blood; Yet by Alva's persuasion at the Councell-table in Spain,
upon a private Item of his own, brake through all, and concluded upon his
advice, with a Royal Army to make good all his demands; Meteran. hist. li. 2.
(which counsel was Treason in Belgia, being the forces were foreign) now if
this Duke had only acted his own nature, and not took these hints from the K.
ends, sure Philip would have used him according to the event of his unhappy
service, and not only have made a relegation and fair confinement of him to
Vzeda, Confinatoe perele da Corte. Conestag. da Portogalliae Istorza. li. 3.
five and twenty miles from it, as a reservation to his own use, till time,
and occasion should call him home, and no neighbor use him in the interim, nor
corrivall envy him, for favor obtained upon such foul, and fatal
undertakings. Sure had he not performed the maine, Ex praescripto Regis, Philip
would have laid a damning deportation upon him, Stradali. 7.
or at least have left him at a loss, and never have called him home, to pass
with an Army into Portugal, setting him at liberty, to chain them short.
Indeed his ill service, when all was passing along to peace, and his Majesty's
owning, or not openly deserting of him, soon turned the work of War, in the
progress and process of it, from a defensive, into an offensive, on the
States part; and it is likely so to continue, Idem li. 6.
being cast into such a way of subsisting, that what goes out of the door in
expense of arms, comes in at the window in exsise and success. As ache a
view of his particular proceedings; after the breach of the pacification, Plus
significat, quam loquitur.
and the Prince of Orange his relinquishing Belgia, upon the tender of a new
oath to the Nobility, and so avoiding his treacherous hands; Alva by private,
pocket warrant, procured by whispering Counsel, upon half a word from his
Majesty, Hippol. a collib. consil. q. 2.
cut off chief of the Nobilities heads who set their hands to the complaint
against ill Counselors, and petitioned for composing all in honorable, safe
ways; Thuan. li. 41.
and that for crimes never published, and therefore for ever suspected, which
raised such a mischievous mixture in men's minds, as fixed a resolution, to
have Spanish blood pay the arreares for ever: that he was held up to go on at
this rate, has cast down the power of the elder house of Austria in lower
Germany, whence the Eagle first took his flight, Comineus Com. li. 8.
to mount to the top of the Capitol, upon the malicious mistake of Lewis the
eleventh. Now let us reflect a little, and see how his Majesty carries the
like proceedings to a more prosperous point, giving full way to sequestre and
punish all malignant delinquents; wherein his Highness holds close to his own
prudent principles, to rule by Counsel, especially in extraordinary
confounding causes, when the ordinary private, set Council of Princes is
concluded too short, and insufficient, as never intended for universal advice
in such domestique designs, as work upon the body and soul of a State;
especially if some of those Counselors, who have pulled hardest to be
interested in public affairs, be found faultiest, and the fomenters of the
dissentions, Pet. Mat. hist. pacis l. 6. n. 3.
driving the interests of a false and foreign friend, Opes factionis. Salust.
Bell. Iugur.
long since sworn Protector Regni Angliae, and has ever since been so wise,
as to have Pensioners at devotion; knowing that seditions make Conquests easy,
where he has a party.

This indeed is the root of all these ruinating courses; which is the next
consideration to be examined for a hoped different event, and will satisfy all
rational, disingaged Statists, concerning his Majesty's deserting many of his
Ministers, as Piaculares publiciodii victimae (as Pliny persuaded just Trajan)

Now to make this manifest, we must lay down what principles necessitated
Philip irrecoverably to correspond and support such kind of instruments,
Meteran. li. 1.
especially his Spanish tools of State, cross to his Fathers last advise, and
you will find it to be the making himself head of the holy League concluded
in the Council of Trent, upon his own conditions to make the Western world
his holy Land, and a fifth Monarchy; then he began to execute the Canons of the
Council, with a Writ, De excommunicato capiendo, farming all the Popes Fines
at a quit rent of his own rating, making this a Title, to have footing by a
faction, in all Dominions he aimed to embrace; now for this work he was to
have Ministers that must live in the bowels of neighbor kingdoms, to be their
death. Witness the Guisian faction that wrought so malignantly upon Scotland,
with reference to England. When they persuaded the Queen Regent to get a guard
of Italians; Thuan. li. 23.
this engine had the maine spring turned by Spanish reason of State. Sure the
performing of this pleasing trust cast him upon many most unpleasing passages,
which were too suitable to his disposit^on, (as well as his design) which was
severe, even to cruelty. For I cannot believe that Q. Mary's temper,
notwithstanding all provocations by her Mothers divorce, and her danger of
disinheriting by the Protestant party, did put her into such ways of wasting
her Country, and Conscience, if King Philips company and counsels had not
engaged her, neither was it a passage of pity, but policy, that made him
mediate for Queen Elizabeth's life, Repraesent. pacis general. ca. 6.
being he had no hope of Issue, and meant to marry her, and would not in any
case she were removed, because the French King, Francis the second had obtained
Mary Queen of Scotland, the next heir to the Crown, and he was wiser than
to let so considerable a Kingdom (that moderateth Christendom) fall into
French hands: so that to return, and leave digressing, this service of an
Ecclesiastique voluntiere, filled his head and hands full of bloody business;
as see how he ventured all, to settle that Council in these petty Provinces;
what ways he went to extirpate the Protestants of France. Instance the
interview of Baion, when Alva went in his room, attending his Queen, to give
the French King and their Mother Katharine de Medices a meeting; Thuan. l. 37.
when Alva had Plena mandata a Philippo, to communicate in Arcano; and all was
covered and colored with his presenting his Majesty with the order of the
golden Fleece; when the maine design was the proposing of a plot for the
Parisian Maatins, in imitation of the Sicilian Vespers; which he delivered as
a Masterpiece from King Philip, Io. Baptista. Hadrian. apud Thuan. li. 37.
Fazellus de rebus Siculis li. 8. Dec. 2.
who communicated it to the Pope Gregory the thirteenth, to beg a benediction
for a cursed Conspiracy; for which invention, or rather imitation of his
predecessor Peter of Arragon, Philip well merited to have his name written in
Rubricks, in the Gregorian Calendar, Stylo no vo reformato, not as a Saint, but
sanguinary hater of reformation. Yea, further, it may be Physically
conjectured, that the same blood begat that cruel Counsel, which put him upon
deliberation, against his own best blood, Charles his brave eldest Son; who
upon Spanish reason of State, Pet. Mat. hist. pacis li. 6. nar. 14.
and no other ground rendered, but fear of his Religion, must die, and have
only the favor to choose his death. Yea, this politic zeal worked to the
last gasp with him; as that free, faithful Author testifies, Idem nar. 16.
Philippum animam agentem, filio suo, summo ardore, bellum in Haereticos
commendasse: and to make it impossible ever to meet in medium ways of
moderation, Mariana de los yerros del govier de los Jesuit. cap. 10.
he made choice of the Jesuits for his conscientious Casuists, which cunning
Confessors have composed a Somma poenitentiale, according to the compass of
their Grandizing Masters conscience, cross to the quiet of all Christendom,
Hispaniam pari justitia continuit, major privato visus dum privatus fuit, and
omnium consensu capax imperii nisi imperasset. Tacit. hist. 1.
and the good of humane society, which they keep as Cases reserved, Inter
arcana dominationis. So that all the world may see how King Philip and his
successors are held to it, to stand by their Ministers, without they will lay
down their design of enlargement of Dominion; Antonio Perez. part 2. cart. 33.
but while that humor reigns, they must be unjust, if it be for a kingdom,
and shall have use of such instruments that they dare not remove but by sudden
ruin. Whereas a moderate Prince who has no such service, and Ministers burn
not with black secrets, to make themselves dear, and overawe him; may with
honor, safety, transcendent justice, and great content bequeath notorious
suspected ill Counselors, to a solemn public trial; being not
necessitated, either to protect them for ever, or, without Process, to ruin
them in a moment. De Clem. li. 2. cap. 5.
Serious Seneca advising two ways of Clemency (a virtue of as much policy as
piety in a Prince) seasoneth that sweetning, with mixing Salutares severitates.
Yea, where he is most judiciously angry with Anger, he enters a Caution, that
sometimes, De Ira. li. 1. cap. 9.
Optimum misericordiae genus est occidere; especially such as are
blood-thirsty, and deceitful men, who should not live out half their days:
Atrocium ministri, Contrivers of mischief and misery, whom no necessity, or
straights of State can excuse. For there are Foeda, Decius de regul. Iuris l.
122. n. 2.
falsa, and flagitiosa, quae patriae quidem causa facienda non sunt; especially
being ways against their King and Country upon a true interpretation, and a
necessity of their own procuring, to the States undoing, by their making the
worst of that, which at the best was no better than naught; having concluded it
good counsel to bring both kingdoms near to ruin, that they might rule the^
with more ease, when they are poor and passive; a most confounding course in a
free Monarchy.

And let no obnoxious disturber that hoped to escape in a smoke, think to
stop, or divert this present course for the common good against the common
enemies; by making it a question whether a Prince should suffer Ministers, of
his own making, be publicly punished for ill execution of their offices? I
refer them to their friends, Tesaur. polit. part terza dis. 55.
Italian and Spanish pens, that have fully discussed this quaery, to their
destruction; only let us represent the state of the question, and leave it to
rational men to consider.

The inquiry is not whether it be safe, or ever seasonable by a civil sword of
Justice, to cut off multitudes of men, though guilty of disturbance, so as to
make a considerable party in State an example, having been missed by a few;
when the way should be to give such time to repent, and come to themselves, and
mitigate; as men only bitten by a mad dog, a Moon will assure them that are
only lunatique for a fit: such epidemicall executions proceed as a work from
these public enemies, suitable to their natures, rather than from our
necessity; these are they that value their own sweat in ill service, above the
blood of the best of men: this is not that we aim at, either as justifiable,
or plausible; but what we propose, stands thus; and we may stand to make it
good to the whole world: that it is most honorable, just, and safe for a
supreme Potentate, who has the sole power of choosing his own ordinary
Ministers, in exigents of State to give up notorious and manifest Ministers of
ill Counsels, to his own extraordinary, supreme Council, both of State and
Justice, Extraordinariae persecutiones in animadversione capitalium Vid.
Brisson. de verb. sign.
as to them that cannot be mistaken in domestique affairs; having power not
only to proceed by President, but also occasionally to create them, as reason
of State, Leg piu dannosa Repub. che riguarda assa tempore indietro.
Machiavel. hist. Fieront. li. 3.
for full, safe, secret, and sudden dispatches shall require; that they be not
foiled in their deliberations, by over-punctuall, paedantique, literal
interpretations; as full, Aristocraticall bodies move many times so slowly in
solemn ways, that their dangers prevent them, especially when all affairs
are in statu perturbato, and quasi in maligno posita, Clapmar de Arcanis
Dominat. li. 3. cap. 2.
then by a tacit consent of States, there be latitudes allowed, and
variations, by way of relaxation from common courses, to serve and secure the
King and State. And if private men may upon favor procure a privilege above,
at least besides Law, as in omitted Cases; sure the State for the avoiding of
present pressing evils, and the obtaining of future good, may assume the power,
as supposed, to go the Kings ways, and gates, upon sufferance, to meet with
those common enemies that keep no compass; but have well digested, that they
lose not reputation, nor abuse their offices, so they get their ends, though by
most high offenses Now that these men be let fall, as the proposers, as well as
the executioners, of ill advice, against the fundamental Laws, and universal
wel-being of his Majesty's Dominions, Media consilia in medium prolata sunt a
prava dispositione, vel quia negotium non probe intelligitur, ut Guiccard.
hypomneses Politiae 142.
and accordingly proceeded withal by the Parliament, more majorum, as being
neither novum, nor nimium, may very well stand with his Majesty's honor, and
settle him in his native glory, with this Motto, Carolum hactenus vixisse, and
imperasse, nullos, nisi bostes Reipub: poenitere. (as was said of Charles the
fifth) Indeed there can be no color of cruelty, covetousness, or inconstancy
cast upon this course: For when upon further trial, and advice with his great
Council, they are discovered as false, their discarding is no inconstancy, but
falls in with his Maties own principle; Fredericus Furius idea confiliarii in
qualitate 11.
that they serve him best, that serve him with most honesty. Neither is it any
defect of prudent circumspection in their choice; for when one Minister of
State is trusted to commend another, and the choice be bad, the Supreme Master
is only misinformed, not mistaken; and so the first error remedied will
rectify all the rest, who were wrought and brought in, as secondary supports
and supplies to make a Party, Campanella in Atheismo triumphato, cap. 6.
and raise a fortune by a Faction, as men bred, and fed for any service: and if
a King should choose any upon his own judgment, he may as a man (and above the
base flats of flattering spirits) by gracious Royalnesse be taken off from the
security of suspecting men, so bad as they be; Ore probi, sed animo
inverecundi, Salust.
and it may be they were much better when their Prince first pitched upon them,
before the possession of power, and secret practice with worser men, rendered
them as bad, or discovered their disposition: Alfonsus de Azevedo de
syndicatoribus Hispaniae
so that nothing of moment can be alleged against his Majesty's way of leaving
them to his supreme Senate, being he does not deliver them as devoted to
destruction upon his own private ends, interests, or disaffections; but has
owned them more, and longer than such a good Master, so free from their guilt,
needed ever to have done: it was mere necessity of State, produced by their
Counsel, that caused his goodness to suspect their bad service.

And sure I am, the want of this now, when the eyes of all the world are
opened, and set upon them as Pests and Vipers, K. James his speech in
Parliament. 1609.
perfidious enemies of mankind, both as he is a rational, and religious
creature, taking up, or shaking the foundations of Church, and State; if now
Justice should not proceed, Spes and praemia in ambiguo: certa funera and
luctus. Tacitus hist. 61.
much dishonor, and more danger would arise out of it: if we should now
undergo the worst of Government (Civil War) under the best of Princes, it
were the depth of misery; which God and man forbid, and this course is the only
way to prevent it.

Rewards and punishments hold up all rational orders, and operations, and have
immediate influence upon the well-standing of a State: now if the worst of men
should not only have immunities, and impunities, it were punishment unjustly
inflicted upon the best; but much more provoking, when they reap and receive
the chiefest rewards, and have the favor, though they want the faithfulness,
to distribute the rest.

Well it were, Paucis charior fides quam pecunia. Salust. de Bello Iugur.
if such men as live against the rules and maxims of man's well-being, that
make Monopolies, and so scarcity of necessary commodities, Crimina extraord.
arbitraria and capitali poena coercentur. Vesembec. in paud. de crimin. extraor.
which the God of nature has made common, should not be permitted to possess
a portion in the earth, or to breathe in the air, but be interdicted fire and
water, as those that stop, turn, or corrupt the course of the Fountain, and
his Majesty's high ways of Justice, and by a Law fiction sink the Land to
serve the Sea, and yet trouble all Traffic; these are to be prosecuted as
enemies of Civil society, being de jure proscribed by the Laws of Nature, and
Nations; who to make good their mischief, Clapmarius de flagitiis Domination.
lib. 5.
would make the head of a State, the top of a Faction, and provoke a just
Prince to be a Party, when his office is to be a Judge, and charge the
disturbance upon such Ministers as sought to work a distance, and by degrees a
defiance with those Subjects that endeavor to deserve his Majesty's favor,
and are most faithful to his Crown and dignity: these men have wrought in so
many obnoxious under-instruments, as their Ministers and Minions, that there
will be room time enough to exercise royal clemency toward them, when the
State is safe, and strongest humors purged; Then it will be a natural,
non-necessitated work, of highest humanity, when there is a true temper held,
betwixt formal refining, real reforming, and utter ruin of all that deserve
it.

Oh how much honor, and comfort well underlaid, which enemies would envy, but
could not hinder, would come to his Majesty, if out of these troubles, and
travels of his three Kingdoms, with false conceptions and monsters, a
deliverance might be obtained by an universal reformation. Sure (with Gods
blessing) we are very fair for it.

So that weigh well, and wind up all these particulars, and consider withal
the temper of the State, strongly disposing to take up Civil dissentions for a
Monarchy, where Counsels meet in one head, has more absolute advantage to
compose and control faction, Warramond de foederib. li. 2.
then any Aristocracy, especially if mixed of Germans, and Spaniards, that
could never fall into a League, but only a Truce for Traffic; and lay to that
the universal love of his Majesty's Royal person; Optanda sunt laudandis
pauciora. Wotton. ad Regem e Scotia reducem.
the confidence of his absolute Justice, and the present concurring of all the
three States to serve him upon new endearing obligations, and then you cannot
but conclude the best event that ever was expected of so difficult and
dangerous a disturbance.

Si non stet Respub: certe in boni Principis sinum cecidit. Vt SENECA sub
AUGUSTO CAESARE.


