THE English Rudiments OF THE LATIN TONGUE, Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER.
Which are so formed, that a Child, omitting altogether the Questions, may
learn only the answers, and be fully instructed in the Rudiments of the
Latin Tongue.

By WILLIAM DU-GARD.

For the Use of Marchant-Tailor's School.

LONDON: Printed by W. D. and are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield at the
Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. An. Do. 1656.

To the LEARNER of the RUDIMENTS of the Latin Tongue.
IN the undertaking of the meanest Action some Scope and End is proposed. In thy
coming to School, thou must consider, that thy End and Aim is, (or ought to
be,) to obtein learning: the End of that is, to* enable thee to do God better
service, either in Church or Commonwealth. To facilitate the way, These
English Rudiments of the Latin Tongue are so composed by Question and Answer,
that (if my experience deceiv me not) they will render the Task more easy and
pleasanter both to ^eacher and Learner. For when the child shall see that he
is able to ask a pertinent Question, and his fellow give him a full Answer; the
Master's labor is much eased, and the Child greatly encouraged, the Memory
less burdened than it was heretofore in the Common Accidence: and yet the
expens and tediousness of other Comments wholly avoided.

But in learning by heart, Let me admonish thee to pass by the Questions
altogether, mindeing them not at all: as for example, in the Numbers, the
Question and Answer stand thus:

Qu. How many Numbers be there in Nouns?

In Nouns be two Numbers; the Singular and the Plural.

Qu. How know you the Singular Number?

The Singular Number speaks but of one: as Lapis, a Stone.

Qu. How the Plural?

The Plural number speaks of more than one: as, Lapides, Stones.

Now, if you omit the Questions, it stand's together thus to be Learned of the
Scholar.

In Nouns be two Numbers; the Singular and the Plural: the Singular Number
speaks but of One; us, Lapis, a Stone: the Plural number speaks of more
than One; as, Lapides, Stones.

The principal Questions are numbered by Figures* 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. -- some are
not numbered, but set down in a lesser Character for explanation of the former:
which in learning by heart may be passed by.

The main labor in learning (as of any Language, so) of the Latin Tongue, is,
in Nouns and Verbs: in the other parts there is little hardness. These
Rudiments, for the Common Rules, are sufficient for the Young beginner, whose
tender capacity cannot comprehend Curious Criticisms. When age and proficiency
draw's them further, they may then be exercised therein: in the mean time, if
they be well practiced in the Declining of Nouns, and Conjugating Verbs, the
greatest difficulty will be overcom. To this End Comenius has furnished us
with a Vestibulum Linguae Latinae: where they may have plenty of Nouns and
Verbs disposed in an easy Method, with a Vocabularie, at the later End, where
every word is declined and fitted for Children's Capacity: and a Janua
Linguarum, a new Work, for those that have made further progress. Bless God for
these helps, which our forefathers were not acquainted withal. Do not thou, by
thy negligence, lose the fruit of so great a benefit, which thou may now
enjoy, to thy great advantage, if it be not thine own fault. Do not therefore
squander away idly that precious time, which thou can never call back again:
nor let slip the Opportunity which is now afforded thee in thy tender age;
least, when time shall better awake thy judgment, thou repent (as multitudes
have don) when it is too late.

These Rudiments have two parts: I. Etymology. II. Syntaxis. Etymology
handle's the eight parts, with their accidents, or, things belonging to them,
severally, as Single words, which begin at In Speech. Syntaxis, as they are
joined together in a speech: which begin's at the Concords. The RULES of
Propria quae Maribus, teach you to know, what Gender a Noun is of Regularly:
Heteroclits, or Nouns that vary from the Ordinary Rule, are set down in Quae
Genus. But for the Declineing of them, when the Gender is once known, you must
bring them to some pattern or example in the five Declensions. The Use of the
Rules at As in praesenti is, to teach you to know the praeterperfect Tens and
the Supines of Verbs, both Simple and Compound: and the Declineing of them must
be reduced to the four Conjugations here set down. Continual practice and
Exercise will quickly gain a dexterity therein: and then thou may with
delight and pleasure go on to the Syntaxis, and set upon other Authors. And for
thy Eas, I have added at the End of these Rudiments all the Nouns comprehended
in the Rules of Propria quae maribus, and Quae genus, with their Declension and
Gender: and all the Verbs in As in praesenti, with a short or long note of
their Conjugation, to which in declining they may be referred. If thou receiv
any Benefit or furtherance hereby, give God the Glory.

Capital Letters.

Romans A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z.

Italick. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T V V W X Y Z.

Small letters, or characters.

Roman. a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z.

Italick. a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z.

We use great characters 1. In proper Names: as, Petrus, Joannes. Peter, John.
2. In the beginning of a Sentence: as, Deum time. Parents honora. Fear God.
Honor thy parents. 3. In Names of Arts* as, Grammatica, Logica, Rhetorica, etc.
4. In Names of Offices and Dignities: as, Episcopus, a Bishop. Celsitudo
Vestra, Your Highness.


Other words, for the most part, are to be written with small characters.

Letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants. There be five Vowels, which
make a perfect sound of themselves, viz. a, e, i, o, u; and the Greek y, for i.
All the rest are Consonants: which sound with a Vowel.

But i and u are sometimes Consonants, and sometimes Vowels. They are always
Consonants, when they are set before themselves, or other Vowels, and must be
written thus, j, v: as, jaci^, injicio, jubeo, voluntas, vultus. But set before
a Consonant they are always Vowels, and thus written: i and u; as, ignis,
inter: ubi, umbra, unus.

Notes or Points, which we use in distinguishing writeing, are 1. a Comma,
which is a short paus --, 2. a Semicolon, Somewhat longer --; 3. a Colon, a
longer stay -- --: 4. a Period, which makes up a perfect sentence -- --. 5. a
Note of Exclamation -- --! 6. a Note of Interrogation --? 7. a Parenthesis --
-- ()


The Rudiments of the LATIN TONGUE.
Question, 1. How many parts of Speech are there?
In Speech be Eight Parts. I. Noun, II. Pronoun, III Verb, IV. Participle,
declined. V. Adverb, VI. Conjunction, VII. Preposition, VIII. Interjection,
undeclined.

What is it to be declined?

To be declined is to he varied or changed into diverse terminations.

What is a termination?

A termination is the ending of a word in the last letter or syllable.

What is it to be undeclined?

To be undeclined is not to be varied or changed at all into diverse
terminations; but to remain always the same: as, hodie* cras, ad, apud. etc.

Of a NOUN.
Qu 2. What is a Noun?
A Noun is the name of a thing that may be seen, felt, heard, or understood:
as, manus an hand, domus an house, bonitas goodness.

Qu. 3. How many sorts of Nouns are there?
There be two sorts of Nouns: a Noun Substantive, and a Noun Adjective.

Qu. 4. What is a Noun Substantive?
A Noun Substantive is that stands by himself, and requires not another word
to be joined with him, to show his signification; as homo a man.

What mean you by that stands by himself?

It stands by himself: i. e. it is understood of it self alone, without the
help of another word.

Qu. 5. What is a Noun Adjective?
A Noun Adjective is that cannot stand by it self in reason and signification;
but requires to be joined with another word: as bonus good, pulcher fair.

Qu. 6. How is a Noun Substantive declined?
A Noun Substantive is declined with one Article; as Hic magister a master: or
else with two at the most; as Hic and haec parens a father, or mother.

Qu. 7. How is a Nonn Adjective declined?
A Noun Adjective is declined either with three Terminations, as bonus, bona,
bonum; or else with three Articles, as Hic, haec, and hoc felix happy; Hic and
haec levis and hoc leve light.

Qu. 8. How many sorts of Nouns Substantives be there?
A Noun Substantive is either Proper to the thing it betokens, as Edvardus is
my proper name: or else is Common to more, as Homo is a common name to all men.

Qu. 9. How many things belong to a Noun?
There belong to a Noun these five things: Number, Case, Gender, Declension and
Comparison.

Qu. 10 How many Numbers be there in a Noun?
IN Nouns be two Numbers; the singular and the Plural.

Qu. 11. How know you the Singular Number?
The Singular number speaks but of One; as Lapis a stone.

Qu: 12. How the Plural?
The Plural number speaks of more then one; as Lapides stones.

Cases of Nouns.
Qu. 13. How many Cases be there in Nouns?
THere be in Nouns six Cases, singularly and plurally: the Nominative, the
Genitive, the Dative, the Accusative, the Vocative, and the Ablative.

How be these Cases known one from another?

The Nominative and the Accusative are known by their Places; the rest by their
Signs.

Qu. 14. How know you the Nominative Case?
The Nominative Case comes before the Verb, and answers to this question,
Who or what: as, Magister docet, The Master teaches.

Qu. 15. How the Genitive?
The Genitive Case is known by this token Of, and answers to this question
Whose or whereof; as Doctrina magistri, The learning of the master.

Qu. 16. How the Dative?
The Dative Case is known by this token To, and answers to this question, To
Whom, or to What: as, Do librum magistro, I give a book to the master.

Qu. 17. How the Accusative?
The Accusative Case follows the Verb, and answers to this question, Whom
or What; as, Amo magistrum, I love the master.

Qu. 18. How the Vocative?
The Vocative Case is known by Calling or Speaking to as, o magister, o master.

Qu. 19. How the Ablative?
The Ablative Case is commonly joined with Prepositions serving to the Ablative
Case; as, De magistro, Of the master: Coram magistro, Before the master.

Also In, With, Through, For, From, By and than, after the Comparative Degree,
be Signs of the Ablative Case.

What be the Common Signs of the Cases?

The Common Sign of the
Nominative is a or the. Genitive -- of. Dative -- to. Accusative -- the
Vocative -- o Ablative -- from.
Articles.
Qu. 20. What is the Use of Articles?
ARticles are marks or notes of the Gender, borrowed of the Pronoun, and are
thus declined.

Singulariter Pluraliter Nominat hit, haec, hoc Nominat. hi, hae, haec Genesis
hujus, hujus, hujus Ge. horum, haru^, horu^ Dativ. huic, huic, huic Dat. his,
his, his Accus. hunc, hanc, hoc Accus. hos, has, haec Voc. caret Vocat. caret
Ablat. hoc, hac, hoc Ablat. his, his, his.

Genders of Nouns.
Qu. 21. How many Genders of Nouns be there?
GEnders of Nouns be seven: the Masculine, the Feminine; the Neuter, the Common
of two, the Common of three, the Doubtful, and the Epicene.

Qu. 22. How know you the Masculine Gender?
The Masculine Gender is declined with this article Hic: as Hic vir, a man.

Qu. 23. How the Feminine?
The Feminine Gender is declined with this article Haec: as Haec mulier, a
woman.

Qu. 24. How the Neuter?
The Neuter Gender is declined with this article Hoc: as Hoc saxum, a stone.

Qu. 25. How the Common of two?
The Common of two is declined with Hic and haec: as Hic and haec parens, a
father or mother.

Qu. 26. How the Common of three?
The Common of three is declined with Hic, haec, and hoc: as Hic, haec, and hoc
Felix, happy.

Qu. 27. How the Doubtful?
The Doubtful Gender is declined with Hic or haec: as Hic vel haec Dies, a day.

Qu. 28. How the Epicene?
The Epicene Gender is declined with one article; and under that one article
both kinds be signified: as Hic passer, a sparrow: Haec Aquila, an eagle,
both he and she.

Declensions of Nouns.
Qu. 29. How many Declensions be there?
THere be five Declensions of Nouns.

Qu. 30. How are the Five Declensions known, one from the other.
These Five Declensions are known asunder by the terminations of their Cases?

Qu. 31. How the first?
I. THe first is, when the Genitive and Dative Case singular end in ae: the
Accusative in am: the Vocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in a: the
Nominative plural in ae: the Genitive in arum: the Dative in is: the Accusative
in as: the Vocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in is: as in example.

Singulariter
Nominativo haec Musa a song Genitive hujus Musae of a song Dativo huic Musae
to a song Accusativo hanc Musam the song Vocativo o Musa o song Ablativo ab hac
Musa from a song.

Pluraliter
Nominativo hae Musae songs Genitivo harum Musarum of songs Dativo his Musis to
songs Accusativo has Musas the songs Vocativo o Musae o songs Ablativo ab his
Musis from songs.

What particular observation have you in this first Declension?

Note that ^ilia an^ Nata do make the Dative and the Ablative plural in is, or
in abus. Also De^, mula, equa, liberta, make the Dative and the Ablative Case
plural in abus only.

Qu. 32. How know you the second Declension?
II. THe Second is when the Genitive Case singular end's in i: the Dative in o:
the Accusative in um: the Vocative for the most part like the Nominative: the
Ablative in o: The Nominative plural in i: the Genitive in orum: the Dative in
is: the Accusative in os: the Vocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in is:
as in example.

Singulariter
Nom. hic magister a master Genesis hujus magistri of a master Dat. huic magistro
to a master Accus hunc magistrum the master Vocat. o magister o master Ablat.
ab hoc magistro from a master.

Pluraliter
Nom. hi magistri masters Genesis horum magistrorum of masters Dat. his magistris
to masters Accus hos magistros the masters Voccat. o magistri o masters Ablat.
ab his magistris from masters.

Singulariter
Nom. hic Dominus a Lord Genesis hujus Domini of a Lord Dat. huic Domino to a Lord
Accus. hunc Dominum the Lord Vocat. o Domine o Lord Ablat. ab hoc Domino from a
Lord.

Pluraliter
Nom. hi Domini Lords Genesis horum Dominorum of Lords Dat. his Dominis to Lords
Accus. hos Dominos the Lords Vocat. O Domini o Lords Ablat. ab his Dominis from
Lords.

Why do you say in the Voc. singular, the Vocative for the most part like the
Nominative?

Because it is no^ always so: for there be diverse exceptions: as,

I. When the Nominative ends in us, the Uocative shall end in e: as Nom. hic
Dominus, Vocativo o Domine. Except Deus, Which makes o Deus, and filius, that
makes o fili.

II. When the Nominative ends in ius, if it be the proper name of a man, the
Uocative shall end in i, as Nom. hic Georgius, Vocativo Georgi.

III. Also these Nouns following make the Uocative in ^, or in ns; as, agnus,
lucus, vulgus, populus, chorus, fluvius.

N. B. Note also that all Nouns of the Neuter Gender, of what Declension soever
they be, have the Nominative, the Accusative, and the Uocative alike in both
Numbers; and in the plural number they end all in a; as in example.

Singulariter
Nom. hoc regnum a kingdom Genesis hujus regni of a kingdom Dativ. huic regno
(...) to a kingdom Accus. hoc regnum the kingdom Vocat. o regnum o kingdom
Ablat. ab hoc regno. from a kingdom

Pluraliter
Nom. haec regna kingdoms Genit. horum regnorum of kingdoms Dat. his regnis to
kingdoms Accus. haec regna the kingdoms Voccat. o Regna o kingdoms Abl. ab his
regnis from kingdoms.

Ambo and duo make the neuter gender in o; and be thus declined:

Pluraliter
Nom. Ambo, ambae, ambo, both. Genesis amborum, ambarum, amborum Dativ. ambobus,
ambabus, ambobus Accus. ambos, ambas, ambo Vocat. ambo, ambae, ambo Ablat.
ambobus, ambabus, ambobus. Likewise Duo.

Qu. 33. How know you the third Declension?
III. The third is, when the Genitive Case singular ends in is, the Dative in
i, the Accu^ative in em, and sometime in im, and sometime in both: the Uocative
like the Nominative: the Ablative in e, sometime in i, and sometime both e and i:
the Nominative Case plural in es: the Genitive in um, and sometime in ium, the
Dative in bus, the Accusative in es: the Uocative like the Nominative: the
Ablative in bus: as in example.

Singulariter
Nom. hic lapis a stone Genesis hujus lapidis of a stone Dat. huic lapidi to a
stone Accus. hunc lapidem the stone Voccat. o lapis o stone Ablat. ab hoc
lapide from a stone.

Pluraliter
Nom. hi lapides stones Genesis horum lapidum of stones Dativ. his lapidibus to
stones Accus. hos lapides the stones Vocat. o lapides of stones. Ablat. ab his
lapidibus from stones.

Singulariter
Nom. hic and haec parens a father or mother Genesis hujus parentis Dat. huic
parenti Accus. hunc and hanc parentem Vocat. o parens Ablat. ab hoc and hac
parente.

Pluraliter
Nom. hi and hae parents Genesis horum and harum parentum Dat. his parentibus
Accus. hos and has parents Vocat. o parents Ablat. parentibus.

Qu. 34. How know you the fourth Declension?
IV. THe fourth is, when the Genitive Case singular ends in us: the Dative in
^i: the Accnsative in um: the Uocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in u:
The Nominative plural in us: the Genitive in number: the Dative ibus: the
Accusative in us: the Uocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in ibus: as in
example.

Singulariter
Nom. haec manus an hand Genesis hujus manus of an hand Dat. huic manui to an hand
Accus. hanc manum the hand Vocat. o manus o hand Ablat. ab hac manu from an
hand.

Pluraliter
Nom. hae manus hands. Geu. harum manuum of hands Dat. his manibus to hands
Accus. has manus the hands Vocat. o manus o hands Ablat. ab his manibus from
hands.

Qu. 35. how know you the fifth Declension?
V. THe fifth is. when the Genitive and the Dative Case singular end in ^i: the
Accusative in em: the Vocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in ^: The
Nominative plural in es: the Genitive in erum: the Dative in ebus: the
Accusative in es: the Uocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in ebns: as in
example.

Singulariter
Nom. haec facies a face Genesis hujus faciei of a face Dat. huic faciei to a face
Accus. hanc faciem the face Vocat. o facies o face. Ablat ab hac facie from a
face.

Pluraliter
Nom. hae facies faces Genesis harum facierum of faces Dat. his faciebus to faces
Accus. has facies the faces Vocat. o facies o faces Ablat. ab his faciebus from
faces.

N. B. Note that all nouns of the fifth declension be of the feminine Gender,
except me* ridies and dies.

Qu. How end's the Genitive Case singular in each Declension?

The Genitive Case singular of the

1. in ae as Musae 2. in i as Magistri. 3. in is as Lapidis. 4. in us as Manus.
5. in ei as Faciei.

The Dative case singular of the

1. in ae as Musae. 2. in o as Magistro. 3. in i as Lapidi. 4. in ui as Manui.
5. in ei as Faciei.

The Accusative case singular of the

1. in am as Musam. 2. in um as Magistrum. 3. in em as Lapidem. 4. in um as
Manum. 5. in em as Faciem.

The Uocative like the nominative, singularly and plurally, in all declensions;
save in the second singular; where it is for the most part like the nominative.

The Ablative singular of the

1. in a as Mus^. 2. in o as Magistro. 3. in e as Lapide. 4. in u as Manu. 5.
in e as Facie.

The Nom. plural of the

1. in ae as Musae. 2. in i as Magistri. 3. in es as Lapides. 4. in us as
Manus. 5. in es as Facies.

The Genitive plural of the

1. in arum as Musarum. 2. in orum as Magistrorum. 3. in um or ium as Lapidum,
tristium. 4. in uum as Manuum. 5. in erum as Facierum.

The Dative plural of the

1. in is. as Musis. 2. in is. as Magistris. 3. in bus as Lapidibus. 4. in ibus
as Manibus. 5. in ebus. as Faciebus.

The Accusative plural of the

1. in as as Musas. 2. in os as Magistros. 3. in es as Lapides. 4. in us as
Manus. 5. in es as Facies.

The Uocative Plural is always like the Nominative.

The Ablative Plural is ever the same with the Dative.

The Declineing of Adjectives.
Qu. 36. How is a Noun Adjective of three terminations declined?
A Noun Adjective of three terminations is thus declined.

Singulariter Pluraliter Nom. bonus, bona bonum. N. boni, bonae, bona, Genesis
boni, bonae, boni. G. bonorum, bonarum, bonoru^ Dat. bono, bonae, bono. D.
bonis, bonis, bonis. Acc. bonum, bonam, bonum. A. bonos, bonas, bona. Voc.
bone, bona, bonum. V. boni, bonae, bona. Abl. bono, bona, bono. A. bonis,
bonis, bonis.

N. B. Eight Adjectives viz. unus, totus, solus, ullus, alius, alter, uter, and
neuter make the Genesis sing. in ius, and the Dative in i: as unus, una, unum. Gen
unius. Dat. uni: in other places like bonus. But alius, alter, uter, and neuter
lack the Uocative case: and alius make's aliud in the neuter Gender, not alium.

Qu. 37. How is a Noun Adjective of three Articles declined?
A Noun Adjective of three Articles is thus declined; after the third
decleusion.

Sing. Plur. N. hic, haec, and hoc, felix happy. N. hi and hae felices and haec
felicia. G. hujus felicis. G horum, harum, ^ horum feliciu^. D. huic felici. D.
his felicibus. A. hunc and hanc felicem, and hoc felix. Ac. hos and has
felices, and haec felicia. V. ^ felix. V. ^ felices* and ^ felicia. A. ab h^c,
hac, and hoc felice vel felici. A. ab his felicibus.

Sing. Plur. N. hic and haec tristis, and hoc triste. sorrowful. N. hi and hae
tristes, and haec tristia. G hujus tristis. G horum harum and horum uistium. D.
huic tristi. D. his tristibus. A. hunc and h^nc tristem, and hoc triste. Ac.
hos and has tristes, and haec tristia. V. o tristis, and o triste. V. o tristes
and o tristia. A. ab hoc hac and hoc tristi. A. ab his tristibus.

Comparisons of Nouns Adjectives.
Qu. 38. What is Comparison?
COmparison is the altering the signification of a word into more or less by
degrees.

Qu. 39. What sorts of Nouns are compared?
Adjectives, whose signification may increas or be diminished, may form
comparison.

What is it, to have the signification increased or diminished?

To have the signification increased or diminished, is to be made more or
less: as hard, harder, hardest: so back again; hardest, harder, hard.

Qu. 4. How many degrees of Comparison are there?
There be three degrees of Comparison: the Positive, the Comparative, and the
Superlative.

Qu. 41. How know you the Positive?
The Positive betokens a thing absolutely without excess, as durus hard.

Qu. 42. How know you the Comparative?
The Comparative somewhat exc^edeth his Positive in signification: as durior,
harder, or more hard.

Qu. 43. Whence is the Comparative degree formed?
The Comparative is formed of the first case of his Positive that ends in i,
by putting thereto or in the masculine and Feminine Gender, and us in the
neuter: as, of duri, hic and haec durior and hoc durius: of tristi, hic and
haec tristior, and hoc tristius.

Qu. 44. How know you the Superlative?
The Superlative exceeds his positive in the highest degree, as durissimus
hardest.

Qu. 45. Whence is the Superlative formed?
The Superlative is formed of the first case of his positive that ends in i,
by putting to ^ and simus; as of duri, durissimus; of tristi, tristissimus.

Qu. 46. How be Nouns Adjectives of the Comparative degree declined?
Nouns Adjectives of the Comparative degree are declined like durior harder,
thus.

Sing. Plur. N. hic and haec durior and hoc durius. N. hi and hae duriores and
haec duriora. G. hujus durioris. G. horum harum and horum duriorum. D. huic
duriori. D. his durioribus. Ac. hunc and hanc duriorem and hoc durius. Ac. hos
and has duriores and haec duriora. V. o durior and o durius. V. o duriores and
o duriora. A. ab hoc hac and hoc duriore vel duriori. A. ab his durioribus.

Qu. 47. What exceptions are there from these general rules?
From these general rules are excepted these that follow.

I. Bonus, m^lior, optimus. Malus, pejor, p^ssimus. Magnus, major, maximus.
Parvus, minor, minimus. Multus plurimus, multa plurima, multum, plus, plurimum.

II. If the positive end in er, the Superlative is formed of the nominative
Case, by putting to rimus; as pulcher pulcherrimus.

III. These nouns ending in lis make the Superlative by changing lis into
limus: as humilis humillimus: similis simillimus: facilis facillimus: gracilis
gracillimus: agilis agillimus: docilis docillimus. All other nouns ending in
lis follow the general rule aforegoing.

IV. If a vowel com before us, it is compared by magis and maxim: as pius,
mag^s-pius, maxime-pius. Assiduus, magis assiduus. maxime-assiduus.

Of a Pronoun.
Qu. 48. What is a Pronoun?
A Pronoun is a part of speech, much lik^ to a Noun, which is used in showing
or rehersing.

Why is it called a Pronoun?

It is called a Pronoun, because it is put for a Noun; and does supply the place
of a Noun.

How are Pronouns used?

Pronouns are used two ways: either in showing or rehersing.

Qu 49. How many Pronouns be there:
There be ^fte^n Pronouns: Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus,
tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras.

Qu. 50 How many have the Vocative case?
Four of these have the Vocative case; as tu, meus, noster, and nostras: all
the rest lack it: also su^ want's the Nominative case.

Qu. 51. What are added to the Pronouns?
To these may be added their compounds: Egomet, tu^e, idem, and also qui,
quae, quod.

Qu. 52. How many Pronoun-Substantives be there?
Ego, tu, su^ are Pronoun-Substantives: all the rest are Adjectives.

Qu. 53. How many Pronoun* Primitives be there?
These eight Pronouns, Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, is^e, hie, and is, be
Primitives.

Qu. 54. Why are they called Primitives?
Because they are first words, and not derived of others.

Qu. 55. What are they called besides?
They be also called Demonstratives; because they show a thing not spoken of
before*

Qu. 56. How many Relatives are there?
These six, hic, ille, iste, is, idem, and qui be Relatives.

Qu. 57. Why are they called Relatives?
because they rehers a thing that was spoken of before.

Qu. 58. How many Pronoun* Derivatives are there?
These seven, Meus, tuns, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras be
Derivatives.

Qu. 59. Why be they called Derivatives?
Because they be derived of their Primitives mei, tui, sui, nostri, and vestri.

Qu. 60. How many things belong to a Pronoun?
There belong to a Pronoun these five things: Number, Case, Gender, as are in a
Noun; Declension and Person, as here follows.

The Declensions of Pronouns.
Qu. 61. How many Declensions are three of Pronouns?
There be four Declensions of Pronouns.

Qu. 62. How will you know what Declension a Pronoun is of?
The Declensions of Pronouns are known by the termination of the Genitive Case
singular, as in Nouns: as, the Genitive of the

I. in i, as mei, tui, sui.

II. in ius or jus, as istius, ejus, cujus.

III. in i. ae, and i, as mei, me^, mei.

IV. in atis, us nostras nostratis.

Qu. 63. How many Pronouns be of of the first Declension?
These three Ego, tu, su^, be of the first Declension, and be thus declined.

Singulariter Pluraliter Nom. Ego Nom. no^ Genesis mei Genesis nostrum vel nostri
Dat. mihi Dat. nobis Acc. me Acc. nos Voc. care^ Voc. caret Abl. a me. Abl. a
nobis.

Singulariter Pluraliter Nom. Tu Nom. vos Genesis tui Genesis vestrum vel vestri Dat.
^ibi Dat. vobis Acc. te Acc. vos Voc. o tu Voc. o vos Abl. a te Abl. a vobis.

Singulariter and Pluraliter
Nominativo care^ Genitivo sui Dativo sibi Accusativo se Vocativo caret
Ablativ^ a se.

Qu. 64. How many Pronouns be of the second Declension?
These six, Ille, ipse, is^e, hic, is, and qui be of the second Declension,
and be thus declined.

Sing. Plur. Nom. iste, ista istud No isti, istae, ista Genesis istius Ge.
istorum, istarum, istorum Dat. isti Dat. istis Accus istum, istam, istud Acc.
istos, ist^s, ista. Voc. caret Voc. caret Ablat. isto, ista, isto. Abl. istis.

N. B. Ille is declined like iste, and also ipse: saving that ipse makes ipsum
in the neuter Gender, not ipsud.

Qu. 65. How is hic declined?
Nom* hic, haec* hoc* Genesis hujus: Dat. huic: as before in the Noun.

Sing. Plur. Nom. is, ea, id Nom. ii, eae, ea Genesis ejus Genesis eorum, earum,
eorum Dat. ei Dat. iis, vel eis Acc. eum, eam, id Accus eos, eas, ea. Vocat.
caret Voc. caret. Ablat. eo, ea. eo. Abl. iis vel eis.

Sing. Plur. Nom. qui, quae, quod N. qui, quae, quae Genesis cujus G. quorum,
quarum, quorum Dativ. cui D. quibus vel queis Accus. quem, quam, quod Ac. quos,
quas, qu^ Vocat caret Voc. caret Ablat. quo, qua, quo Abl. quibus vel queis.

So is Quis declined, whether it be Interrogative, or Indefinite.

Singulariter
Nom. quis, quae, quid. Genesis cujus. etc.
But the Compound of Quisquis is thus declined.

Singulariter
Nom. quisquis, quicquid Accus. quicquid Abl. quoquo, quaqua, quoquo.
Qu. 66. How many Pronouns be of the third Declension?
These ^^ve, meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester, are of the third Declension;
and are declined like nouns Adjectives of three terminations, in this wife,

Sing. Plural. Nom. meus, mea, meum N. mei, meae, mea Genit. mei, meae, mei
Genesis meorum, mearum, meorum Dat. meo, meae, meo Dat. meis Acc. meum, meam, meum
Acc. meos, meas, me^ Vocat. mi, mea, meum Voc. mei, meae, ^e^ Ablat. meo, me^,
meo. Abl. meis.

So is noster declined, and tuus, suus, vester: saving that these three last do
lack the Vocative Case.

Qu. 67. How many Pronouns be of the fourth Declension?
Nostras, Vestras, be of the fourth Declension, and be thus declined.

Sing. Plur. Nom. hic and haec nostras, and hoc nostrate N. hi and hae
nostrates, and haec nostratia Genesis hujus nostratis G. horum and harum
nostratium Dat. huic nostrati D. his nostratibus Acc. hunc and hanc nostratem,
and hoc nostrate A hos and has nostrates, and haec nostratia Voc. o nostras,
and o nostrate V. ^ nostrates, and ^ nostratia Abl. ab hoc, hac, and hoc
nostrate vel nostrati A. ab his nostratibus.

Cujas is here to be referred for the like manner of declining. So Arpinas,
Ravennas, Londinas, etc. which be called Gentiles, because they properly
detoken pertaining to countries or nations, to sects, or factions.

Qu. 68. How many Persons be there in a Pronoun?
A Pronoun has three Persons.

Qu. 69. How know you the first person?
The first person speaks of himself: as Ego, I, Nos, We.

Qu. 70. How the second?
The second person is spoken to: as Tu, Thou: Vos, Ye: and of this person is
every Vocative Case.

Qu. 71. How the third?
The third person is spoken of, as, Ille, He; Illi, They: and therefore all
Nouns, Pronouns, and Participles be of the third person: viz. because they are
spoken of.

Of a VERB.
Qu. 72. What is a Verb?
A Verb is a part of speech, declined with mood and tens, and betokens to do:
as amo I love: or to suffer, as amor I am loved: or to be, as sum I am.

What is the difference between a Noun and a Verb?

A Noun signifie's the Name of a thing: A Verb signifies the manner of Doing,
Suffering, or Being of a thing.

Qu. 73. How many sorts of Verbs be there?
There be two sorts of Verbs: Personal* which is declined with diverse persons,
or terminations; as amo, amas, amat: and Impersonal, not ^aried by diverse
persons, but formed in the third person singular only: as Taedet it irketh:
Opor^et it behooveth.

Q^. 74. How many kinds of Verbs Personals be there?
Of Verbs Personals there be five kinds: Active, Passive, Neuter, D^ponent,
and Commune.

How do these differ one from another?

These differ three ways: 1. In Termination. 2. In Signification. 3. In
Declining or Forming.

Qu. 75. How know you a Verb Active?
A Verb Active ends in o: and signifie's to do: as Amo, I love.

Qu. 76. How a Verb Passive?
A Verb Passive ends in or: and signifie's to suffer: as Amor, I am loved.

Qu. 77. How a Verb Neuter?
A Verb Neuter ends in m, and signifie's to be; as sum, I am: or in o, and
signifie's sometime to do, as Curro, I run: and sometime to suffer, as Aegroto, I
am sick.

Qu. 78. How a Verb Deponent?
A Verb Deponent ends in o^, like a Passive: and yet in signification is but
either like an Active; as Loquor verbum, I speak a word: or like a Neuter
signifying actively; as glorior, I boast.

Qu. 79. How a Verb Commune?
A Verb Commune ends in r; and yet in signification is both Active and
P^ssive; as Osculor ^e, I ^iss thee: Osculor a te, I am kissed of thee.

MOODS.
Qu. 80. How many Moods are there?
THere be six Moods: the Indicative, the Imperative, the Optative, the
Potential, the Subjunctive, the Infinitive.

Qu. 81. How know you the Indicative Mood?
The Indicative Mood shows a reason, true or falls; as Ego amo, I love: or else
asks a questiou; as Amas tu? Do thou love?

Qu. 82. How the Imperative?
The Imperative bids or commands: as Ama, Love thou.

Qu. 83. How the Optative?
The Optative wishes or destreth: with these signs, would God, I pray God, or
God grant: and has evermore an Adverb of wishing joined with him: as Utinam
amem I pray God I love.

Qu. 84. How the Potential?
The Potential Mood is known by these signs* may, can, might, could, would,
should, or ought: as Amen, I may or can love: without an Adverb joined with him.

Qu. 85. How the Subjunctive?
The Subjunctive Mood has evermore some conjunction joined with him: as Cum
amarem, when I loved.

Why is it called the Subjunctive Mood?

It is called the Subjunctive Mood; because it depends of another Verb, either
going before, or coming after: as cum amarem, eram miler: when I loved, I was a
wretch.

How do the Optative, Potential, and Subjunctive Moods differ?

The Optative, Potential, and Subjunctive Moods are the same in termination:
but they differ in signification, and ^ign of the Mood.

Qu 86 How know you the Infinitive Mood?
The Infinitive signifie's to do, or to suffer, or to be: and has neither
Number nor Person, nor Nominative Case before him.

By what sign is it known?

It is commonly known by this sign To; as amar^* To love*

When two Verbs com together, what Mood must the later be?

When two Verbs com together without any Noun between them, then the later
shall be the I^finitive Mood: as cupio discere, I desire to learn.

Gerunds.
Qu. 87. What are there peculiarly belonging to the Infinitive Mood?
THere belong to the Infinitive mood Gerunds and Supines.

Why do they belong to the Infinitive Mood?

Because their signification is Infinite; like to the signification of the
Infinitive Mood, not making any difference of Number o^ Person.

Qu. 88. How many Gerunds are there?
There b^e three Gerunds, ending in di, do, and dum: which have both the Active
and Passive signification: as amandi of loving, or being loved: amando in
loving, or being loved: amandum to love, or to be loved.

Supines.
Qu. 89. How many Supines be there?
There be two Supines. The First end's in um, and signifie's Actively: as,
amatum to love. The Later in u, and for the most part signifie's passively: as
amatu to be loved.

Tenses.
Qu. 90. How many Tenses be there?
THere be five Tenses or Times: the Present tens: the Preterimperfect Tens:
the Preterperfect Tens: the Preterpluperfect Tens: and the Future Tens.

Qu. 91. How know you the Present Tens?
The Present Tens speaks of the time that now is: as, amo I love.

Qu. 92. How the Preterimperfect Tens?
The Preterimperfect Tens speaks of the time not perfectly past: as amabam, I
loved, or did love.

Qu. 93 How the Preterpersect Tens?
The Preterpersect Tens speaks of the time perfectly past, with this sign
have: as amavi, I have loved.

Qu. 94. How know you the Preterpluperfect Tens?
The Preterpluperfect Tens speaks of the time more then perfectly past, with
this sign had: as amaveram, I had loved.

Qu. 95. How the Future Tens?
The Future Tens speaks of the time to com, with this sign shall or will, as
amabo, I shall or will love.

Persons.
Qu. 96. How many Persons are there in Verbs?
THere be in Verbs three Persons in both Numbers: as, Sing. Ego amo, I love;
tu amas, thou love; ille amat, he loves* Plural. Nos amamus, we love; vos
amatis, ye love; illi amant, they love.

Conjugations.
Qu. 79. How many Conjugations have Verbs?
VErbs have four Conjugations, which are known after this manner.

Qu. 98. How know you the first Conjugation?
The first conjugation has a^ long before re and ris: as ama^re, ama^ris.

Qu. 99. How the second?
The second Conjugation has e^ long before re and ris: as doce^re, doce^ris*

Qu. 100. How the third?
The third Conjugation has short before re and ris: as legre, legris.

Qu. 101. How the fourth?
The fourth Conjugation has i^ long before re and ris as audi^re, audi^ris.

Qu. 102. How be Verbs in O declined?
Verbs in O, of the four Conjugations be declined after these examples.

I. AMo, amas, amavi, amare: amandi, amando, amandum: amatum, amatu: amans,
amaturus. To love. II. Doceo, doces, docui, docere: docendi, docendo, docendum:
doctum, doctu* docens, docturus. To teach. III. Lego, legi^s, legi, legere:
leg^ndi, legendo, legendum: lectum, lectu: legens, lecturus. To read. IV.
Audio, audis, audivi, audire: audiendi, audiendo, audiendum: auditum, auditu:
audiens, auditurus. To hear.
INDICATIVE MOOD.
Present tens singular.
I love, Thou love, He loves, We love, Ye love, they love, or or or or or
or do love, do love, does love, do love, do love, do love.

Amo, amas, amat. Amamus, amatis, amant. Doceo, doces, docet. Pluraliter
Docemus, docetis, docent. Lego, legis, legit. Legimus, legitis, legunt. Audio,
audis, audit. Audimus, auditis, audiunt.

Preterimperfect tens singular;
Amabam, I loved or did love. Docebam, Legebam, bas, bat. Plural. bamus, batis,
bant. Audiebam,

Preterperfect tens singul.
Amavi, I have loved. Docui, Legi, isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, ^runt vel ^re.
Audivi,

Preterpluperfect tens sing.
Amaveram, I had loved. Docueram, Legeram, ras, rat. Plural. ramus, ratis,
rant. Audiveram,

Future tens singular;
Amabo, I shall or will. Docebo, bis, bit. Plural. bmus, btis, bunt. Legam, es,
et. Plural. ^mus, ^tis, ent. Audiam,

Imperative Mood.
Love Love he, Love we, or Love Love they, or thou: let him love. let us
love: ye: let them love.

Present tens singular;
Ama, amet, amato: amato. Plu. amemus, amate, ament, amatote: amanto Doce,
doceat, doc^to: doceto. Pl. doceamus, docete, doceant, docetote: doce^to Lege,
legate, legito: legito. Plu. legamus, legite, legant, legitote: legunto Audi,
audiat, audito: audito. Pl. audiamus, audite, audiant, auditote: audiu^to

N. B. The Optative, Potentiall, and Subjunctive Mood have the same
termination: only they differ in Signification, and Sign of the Mood: as,
utinam amem, God grant I love, in the Optative Mood: amem, I may or can love,
in the Potential Mood: cum amem, when I love, in the Subjunctive Mood: and so
likewise in other Tenses.

Subjunctive Mood.
Present tens singul. cum
When I love. Amem, ames, ame^. Plur. cum amemus, ametis, ament. Doceam, Legam,
as, at. Plur. cum amus, atis, ant. Audiam,

Preterimperfect tens sing. cum
Amarem, When I loved, or did love. Docerem, Legerem, res, ret. Plur. cum
remus, retis, rent. Audirem,

Preterperfect tens sing. cum
Amaverim, When I had loved. Docuerim, Legerim, ris, rit. Plur. cum rimus,
ritis, rint. Audiverim,

Preterpluperfect tens sing. cum
Amavissem, When I had loved. Docuissem, Legissem, ses, set. Plur. cum semus,
setis, sent. Audivissem,

Future tens sing. cum
Amavero, When I shall or will love. Docuero, Legero, ris, rit. Plur. cum
rimus, ritis, rint. Audivero,

Infinitive Mood.
Present and Preterimperfect tens
Amate, Love. Docere, To Teach. Legere, Read. Audire, Hear.

Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect tens,
Amavisse Loved. Docuisse, To have or had Taught. Legisse, Read. Audivisse.
Heard.

Future tens.
Amaturum love Docturum esse, To teach hereafter. Lecturum read Auditurum hear

Gerunds
Amandi, of loving: do in loving: dum, to love. Docendi, of teaching: do, in
teaching: dum, to teach Legendi, of reading: do, in reading: dom, to read.
Audiendi, of hearing: do, in hearing: dum, to hear.

Supines
Amatum love. Amatu loved. Doctum To teach Doctu To be taught. Lectum read.
Lectu read. Auditum hear. Auditu heard.

A participle of the present tens.
Amans, loving. Docens, teaching. Legens, reading. Audiens, hearing.
The participle of the first future tens.
Amaturus to love, or about to love. Docturus to teach, or about to teach.
Lecturus to read, or about to read. Auditurus to hear, or about to hear.
Before w^e decline any Verbs in or, for supplying of many tenses lacking in
all such Verbs, we must learn to decline this Verb Sum, in this wise following.

Sum, es, fui, esse, futurus: To be.

Indicative Mood.
Present tens singular; Sum, I am: es, est. Pluraliter, Sumus, estis, sunt.

Preterimperfect tens sing. Eram, I was: eras, erat. Plural. eramus, eratis,
erant.

Preterperfect tens singular; Fui, I have been: fuisti, fuit. Plur. ^u^mus, ^u,
istis, fuerunt vel fuere.

Preterpluperfect tens singular; Fueram, I had been: fueras, fuerat. Plural.
fueramus, fueratis, fuerant.

Future tens. singular; Ero, I shall or will be: eris, erit. Plur. erimus,
eritis, erunt.

Imperative Mood.
Present tens singular;
Sis, Sit, Plural Sitis, Sint, Es, be Simus. Este, Sunto. Esto, thou, Esto,
Estote,

Subjunctive Mood.
Present tens singul. cum Sim, When I am: sis, sit. Plu. cum simus, sitis, sint.

Preterimperfect tens sing cum Essem, When I was: esses, esset. Plu. cum
essemus, essetis, essent.

Preterperfect tens singular; cum Fuerim, When I have been: fueris, fuerit.
Plur. cum fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint.

Preterpluperfect tens s^ng; cum Fuissem, When I had been: fuisses, fuisset.
Plu. cum fuissemus, fuissetis, fuissent.

Future tens sing. cum Fuero, When I shall or will be: fueris, fuerit* Plur.
cum fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint.

Infinitive Mood.
Present and preterimperfect tens;
Esse, to be, Preterperfect and Preterpluperf. tens, Fuisse, to have or had
been.

Future tens; Fore vel futurum esse, to be herereafter.

Verbs in Or, of the Four Conjugations, be declined after these examples.
AMor amaris vel amare: amatus sum vel fui, amari: amatus, amandus, To be
loved.

Doceor, doceris vel docere doctus sum vel fui, doceri: doctus, docendus, To
be taught.

Legor, legris vel legre: lectus sum vel fui, legi: lectus, legendus, To be
read.

Audior, aud^^is vel audire: auditus sum vel fui, audiri: auditus, audiendus.
To be heard.

The Indicative Mood.
Present tens singular,
I am loved. Amor, amaris vel amare, amatur. Doceor, doce^r is vel doce^re,
docetur. Legor, legris vel legre, legitur. Audior, audiris vel audire, auditur.
Plur. m^^, mini, ntur.

Preterimperfect tens*sing
Ama^ar, Docebar, Legebar Audiebar. I was loved. baris vel bare, batur. bamini,
bantur. Plur. bamur,

Preterperfect tens sing.
Amatus Doctus Lectus Anditus I have been loved. sum vel fui, tus es vel
fuisti, tus est vel fuit* Plur* ti sumus vel fuimus* ti estis, vel fuistis, ti
sunt, fuerunt vel fuere.

Preterpluperfect tens sing.
Amatus Doctus Lectus Auditus I had been loved. eram vel fueram, tus eras vel
fueras, tus erat vel fuerat. Pl ^i eramus, vel fueramus, ti eratis vel
fueratis, ti erant vel fuerant.

Future tens singular.
Amabor, Docebor, Legar, Audia^, I shall or will be loved. bris vel bre, tur.
eris vel ere, etur. entur. Plu bmur, imini, untur. Plur. emur, emini,

Imperative Mood.
Be thou loved. Let him be loved. Let us be loved. Be ye loved, Let them
be loved.

Present tens sin.
Amare, ametur, amator: amator. Pl. amemur, Amamini, amentur, amaminor:
amantor. Docere, doceatur, docetor: docetor. Pl. doceamur, Docemini, doceantur,
doceminor: docentor. Legere, legatur, legitor, legitor. Pl. legamur, Legimini,
legantur, legiminor: leguntor. Audire, audiatur, Auditor: auditor. Pl. audi.
amur, Audimini, audiantur, audiminor, audiuntor.

Subjunctive Mood.
Present tens sing. cum
When I am loved. Amer, eris vel ere, etur. Plu. emur, emini, entur. Docear,
Legar, Audiar, aris vel are, atur. Pl. cum amur, amini, antur.

Preterimrerfect tens singular, cum
Amarer, Docerer, Legerer, Audirer, When I was loved. reris vel rere, retur.
Plu. cum remur, remini, rentur.

Preterperfect tens sing cum
Amatus Doctus Lectus Auditus When I had been loved. sim vel fuerim, tus sis
vel fueris, tus sit vel fuerit. Plural. cum ti simus vel fuerimus, ti sitis vel
fueritis, ti sint vel fuerint.

Preterpluperfect tens singular, cum
Amatus Doctus Lectus Auditus When I had been loved. essem vel fuissem, tus
esses vel fuisses, tus esset vel fuisset.. Plur. cum ti essemus vel fuissemus,
ti essetis vel fuissetis, ti essent vel fuissent.

Future tens ^ingul. cum
Amatus Doctus Lectus Auditus When I shall or will be loved. ero vel fuero,
tus eris vel fueris, tus eris vel fuerit. Plural. cum ti erimus vel fuerimus,
ti eritis vel fuer^^is, ti erunt vel fuerint.

Infinitive Mood.
Present and Preterimperfect tens.
Amari, Doceri, Legi, Audiri, To be Loved. ^aught. Read. Heard.

Preterperfect tens and Preterpluperfect tens.
Amatum Doctum Lectum Auditum To have or had been loved. esse vel fuisse.

Future tens.
Amatum iri, vel amandum esse, loved Doctum iri, vel docendum esse, to be
taught hereafter. Lectum iri, vel legendum esse, read Auditum iri, vel
audiendum esse, heard

A Participle of the preterperfect tens.
Amatus, Loved. Doctus, Taught. Lectus, Read. Auditus, Heard.
A Participle of the Future in dus.
Amandus, Loved. Docendus, To be Taught. Legendus, Read. Audiendus, Heard.

Of certain Irregular Verbs which are declined and formed in manner following.
POssum, potes, potui, posse, potens: To may or can.

Volo, vis, volui, velle: volendi, volendo, volendum: supinis caret, volens: To
will, or, to be willing.

Nolo, nonvis, nolui, nolle: nolendi, nolendo, nolendum: supinis caret, nolens:
To nill, or to be unwilling.

Malo, mavis, malui, malle: malendi, malendo, malendum: supinis caret, malens:
To have rather, or* to be more willing.

Edo, edis vel es, edi, edere vel esse: edendi, edendo edendum: esum esu, vel
estum, estu, edens, esurus, vel esturus: To eat.

Fio, fis, factus sum vel fui, fieri: factus, faciendus: To be made, or, to
be don.

Fero fers, tuli, far: ferendi ferendo, ferendum: latum latu: ferens,
laturus: To bear or suffer.

Feror, ferris, vel far, latus sum vel fui, far: latus, ferendus. To be
born or suffered.

Indicative Mood.
Present tens singular* Pluraliter* POssum, potes, potest. Possumus, potestis,
possunt. Volo, vis, vult. Volumus, vultis, volunt. Nolo, nonvis, nonvul^,
Nolumus, nonvultis, no. lunt. Malo, mavis, mavult. Malumus, mavultis, malunt.
Edo edis vel es, edit vel est. Edimus, editis vel estis, edunt. Fio, fis, fit.
Fimus, fitis, fiunt. Fero, fers, fert. Ferimus, fertis, ferunt. Feror, ferris
vel far, fertur. Ferimur, ferimini, feruntur.

Preterimperfect tens sing.
Poteram, Volebam, Nolebam, Malebam, as, at. Pluraliter, amus, atis, ant.
Edebam, Fiebam, Ferebam, Ferebar, baris vel bare, batur. Plu. bamur, bamini,
bantur.

Preterperfect tens singular;
Potui* Malui, Volui, Edi, isti, it. Flural. imus, istis, erunt vel ere. Nolui,
Tuli, sum vel fui, tus es vel fuisti, tus est vel Factus fuit Plur. ti sumus
vel fuimus, ti estis vel Latus fuistis, ti sunt, fuerunt vel fuere.

^ Preterpluperfect tens singular;
Poteram, Malueram, Volueram, Ederam, ras, rat. Plural. ramus, ratis, rant.
Nolueram, ^uleram, eram vel fueram, tus eras vel fueras, tus Factus erat vel
fuerat. Plur. ti eramus vel fueramus, ti eratis vel fueratis, ti erant vel
fuerant. Latus

Future tens singular;
Potero, eris, erit. Plural. Poterimus, eritis, erunt. Volam, Edam, Nolam,
Fiam, es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent. Malam, Feram, Ferar, fereris vel ferere,
feretur. Plu. feremur, feremini, ferentur.

Possum, Volo, Malo, have no Imperative Mood*

Imperative Mood.
Present tens singular;
Noli, Nolito, Pluraliter. Nolite, Nolitote. Es, esto, edat, edite, este,
edant, ede, esto, Pl. Edamus, estore, edunto. edito: edito. editote: Fiat,
Fite, Fiant, Fito-tu: Fito. Pl. Fiamus, fitote: fiunto. Fer, Ferat, Ferte,
Ferant, ferto: ferto. P. Feramus, fertote: ferunto. Far, Feratur, Pl. Feramur
Ferimini, Ferantur, fertor: fertor. feriminor: feruntor.

Subjunctive Mood.
Present tens singul. cum
Possim, Nolim, is, it. Plual. cum imus, iris, int. Velim, Malim, Edam, Fiam,
as, at. Plu. cum amus, atis, ant. Feram, Ferar, raris vel rare, ratur. Plur.
cum amur, amini, antu^.

Preterimperfect tens sing. cum
Possem, Ederem Vellem, vel essem, es, et. Plural. cum emus, Nollem, Fierem,
etis, ent. Mallem, Ferrem, Ferer, reris vel rere, retur. Pl. cum remur, remini,
rentur.

Preterperfect tens sin. cum
Potuerim, Maluerim, Voluerim, Ederim, ris, rit Plu. cum rimus, Noluerim,
Tulerim, ritis, rine. sim vel fuerim, tus sis vel fueris, tus sit Factus vel
fuerit. Pl cum ti simus vel fuerimus, Latus ti sitis vel fueritis, ti sint vel
fuerint.

Preterpluperfect tens cum
Potuissem, Maluissem, Voluissem, Edissem, ses, set. Plural. cum semus, setis,
sent. Noluissem, Tulissem, essem, vel fuissem, tus esses vel fuisses, tus
Factus esset vel fuisset. Plur. cum ti essemus vel Latus fuissemus, ti essetis
vel fuissetis, ti essent vel fuissent.

Future tens sing. cum
Potuero, Maluero, Voluero, Edero, ris, rit. Plural. cum rimus, Noluero,
Tulero, ritis, rint. ero vel fuero, tus eris, vel fueris, tus erit Factus vel
fuerit. P. cum ti erimus vel fuerimus, Latus ti eritis vel fueritis, ti erunt
vel fuerinr.

Infinitive Mood.
Present tens and Preterperfect tens. Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect tens.;
Posse, Potuisse. Velle, Voluisse. Nolle, Noluisse. Malle, Maluisse. Edete vel
esse, Edisse. Far, Tulisse. Fieri, Factum esse vel fuisse. Ferri. Latum esse
vel fuisse.

Qu. 103. How are Eo and Queo formed?
FO and Queo make Ibam and Quibam in the Preterimperfect Tens of the Indicative
Mood, and Ibo and Qui^o in the future Tens: and in all other Moods and Tenses
are varied like Verbs in o of the fourth Conjugation; saving that they make
their Gerunds, Eundi, do, dum. Queundi, do, dum: and Eo in the oblique cases of
the Participle of the present tens make's Euntis, eunti, etc.

Qu. 104. What Tenses are formed of the Preterperfect tens of the Indicative
Mood?
Of the Preterperfect tens of the Indicative Mood be formed the
Preterpluperfect tens of the same Mood: the Preterperfect tens,
Preterpluperfect tens, and Future tens, of the Optative Mood, the Potential
Mood, and the Subjunctive Mood; as of Amavi, are formed, Amaveram, amaver^m,
amavero, by changing i into e short; Amavissem, amavisse, keeping i still.

Qu. 105. How are Verbs Impersonals declined?
IMpersonals be declined thorowout all Moods and Tenses in the voice of the
third person singular only: as, Delectat, delectabat, delectavit,
delectaverat, delectabit. Decet, decebat, decuit, decuerat, decebit, decere.
Studetur, studebatur, studitum est vel fuit, studitum erat vel fuerat,
studebitur, etc.

Qu. 106. What is the common Sign of Verbs Impersonals?
They have commonly before their English, this sign, it: as, Delectat, it
delights: Decet, it becomes.

Of a PARTICIPLE.
Qu. 107. What is a Participle?
A Participle is a part of Speech, derived of a Verb, and takes part of a
Noun, as Gender, Case, and Declension: and part of a Verb, as Tens and
signification; and p^rt of both, as Number and Figure.

Qu. 108. How many kinds of Participles be there?
There be four kinds of Participles: One of the Present tens; another of the
Preter tens: one of the Future in r^s, another of the Future in dus.

Qu. 109. How know you a Participle of the present tens?
A Participle of the Present tens has his English ending in ing, as loving:
and his Latin in ans, or ens, as, Amans, Docens.

Qu. 110. Whence i^ is formed?
It is formed of the Preterimperfect tens of the Indicative Mood, by changing
the last syllable into us: as Amabam, amans; Audieban, audiens, Auxiliabar,
auxilians; Poteram, potens.

Qu. 111. How know you a Participle of the Future in rus?
A Participle of the Future in rus betokens to do, like the Infinitive Mood
of the Active voice, as Amaturus. To love, or about to love.

Qu. 112. How is it formed?
And it is formed of the later Supine, by putting to rus, as Doctu, docturus.

Qu. 113. How know you a Participle of the Preter tens?
A Participle of the Preter tens has his English ending in d, t, or n; as
loved, taught, slain: and his Latin in tus, sus, xus; and one in uus, as
Mortuus.

Qu. 114. How is it formed?
And it is formed of the later Supine, by putting to ^; as of Lectu, lectus:
except Mortuus.

Qu. 114. How know you a Participle of the Future in dus?
A Participle of the Future in dus, betokens to suffer, like the Infinitive
Mood of the Passive voice: as: Amandus, to be loved.

Qu. 116. How is it formed?
And it is formed of the Genitive Case singular of the Participle of the
Present tens, by changing it is into dus: as Amantis, amandus: Legentis,
legendus. And it is also found to have the signification of the Participle of
the Present tens: as Legendis veteribus proficis, in reading old Authors thou
do profit.

Qu. 117. How many Participles com of a Verb Active? etc.
Of a Verb Active, and of a Verb Neuter which have the Supines, com* Two
Participles: One of the Present tens; and another of the Future in rus: as, of
Amo, comes amans, amaturus; of Curro, currens, cursurus.

Qu. 118. How many of a Verb passive?
Of a Verb Passive, whose Active has the Supines, com two Participles: One of
the Preter tens, and another of the Future in dus: as, of Amor comes amatus,
amandus.

Qu. 119. How many of a Verb Deponent?
Of a Verb Deponent com Three Participles: One of the Present tens, one of the
Preter tens, and one of the Future in rus: as, of Auxilior, comes auxilians,
auiliatus, auxiliandus.

And if the Verb Deponent do govern an Accusative case after him, it may form
also a Participle in dus, as of Loquor, loquendus.

Qu. 120. How many of a Verb Commune?
Of a Verb Commune com Four Participles: as, of Largior, comes largiens,
Largiturus, largitus, largiendus.

Qu. 121. How are Participles declined?
Participles of the Present tens be declined like Nouns Adjectives of three
Articles: as, Nominativo hic, haec and h^c Amans, Genitivo amantis, Dativo
amanti* etc.

Participles of other tenses be declined like Nouns Adjectives of three
Terminations: as, Amaturus, amatura, amaturum: Amatus, a, um: Amandus, da, dum.

Of an ADVERB.
Qu. 122. What is an Adverb?
AN Adverb is a part of Speech joined to the Verbs, to declare their
signification

Why are Adverbs joined to Verbs?

They are joined principally to Verbs, (and sometimes to other parts) to declare
their signification: i. e. by some circumstance of Time, Place, Number, Order,
or the like.

Qu. 123. How many sorts of Adverbs be there?
There be sundry sorts of Adverbs: Some be of
1. Time: as, Hodie to d^y, cras to morrow, heri yesterday, perendie next after
to morrow, olim in time past* or ^o com, aliquando sometimes, nuper of late,
quando when. 2. Place: as, Ubi where, ibi there, hic here, istic there, intus
within, for is without. 3. Number: as, Semel once, ^is twice, ter thrice,
quater four times, iterum again. 4. Order: as, Inde from thence, deinde
afterward, denique to conolude, postrem^ last of all. 5. Asking or doubting:
as, C^r wherefore, quare wherefore, unde from whence, quorsum to what end, number
whether, nunquid whether. 6. Calling: as, Heus hoe, O hoe, ehodum hoe sirrah.
7. Affirming: as, Certe surely, nae verily, profecto truly, sane truly or
doubtless, scilicet doubtless or truly, licet although, esto be it so. 8.
Denying: as, Non not, minime no, or in no wise, haud not, neutiquam not, or on
no wise, nequaquam no, or on no wise. 9. Swearing: as, Pol in good sooth,
aedepol in good footh, hercle truly, medius fidius, in faith or truth. 10.
Exhorting: as, Eia go to, or well, age go to, agite go ye to, agedum well, go
to yet. 11. Flattering: as, sodes if thou dare, or on good fellowship, amabo
of all love. 12. Forbidding: as, Ne no, not. 13. Wishing: as, Utinam oh that,
or I would to God, si O that, o si O that, o si O if, O Oh that. 14. Gathering
together: as, Simul together, und together, pariter together, non modo not
only, non solum not only. 15. Parting: as, seorsim asunder, or one from
another, sigillarim every one asunder, or peculiarly, vicatim street by street,
or village by village. 16. Choosing: as, Potius rather, imo yea rather. 17. A
thing not finished: as, Pene almost, fere almost, prope nie or near, or almost,
vix scarcely, modo non almost. 18. Showing: as, En behold, ecce behold. 19.
Doubting: as, Forsan peradventure, forsitan peradventure, fortassis it may be,
for^asse it may be or peradventure. 20. Chance: as, Forte by chance, fortuito
by chance, or at adventure. 21. Likeness: as, Sic so, sicut like as, quasi as,
ceu as, tanquam even as, velut as. 22. Quality: as, Been well, male evilly,
docte learnedly, fortiter strongly. 23. Quantity: as, Multum much, parum
little, minimum the least of all, paululum very little, plurimum most of all,
or very much. 24. Comparison: as, Tam so, or as well, quam as, magis more,
minus less, maxim especially.
Qu. 124. Are not some Adverbs compared?
Certain Adverbs be compared: as, Docte learnedly; doctius more learnedly;
doctissime most learnedly. Fortiter valiantly; fortius more valiantly;
fortissime most valiantly. Prope near, propius nearer; proxime nearest of all.

Qu. 125. Are not Prepositions sometimes made Adverbs?
Prepositions, set alone, without any Casual word to serve to, be not
Prepositions, but are changed into adverbs: as, Qui ante non cavet, post
dolebit: He that bewareth not before shall be sorry afterward. ^oram laudare
and clam vituperare, inhonestum est: In presence to commend one, and behind
the back to disprais, is an unhonest point.

Of a CONJUNCTION.
Qu. 126. What is a Conjunction?
A Conjunction is a part of speech, which joyneth words and sentences together.

What is the use of Conjunctions?

To join words and sentences together.

Qu. 127. How many sorts of Conjunctions be there?
Conjunctions be of diverse sorts: Some
1. Copulatives: as, Et and, que and, quoque also, ac and, atque and, nec
neither, neque neither. 2. Disjunctives: as, aut either, ve or, or either, vel
either, seu either, sive either. 3. Discretives: as, Sed but, quidem but truly,
autem but, vero but, at but, ast but. 4. Causals: as, Nam for, namque for, enim
for, etenim for, quia because, ut that, quod that, quum since that, quoniam
because: and quando (set for quoniam) since that, or because. 5. Conditionals: as,
Si if, sin but if, modo so that, dum so that, dummodo so that. 6. Exceptives:
as, Ni except, nisi except, quin but, alioquin except that, or otherwise,
praeterquam except that. 7. Interrogatives: as, Ne whether, an whether, utrum
whether, necne whether or no, anne whether or no, nonne is it not so? 8.
Illatives: as, Ergo therefore, ideo therefore, igitur therefore, quare
wherefore, itaque therefore, proin therefore, proin wherefore. 9. Adversatives:
as, Etsi although quanquam, although, quamvis although, licet although, or
albeit, esto be it so. 10. Redditives to the same: as, Tamen notwithstanding,
attamen yet notwithstanding. 11. Electives: as, Quam how, ac as, atque as, or
than. 12. Diminutives: as, Saltem at least, vel yea, or at the least.
Of a PREPOSITION.
Qu. 128. What is a Preposition?
A Preposition is a part of speech most commonly set before other parts,

How many ways?

Either in Apposition: as, Ad patrem, or else in Composition: as, Indoctus.

Why do you say Commonly set before other parts?

Because some Prepositions are ordinarily set after their Cases: as, Versus,
Tenus.

Qu. 129. What Cases do Prepositions serve to?
Some Prepositions serve to an Accusative Case: some to an Ablative: some to both.

Qu. 130. How many serve to the Accusative?
I. These Prepositions following serve to the Accusative Case.

Ad to, apud at, ante before, adversus, adversum against; cis, citra on this
side; circa, circiter, circum about; contra against, erga toward, extra
without, intra within, inter between infra beneath, juxta besides, or nigh to,
ob for, penes in the power, per by, or through, pone behind, post after,
praeter besides, propter for, prope nigh to, secundum according to, secus by,
supra above, trans on the further side, versus toward, ultra beyond.

II. These Prepositions following serve to the Ablative Case.

A*, ab, abs of or from; absque without, coram before. cum with, de of, or
concerning: E*, ex, out of; palam openly, prae before, or in comparison; pro
for, sine without.

III. These Prepositions following serve to both Cases, i. e. an Accusative and
Ablative.: as, in, sub, super, subter, clam.

1. In, with this sign To, to the Accusative Case: as, in urbem, into the city:
In, without this sign To, to the Ablative Case: as, In te spes est, My hope is
in thee.

2. Sub noctem, a little before night: Sub judice lis est, The matter is before
the judge.

3. Super lapidem, upon a stone: super viridi fronde, upon green leaves.

4. Subter terram, under the earth: subter aquis, under the water.

5. Clam parrem, and clam patre, without my father's knowledge.

To which may be added

6. Tenus, which govern's an Ablative Case singular, and plural; and a Genitive
plural: as, Capulo tenus, up to the hilt; aurium tenus, up to the ears.

N. B. Tenus and Versus are always set after there Casual words: as, Londinum
versus, toward London: and likewise may Penes be set also.

These Prepositions are always found in Composition: Am, di, dis, re, se, con.

Also Prepositions set alone without their Casuals are changed into Adderbs: as
is aforesaid in the Adverb.

Of an INTERJECTION.
Qu. 131. What is an Interjection?
AN Interjection is a part of speech which betokens a sudden passion of the
mind, under an unperfect voice.

Qu. 132. How many kinds of Interjections be there?
Some be of

1. Mirth: as, Evax, Hey brave; vah, how. 2. Sorrow: as, Heu, alas! hei,
welladay! 3. Dread: as, Atat, out alas! 4. Marvelling: as, papae, o strange! 5.
Shunning: as, Apage: avaunt. 6. Praising: as, Euge well don. 7. Scorning: as,
Hu, whoo. 8. Exclaiming: as, Proh, oh. 9. Cursing: as, Vae, woe. 10. Laughing:
as, Ha, ha, he. 11. Calling: as, Eho, so ho: Io, avoy. 12. Silence: as, Au, st:
pax, whist.
N. B. Other words sometimes are put for Interjections, viz. when they signify
^ sudden passion of the mind: as, Infand^m! a thing not to be spoken of:
amabo, of all loves: malum! with a mischief, etc.

WHereas there are properly two parts of Grammar, I. Etymology, which handles
the Eight Parts, with their accidents, severally, as single words: II.
Syntaxis, which treats of Words as they are joined together in a Speech;
having don with the Rudiments, as they concern Etymology: we shall give you a
few General Rules in English concerning Syntaxis; and so refer you to the
Latin Syntaxis, which handle's them more largely: forbearing to trouble
children with any Criticism, or Niceties, until they be well grounded in the
plain ordinary Rules.

SYNTAXIS, OR, CONSTRUCTION
SYntaxis, or Construction, is the due joining of words together in speech,
according to the right rule of Grammar.

Of Syntaxis there be two parts:

I. Concordance of words.

II. Government of words.

I. Of the Concordance of words.
THere be three Concords: the First, between the Nominative Case and the Verb:
the Second between the Substantive and the Adjective: the Third between the
Antecedent and the Relative.

I. Concord.
A Verb Personal agrees with his Nominative Case in number and Person: as,
Praeceptor legit, vos vero negligitis; The master reads, but ye regard not.

II. Concord.
THe Adjective (whether it be a Noun, Pronoun, or Participle) agrees with his
Substantive in Case, Gender, and Number: as, Amicus certus in re incerta
cernitur: A sure friend is tried in a doubtful matter. Ager colendus, a field
to be tilled. Hic vir, this man; meus herus est* it is my master.

III. Concord.
THe Relative agrees with his Antecedent in Gender, Number, and Person: as,
Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur: That man is wise that speaks few things or
words.

N. B. The Antecedent most commonly is a word that goes before the Relative,
and is again rehearsed of the Relative.

The Rule of the Relatives.
WHen there comes no Nominative case between the Relative and the Verb the
Relative shall be the Nominative case to the Verb: as, miser est, qui nummos
admiratur: Wretched is he, that is in love with money.

But when there comes a Nominative case between the Relative and the Verb, the
Relative shall be such case as the Verb will have after him: as, Felix, quem
faciunt aliena pericula cautum: Happy is he, whom other men's harms make wary.

When you have a Verb, Adjective, or Relative, ask the question, who? or what?
and the word answering to that question shall be the Nominative Case to the
Verb, the Substantive to the Adjective, and Antecedent to the Relative.

The Rule of Question and Answer.
WHen a question is asked, the answer must be made in Latin by the same case
of a Noun, and the same Tens of a Verb that the question is asked by: as, Cujus
est fundus? Whose ground is it? Vicini: My neighbors. Quid agitur in ludo
literario? What do you in the school? Studetur: We study.

II. Of the Government of words.
I. The Rule of Noun-Substantives.
WHen two Substantives com together signifying diverse things, the later shall
be the Genitive case: as, Facundia Ciceronis, the eloquence of Cicero; or
Cite^^'s eloquence. Amator studiorum: A lover of studies.

But if they belong both to one thing, they shall be put both in one Case: as,
^ater meus, vir, amat me* puerum: My father, being a man, loves me, a boy.

When the English of the word Res is put with an Adjective, you may put away
Res, and put the Adjective in the Neuter Gender, like a Substantive: as, Multa
me impedierunt* Many things have let me. And being so put, it may be the
Substantive to the Adjective: as, Pauca his ^imilia: a few things like unto
these. Nonnulla hujusmodi; many things of like sort.

An Adjective in the Neuter Gender, put alone without a Substantive, stands
for a Substantive, and may have a Genitive case after him, as if it were a
Substantive: as, Multum lucri, much gain. Quantum negotii? how much business?
Id opens, that work.

Words importing indument of any quality or property, to the prais or disprais
of a thing, coming after ^ Noun-substantive, or a Verb-substantive, it may be
put in the Ablative case, or in the Genitive: as, Puer bona indole, or, puer
bonae indolis; a child of a good towardness. Puer boni ingenil, or, puer bono
ingenio; a boy of a good wit.

Opus and Usus, when they signify need, require an Abiative case: as, Opus est
mihi tuo judicio: I have need of thy judgment. Viginti minis opus est filio: My
son has need of twenty pounds.

The Rules of Adjectives.
Adjectives governing a Genitive Case.
1. ADjectives that signify desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, and such
like, require a Genitive Case: as, Cupidus auri, greedy of gold: Peritus belli,
skilfull*in war: Memor mortis, mindful of death: Reus forti, accused of theft.

2. Adjectives Uerbals in ax govern a Genitive case: as, Tempus edax rerum;
Time is a devourer of things.

3. Nouns Partitives, Interrogatives, certain Nouns of Number, Comparatives,
and Superlatives used partitively, require a Genitive case: as, Aliquis
vestrum; some of you: Quis fratrum? which of the brethren? Quatuor judicum; four
of the judges: Manuum fortior est dextra; of the hands, the right is the
stronger. Digitorum medius est longissimus: of the fingers the middle is the
longest.

Adjectives governing a Dative Case.
1. ADjectives that signify, (1.) Profit or disprofit. (2.) Likeness or
unlikeness (3.) pleasure. (4.) submitting, or (5.) belonging to any thing,
require a Dative case: as, Labor est utilis corpori, labor is profitable for
the body. Est sinitimus oratori Poeta: a Poet is very near to an Orator.
jucundus omnibus, pleasant to all persons. Parenti supplex, suppliant to his
father.

2. Nouns Adjectives ending in bilis, of the passive signification, and
participants in dus, require a Dative case: as, Flebilis, flendus omnibus: To
be lamented of all men. Formidabilis, formidandus hosti, To be feared of his
enemies.

Adjectives governing an Accusative Case.
ADverbs govern an Accusative case (and sometimes an ablative,) which signifies
the length, breadth, or thickness, of a thing: as, Turris alta centum pedes; a
tower an hundred foot high. Arbor lata tres digitos, a tree three fingers
broad. Liber crassus tres pollices, vel tribus pollicibus, A book three inches
thick.

Adjectives governing an Ablative Case.
1. ADjectives which signify fullness, emptiness, plenty, or want, require an
ablative case, and sometime a a Genitive: as, Copia abundans, Abounding in
plenty. Animus curis vacuus; A mind void of cares. Stultorum plena sunt omnia;
All things are full of fools. Expers omnium; wanting all things.

2. Dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, and such like, will have an
ablative case: as, Dignus honor; worthy of honor. Indignus praemio; unworthy
of a reward. Deo fretus; trusting upon God. Virtute praeditus; endued with
virtue. Captus oculis; blind. Sua sort contentus; content with his lot.

N. B. But Dignus, indignus, and contentus, may, instead of the ablative case,
have the Infinitive Mood of a Uerb: as, Laudari dignus; Worthy to be praised.
Contentus in pace vivere; content to live in peace.

3. Nouns Adjectives of the Comparative degree, having Than or By after them,
do cause the word following to be the Ablative case: as, Frigidio^^glacie; more
cold than ice. Doctior multo; bettre learned by a great deal. Uno, pede altior;
higher by a foot.

3. Adjectives govern an Ablative case signifying the Cause, or the Instrument,
or the manner of doing: as Deteriores omnes sumus licentia; We are all the
wors by liberty. Percussit eum gladio; he struck him with a sword. Mira
celeritate rem peregit; he performed the business with wonderful speediness.

The Rules of Pronouns.
1. THese Genitive cases of the Primitives, Mei tui sui, nostri and vestri, are
used, when suffering or pasu^on is signified: as, Pars tui; part of thee. Amor
mei; the love of me. But when possession is signified, Meus, tuus, suus,
noster and vester be used: as, Ars tua; thy Art. Imago tua; thy image.

2. These Genitive cases, Nostrum and vestrum, be used after distributives,
partitives, Comparatives and Superlatives: as, Nemo vestrum, none of you:
aliquis nostrum, some of us. Major vestrum, the bigger of you: maximus natu
nostrum, the eldest of us.

The Rules of Verbs.
Verbs governing a Nominative Case.
1. VErbs substantives, as, Sum, forem, fio, existo nascor: Uerbs passives of
calling: as, Dicor, vocor, salutor, appellor, habeor, existimor, videor: and
Uerbs of gesture will have a Nominative case after them, as well as before
them: as, Fama est malum; Fame is an evil thing. Malus cultura fit bonus; an
evil person by due ordering or governance is made good. Croesus vocatur dives;
Cresus is called rich. Petrus incedit claudus; Peter goe's lame. Dormit
securus; he sleep's void of care.

Verbs governing a Genitive Case.
1. THis Uerb Sum, signifying possession, owing, or pertaining to a thing, as a
token, property, or duty, requires a Genitive case: as, Haec vestis est
Patris; This garment is my fathers. Insipientis est dicere, non putaram; It is
the property of a fool to say, I had not thought. Adolescentis est majores natu
revereri; it is the duty of a young man to reverence his elders. But these
Nominatives, Meum, tuum, suum, nostrum, vestrum, humanum, belluinum, and such
like are excepted; as, humanum est errare; belluinum vero in errore
perseverare; It is humane frailly to commit an error; but it is brutish to
persevere in error.

2. Uerbs that signify esteem or regard, will have a Genitive case: as, Parvi
penditur probitas; Honesty is reckoned little worth. Plurimi passim fit
pecunia^ Money is every where much regarded.

3. Uerbs of accusing, condemning, warning, or absolving, will have a Genitive
case, of the crime or punishment, with an accusative case of the person: as,
Qui alterum incusat* probri, ipsum se intueri oportet; It behooveth him to look
to himself, who accuses another of dishonestie. Admonuit me errati; he warned
me of a mistake.

4. Satago, misereor, miseresco require a Genitive case: as, Rerum suarum
satagit: He is busy about his own matters.

5. Reminiscor, obliviscor, and memini, will have a Genitive, or accusative
case: as, Datae fidei reminiscitur: He* remembers his promiss. Proprium est
stultorum aliorum vitia cernere, oblivisci suorum; It is the property of fools
to see other men's faults, and to forget their own. Memini tui vel te; I
remember thee. Memini de te, I speak of thee.

Verbs governing a Dative Case.
1. ALl Verbs put Acquisitively that is to say, with these tokens To or For
after them, will have o Dative case: as, Non omnibus Dormio; I sleep not to all
men. Huic habeo, non tibi; I have it for this man and not for thee.

2. Verbs that signify (1) to profit or to disprofit: (2) to compare: (3) to
give or restore: (4) to promiss or to pay: (5) to command or show: (6) to
trust: (7) to obey, or resist: (8) to threaten or to be angry with, require a
Dative case: as, Bonis nocet, qui parcit malis; He hurt's the good, who
spare's the bad. Parvis componere magna; To compare great things with small.
Fortuna multis nimium dedit, nulli sat^s; Fortune has given too much to many,
to none enough. Hoc tibi promitto; I promise you this. Aes alienum mihi
numeravit; He paid unto me the debt. Imperat aut servit collecta pecunia
cuique; Money gathered together commands or serves every body. Mulieri ^e
credas; Believ not a woman. Semper obtemperat pius filius patri; A dutiful son
always obeys his father. Ignavis precibus fortuna repugnat; Fortune
resists slothful prayers. Utrique mortem minatus est: He threatened death to
them both. Adolescenti succenset; He is angry with the young man.

3. Sum, with his compounds: as, Adsum, absum, praesum, desum, ( except possum)
require a Dative case: as, Sum tibi natura pater: I am a father to thee by
nature. Multa petentibus desunt multa; Many things are wanting to them that
require many things.

4. Sum and Suppetit, being put for habeo, will have a Dative case: as, Est
mihi matter: i. e. habeo matrem; I have a mother. Pauper non est, cui rerum
suppetit usus; He is not a poor man, who has the use of things.

5. Sum, and other Verbs have oftentimes a double Dative case: as, Sum tibi
praesidio; I am to thee a safeguard. Rex pius est Reipublicae ornamento; A godly
King is an ornament to the Commonwealth. Hoc tu tibi laudi ducis; You esteem
this a commendation to you.

6. Verbs compounded with Satis, Been, and male; and many Verbs compounded with
these Prepositions, Prae, ad, con sub. ante, post, ob, in and inter, will have
a Dative case: as, Benefecit multis, malefecit nulli; He has don good to
many, he has don hurt to none. Ille huic negotio praefuit; He was chief in
this business. But praeeo, praevinco, praecedo, praecurro, praevertor, will
hade an Accusative case.

Verbs governing an Accusative Case.
VErbs transitives, (that is to say, whose action passes into another thing)
will have after them an Accusative case, of the Doer or sufferer: as, usus
promptos facit; Use make's men ready. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam; Ca^e
followe's money increasing.

2. Certain Verbs intransitive, of an absolute signification, admit after them
an Accusative, and sometime an Ablative of their own, or a near signification:
as, Endymionis somnum dormis; Thou sleep the sleep of Endymion. Longm^ire
viam; to go a long way. Morte obiit repentina; He died a sudden death.

3. Verbs of asking, teaching, and arraying, will have two Accusative cases:
One of the Person, and another of the Thing: as, Frugalitatem and temperantiam
multos docuit penuria; Poverty has taught many thristiness and temperance:
Ter. Induit se calceos quos prius exuerat: He put on his shoes, which he had
put off before.

Verbs governing an Ablative Case.
1. ALl Verbs require an Ablative case, signifying the instrument wherewith any
thing is don, (put with this sign With before it) or the cause, or the manner of
doing: as, Gladio eum vulneravit; He wounded him with a sword: Tacuit metu,
He held his peace for fear. Summa eloquentia causam egit: He pleaded the cause
with great eloquence.

2. The word of price is put after Verbs in the Ablative case: as, Vendidi
auro: I sold for gold: Emptus sum argento; I am bought for silver: Except these
Genitives, when they be put alone without Substantives: tanti, quanti, pluris,
minoris, tantivis, tantidem, quantilibet, quanticunque: as, Quanti mercatus es
hunc equum? For how much have you bought this horse. Certe pluris quam vellem:
Truly for more then I was willing to give. But when they have Substantives, thy
are put in the ablative case: as, minori pretio vendidi quam emi: I sold for a
less price than I bought.

3. Verbs of plenty, or want, ^illing, emptying, loading and unloading will
have an ablative case: as, Opibus abundas Thou do abound in ^iches. Cares
virtute; Thou want virtue.

4. Fungor, fruor, utor, potior, gaudeo, vescor, nitor, dignor, prosequor,
muto, munero, communico, afficio, supersedeo, and such like, require an
ablative case: as, Virtute decet, non sanguine niti; It becomes us to trust to
Virtue, not to blood. Utere virtute; Use virtue. Ne malis gaudeas alienis;
Rejoice not in other men's evils. Vescor carnibus; I eat flesh.

5. Verbs that signify receiving, Distance, or taking away, will have an
ablative case with a, ab, ex or de: as, Accepi literas a Petro: He received
letters from Peter. Audivit ex multis; He heard it of many: and this ablative
after Verbs of taking away or distance may be turned into the Dative: as,
Eripuit illi vitam; He took away his life.

6. Verbs of Comparing or exceeding may have an Ablative case of the word that
signifies the measure of exceeding: as, Praefero hunc multis gradibus: I
prefer this man by many degrees. Paulo intervallo illum superat; He is beyond
the other but a little space.

7. A Noun, or Pronoun-substantive, joined with a Participle, expressed or
understood, and having none other word, whereof it may be governed, it shall
be put in the Ablative case absolute: as, Rege veniente hosts fugerunt: The
king coming the enemies fled. Me duce vinces; I being Captain thou shall
overcom. And it may be resolved by any of these words, dum, cum, quando, si,
quanquam, postquam: as, Rege veniente, id est, dum veniret rex: Me duce, id
est, Si ego dux fuero.

Construction of Verbs Passives.
A Verb Passive will have after him an Ablative case with a Preposition, or
sometime a Dative of the Doer: as, Virgilius legitur a me; Virgil is read of
me; Tibi fama petatur; Let fame be sought of you.

2. These Neuter-passives, Vapulo, veneo, liceo, exulo, fio, signifying
passibely, follow the rule of passives: that is to say, they will have an
ablatide case with a Preposition: as, A Praeceptore vapulabis: Thou shall be
beaten of thy master. a conviviis exulat Philosophia; Philosophy is banished
from banquets.

The Rule of the Infinitive Mood.
VErbs of the Infinitive Mood are set after Verbs, or adjectives: as, Vis fieri
dives, Pontice? nil cupias; Ponticus, would thou be made rich, thou must
desire nothing. Dignus amari; worthy to be loved.

N B. The former verb is sometimes concealed by the Figure Ellipsis: as,
Haeccine fieri flagitia? ^^baudi, decet, vel oportet: Ought such villainies to
be committed? sometimes by Enallage: as, Agere gratias; pro agebat; He gave
thanks.

The Rule of Gerunds.
1. GErunds and Supines will have such case: as the Verbs they come of: as, Vir
docendi studiosus; A man desirous to teach. Utendum est aetate; We must use
time. Veni auditum concionem: I came to hear a sermon.

2 Gerunds in Di, are set after certain Substantives and adjectives, like as
the Genitive case: as, Nunc non est narrandi locus; Now there is no place of
telling. Amor sceleratus habendi; The wicked love of having. Certus eundi;
Certain of going. Peritus jaculandi; Skillful in darting. But sometime the
Infinitive Mood is put for the Gerund in Di; as, Peritus medicari; for
medicandi; Skillful in healing, or surgery.

3 The Gerund in Do is used with one of these Prepositions; a, ab, abs, de, e,
ex, cum, in, pro: as, Ignavi a discendo cito deterren^ur; Idle boys are
quickly frighted from learning. But sometimes they are used without a
Preposition: as, Scribendo disces scribere; By writing thou shall learn to
write.

4. The Gerund in dum is used after one of these Prepositions; Inter, ante, ad,
ob, propter: as, Inter coenandum hil^res este: Be merry at Supper, But the
English Must or Ought (signifying necessity) may be put in the Gerund in Dum
with the verb est: as, Abeundum est mihi; I must go hence. Orandum est, u^ men's
sit sana in corpore sano; We ought to pray, that there may be a sound mind
in a sound body.

5. Sometimes Gerunds are turned into Participles in Dus: which agree with the
Substantive following them: as, Deus in faciendo homine, similitudinem suam
secutus est: God, in making man, followed his own image.

The Rules of Supines.
1. THe first Supine signifie's actively and is put after verbs and
participles, that signify moveing to a place: as, Cur te is perditum? Why
go thou about to destroy thy self.

2. The later Supine signifie's passively, and followe's Nouns adjectives: as,
Factu facile; Eas^^ to be don. Turpe dictu; Unfit to be spoken.

The Construction of Time, Space, and Place.
The Rule of Time.
NOuns that betoken part of Time, be commonly put in the Ablative case: as,
Nocte vigilas, Luce dormis: Thou wakest by night; and sleep by day. But
Nouns that betoken continual term of Time, without ceasing or intermission, be
commonly used in the accusative case: as, Hyemem totam stertis: Thou sleep
the whole winter.

The Rule of Space, or distance of Place.
NOuns that betoken Space between place and place be commonly put in the
Accusa^ive case: as, Pedem hinc ne decesseris: Go not thou a foot from this
place.

The Rule of Place.
1. NOuns Appellatives, and Names of great Places are used with a Preposition,
if they follow a Verb that signifies an action in a place, to a place, from a
place, or by a place: as, Vivo in Anglia* I'live in England. Ven^ per Galliam
in Italiam; I came by France into Italy. Proficiscor ex urbe, I go out of the
City.

2. The proper name of a place being of the first or second Declension, and the
singular Number, shall be put in the Genitive case: as, Vixit Londini, He
lived at London. Studuit Oxoniae; He studied at Oxford. So likewise Humi,
domi, militiae, belli are used: as, Procumbit humi bos; The ^^ falls ^n the
ground.

3. But if the proper name of a place be of the third Declinsion, or plural
Number, it shall be put in the Dative or Ablative case: as, Militavit
Carthagini, vel Carthagine; He was a soldier at Carthage. Athenis natus est;
He was born at Athens. So are the common Nouns Ruri or Rure used: as, Ruri or
rure educatus est; He was brought up in the Country.

4. Proper Names are put in the Accusative case, if they follow Verbs that
signify motion to a Place: as, Eo Londinum ad merces emendas; I go to London
to buy wares. Concessi Cantab^igiam ad capiendum ingenii cultum; I went to
Cambridge to get learning. So are Rus and Domus used: as, Egorus ibo; I will go
into the Country. Ite domum; Go ye home.

5. Proper Names are put in the Ablative case, if the Verb signify motion from
or by a place: as, Discessit Londino; He departed from London. Profectus est
Londino ( vel per Londinum) Cantabrigiam; He went by London to Cambridge.
Domus and rus be likewise so used: as, Abiit Domo; He went from home. Rure
reversus est; He returned out of the Country.

The Construction of Verbs Impersonals.
1. INterest, refert, and est for interest, require a Genitive Case of all
Casual words, except mea, tua, sua, nostra, vestra and cuja: as, Interest
omnium recte agere: It concern's all men to do rightly. Mea parvi, Johannis
vero multum refert: It concern's me little, but John very much.

2. Some Impersonals require a Dative case: as, Libet, licet, placet, displicet,
and the like: as, peccare nemini licet: It is lawful for no man to sin.

3. Some will have an Accusative cas^ only: as, Juvat, decet, delectar,
opor^et: as, Uxorem aedes curare decet: It becomes a wise to look after the
house.

5. Some an Accusative with a Preposition: as, Attiner, pertiner, spectar,: as,
Spectat ad omnes been vivere; It belong's to all men to live well.

5. Some will have an Accusative with a Genitive: as, Poenitet, taedet, mis^ret,
pudet, piget: as, Petrum peccati poeniter; It repent's Peter of his sin. Me
civitatis taedet; I am wea^y of the City.

6. A Verb Impersonal of the Passive voice has like Case as other verbs
passives have: as, ab hostibus constanter pugnatur; The enemies fight
continually. Yet many times the Case is not expressed but understood: as,
Maxima vi certatur; subaudi, ab illis: They contend with great strength.

The Construction of Participles.
1. PArticiples govern sach Cases as the Verbs they com of: as, Fruiturus
amicis, Like to enjoy his friends. Tendens ad sidera palmas; Holding up his
hands toward Heaven.

2. Participles when they be changed into Nouns, will have a Genitive case:
as, F^^itans litium; Shunning contention. Cupientissius tui; Most desirous of
thee.

3. Exosus, perosus, and pertaesus, when they signify actively, require an
Accusative case: passively, ^ D^tive: as, exosus saevitiam Hating cruelty.
Exosus Deo and sanctis; Hated of God and good men.

4. Natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, creatus, ortus, editus, will have an
Abl^tive Case: as, bona* bonis prognata parentibus; A good woman, born of good
parents.

The Construction of Adverbs.
1. EN and Ecce, being Adverbs of Showing, govern a Nominative Case, seldom an
Accusative: But being adverbs of Upbraiding, an Accusative only: as, En
Priamus; Behold Priamus. En habitum: See his garb.

2. Certain Adverbs of quantity, time and place, will have a Genitive Case: as,
Abunde fabularum audivimus; We have heard abundance of tales. Affatim
pecuniae; Money enough. Tun^ temporis; That time. Quo terrarum abiit? Whither
is he gone?

3 Adverbs derived of Nouns that govern ^ Dative case, govern likewise the same
case: as, Ve^^t obviam illi; He came to meet him. Canit similiter huic; He
sing's like him. Sibi inutiliter vivit; He live's unprofitably to himself.
These Datives be used adverbially: as, Tempori, luci, vesperi: as, Tempori
surgendum; We must rise betime. Vesperi ^ubandum; We must go to bed at even:
Luci laborandum: We must labor by day.

4. Certain Adverbs will have an Accusative case of the preposition that they
com of: as, Propius urbem; Nearer the city. Proxime Hispaniam, Next* to Spain.

5. Prepositions set without ^ Case, or else ^ooming the degrees of Comparison
be changed into Adverbs

Of Adverbs which govern Moods see the Laune Syntaxis.

The Construction of Conjunctions.
1. Conjunctions Copulatives and disjunctives, with these four, quam, nisi,
praeterquam, an, do commonly couple like cases in Nouns, and like Moods and
Tenses in Verbs: as Xenophon and Plato fuere aequales; Xenophon and Plato were
equals. Petrus and Joannes precabantur and docebant in templo, Peter and John
did pray and preach in the temple.

2. Sometimes they join diverse Cases, and diverse Tenses, as, Vixi Romae and
Venetiis, I lived at Rome and Venice. Tibi gratias ago, agamque dum vivo* I
give you thanks, and I will give you thanks whilst I live.

3. Cum, tum, and tum doubled, couple like Cases: as, Amplectitur cum eruditos
omnes, tum* imprimis Ma^cellum: He embraces all learned men, but especially
Marcellus. Odit tum literas, tum virtutem, He hates both learning and virtue.

Of Prepositions.
1. Sometime a Preposition is not expressed, but understood, and the Casual word
nevertheless put in the Ablative Case: as, Habeo te loco parentis, i. e. in
loco, I esteem you in stead of a father.

2. A Verb compounded with a Preposition, sometimes require's the Case of the
preposition that i^ is compounded withal: as, Praetere^ ^o te insalutatum: I
pass by thee unsaluted. Decedo magistratu: I go ^ut of my office.

Of Interjections.
1. O An Interjection of Exclamation, require's a Nominative, Accusative, and
Vocative case: as, o festus dies! o gladsom day! o fortunatos agricolas! o
happy husbandmen! o formose puer! o fair boy!

2. Hei and Vae a Dative: as, Vae tibi, Woe to thee.

3. Pro, proh, ah and vah, an Accusative, and ^ Vocative: as Pro fidem! o the
faith!

4. Hem and Apage an Accusative: as, hem astutias! Fie upon craft. Apage
istiusmodi salutem: Away with such Complements!

5. Heu a Nominative, Dative, and Accusative: Heu pietas! Alas the Godliness!
Heu stirpem invi^am! Oh the hated stock! heu misero mihi! alas for me poor man.

6. Interjections are often put absolutely without a Case: as Quae (malum!)
Dementia? What madness is this with a mischief. And sometimes they are
understood: as Facinus indignum! for o facinus indignum! o the base pranck.

A brief Explanation of the Rules in Propria quae Maribus, and Quae Genus,
concerning Nouns; and of As in Praesenti, concerning Verbs: The Declining and
Conjugating whereof, the young Scholar may learn in the INDEX following; where
every word comprehended in those Rules is Alphabetically set down.
N. ^. THE Rudiments teach you, that a word of the Masenline Gender is declined
with this Article Hic, the feminine with Haec, the Neuter with Hoc: as, Hic
Vir; Haec Mulier; Hoc Regnum: But they give you not the Reason, why it is of
this, or that Gender; but leav you to the Rules at Propria quae maribus, etc.
The Use whereof is, to teach you to know what Gender a Noun is of, and the
Reason why it is so, and not otherwise.

THe Rules at As in praesenti, etc. ser^ to tell you the Preterperfect Tenses,
and the Supines of Verbs; which must be declined according to the Examples of
the Four Congugations in the Rudiments.

And as you learn in the Rudiments, that there be two sorts of Nouns, viz.
Substantive, and Adjective: so, according to the same Method; I. You have Rules
for Substantives, beginning at Propria quae maribus, etc. II. For Adjectives,
beginning at Adjectiva unam, etc.

Again, as in the Rudiments, a Noun-substantive is either Proper, or Common:
so, I. You have Rules for Proper Names* beginning at Propria quae maribus, etc.
II. For Common, beginning at Appellativa Arborum.

Proper names are either Masculine, or Feminine.

Propria quae maribus, etc. i. e.
Proper Names that belong to the Male-kinde, are of the Masculine Gender: and
they are of Five sorts. I. the names Heathenish Gods; as, Mars, Bacchus,
Apollo. II. of Men; ^^, Caro, Virgilius. III. of Rivers; as, Tibris, Oron^. IV.
of Months; as, October. V. of Winds; as, Lib^* No^us, Auster.

Propria foemineum, etc. i. e.
Proper Names, which belong to the Femalekinde, are of the Feminine Gender: and
they are of Five sorts, I. of Heathernish Goddesses; as, Juno, Venus. II* of
women; as, Anna. Philotis. III. of Cities, as ^lis. Opus. IV. of Countries, as
Graecia, Persis. V. of Islands, as Creta, Britannia, Cyprus.

Some Names of Cities are excepted, as Agragas, masc. Argos, Tybur, Praeneste,
neut. and Anxur, bath masc. and neut.

Appellativa arborum, etc. i. e.
The Common names of Trees are of the Feminine Gender, as Alnus, cupressus,
cedrus. Except pinus and Oleaster, of the Masc. and siler, suber, thus, robur
and acer of the Neut.

Sunt etiam valucrum, etc. i. e.
The Common Names of 1 Birds: 2 wild Beasts: 3 and Fishes are of the Epicene
Gender, as Pas^er, hirundo, tigris, vulpes, ostrea, cetus.

Omne quod exit in um, etc. i. e.
All Nouns that end in um, whether Greek or Latin, proper or common, and a
Noun undeclined are of the Neuter Gender: as Londinum, Eboracum, regnum; except
Proper names of women, according to the Rule of De^pauterius,

Um neutrum po^as, hominum si propria tollas.

N. B. The Genders of Nouns are better known by the Genitive case; according to
the Three Special Rules.

There be Three Special Rules, thus distinguished.
I. Prima non crescit omnin^: i. e. The First does not increas at all.

II. Secunda crescit acute: i. e. The Second encrease's Long.

III. Tertia crescit graviter: i. e. Third increases Short.

I. Special Rule.
Nomen non crescens, etc. i. e.
A Noun that does not ^ntreas in the Genitive case, is of the Feminine Gender:
as, Caro, carnis; nubes, nubis; capra, caprae.

N. B. Non crescere in Genitivo, est pares habere Syllabas in Nominativo ac in
Genitivo. i. e. Not To encreas, is to have like Syllables in the Nominative and
the Genitive: as caro, carnis.

Crescere, est plures habere syllabas in Genitivo quam in Nominativo. i. e. To
encreas, is to have more Syllables in the Genitive than in the Nominative: as,
pietas, pietatis.

Mascula Nomina in a, etc. i. e.
Nouns in a, signifying the Offices of men, are excepted from the first Special
Rule, though they do not encreas, and are Masculine: as Scriba, assecla, etc.

2. Nouns ending i^ a, which are derived of Greek nouns of the first
Declension, ending in as, or es: as Satrapas, Satrapa: athletes, athleta.

3. Likewise these words, not increasing, are of the masculine gender: as
Verres, natalis, aqualis: words compounded of As, as centussis: lienis, orbis,
etc.

4. Words ending in er, in os, and us, not increasing, are of the masculine
gender: as Venture, logos, annus. Except Matter, humus, domus, colus, ficus,
acus, porticus, socrus, nurus, manus, idus, anus, vannus: and Greek words,
which change os in Greek, into us in Latin: as papyrus, antidotus, etc.

Neutrum nomen in e, etc. i. e.
Nouns that end in e, making is in the Genitive case: Nouns that end in on or
um, not increasing: as Mare, rete, barbiton, ovum: likewise, Hippomanes,
cacoethes, virus, pelagus, are of the neuter Gender. But Vulgus is of the
Masculine and neuter.

Incerti generis etc. i. e.
These words, not increasing, are of the doubtful Gender: as Talpa, dama,
canalis etc.

Compositum ^ verbo and^. i. e.
A Noun ending in a, compounded of a Verb, not increasing, is of the common of
two: as Grajugena, agricola, advena: and so likewise Senex, auriga, etc.

II. Special Rule.
Nomen crescentis penultima si Genitivi Syllaba acuta sonat, etc. i. e.
A Noun, whose last Syllable but one increases long in the Genitive case, is
of the Feminine Gender.

N. B. Acute crescere, est penultimam acuere, vel elevare, vel attollere in
pronunciando: i. e. To encreas long, is to lift up the last syllable but one in
pronouncing, or to pronounce it sharp: as virtus, virtutis; pietas, pietatis.

Mascula dicuntur monosyllaba etc. i. e.
These Nouns of one syllable, increasing long, are of the Masculine Gender: as
Sal, sol, etc.

2. Nouns of many syllables, ending in n: as, Acarnan, lichen, delphin.

3. Nouns ending in o, signifying a body: as, leo, curculio* and likewise,
senio, ternio, sermo.

4. Nouns ending in er, or, and os, increasing long: as Crater, conditor, Heroes.

So torrens, etc. many ending in dens: as bidens: so all other nouns in that
Rule: except Siren, mulier, soror, uxor: which are of the feminine Gender. But
mulier belong's to the Third Special Rule, because it encrease's short.

Sunt neutralia and haec monosyllaba etc., i. e.
These nouns, increasing long, are of the neuter gender: as mel, fell, etc --
and nouns of more syllables, which end in all and ar: as capital, laqucar. Halec
is of the feminine and neut* in the singular Number, and of the feminine only
in the Plural:

Sunt dubia haec Python, etc. i. e.
These nouns, increasing long, are of the doubtful gender: Python, scrobs, etc.

Sunt commune, parens, etc. i. e.
These nouns, increasing long, are of the Commune of two genders: as parens,
etc.

III. Special Rule.
Nomen crescentis penultima si Genitivi Sit Gravis, etc. i. e.
A Noun, whose last syllable but one increases short in the Genitive, is of
the Masculine Gender.

N. B. Crescere graviter, est deprimere penultimam in pronunciando: i. e. To
encreas short [or flat] is, to press down the last syllable save One in
pronouncing: as Sanguis, sangunis.

Foeminei generis sit hyperdissyllabon, etc. i. e.
Nouns of more than two syllables ending in do, making dinis in the Genitive
case; and in go, making ginis, increasing short, are of the ^em. gender:
dulcedo, -- dnis: compago, -- gnis* so likewise virgo, etc.

2. Greek words which end in as, or is: as, Lampas, iaspis: so cassis, cuspis,
pecus, udis; forfex, etc. Jungenda his mulier, propria si class locabis.

Est neutrale genus, etc. i. e.
Nouns signifying a thing without life, increasing short, and ending either in
a, en, ar, ur, us, or put, are the neuter gender: as, Problema, omen, jubar,
jecur, onus, occiput: yet pecten and furfur are masculines.

So, likewise cadaver, and the rest in that Rule.

Sunt dubii generis etc. i. e.
These Nouns, increasing short, are of the Doubtful gender: as cardo etc.

Communis generis sunt ista etc. i. e.
These Nouns, increasing short, are of the Commune of two: as vigil, pugil etc.

Rules for Adjectives.
Adjectiva unam etc. i. e.
ADjectives that have but one Termination, are of all three Genders: as, hic,
haec and hoc Felix, audax.

Sub gemina si voce cadant etc. i. e.
If Adjectives, have two terminations, the first Termination is the Commune of*
two: the second, the neuter: as Hic and haec omnis, and hoc omne.

At si tres variant voces etc. i. e.
If an Adjective has three terminations; the First is the masculine Gender;
the Second, the feminine; the Third, the neuter: as bonus, na, number.

At sunt quae flexu etc. i. e.
There are words, which are Adjectives by nature and use; and yet are declined
like Substantives with two articles: as pauper, puber etc. though some of them
are found in the neuter Gender.

H^c proprium quendam etc. i. e.
These Adjectives have a peculi^^ manner of declineing, differing from the
common form: as campester, volucer etc. -- See them severally in the Index.

Quae Genus explained.
Quae genus aut flexum etc. i. e.
HEteroclit^ [i. e. words of another manner of declining; or words declined
otherwise than the ordinary manner] are of three sorts:

I. Variantia genus, aut flexum: i. e. Such as vary their Gender, or
Declension.

II. Defectiva: i. e. Such as want some Case or Number.

III. Redundantia: i. e. Such as abound; or have overmuch.

I. VARIANTIA GENUS.
Haec genus ac partim etc. -- i e.
These two words Pergamus and Supellex are feminine singular: neuter plural.

Dat prior his numerus etc -- i e.
These words, Rastrum, fraenum, filum, and capistrum, are of the Neut. genesis in
the singular Numb. Mase. and neut. plural.

But Coelum and Argos are neut. in the singular: masculine only in the plural.

Nundinum, epulum, and Balneum, are neuters in the sing. numb. feminines only
in the plural: but Juvenal has Balnea.

Haec maribus dantur etc. i. e
These Nouns are masculines ^ngular; neuters plural: as Maenalus, Dindymus,
Ismarus, Tartarus, Ta^ygetus, Taenarus, Massicus, Gargarus.

But Sibilus, jocus, locus, and Avernus, are masculines in the singular:
masculines and neuters in the plural.

II. DEFECTIVA.
Quae nullum variant casum etc. i e.
These words are Aptotes, which vary or change no case: as fas, nil, nihil,
instar: also many ending in u or i: as cornu, genu, gummi, frugi: so likewise
Tempe of the plural numb. undeclined: so tot and quot; and all numbers, from
three to an hundred: as quatuor, quinque, sex etc --

Estque Monoptoton etc. i. e.
These words are Monoptetes, which have but one case only: as noctu, naru,
jnssu, injussu, astu^permissu. But astus is read in the plur. and inficias
only in the Accusative case plur.

Sunt Diptota etc i. e.
These words are Diptotes, which are declined with two cases only: as fors,
for^e* spontis, sponte: plus, pluris: repetundarum, ^epetundis: jugeris,
jugere: verberis, verbere: suppetiae, sup^etias: tantundem, tantidem: impetis,
impete: whereof four have the plural number in all cases: viz. Verberis, vicem,
plus, and jugere.

Tres quibus inflectis casus etc. i. e.
These words are Triptotes, which are declined in three cases only: as Precis,
precem, prece: opis, opem, open: But frugis and ditionis seem to want the Nom.
case. Vis want's only the Dative case sing. But all have the plur. Number. whole.

Quae referunt etc. i. e.
These Nouns want the Vocative case: viz. 1. Relatives; as qui: 2.
Interrogatives; as ecquis: 3. Distributives; as nullus* neuter, omnis: 4.
Indefinites; as quilibet, alter: 5. All Pronouns, except four, noster, nostras,
meus, and tu.

Propria cuncta notes etc. i. e.
All proper names (because they signify but one, and no more) want the plural
number: as Mars, Cato etc -- and other things comprehended in this distick, viz.

1. Propria. 2. Virtutes. 3. Arts. 4. Pensa. 5. Uda. 6. Figura.

7. Morbi. 8. Herbae. 9. Vitia. 10. Aetates. 11. Frumenta. 12. Metalla. as 1
Guilielmus, Thomas: 2 prudentia, justitia: 3 Grammanica, Logica: 4 Piper,
saccharum: 5 Aromatica: 6 Metaphora, Synedoche: 7 Cephalalgia, podagra: 8
amaranthus, amaracus: 9 Desidia, avaritia: 10 juventa, Senectus: 11 rriticum;
12 aurum, ferrum.

Hordea, farra, forum. etc. i. e.
These words of the neuter gender, have three like cases in the plural Numb.
viz. Nom. ^c^^s. and Voc. as Hordeum, far, forum etc --

Hordea, farra, forum, mel, mulsum, defruta, th^sque, Jus, mare, rus, vinumque,
os -- oris dans genitivo Tres tantum similes voces pluralia servant.

Hesperus, and vesper etc. i. e.
These masculines singul* want the plural: viz. Hesperus, vesper, pontus,
limus, fimus, penus, sanguis, ether, nemo.

Singula foeminei generis etc. i. e.
These feminines singular want the plural: as pubes, salus, talio, indoles etc
--

But Soboles and labes, and all words of the fifth Declension have three like
cases in the plural, viz. the Nom. accus. voc. except res, species, facies,
acies, and dies, which have the plural whole.

Nec licet his neutris etc. i. e.
These Neuters singul. want the plural: as Delicium, senium etc.

Mascula sunt tantum etc. i. e.
These Masculines want the singular number: as Manes, majores etc.

Hoec sunt foeminei generis etc. i. e.
These feminines want the singular Number: as Exuviae, phalerae etc.

Rarius haec primo etc. i. e.
These Neuters want the singular Number: as Moenia, tesqua etc.

III. Redundantia.
Haec quasi luxuriant etc. i. e.
These words have diverse Terminations, Declining and Gender: as clypeus,
clypeum etc.

Sed tibi praeterea etc. i. e.
Certain Greek words from their accusative case create a new nominative: as;

Panther -- e^ris: Acc. Panthe^ra: Nom. Panthe^ra; ae.

Crater -- e^ris: Acc. crate^ra: Nom. crate^ra; ae.

Cassis -- dis: Acc. cassda: Nom. cassida* ae.

Ether -- ris: Acc. aethra: Nom. aethra; ae.

Vertitur his rectus etc. i. e.
These words vary the termination of the Nominative case; but keep the same
signification and gender: as Gibbus, i: and gibber -- ris; masculine; etc.

. Haec simul and quarti etc. i. e.
These words are of the second and fourth Declension: as Laurus; i, and us; etc.

Et quae lu^uriant etc. i. e.
There be many Adj^ctives redundant: but esp^cially those that are derived of
these words; A^ma, jugum etc -- as of Arma, orum comes inermus, a, um: and
inermis, me. Of jugum; bijugus, a, um; and bijugis, e: multijugus, a, um; and
multigugis, e. Of N^^vus, i; enervus, a, um: and enervis, c. Of somnus, i;
insomnus, a, um; and insomnis, e.; and semisomnis; and us, a, um. Of clivus, i;
ac^livus* a, um; and acelivis, e: declivis; proclivis. Of animus, i;
aequanimus; and aequanimis* exanimus, and exanimis: inanimus, and is;
pusillanimus, and is; una^i^us, and is. Of (...), i; (...), and illimis:
sublimbs; and sublimis. Of frenum, i; effrenus, and effrenis. Of ^e^a;
^^^cerus. Of bacillum, imbecillus, vel imbecillis.

As in praesenti explained.
As in presenti etc. i. e.
VErbs of the first Conjugation, having the Termination As in the Present Cens,
make avi in the Preterperfect Cens: as no -- ^^s, navi: vocito, as, avi: Except
lavo, as, lavi ( not lavavi) juvo, as, juvi etc.

Es in pr^senti etc. i. e.
Verbs of the second Congugation, having Es in the present tens, make ^^ in the
(...) t^^s: as Nigreo, nigres, nigrui: Except jubeo, es, jussi etc. and all
other excepted in that Rule: for which lo^k the Index.

Terti^ pr^teritum etc. i e.
Verbs of the third Conjugation, form their preterperfect tens according to the
termination of the present tens: as;

Bo the termination in the present tens. make's By in the preterperfect tens:
as Lambobi: except scribo scri^si; nubo nupsi; and cumbo cub^^.

Co is made ci: as vinco vici: except pa^co which make's peperci and parsi;
dico di^i; duco duxi.

Do is made di: as mando di: But scindo make's scidi; findo fidi; fundo fudi;
tundo turudi; pendo pependi; tendo tetendi; pedo pepe^di; cado cecdi; caedo
ceci^di; cedo cessi; vado vasi; rado rasi; laedo laesi; ludo lusi; divido
divisi; trudo trusi; claudo clausi; plaudo plausi; rodo rosi.

Go is made xi: as jungo junxi: But if r be set before go, then it is made si:
as spargo sparsi: But these words ending in go make gi: lego legi; ago egi;
tango te^gi; pungo punxi and pupugi; frango fregi; pango pepigi; pango pegi;
pango panxi.

Ho is made xi: as traho traxi; veho vexi.

Lo is mode ui: as colo colui: But psallo and sallo make salli; vello velli and
vulsi, fallo fefelli; cello ceculi; pello pepuli.

Mo is made ui: as vomo vomui: But emo make's emi; como compsi; promo prompsi;
demo dempsi; sumo sumpsi; premo pressi.

No is made vi: as sino sivi: except temno tempsi; sterno stravi; sperno
sprevi; cerno crevi; gigno genui; pono posui; cano cecni.

Po is made psi: as scalpo scalpsi: except rumpo rupi; strepo strepui; crepo
crepui.

Quo is made qui: as linquo liqui: except coquo coxi.

To is made vi: as sero (pro planto and semino) sevi; sero (pro ordino) serui;
verto verti and versi; uro ussi; gero gessi; quaero quaesivi; tero trivi; curro
cucurri.

So makes sivi: as accerso accersivi; arcesso, incesso, lacesso, sivi: capesso
capessi and capessivi; facesso facessi; viso visi: but pinso sui.

Sco makes vi: as pasco pavi: posco poposci; disco didici; quinisco quexi.

To is made ti: as verto verti; but sisto (pro facio stare) make's stiti; mitto
misi; peto petivi ( Syn. petii) sterto ster^ui; meto messui.

Ecto make's exi* as flecto flexi; pecto pexi and pexui; necto nexi and nexui.

Vo make's vi: as volvo volvi: except vivo vixi; nexo nexui; and texo texui.

Gio make's ci: as facio feci; jacio jeci; old verb lac^o lexi; specio spexi.

Dio make's di: as fodio fodi.

Gio make's gi: as fugio fugi.

Pio make's pi: as capio cepi: except cupio cupivi; rapio rapui; sapio sapui
and sapivi.

Rio makes ri: as, pario peperi.

Tio make's ssi: as quatio quassi.

U^ mak'es ui: as statuo statui; pluo plui or pluvi; struo struxi; fluo fluxi.

Quarta dat is, ivi; etc. i. e.
VErbs of the fourth Conjugation, having is in the present reui, making ivi in
the preterfect tens: as scio, scis, scivi: except venio veni; cambio campsi;
^aucio rausi etc.

Praeteritum dat idem etc. i. e:
THe Compound Verb has the some preter^erfect tens with the simple Verb: as
doceo docui* edoceo edocui.

But the syllable which is doubled in the preterperfect tens of the simple
verb, is not doubled in the compound: as spondeo spopondi; respondeo respondi;
not respopondi: except praecurro praecucurri* excurro excucu^ri; repungo
repupugi and repunxi: and the compounds of Do, disco, sto, and posco: as
pessundo pessundedi; dedisco dedidici; persto perstiti; deposco depoposci.

When Plico is componded with sub or a Noun, it make's avi: as, supplico
supplicavi; multiplico, avi: But applico, complico, replico, and explico make
u^ or avi.

Though Oleo make's olui* Yet the Compounds thereof will rather make olevi: but
^edoleo make's redolui, and suboleo subolui.

The compounds of Pungo make punxi: as compungo, dispungo, expungo, interpungo:
only repungo make's repupugi and repunxi.

The compounds of Do, when they are of the th^^^ Conjug^^ion, make didi, not
dedi: as addo addidi, credo credidi, etc -- only abs^ondo make's abscondi.

The compounds of Sto make stiti: as consto, as, constiti; obsto, as, stiti*
praesto, as, stiti etc.

Verba haec simplicia etc. i. e.
THese Verbs damno, lacto etc. if they be compounded, change their first Vowel
into e: as damno condemno, lacto illecto, sacro consecro, fallo re^ello, arceo
co^rceo, tracto de^ecto, fatiscor defetiscor, partio impertio, carpo decerpo,
patro perpetr^, scando ascendo, descendo; spargo inspergo, pario comperio,
comperi* reperio reperi, aperio aperui* operio operui.

The compounds of Pasco keep the Preterperfect tens of the ^^mple Verb: as
epasco, depasco: except compesco, ui; and dispesco* ui.

Haec, habeo, la^^o etc i. e.
THese Verbs compounded change the first Vomel into i: as habeo inhib^o,
cohibeo (except posthabeo and antehabeo) la^eo deliteo* salio insilio, desilio,
re^ilio; staruo constituo, restituo; cado occido* recdo: l^do illido, collido;
pango pegi, compingo, impingo; cano con^ino, qu^ro inquir^, c^^^ in^ido,
concido; tango contingo; egeo indigeo, tenco contineo, detineo, retineo; taceo
conticeo, reticeo; s^^i^ insip^o, desipio; R^pio ^ripio, corrip^o.

2. The compounds of Cano make the preterperfect Tens in ui: as concino
concinui.

3. The Compounds of Placeo change the first vowel into i: except complaceo and
perplaceo.

4. These four compounds of pango pegi change not the first vowel: as Dep^^go,
oppango, circumpango, repango.

5 These four Compounds of Man^o mansi, change the first vowel into i, and form
their Preterperfect tens in minui: as pr^mineo pr^minui, emineo eminui,
promineo prominui, immineo immi^^^: Other Compounds of man^o keep the Form of
the simple verb: as permaneo perman^^.

6. The compounds of Scalpo, calco, salto change a into u: as exc^lp^, inculc^,
resu^^o.

7. The compounds of claudo, qu^tio, lavo, cast away a; as occludo, excludo;
percutio, excutio; prol^^, diluo.

Haec si compon^^ etc. i. e
THese Verbs, Ago, emo, sedeo etc. being compounded* change the ^^^st vowel of
the Present tens into i: but not of the Preterperfect tens* as of Ago egi,
exigo -- egi; of emo emi, r^dimo rede^i; of sedeo sedi, consideo -- edi; of
rego, ^rrigo, corrigo, dirigo, erigo -- rexi; of frango, confringo, refringo --
egi; of capio cepi, incipio -- epi, concipio -- epi; of ^acio ^eci, conjicio --
^ci; of lacio lexi, allic^o -- ^xi; of specio spexi, despicio -- exi; of premo
pressi, opprimo oppressi.

But Perago and satago are ^^^^^ned like the simple verb ago.

Dego and cogo compounded of Ago: and pergo and surgo combounded of rego, cast
away the middle syllable; and for deago and coago, we say dego and cogo --
e^gi; for perrego and surrego, we say, pergo and surgo, perrexi and surrexi.

Facio, compounded with a preposition, change's the first vowel into i:
otherwise not: as officio, conficio, deficio, efficio, inficio, interficio,
officio, perficio, praficio, proficio, reficio: Benefacio, malefacio, olfacio,
calfacio etc.

Lego, compounded with re, se, per, prae, sub, trans, keep's e in the Present
tens: as relego, perlego, praelego, sublego, translego: the rest of the
compounds of lego change the first vowel into i: as colligo, deligo, eligo,
diligo, intelligo, negligo, seligo: whereof diligo, intelligo, and negligo make
lexi: the rest legi.

Nunc expraeterito etc. ie.
The Supine is formed of the preterperfect tens; by changing the termination
into the termination of the Supine: as,

By the termination in the preterperfect tens make's tum in the Supine: as of
bibo bibi, the Supine is bibitum.

Ci is made ctum: as Vinco vici victum, ico ici ictum, facio feci factum, jacio
jeci jactum.

Di is made sum: as video visi visum: and some double ss: as pando pandi passum*
sedeo sedi sessum, scindo scidi scissum, findo fidi fissum, fodio fodi fossum.

N. B. But the syllable which is doubled in the preterperfect tens is not
doubled in the Supiries: as Tondeo totondi tonsum; caedo cecidi caesum, cado
cecdi casum, tendo tetendi tensum and tentum, tundo tutudi tunsum, pedo pepe^di
peditum, do dedi datum.

Gi is made ctum: as Lego legi lectum, pango pegi and pepigi pactum, frango
fregi fractum, tango tetigi tact^m, ago egi actum, pungo pupugi punctum, fugio
fugi fugitum.

Li is made sum: as sallo salli salsum, pello pepuli pulsum, cello ceculi
culsum, fallo fefelli falsum, vello, velli and vulsi, vulsum; fero tuli latum.

Mi, ni, pi, qui, are made tum: as emo emi emptum, venio veni ventum, cano
cecini cantum, capio cepi captum, coepio coepi coeptum, rumpo rupi ruptum,
linquo liqui lictum.

Ri is made sum: as Verro verri versum, pario peperi partum.

Si is made sum: as Viso visi visum, mitto misi missum, fulcio fulsi fultum,
haurio hausi haustum, sarcio sarsi sartum, farcio farsi*fartum, uro ussi ustum,
gero gessi gestum, torqueo torsi tortum and torsum, indulgeo indulsi indultum
and indulsum.

Psi is made tum: as scribo scripsi scriptum, cambio campsi campsum.

Ti is made tum: as Sto steti statum, sisto stiti statum, verto verti versum.

Vi is made tum: as flo flavi flatum, pasco pavi pastum, lavo lavi lotum,
lautum and lavatum, poto potavi potum and potatum, faveo favi fautum, caveo
cavi cautum, sero sevi satum, lino limi livi litum, solvo solvi solutum, volvo
volvi volutum, singultio singultivi singultum: venio venivi venum, sepelio
sepelivi sepultum.

Ui make's itum as domo domui domitum, except exuo exui exutum, induo indui
indutum, ruo rui ruitum, seco secui sectu^, neco necui nectum, frico fricui
frictum, misceo miscui mistum, amicio amicui amictum, torreo torrui tostum,
doceo docui doctum, teneo tenui tentum, consulo consului consultum, alo alui
alitum and altum, salio salui saltum, colo colui cultum, occulo occul^i
occultum, pinso pinsui pistum, rapio rapui raptum, sero serui sertum, texo
texui textum.

But these Verbs change ^i into sum: as Censeo censui censum, cello cellui
celsum, meto messui mestum, nexo nexui nexum, p^xo pexui pexum, pateo pat^i
passum, careo carui cas^um and caritum.

Xi is made ctum: as vincio Vinxi vinctum* But five cast away n: as fingo finxi
fictum, mingo minxi mictum, pingo pinxi pictum, stringe strinxi strictum, ringo
rinxi rictum.

These four verbs make xum, viz. Flecto flexi flexum, plecto plexi plexum, figo
fixi fictum, fluo fluxi fluxum.

Compositum u^ simplex etc. i. e.
THe Supine of the compound Verb is formed as the Supine of the simple Verb: as
Voco vocavi atum: so invoco invocavi invocatum; doceo docui doctum, edoc^o
edocui edoctum.

Yet some compound Supines have not the same syllible which the simple have: for
of tundo tutudi tunsum, the compounds make tusu^: as, contundo contudi
contusum; pertundo pertudi pertusum; of ruo rui ruitum, the compounds make
rutum: as corruo corrui corrutum; eruo erui erutum: of salio salui saltum, the
compounds make sultum: as insilio insilui insul^um: of sero sevl s^tum, the
compounds make situm: as insero insevi insitum* consero consevi consitum.

These Supines captum, factum. and c* change a into ^, when they are
compounded: as of capio cepi captum, incipio incepi inceptum; recipio recepi
receptum: of facio feci factum, inficio in^eci infectum: of jacio ^eci jactum*
ejicin eje^ci ejectum etc -- of rapio ^^pui rap^um, eripio eripui ereptum: of
cap^ cecini cantum, concino concinui concentum; of pario pepe^i partum,
comperio compe^i compertum; of spargo sparsi sparsum, conspergo conspers^
conspersum; of carpo carpsi carptum, decerpo decerpsi decerptum; of farcio
farsi fartum, infercio infersi infertum.

The compounds of Edo make esum in the Supine,* not estum, as exe^di exe^di,
exesum exesu: but come^do come^di, make's both comestum and comesum.

The compounds of Nosco make notum in the Supine: as pernosco pernovi pernotum:
But cognosco cognovi make's cogni^tum, and agnosco agnovi agni^tum.

Verba in Or admittunt etc. ie.
VErbs Passives in Or do form their Prete^^ perfect Cens of theiater Supine
^^^ive, by changing u into us, and adding sum vel fui, ^^ of Lectu is made
Lectus sum vel fui.

But Verbs Deponents, and Verbs Commune do form a Preterperfect Cens of
themselves, because they have no Verb Active, of whose Supine they might be
formed: as Labor lapsus, patior passus, comparior compassus and c.

Prateritum Active etc. i. e.
These Verbs have a Preterperfect Cens both of the Active and Passive voice: as
Coeno coenavi and coenatus sum, juro jutavi and juratus sum, poto potavi and
potus sum, titubo titubavi and titubatus sum, careo carui and cassus sum,
prand^o prandi and prassus sum, pateo patui and passus sum, placeo placui and
placitus sum, suesco suevi and suetus sum, veneo venivi and venditus sum, nubo
nupsi and nupt^ sum (not nuptus, because it is only proper to a woman, for a
man ^^ s^^ duce^e uxor^^) m^^^or mer^l and meritus sum, libet libuit and
libitum est vel fuit, licet licuit licitum est vel fuit, taedet taeduit and
pertaesum est vel fuit, pudet puduit and puditum est vel fuit, piget piguit and
pigitum est vel fuit.

Neutropassivum etc. i. e.
VErbs Neuter-passives ( i. e. Verbs that have an active termination in the
Present tens) form their* Preterperfect tens like a Verb Passive: as Gaudeo
gavisus sum, fido fisus sum, audeo ^usus sum, fio fis factus sum, soleo solitus
sum, meereo moestus sum. But Phocas (the Grammarian) says moestus is a Noun
Adjective.

Quaedam praeteritum verba etc. i. e.
Some Verbs have no Preterperfect tens of their own, but borrow it of others,
viz.

Inceptives in sco, standing for their Primitive, borrow their Preterperfect
ten^ of that Primitive for which they stand: as tepesco tepui of tepeo:
fervesco fervi of ferveo.

So likewise cerno cernis vldi, of video: quatio is, concussi of concutio;
ferio is, percussi of percutio; meio is, minxi of mingo; sido is, sedi of
sedeo; tollo is, sustuli of suffero; sum es, fui of fuo; fero fers, tuli of
tulo; Sisto is, stiti, statum, pro stare; verb. nent. Sisto is, steti, statum,
pro facio stare, active.
Sisto is, steti of sto; furo is, insanivi of i^sanio; Vescor ris, vel re,
pastus sum of pascor; medeor ^ris vel e^re, medicatus fum, a medicor; liquor
ris vel re, liquefactus sum of liquefio; reminiscor ris vel re, recordatus sum
of recordor.

Praeteri^um sugiunt etc. i. e.
THese words want their preterperfect tens, vergo, ambigo, glis^o, fatisco,
polleo, nideo.

2. Verbs Inteptives: as puerasco, senesco, diesco, advesperasco etc.

3. All Passives whose Actives want the Supines: as metuor, timeor.

4. All Meditatives, which signify a desire: as scripturio: Except parturio
and esurio, which make parturivi, and esurivi.

Haec raro aut nunquam etc. i. e.
THese Verbs seldom or never have the Supines: viz. Lambo, mico, rudo, scabo,
parco, dispesco, posco, disco, compesco, quinisco, dego, ango, sugo, lingo,
ningo, satago, psallo, volo, nolo, malo, tremo, strideo, strido, flaveo, liveo,
aveo, paveo, conn^veo, ferveo.

2. The compounds of Nuo: as annuo, abnuo, innuo, renuo.

3. The compounds of Cado * as accdo, concdo, decdo, excdo, incdo, intercdo,
procdo: Except occido which make's occasum; and recdo which make's recasum.

4. Likewise, Respuo, linquo, luo, metuo, cluo, frigeo, calvo, sterto, timeo,
Luceo, and arceo, the compounds whereof make erctum; as co^rceo, es, ui, ^tum:
exerceo, es, ui, erctum.

So the compound of Gruo: as congruo, ingruo.

6. And generally all Verbs Neuter of the second Conjugation, whose
Preterperfect Tens end's in ui, except these following, Oleo, doleo, placeo,
taceo, pareo, careo, noceo, pateo, lateo, valeo, and caleo; for these have the
Supines.

An INDEX of the NOUNS in Propria quae maribus, and Quae genus: and of the
VERBS in As in praesenti: with their Interpretation, Declension and
Conjugation, placed Alphabetically; for the benefit of young Beginners.
ABdo, is, ddi, re. endi, o, um. ditum, u, ens -- iturus, to hide. of ab and
do. Abscondo, dis, di, re, endi, o, um sum, u. vel itum, tu. ens, surus and
iturus, to hide of abs and condo. Abyssus, i, 2 foem. a bottomsess pit.
Acarnan, a^nis, 3 masc. one of Acarnania in Greece. Accerso, is, ivi, re. endi,
o, um. itum, tu, en^, iturus, to go to call of accio. Acer -- acris, 3 neut. a
maple. Acies, iei, 5 f. an edg. Acus, us, ui, 4 f. a needle. Adeps, pis, 3 dub.
fa^ness. Adipiscor, ris, adeptus sum vel fui, adipisci. endi, o, um. adeptum,
u. adipiscens, -urus, depo. to get or obtein. of ad, and the old Verb apiscor.
Adolescens, entis, 3 com. a young man or woman. Ador, oris, 3 n. wheat Advena,
ae, 1 com. a stranger. of ad and venio. Aes, aeris, 3 neut. brass, copper.
Ether, ^ris, 3 masc. the sky, in accus. aethere^, or aethra. Aethra, ae, 1 If
the sky* a new nom. case made of the Ac^nsative aethera. Agnosco, is, agnovi,
re. endi, o, um. agnitum, tu. ens, iturus, to acknowledge. of ad and nosco. Ago
is, ^gi agree. endi, o, um. actum, u. agens, agens, acturus. to do. Agragas,
antis, 3 mas. a town in Scicilie. Agricola, ae, 1 com. an husbandman. of ager a
field, and colo to till. Ales, it is, 3 c. a bird, any great winged fowl, of ala.
Ales, it is, Adj. c. genesis swift, having wings. Alnus, i, 2 f. an Alder-tree. Alo,
is, alui, alre. alendi, o, um. alitum, tu. and altum, tu. alens, aliturus, and
alturus, to nourish. Altet, a, um, genesis alterius, dat. alteri, another. Alvus,
i, 2 f. the belly, or paunch. Amazon, onis, 3 f a warlike woman of Scythia.
Ambigo, is, praet. caret, ambigre. ambigendi, o, um. Supinis caret. ambigens,
to be in doubt, compounded of am and ago. Amicio, is, cui ( seldom ^micivi)
i^re. amiciendi, o, um. amictum* u. iens, icturus, to cloth Amnis, is, 3 m. a
river. Anas, atis, 3 dub. a duck, or a drake. Ango, is, anxi anger. endi o, um.
( Sup. caret) angens, to vex, or trouble. Anguis, is, 3 m. a snake. Animus, i,
2 m. the mind. Anna, ae. 1 f. Anne. Annuo, is, annui, re. -u- endi, o, um (
Sup. caret) annuens, to grant. ex ad and nuo, proprie est nutu, i. e. capitis
signo, assentior. Annus, i, 2 m. a year. Antes, ium, 2 m. Sing. caret, the
uttermost ranks of vines, or a Buttress. Antidotus, i, 2 f. an Antidote, or
medicine to expel poison. Antiae, arum, 1 f. Sing. caret, women's forelocks.
Antistes, it is, 3 c. a prelate; One that stands or goes before other, a
Ruler. Anus, us, 4 f. an old woman. Anxur, uris, 3 m. and n. a Town in Italy,
now called Tarentine. Aperio, is, erui, aperi^re, iendi, o, um. apertum, tu.
aperiens. aperturus, to open, or to show, comp. of ad and pario. Apes, is, 3 f.
a Be. Apis, is, 3 f. a Be. Apiscor, ris, aptus sum, to get: an old Verb, out
of use* from whence com's adipiscor. Apollo, Apollnis, 3 mas. the God of
wisdom. Appendix, cis, 3 f. a penthous, or addition. Applico, as, applicui, and
applicavi, applicare. -- andi, o, um. atum, tu, and itum, tu. ans, aturus, and
iturus, to apply. of ad and plico. Aptoton, i, 2 n. a noun having no variation
of terminations, or cases. Aqualis, is, m. an Ewer or Laver. Arbor, oris. 3 f.
a tree. Arbos, oris, 3. f. a tree. Arceo, es, arcui, arce^re, -- endi, o, um. (
Sup. caret) arcens, to keep away, or keep back, to hinder* but the compounds
make -- ercitum in the Supines, as exerceo, and coerceo. Arcesso, is, ivi, re.
-- endi, o, um ^um, tu ens, iturus, to call, or to accuse. Arcas, adis, 3 m. an
Arcadian. Arctus, i, 2 f. a sign called the Bear. Ardeo, es, arsi,
arde^re-endi, o, um. arsum u. ardens, arsurus. to burn, or to be hot. Argos,
gi. 2 n. in the Plur. numb. Hi Argi, orum, is, a Town in Peloponnesus. Arma,
orum. 2 n. Sing. caret, weapons. Ar^spex, cis. 3 com. a soothsayer. As, assis,
i. 3 m. a pound, or 12 ounces. Assecla, ae. 1 m. a page. Athamas, antis. 3 mas*
Athamas, king of Thebes. Astu -- by craft. abl. 4 decl. masc. Athenae, -- arum.
1 f. Athens. only plural. Athleta, and athletes -- ae. 1 masc. a champion, ^^
Wrastler. Atomus, i. 2 dub. a mote in the sun. Auceps, pis. 3 a fowler. Audeo,
es, ausus sum vel fui, aude^re, -- endi, o, um. ausum, u audens* ausurus. to
be bold. Aveo, es* ( caret praet.) avere. avendi, o, um. ( Sup. caret) avens,
to covet. Augeo, es, auxi, auge^re, -- endi, o, um. auctum, tu. augens,
aucturus. to encreas. Avernus, i. 2 mas. and in the Plural, Averna, orum, n. a
lake in Campania dedicated to Pluto, thought to be the gate to Hell. Augur,
uris. 3 com. a soothsayer. Auriga-ae. 1 com. a carter; or carman. Auster, i. 2
masc. the southwinde. Author, o^ris. 3 masc. and foe. an Author. Axis, is. 3
masc. An axeltree.
B
BAcchanalia, ium and orum. 2 or 3. n. Feasts dedicated to Bacchus. Sing.
caret. Bacchar, aris. 3 foe^^ An herb called our Lady's gloves. Bacchus, i. 2
masc. the God of wine. Bacillus -- i. 2 masc. a staff. Baculum -- i. 2 neut. a
staff. Baculus -- i. 2 masc. a staff. Balneum i. 2 neut. a Bath. in the Plural
it make's Balnea -- orum: neut. and Balneae, arum. foem. Barbiton -- i. 2
Neuter* a Lute; or any musical instrument. Bellaria, iorum. 2 neut. Juncates.
Sing. caret. Bes, bessis. 3 Neut. eight ounces. Bidens, entis. 3 masc. pro
instrumento. a fork with two teeth, or grains. Bidens -- entis. 3 foem. pro
ove: a sheep of two years; or, which has two teeth longer than the rest.
Bifrons -- ontis. 3 com. that hoth two faces, or foreheads. Bilis, is. 3 f.
choler; melancholy. Plur. caret. Bombyx -- ycis. 3 masc. pro vermiculo, a
silkworm: pro sono, an humming sound. Bos, bovis. 3 com. an Ox, bull, or cow;
in the Genitive plural boum; in the Dative and Ablative plural* it make's
bobus, contracted from bovibus. Britannia, iae. 1 f. Britain. Bubo, o^nis. 3
dub. an Owl. Bucephalus, i. 2 m. Alexander's great horse. Bys^us, i. 2 foem.
fine flax, or silk.
C.
Cacoethes, is. 3 neut. an evil custom. Cadaver -- ris. 3 neut. a carcass; a
dead body. Cado, is, ccdi; cadre. cadendi o um casum u: cadens, c^surus. to
fall. Caedo is, cecidi; caedre. endi o um: caesum u, caedens, caesurus. to
beat. Calco as avi; are. andi do dum. atum tu, ans. a^urus. to kick or tread
upon. Calendae -- arum. 1 foem: the Calends of a month. Sing* caret. Caleo es
ui, e^re: endi do dum: ( Sup. caret) calens. to be hot. Callis is, 3 masc. a
path. Calvo is vi, re: endi do um: ( Sup. caret) calvens. to deceiv. Calx cis,
3 du. an heel. pedis calx; to distinguish it from Calx calcis, 3 foem. chalk,
or lime. Cambio is, campsi; i^re: iendi o um: campsum u; cambiens, campsurus.
to exchange. Canalis is, 3 m. a channel. Cancelli -- o^rum, 3 masc. latasses*
Sing. caret. Canis is, 3 com. a dog or bitch. Cano is, ccni; canre: endi o um:
cantum u; canens, canturus. to sing, Capesso is, capessi, and capessivi;
capessre: endi do dum. Capio -- is, ce^pi; capre: iendi do dum: captum tu:
capiens; capturus. to take. Capistrum i, 2 n. an halter, or headstall; in the
plural Number both masc. and n. as hi capistri o^rum; and haec capistra o^rum.
Capital alis, 3 n. a quoif. Capra -- ae, 1 foem. a sheegoat. Cardo nis, 3 dub.
the hinge of a door. Car -- aris, 3 m. a man of Ca^ia. Careo -- es, ui and
cassus sum vel fui, care^re; carendi o um: cassum -- u, and caritum -- tu;
carens, cassurus and cariturus. to want. Carex -- cis, 3 foem. sedge. Caro,
carnis: 3 foem. flesh. Carpo is, carpsi, carpre: -- endi, o, um: carptum, tu.
carpens, carpturus. to crop. Castra -- orum. 2 n. tents. Sing. caret. Cassida,
ae. 1 foem. an helmet. formed from cassi da the Accusative case of cassis --
dis. Cassis -- dis, idi, idem, and ida. 3 foem. an helmet: and from Cassda the
Accusative case com's a new Nom. Cassda, ae. Cassis, cassis. 3 masc. a net, or
snare. Cato, onis. 3 masc. Cato, the name of a wise man in Rome. Caveo, es,
cavi, cave^re. endi, o, um. cautum, tu. cavens, cauturus. to beware. Caulis,
is. 3 m. a stalk. Cedo, is, cessi, cedre. endi, o. um. cessum, u. cedens,
cessurus. to yield. or give place. Cedrus, i. 2 f. a cedar. Cello, is, cculi,
cellere. -- endi, o, um. culsum, u. cellens, cul. urus, pro frango. to break,
or to beat. an old Verb, now out of use, unless in the compounds. Censeo, es,
censui, cense^re, -- endi, o, um: censum, u: censens, -- urus. to think or
esteem. Centum; hi, hae, and haec. invariab* an hundred. Centussis, is. 3 m. an
hundred pound weight. Cera, ae. 3 f. wax. Cerno, is, crevi, ( or vidi, borrowed
of video) cernere, -- endi, o, um, cretum, tu. cernens, creturus. to see, or
perceiv. Cetus, i. 2 masc. a whale: and in the Plural Cete undeclined: a
monstrous great fish. Cholera, ae. 1 foem. choler. Plur. caret. Cicer, ci^cris.
3 neut. an Italian peace. Cieo, es, civi, cie^re. -- endi, do, dum. citum, tu.
ciens, citurus. to incite, to call. Cinis, cinris. 3 m. ashes. Claudo, is,
clausi, claudre. -- endi, o, um. clausum, u. claudens, clausurus. to sh^t.
Clivus, i. 2 m* the pitch of an hill. Clunis, is. 3 com. a buttock. Cluo, is, (
praet. caret) clure: -- endi, o, um. ( Sup. caret) cluens. to shine, to be
famous. Clypeum, i. 2 n. a buckler. Clypeus, i. 2 m. a buckler. Coelum, i. 2 n:
heaven: in the Plur. Hi coeli, orum: the masc. only. Coeno, as, avi, and
coenatus sum vel fui, coenare, -- andi, do, um: coenatum, tu; coenans,
coenaturus; to sup. Coepio, is, coepi, coepere: -- piendi, o, um. coeptum, tu.
coepiens, coepturus; pro incipio, to begin. an old Verb, out of use. of it
com's Coepi -- coeperam, coeperim, coepero, coepissem, coepisse: a Verb
defective. I have begun, or taken in hand. Cognosco, is, cognovi, cognoscre. --
endi, o, um. cognitum, tu. cognoscens, turus. to know. of con and nosco.
Collis, is, 3 m. a little hill. Colo, is, colui, colre. -endi, o, um. cultum,
tu. colens, culturus. to worship. Colus, i, and us. 2 and 4 foem. a distaff.
Comes -- it is. 3 com. a companion. Comminiscor, ris vel -re. commentus sum vel
fui, comminisci, -- endi, o, um. commentum, tu. comminiscens, commenturus, to
invent: to devise, to find out: Depon. como, is, compsi, comre. -endi, o, um.
comptum, tu. comens, compturus. to kemb. to trim. Compago -- nis. 3 f. a joint.
of con and pango. Compes -- dis. 3 f. a fetter. Compdes, dum. 3 f. only
Plural: Fetters. Co^ditor, oris. 3 m. a builder* Conger, gri. 2 m. a conger.
Congrus, gri. 3 m. a conger. Conjux, conjugis. 3 com. an husband or wife.
Coquo, is, coxi, coqure. coquendi, do, dum. coctum, tu. coquens, cocturus. to
sees Consulo, is, consului, consulre. endi, do, dum. consultum, tu. consulens,
consulturus: to ask or give counsel: to provide for. Cor, cordis. 3 n. the
heart. Corbis, is. m. a basket. Cornu, neu. undecl. an horn: flexile cornu; a
trumpet. Plu. Cornua, uum, ibus; etc -- Cornus us, 4 m. an horn. the wing of an
army: Plin. lib. 11. 37. Cornus, i and us: 2 and 4 a dogtree: quando arbor
habetur; to distinguish it from Cornus an horn. Colus, i* 2 f. the herb called
Alecoast. Coxendix cis, 3 f. an hip. Crater, e^ris: 3 m. a cup: ac. crate^rem
and crate^ra. Crate^ra -- ae: 1 f a cup: a new Nom. case, made from the Accus.
crate^ra. Crepo, as, ui; crepa^re: andi, o, um: creptum, tu; crepans,
crepiturus: to make a nois; to give a crack. Crepundia io^rum, 2 neut. gugaws
or trifles for children to play withal: Sing. caret. Cres -- it is: 3 masc. one
of Creet. Creta tae, 1 foem. Creet. Crinis is, 3 m. the hair. Crus cru^is, 3
neuter; the leg. Crystallus -- i, 2 foem. crystal Cubo as, cubui, cubare: andi
o um; cubtum ^, cubans, cubiturus; to lie down. Cucumer -- ris; 3 masc. a
cucumber; and Cucumis ris; 3 masc. a cucumber. Culex, cis; 3 dub. a g^at. Cumbo
is, cubui; cumbre: endi o um: tum tu; cumbens, iturus; to lie down; an old
verb. Cunabula orum; 2 neut. cradles: Sing. caret. Cunae ^rum: 1 f. cradles:
Sing caret. Cupio is, ivi; re: cupiendi o um; cupitum, tu; cupiens, cupiturus:
to desire; formerly it was of the fourth Conjugat. Cupressus -- i: 2 foem. a
Cypress-tree. Curculio -- o^nis: 3 masc. a weesel. Cures e^tis: 3 m. a man of
Creet. Curro is, cucurri* currre: endi do dum; cursum u; currens, cursurus: to
run. Cuspis dis, 3 f. the point of a weapon. Custos odis, 3 m. a guardian, or
keeper. Cyprus, i: 2 f. the Island Cyprus.
D.
Dama ae, 1 dub. a buck or do. Damno as, avi; are: andi do dum: atum tu, ans,
aturus, to condemn. Dedo is, deddi; dedre: dedendi do dum; deditum tu; dedens,
dediturus, to yield: of de and do. Defrutum -- i, 2 neuter, wine, the third
part whereof is boiled away: in the Plural Number it has but three like cafes:
Nom. Accus. Vocat. defruta* Dego is, degi; degree: endi o um* ( Sup. caret)
degens, to live: ex de and ago. Deleo es, e^vi; e^re: endi do dum: deletum tu;
delens, deleturus: to blot out: of de and leo; an old verb. Deliciae a^rum, 1 f
delights. pleasures, Sing. caret, Delicium -- ii, 2 neuter, the thing wherein
we delight. Delphin i^nis, 3 mascul. a dolphin. Delphinus -- i, 2 masc. a
dolphin. Demo is, dempsi; demre: endi do um: demptum tu, demens, dempturus, to
take away: of de and emo. Dens -- entis, 3 masc. a tooth. Depango is, depegi;
depangre: endi do dum: depactum tu; depangens, depacturus, to fasten down.
Desidia iae, 1 foem. sloth; Plur. caret. Dico* is, dixi; dicre: dicendi o um;
dictum tu; dicens, dicturus: to speak. Dies, diei. 3 dub. a day; in the Plural
Number it is only of the Masculine Gender. Diffiteor -- e^ris vel e^re:
diffessus sum vel fui; diffite^ri: -- endi o um: diffessum u; diffitens,
diffessurus: to deny, Depon. ^ di and fateor. Digredior -- ris vel re:
digressus sum vel fui: digrdi: -- iendi do um: digressum u; digrediens, surus,
to go aside, Depo^* a di and gradior. Diligo -is dilexi, diligre -endi, o, um;
dilectum, tu; diligens, dilecturus. to love. ex de and lego. Diluo -is, dilui,
dilure. -- endi, endo, endum. dilutum -tu. diluens, diluturus. to wash. ex di
and luo. Dindymus -i. 2 mascul. the top of Ida by Troy* in the Plural Number it
is of the Neut. gend. Dindyma -orum. Diphthongus -gi. 2 foem. a diphthong.
Diptoton -- i. 2 neut. a Noun declined with two cases. Dirae -arum. 1 foe.
cursing. sing. caret. Disco -is, ddci, discre. -endi, o, um. ( Sup. caret)
discens. to learn. Dispesco -is, ui, esc^e. -endi o, um. ( Sup. caret)
dispescens. to drive beasts from pasture. of dis and pasco. Displiceo, is, ui,
^re. -endi, o, um. t^m tu. displicens, displiciturus. to displeas. a dis and
placeo. Ditio -- onis. 3 f. a title, power, command. Divido -- is, divisi,
dividre. -- endi, o, um. divisum, u. dividens, divisurus. to divide. quasi
divideo: i. e. in diversas parts video. Divitiae, arum. 1 f. riches. Sing.
caret. Do, das, ddi, dare, dandi, -o -um, datum, tu, dans, daturus. to give.
Doceo -es, ui, e^re -endi, o, um. doctum, tu. doce^s, docturus. to teach.
Dodrans -antis. 3 masc. nine ounces. Dol^o -es, dolui, dole^re. endi, o, um.
dolitum, tu. dolens, iturus. to griev. Domo -as, domui -are. -andi, o, um.
domitum, tu. domans, domiturus. to tame. Domus-domi and domus. Dat. domo and
domui. Acc. domum. Voc o domus. Ablativo domo. Pluraliter Nom. Domus* Genit.
domorum and domuum. Dat. domibus. Accus domos, and domus. Voc. domus. Ablat.
domibus. Duco -is, duxi, ducre, -endi, o, um. ductum, tu. ducens, ducturus to
lead. Dulcedo, nis. 3 f. sweetness. Dux ducis. 3 commun. a Captain or guide.
Ecquis, ecquae, or ecqua, ecquid. who? an Interrogative. Edo -- is, eddi, edre.
edendi, o, dum. editum, tu. edens, editurus. to set out; or to publish. of e
and do. emitto; for as do. (...), (...). Edo, edis vel es, edi, edre vel esse.
edendi, do, dum. esum, esu. vel estum, estu edens, esurus v^l esturus. to eat.
(...). Edo -^nis. 3. masc. (...). a great eater. Edoceo -- es, ui, e^re, endi,
o, um. edoctum, tu. ens, cturus. to teach perfectly, or thoroughly, ab e and do.
Effata -orum 2 neut. Augur's prayers; also Oracles. sing caret. Egeo -es, egui,
e^re. -endi, o, um. ( Sup. caret) egens to want. Elephantus i. 2 masc. an
Elephant. Elephas-antis. 3 masc. an Elephant. Elis, Eldis. 3 f. a city in
Arcadia, or a country in Peloponnesus. Emineo-es, ui, e^re. -endi, do, dum. (
Sup. ca. ret) eminens, to excel. ab e and maneo; quasi extra alios, hoc est,
pro aliis maneo. Emo -is, e^mi, re. endi^, o, um. emptum, tu. emens, empturus
to buy. Ensis -- is, 3 masc. a sword. Epasco -is, epavi, epascre. -endi, o, um.
( Sup. caret) epascens. to eat up. Epulum -- i, 2 neut. a feast or banquet: in
the Plural Numb. it is of the foem. Gender; hae epulae -- arum. Eques-tis, 3 c.
an horsman; or a knight. Eques auratus ab aureo annulo nomen habet, quo
equestris ordo a plebe distinguebatur. Ere^mus-mi. 2 foe. a wilderness. Eripio
-is, ui re. iendi, o, um. ereptum * tu. eripiens, erepturus, to take away by
violence, to pluck out, ab e and rapio. Esurio is, i^vi; i^re: iendi do dum:
itum tu: esuriens, esuriturus: to hunger. Eventum, i. 2 neut. chance or hap.
Eventus us, 4 masc. chance, hap, success, issue Excludo is, exclusi; excludre:
-endi o um exclusum su; excludens, usurus, to exclude: ab ex and claudo.
Excubiae -- arum, 1 foem. watchings. Exculpo -- is, exculpsi; exculpre: -- endi
do dum: exculptum exculptu; exculpens, exculpturus: to carv: of ex and scalpo.
Excurro -is, excucurri: excurrre; endi o um: excursum u, excurrens excursurus,
to run out: of ex and curro. Excuso as, avi ^re: andi do dum atum atu, ans,
aturus, to excuse. Excutio is, excussi, ex-cut^re: iendi o um, excussum u,
excutiens, excussurus, to shake off. of ex and quatio. Exequiae arum, 1 f.
funeral ceremonies: sing. caret. Exlex e^gis, 3 c. a lawless body. Expergiscor,
ris vel re, experrectus sum vel fui, expergisci; expergiscendi o um*
experrectum u; expergiscens, experrecturus, to awake. Experior, ^ris vel i^re,
expertus sum vel fui* experi^ri: iendi do dum; expertum u, experiens,
experturus. to make trial Explico as, explicui and explicavi, explicare: andi o
um: explicitum tu, vel explicatum tu: explicans, expliciturus and explicaturus:
to declare. Exta o^rum, 2 neut. the entrales: Sing. caret. Extorris is, 3 c. a
banished man or woman Exsul ulis, 3 com. a banished man or woman. Exuo is,
exui; exure: exuendi do dum: exutum tu; exuens, exuturus: to put off. Exuviae
^rum, 1 f. things put of. ab exuendo.
F.
FAcies ie^i, 5 f. a face. Facio is, feci, ^acre: iendi o um: ctum tu, ciens,
cturus, to make or do. Facesso is, facessi, facessre: endi o um; facessum su,
facessens urus, to go about to do. Fallo is, fefelli, fallre; endi o um, falsum
u, fallens, falsurus, to deceiv. Fames is, 3 f. hunger Plur. caret. Far,
farris. 3 n. bread-corn. in the Plur. Numb. it has only three like cases,
farra, farra, farra. Farcio is, farsi, farci^re: iendi o um, fartum tu,
farciens, turus, to stuff. Fas, neut. indeclined, right. Fascis is, 3 masc. a
faggot. Fasti orum, 2 m. Registers of things of the year: Sing. caret. Fateor,
e^ris vel e^re; fassus sum vel fui; fateri: endi o um, fassum u, fatens,
fassurus, to consess. Fatisco is, ( Praeter. caret) fatisc e: endi o um, ( Sup.
caret) fatiscens, to be weary, to gape. Fatiscor, ris vel re, fessus sum vel
fui; fatisci: endi o um ( Sup. caret) fatiscens, to be weary. Faveo es, favi;
fave^re: endi do dum, fautum tu, favens, fauturus, to favor. Fell, fellis, 3 n
gall. Feriae ^rum, 1 f. holy days, Sing. caret. Ferio is* percussi ( of
percutio) feri^re: iendi o um, percussum ussu, feriens, percussurus, to strike.
Fero, fers, tuli, far: ferendi do dum, latum u, ferens, laturus, to bear or
suffer. Ferveo es, fervi, ferve^re: endi o um, ( Sup. caret) fervens, to be
hot. Fervesco is, fervi (a ferveo) fervescre: endi o um, ( Sup. caret)
fervescens, to wax hot. Ficus, fici and ficus 2 and 4. a figg, or fig tree; pro
fructu and arbore. Ficus, fici, 2 m. pro morbo: the piles in the fundament.
Fides, fidei, 5 f. faith, or truth. Fides, or fidis, Genesis fidis, 3 foem. a
string of an instrument. Fido, is, fisus sum vel fui, fidre. endi, o, um, fisum
su, fidens, surus to trust. Figo-is, figi, figre. -endi, o, um. fixum, u.
figens, fixurus. to fasten. Filix, cis. 3 foem. fearn, or brake. Filum-i. 2
neut. thread. Fimus-i. 2 masc. dung. Findo, is, fdi; findre. endi, o, um fisum,
su findens, fisurus. to cleav. Fingo -- is, finxi, fingre. -- endi, o, um.
fictum, u. fingens, ficturus. to feign, or fashion. Finis -is 3 dub an end. Fio
fis, factus sum vel fui, fieri, factus, faciendus. to be made or don. Flaveo
-es (car. praet.) flave^re -endi, o, um ( Sup. ca.) flavens. to be yellow.
Flecto -- is* flexi, flectre. -- endi, o, um. flexum, u flectens, flexurus. to
bend. Fleo, es, flevi, fle^re. flendi, o, um fletum, u. flens, fleturus. to
weep. Flo -as flavi flare; flandi -o -um; flatum -tu; flans flarurus. to blow.
Flos -O^^is. 3 m. a fl^wer. Fluo -is fluxi flure; fluendi, o, um; fluxum -u;
fluens fluxurus. to flow. Fodio -- is fodi fodre; fodiendi ^o -um; fossum -u;
fodiens fossurus. to dig. Follis -is. 3 masc. a pair of bellows. Fons -ontis.
3 mascul. a fountain, or well. Forceps -pis. 3 mascul. a pair of tongs. Forfex
-cis. 3 f. a pair of shears, or scissers. Fors Nom Abl. forte. 3 f. by chance.
Forum -i. 2 n. the market. in the Plu. Numb. it has only three like cases;
fora, fora, fora. Frango -- is fregi frangre; endi -endo -um; fractum -u;
frangens, fracturus. to break. Fraenum -i. 2 n. a bridle: Plur. hi fraeni,
orum; and haec fraena -orum. etc. Frico -as, fricui fricare; andi -o -um;
frictum -u; fricans, cturus. to rub. Frigeo -es, frixi, frige^re; frigendi
-endo -dum; frictum -ctu; frigens, fricturus. to be cold. Frugi. Adj. undecl.
thrifty, sparing. Fruges -is. 3 foem. fruit: some make the old Nom. case frux.
Fruor -- ris vel re, fructus vel frul fruitus sum vel fui; frui: fruendi, o,
um. fructum, u; vel fruitum -u. fructurus vel fruiturus. to enjoy. Fuga -ae 1
foem. Flight. Fugio -is, fugi, fugre; fugiendi -o -um; fugitum, tu, fugiens,
fugiturus. to flee from, to avoid Fulcio-is, fulsi, fulci^re: fulciendi, o, um;
fultum -u; fulciens, fulturus. to underprop. Fundo -is, fudi; fundere: endi, o,
um: fusum, su: fulgens, fusurus. to pour out, or to melt. Funis -- is. 3 masc.
a rope. Fur -- uris. 3 com. a thief. Furfur -uris. 3 masc. bran. Furo, is,
insanivi ( ab insanio) furre; endi, o, um; ( Sup. car.) furens. to be mad.
Fustis -- is. R masc. a club.
G.
Gabii, orum. 2 m. Volscorum urbs. a Town in Italy. Sing caret. Gallia -- ae.
1 foem. France. Garamas -- antis. 3 masc. an inhabitant of Africa. Gargarus --
i. masc. the top of the Hill Ida: in the Plur. numb it is only the Neut. gend;
as haec Gargara -- o^rum and c -- Gaudeo -es, gavisus sum vel fui, gaude^re;
-endi -- do -- dum: gavisum -u; gaudens, gavisurus. to rejoice. Gelu. Neu.
undeclined. Frost. Genu neut indecl. The knee. but in the Plural it is
declined, genua -- uum, bus, and c -- Gero, is, gessi, gerre. endi -o -um:
gestum -u. gerens gesturus. to beat. Gibber -ris. masc a bunch, or swelling.
Gibber -a -um. Adj. that has a swelling. Gibbus -i. ^ masc. a bunch, or
swelling. Gibbus, a, um; Adj. bossed, swelling. Gigas -- antis. 3 m. a giant.
Gigno -- is, genui, gignre: -endi -o um; gentum, u: gignens, geniturus. to
beget. Gingiber -- ris. 3 neuter. ginger. Glis, gliris, habens genitivo: 3 m. a
dormous. Glis, glissis, 3 f. potter's clay, terra argillosa. Glis, glitis, 3
foem. a thistle, carduus Glisco is, (Praeter. caret) gliscre. endi do dum,
(Sup. caret) glissens, to grow, or to desire fervently. Gluten nis, 3 n. glue:
plu. caret. Gorgon onis, 3 f. a terrible woman; one of the daughters of
Phorcus. Gradior, ris vel ^e, gressus sum vel fui, gradi: iendi do dum, gressum
u, gradiens, gressurus, to go. Graecia ae, 1 f. Greece. Grajugna ae, 1 com. a
Grecian born: a Graius and gigno. Grando nis* 3 foem. hail. Grates, 3 foem
thanks: used only in the Nom. and Ac. plural. Grex, grgis, 3 mascul. a flock
of small cattle, as sheep, goats etc -- Grex pecudum: armentum pecorum. Grossus
i, 3 masc. a green figg. Gruo is, ( Praet. caret) grure: endi o um, (Sup.
caret) gruens. to cry like a crane. Grus, gruis, 3 dub. a crane. Gryps,
gryphis, a gryfon. Gummi, n. indecl. gum. Gurgulio onis, 3. m. the wesand, or
a weesel.
H.
HAbeo es, habui, habe^re; habendi o um, habitum itu, habens, habiturus, to
have. Haereo es, haesi; haere^re: endi do dum haesum u, haerens, haesurus, to
stick. Haeres e^dis. 3 ^om. an heir. Halec e^cis, 3 f. an herring: and in the
f. genesis is declined through all cases. Halec e^cis, 3 n. and in this neut.
gender it want's the Plur. number. Haurio is, hausi; hau^i^re: iendi do dum;
haustumstu, hau^iens, hausturus, to draw. Heroes -- ois, 3 m. a noble man.
Hesperus i, 2 m. the evening star, Plur. caret Heteroclitum i, 2 neut. an
Heteroclite: that is, a word declined otherwise than the ordinary manner.
Hilaris e, Adject. merry. Hilarus a um, Adj. merry. Hippomanes is, 3 n a
piece of flesh in a col^s forebead: or a venomous humor distilling from a mare.
Hirundo nis, 3 f. a swallow. Histrix cis, 3 f. a porcupike. Homo nis, 3 com. a
man or woman. Honor oris, 3 m. honor. Honos oris, 3 m. honor. Hordeum i, 2 n.
barley: it has three like cases in the Plu Numb Hordea, hordea, hordea. Hospes
it is. 3 com. an host or a guest. Hostis i, 3 com. an enemy. Humus i, 2 f. the
ground. Hydrops o^pis, 3 masc. the dropsy. Hyems mis, 3 f. the winter.
I.
JAceoes, jacui, jace^re: endi o um: (Sup. caret) jacens, to lie down. Jacio
is, je^ci; jacre: jaciendi o um, jactum u, jaciens, jacturus. to cast. Jaspis
dis, 3 foem. a jasperstone. Ico, icis, ici, icre; endi o um, ictum u, icens
icturus, to strike. Icon onis, 3 f. an image. Ida ae, 1 f. a mountain near
Troy. Idus, iduum, idbus, and c. 4 f. the Ides of a month. Jecur, jecoris, or
jecinoris: 3 n. the liver. Ignis is, 3 masc. the fire. Illex e^gis, 3 com. a
lawless body: ab in privativa particula, and lex. Imber, imbris, 3 m. a shower.
Imbrex cis, 3 dub. a guttertile. Immineo es, imminui, immine^re: endi do dum;
(Sup. caret) imminens* to hang over: comp. of in and maneo. Impetis 3 m. of
violence (of the old Nom. case impes) Abl. impete, hoc est, impetu: by
violence. Incesso is, ivi; incessre: endi o um: incessitum tu; incessens,
iturus, to provoke. Incido is, idi; incidre: endi o um; incisum u, incidens,
incisurus, to cut, or to grave in, ab in and caedo. Incdo is, incdi; incidre:
-- endi do um. (Sup caret) incidens. to fall into, or upon* of in and cado.
Incipio -is, ince^pi; incipre: -- iendi -o -um: inceptum, u; incipiens,
incepturus. to begin. of in and capio. Inculco -- as -- avi; are: -- andi o um:
-- atum, u; inculcans, inculcaturus. to repent often. of in and calco. Indo --
is, inddi; indre: -- endi -- do -- dum: indtum -- tu: indens; inditurus. to put
in ^ of in and do. Indoles -- is. 3 f towardness: (Plur. car) Induciae -- arum.
1 f truce. Sing caret. Indulgeo -- es, indulsi; indulge^re: -- endi -- do --
dum: indultum and indulsum; indulgens; indulturus and indulsurus: to make much
of. Inermis e: Adj. unarmed: ab in and arma. Inermus, a, um: Ad^. unarmed: ab
in and arma. Infans -- antis: 3 com. an infant, a babe. Inferiae, arum; 1 f.
sacrifices to the infernal spirits. Inficias. 1 foem. only in the Accus.
plural: as eo inficias; I deny it. Inficio -- is, infe^ci; inficre: -- iendi,
o, um: infectum, u: inficiens, infecturus: to infect; or to die. ab in and
facio. Ingruo -- is, ui; ingruere: -- endi do dum; (Sup. car.) ingruens. to
invade. ab in and gruo. Injussu. 3 mas^. only in the Abl. case. without
bidding. Insidiae, arum. 1 f wiles; snares to entrap one. Instar. neut.
undeclin. like, as it were, significat vel similitudinem, vel aequiparationem
and mensuram. Intelligo -- is* intellexi; intelligre: -- endi -- o -- um:
intellectum -u, intelligens, intellecturus: to understand. of instar and lego:
vel, ex intus and lego: quasi intus mecum lego, and loquor. Interpres -- it is. 3
com an interpreter. Invidia -- ae. 1 foem. envy. Plur. caret. Jocus -- i. m. a
jest. in the Plu. Numb. masc. and neut. as hi Joci and haec Joca, orum. etc --
Irascor, ris vel re, iratus sum vel fui, irasci: -- endi do dum iratum u.
irascens. to be angry with. Ismarus, i. 2 masc. a mountain in Thrace. in the
plural it is of the Neuter gender: Haec Ismara -orum, etc. Iter itinris ( of
the old Nom. Itiner) 3 neut. a journey. Jubar aris. 3 neut. the sunbeam. Jubeo
es, jussi jube^re: endi o um, jussum u, jubens, jussur us, to command. Jugris
in the Genitive case, and jugre, in the Ablat. 3 neuter. an acre. in the Plur.
it has all cases, jugera, um, bus, etc -- Jugum i 2 neut. the top of an hill.
a yoke Jungo -is, junxi, jungre: -- endi o um; junctum ctu, jungens, juncturus.
to join. Juno onis. 3 foem. Jupiter's wi^e. Jus. juris. 3 neut. right. in the
Plur. Number it has three like cases only; jura, jura, jura. Jussu. in the
Abl. only. 4 m. by command. Justa orum. 2 neut. funeral rites. Sing caret.
Justitium -ii, 2 neut. vacation: juris dicendi intermissio. Juvenis is. 3 com.
a young man, or woman. Juventus -utis. 3 f. youth. Plur. caret. Juvo as, juvi,
are; andi do dum: jutum u, juvans, juturus. to help.
L.
LAbes is. 3 f. a spot. in the Plur. Number. it has three like cases. Nom. labes,
Ac. labes, Voc. labes. Labor oris. 3 m. labor. Labos oris. 3 m. labor. Lac,
lactis. 3 n. milk. Plur. caret. Lacesso -is, ivi, lacessre: endi o um.
lacessitum u. lacessens, lacessiturus. to provoke. Lacio is, lexi, lacre: iendi
o um. lectum u. laciens, lecturus. to allure, or entice: an old verb: but the
compounds are in use; as. allicio, elicio, illicio, pellicio, prolicio. Lactes
ium, 3 f. the small guts; sing. caret. Lacto as, avi, are; andi do dum, atum
tu; ans, aturus, to give milk, or to deceiv. Lacus us, 4 m. a lake; Dat. and
Abl. plur lacubus. Laedo is, laesi, laed^e; endi o um; laesum u, laedens,
laesurus, to hurt. Laelaps apis. 3 masc. a dog called Tempest. Lambo is, lambi,
lamb^e; endi o um* (Sup. ca^et) lambens. to lick. Lampas adis, 3 m. a lamp.
Lanista ae, 1 m. a master of fence. Laquear -- aris, 3 neut. a vaulted roof.
Laser ris, 3 neut. the herb called Benjamin. Lateo -es, latui, late^re; endi o
um; latitum tu, latens, latiturus, to lurk, or to lie hid. Lavo as, lavi,
lavare; andi do dum, lautum -tu, lotum u, and lavatum u; lavans, lauturus,
loturus, and lavaturus. Laurus i and us, 3 and 4, f. a bay tree. Lebes e^tis, 3
m. a caldron, or pan. Lecythus i, 2 dub. an oylglass. Lego is, legi, legre;
endi o um, lectum tu, legens, lecturus. to read. Lemures um, 3 masc.
hobgoblins, Sing. caret. Leo onis, 3 m. a lion. Leo es, levi, le^re; -- endi
-do * dum; letum tu; lens, leturus, to anoint, or imprint; an old Verb, not in
use, but only in the compound Deleo, to blot out Lethum i, 2 n. death; Plu.
caret. Liberi orum, 3 m children. Sing. caret. Libet, libebat, libuit and
libitum est vel fuit, libitum erat vel fuerat, libebit; it pleases. Libs,
libis, 3 m. the southwest wind. Licet, licebat, licuit; vel licitum est vel
fuit; licuerat, vel licitum erat vel fuerat, licebit; it is lawful. Lichen
e^nis, 3 m. liverwort. Lien e^nis, 3 m. the melt, or spleen. Ligur -- uris, 3
com. one of Liguria, incola Liguriae. Limax acis, 3 m. a snail. Limus i, 2 m.
dirt; Plur. caret. Lingo is, linxi; lingre; endi o um, (Sup. caret) lingens; to
lick. Lino is; lini, livi, and levi; linre; linendi -- do -- dum; litum -tu,
linens, liturus; to daub, or besmear. Linquo is, liqui; linquere; endi do dum,
lictum tu, linquens, licturus, to leav Linter is, 3 dub. a cockboat. Liquefio
-- is, liquefactus sum vel fui; liquefieri; liquefactus, -faciendus, to be
molten. Liquor ris vel re, idem. Liveo es, livi, live^re; -- endi o um (Sup.
caret) livens; to be wan, to be black and blue. Lixa -- ae, 1 m. a scullion.
Locri -orum; 2 m. a town in Italy; Sing. caret. Locus -i, 2 masc. a place;
Plural. hi Loci, and haec loca -orum. Logos i, 2 m. speech or reason. Loquor*
it is vel re, loquutus sum vel fui, loqui; endi o um; loquutum tu; loquens,
loquuturus, loquutus, and loquendus. Luceo es, luxi; luce^re; lucendi o um,
(Sup. caret) lucens, to shine. Ludo is, lusi, ludre; ludendi o um; lusum su,
ludens, lusurus, to play. Lues is, 3 f. the murrain, Plur. caret. Lugeo es,
luxi, luge^re; lugendi do dum, luctum ctu, lugens, lucturus, to mourn, or
lament. Luo is, lui, lure; luendi o um, liutum tu, luens, luiturus; to redeem,
to pay, to clens; but the compounds change the signification; and make utum in
the Supines, not uitum; as, abluo -ui -utum; colluo, collui, collutum; diluo,
dilui, dilutum; eluo, elui, elutum; polluo ui utum. Lustra -orum, 2 n. dens of
wild beasts, Sing. caret. Lynx -- yncis, 3 dub. a spotted beast, an ounce.
M.
MAenalus -i, 2 masc an hill in Arcadia: in the Plural, haec Maenala -o^rum.
Magnes e^tis. 3 m. a loadstone. Majores orum. 3 masc. our Ancestors. Sing.
caret. Malo, malis, malui, malle: malendi do dum, ( Sup. caret) malens, to be
more willing. Mando is, mandi, mandre: endi, o, um: mansum u. ens, mansurus. to
eat. Mando, as, avi, are: andi o um: a^tum u. ans aturus. to command, or commit
to. Maneo es, mansi, mane^re: endi o um. mansum u. manens, mansurus. to tarry,
or abide. So the comp. permaneo, remaneo: but emineo, immineo, praemineo,
promineo make minui in the praeter perfect tens. Manes ium. 3 m. spirits. sing.
caret. Manubiae arum. 1 f. spoils taken in war. Sing caret. Manus us. 4. foem.
an hand. Mapalia orum. 2 neut. cottages. Sing caret. Mare is. 3 neut. the sea.
Margo nis. 3 dub. the brink or skirt of any thing. Marmor oris. 3 neut. marble.
Mars it is. 3m. the god of war. Martyr yris. 3 co. a martyr. Mas, maris. 3 m. a
man, or the malekinde. Massicus i. 2 m. an hill in Campania: in the Plural haec
Massica orum. Matter, matris. 3 f. a mother. Medeor, e^ris vel e^re, medicatus
sum vel fui ( a medicor) mederi: medendi o um. medicatum u. medens,
medicaturus. to heal or cure. Medicor, aris vel are, atus sum vel fui, ari:
andi do dum. atum atu. ans, aturus. to heal or cure. Meio is, minxi, ( a mingo)
meire: endi o um, mictum u. meiens, micturus. to piss. Mel, mellis. 3 n honey.
in the Plur. it has only three like cases. Nom. Acc. Voc. Mella, mella.
mella. Meleager -agri. 2 masc. a man's name. Meleagrus agri. 2 masc. a man's
name. Menda ae. 1 foem. a fault. Mendum i. 2 neut. a fault. Menses ium. 3 m.
women's flowers. Sing caret. Mensis is. 3 m. a month. Mereor, e^ris vel e^re,
merui, vel meritus sum vel fui, mere^ri: merendi o dum. meritum u. merens,
meriturus to deserv. Meridies iei. 3 m. noonday. Meto is, messui, meter: -endi
o um; messum u; metens, messurus: to mow Metuo is, metui, meture: me^uendi o
um; ( Sup. caret) metuens; to fear. Metuor, -- uris vel ure, ( caret praet.)
metui: metuendus: to be feared. Men's, a um; mine. a Pron. Possessive. Mico as
micui, micare: andi o um: ( Sup caret) micans: to shine or glitter. Miles it is:
3 com. a soldier. Minae arum: 1 foem. threatenings: Sing. caret. Mingo is*
minxi, mingre: endi do dum; mictum u; mingens, micturus. to piss Minores o^rum:
3 m. posterity: sing caret. Misceo es, miscui, misce^re: endi do dum; mistum
u; miscens, misturus: to mingle. Misereor, e^ris vel e^re, misertus sum vel
fui: misereri: -erendi o um, misertum u; miserens, miserturus: to take pity on.
Mitto is, misi, mittre: endi, do dum, missum u; mittens, missurus. to send.
Moenia ium: 3 n. the walls of a town: Sing. caret. Moereo -- es, moestus sum
vel fui, moere^re: endi do dum; ( Sup. caret) moe-rens: to be sad. Monopto^ton
i: n. a monoptote: i. e. a word that has but one termination, and that in one
oblique case. Mons, montis: 3 m. a mountain. Mordeo es, momordi, morde^re: endi
o um; morsum u; mordens surus: to bite. Morior, morris vel morre, mortuus sum
vel fui, mori^: moriendi o um; ( Sup. caret) moriens, moriturus. to die.
Morior, i^ris vel i^re: mortuus, moriri etc. unde Ter. Eun. Act 3. sc. 1. Risu,
omnes qui aderant, emoriri* Mos moris: 3 m. a custom. Mulceo es, mulsi,
mulce^re: endi do dum; mulsum u; mulcens, mulsurus: to assuage. Mulgeo es,
mulsi (and mulxi) mulge^re; endi o um; mulctum ctu; mulgens, mulcturus: to
milk. Mulier muliris: 3 f a woman: under the third special Rule, increasing
short. Mulsum -i, 2 neut. wine and honey mingled together. Plur. caret.
Multiplico as, avi, are; andi do dum, atum tu, ans, aturus, to multiply. Munia
-- orum 2 neuter, a duty or office. Singul. caret. Mus, muris, 3 m. a mous.
N.
NAnciscor, ris vel re, nactus sum vel fui, nancisci; -endi o um; nactum ctu,
nanciscens, nacturus, to obtein. Nascor, is vel re, natus sum vel fui, nasci;
nascendi do dum; natum tu; nascens, nasciturus, to be born. Natales -ium,
masc. [generis nobilitas, nascendi conditio] ones stock or kindred; Singul.
caret, cum genus assignant; but Natalis is, 3 m ones birth day; dies natalis.
Natrix cis, 3 dub. a waterserpent. Natu 4 m. by birth, only in the Abl Sing.
Neco, necas, necui, necare; -andi o um, nectum u; necans, necaturus, to kill.
Necto is, nexi vel nexui, nectendi o um, nexum u, nectens, nexurus, to knit.
Nefrens endis, 3 m. a young pigg. Negligo is, neglexi, negligre; endi o um,
neglectum -ctu, negligens, neglecturus, to neglect; ex ne and lego. Nigreo -es,
ui, nigre^re; endi o um, ( Sup. caret) nigrens, to become black. Nemo, nemnis, 3
com. no body, a ne and homo; but the Genitive case is seldom used; according to
the Verse, Nemo caret genito, quinto, numeroque secundo. Yet Plautus has
Nemnis, neminis misereri certum est, quia mei nemo miseret. Plaut. in Captivis.
Nemnis ingenio quenquam confidere oportet, Lucilius. Neo, nes, nevi ne^re:
nendi o um, netum tu, nens, neturus, to spin. Nervus vi, 2 m. a sinew. Neuter,
a, um; ge neutrius, Adj. neither of both. Nexo, as, ui, nexare: andi o um,
nexum u, nexans, nexurus. Nideo, es, ( praet. caret) nide^re; endi o um, ( Sup.
caret) nidens, to shine. Nihil, neut indeclin. nothing. Nihilum -- i, 2 n.
nothing, Plur. caret. Nil, neut undecl. nothing; contracted of nihil. Nitor,
ris vel re, nisus vel nixus sum vel fui, niti; nitendi do dum, nisum su, vel
nixum u; nitens, nisurus vel nixurus, to endeavor. Niveo es, nivi, nive^re;
nivendi o um, ( Sup. car.) nivens, to wink inde conniveo. No, nas, navi. nare;
nandi o um, natum tu, nans, naturus, to swim. Noceo es, ui, noce^re; nocendi o
um, nocitum u, noscens, iturus, to hurt. Noctu, 4 m by night; a Monoptopte,
found only in the Abl. Sing. Nolo, nonvis, nolui, nolle; nolendi o um, (
Supinis caret) nolens; to will, or to be unwilling. Nonae arum, 1 f. the Nones
of a month, Sing. caret. Nosco -is, novi, noscre; endi o um, notum tu,
noscens, noturus, to know Noster a um, ours pron. Adj. Nostras, hic and haec:
and hoc nostrate atis, of our country. Notus i, 1 m. the south wind, Plur.
caret. Nubes is, 3 f. a cloud. Nubo -- is, nupsi, and nupta sum, nubre; nubendi
o um, nuptu -u, nubens, nupturus, a, um, to be married; it is proper only to
a woman; therefore it is nupta sum, not nuptus: a man is said uxorem ducre.
Nugae a^rum. 1 foem. trifles. Sing. caret. Nullus -a -- um. none. Nundinum -i,
2 neut. a fair, in the plur. it is nundinae arum, 1 foem. Nuo is, nui, nure,
nuendi o um, nutum u, nuens, nuturus, to nod. a Verb not much in use; but the
compounds are received; as abnuo, annuo, innuo, renuo. Nuptiae arum, 1 f.
marriag^* Sing. caret. Nurus -us, 4 f. a daughter in law. Nycticorax acis. 3
mascul. a night raven.
O.
OBdo is, obddi, obdre: endi o um: obditum u: obdens obditurus. to bolt, or set
against: comp. of Ob and do. Obex cis. 3 dub. a bolt or bar. Obliviseor, ris
vel re; oblitus sum vel fui; oblivisci: obliviscendi do do dum: oblitum u,
obliviscens, turus* to forget. Obses dis. 3 com. a pledge in war, an hostage.
Occdo is occdi, -re: endi o um, occasum u, occdens, occasurus. to set, to fall
down, to perish of ob and cado. Occido, idis, occidi, occidre; occidendi o um.
occisum u. occidens occisurus. to kill or slay. to wound to death. Occiput it is.
3 n. the hinder part of the head. of ob and caedo. Occludo is, occlusi, udre:
endi o um; usum u. udens, usurus. to shut up of ob and claudo. Occulto, as,
avi, are: andi o um. atum atu* occulans, aturus. to hide, to conceal:
frequentative, of occulo. Occulo is, occului, occulre: endi do dum: occultum --
tu, occulens, occulturus. to hide: of ob and colo: or rather of ob and culo, i.
e. vol^o, tego. October bris. 3 m. the month so called. plur. caret Odor
odoris. 3 m. a sent or savor quasi olor ab oleo. Odos odoris. 3 m. a sent or
savor quasi olor ab oleo. Oleaster, astri. m. a wild olive tree. Oleo es,
olui, ole^re: olendi do dum: olitum tu; olens oliturus. to give a smell, or
sent: the Compounds make olevi in the Preterperfect tens: as oboleo ole^vi:
adoleo, vel potius adolesco, adole^vi: exoleo vel exolesco exole^vi: obsoleo,
obsolevi: inoleo vel inolesco; inole^vi: but four compounds follow the simple
Verb: as oboleo obolui: peroleo, perolui: redoleo, redolui: suboleo subolui.
Olfacio is, olfeci, olfacre; olfaciendi do dum; olfactum u; olfaciens,
olfacturus. to smell. of ole^re and facio. Omen nis 3 n. fore speaking. Omnis,
hic and haec: and hoc omne. every one, all. Onus ris, 3 neut, a burden. Onyx --
ycis. 3 dub. the nail of a man's hand: also a precious stone, white like a
nail: Onyx cum prole with it is compound, Sardonyx. a Sardis stone. Operio is,
operui, operi^re; operiendi o um: opertum u; operiens, operturus, to cover. of
ob and pario. Opifex cis. 3 com. a workman. Opes, opem, open. 3 f. help, aid; a
Triptote. Oppango -- is, oppe^gi, oppangre; endi do dum; oppactum ctu.
oppangens, oppacturus: to fasten, or to join unto. of ob and pango. Opus untis
3 f. a Town in Locris. Orbis is. 3 masc. any round thing; as a globe, a bowl,
the world. Ordior ( pro incipio) i^ris vel i^re, orsus sum vel fui; ordiri:
ordiendi do dum; orsum u; ordiens, orsurus. to begin: h^^c exorior. Ordior (
pro texo) ordi^ris vel ordi^re, orditus sum vel fui, etc. to weav. Oriens
entis. 3 m the East. Orior i^ris vel ris: ortus sum vel fui, oriti: oriendi do
dum; ortum tu; oriens, oriturus; to spring, to arise, to begin. Orontes, is. 3
masc. a river in Syria. Os oris. 3 neut. a mouth; in the Plural number it has
three like cases: ora, ora, ora. Os ossis. 3 neut. a bone. Ostrea -- eae. 1
foem. an oyster. Ovum i^. 2 neut. an egg.
P.
PAciscor, ris vel re; pactus sum vel fui: pacisci: -- endi -do -- um; pactum
u; paciscens, pacturus to make a bargain. Palleo es, ui, palle^re: endi -do
-dum, (Sup caret) pallens, to be pale. Pampinus i, 2 dub. a vineleaf. Pando
is, pandi, pandre; -- endi do dum* passum u, pandens, passurus, to open. Pango
( pro paciscor) pangis, ppgi pangre; endi do dum, pactum ctu, pangens,
pacturus, to bargain: though some say pepgi come's of pego the old Verb; for
which we use paciscor. Pango [ pro jungo, vel figo, vel planto] pangis, pe^gi,
paugre; -- endi -do -dum, pactum ctu, pangens, pacturus: hence comp. depango,
oppango, circumpango, repango, compingo, impingo. Pango [ pro cano] pangis,
panxi, pangre; endi do dum (Supin* caret) pangens. to sing. Panis is, 3 m.
bread. Panther e^ris, 3 m. a panther: Accus. panthe^ra: hence Panthe^ra ae, 1
f. a panther. Papaver ris, 3 neut. poppy. Papyrus i, 2 f paper. Paradisus i, 2
masc. paradise. Parco is, peperci and parsi, parcre: endi do dum, (Supinis
caret) parcens, to spare. Parens entis, 3 com. a father or mother. Pareo -- es,
parui, pare^re: -endi -o -um, partum tu, parens, pariturus, to obey. Pario is,
peperi* parre: pa^iendi o um, partum tu, pariens, parturus, to bring forth.
Parnassus is 2 m. an hill in Phocis. Partio is, partivi, parti^re: iendi o um,
partitum u, partiens, partiturus, to divide. Parturio is, i^vi i^re: -iendi do
dum, i^tum u, -iens, parturiturus, to be toward labor. Pasco -- is, pavi,
pascre: pascendi o um* pastum tu, pascens, pasturus, to feed or nourish.
Pascor, ris re, pastus sum vel fui, pasci; pastus, pascendus. to be fed.
Passer ris. 3 epic a sparrow. Pateo -es, patui, and passus sum vel fui: patendi
o um, passum -- u, parens, passurus, to lie open Patior, ris vel re, passus sum
vel fui, pa^i: patiendi -do -dum, passum -- u, patiens, passurus, passus, and
patiendus, to suffer. Patro as, avi, are: and^ do dum, atum tu, -ans, aturus,
to commit. Patruelis is, 3 c. a brother's child. Paveo es, pavi* pave^re: endi
o um, (Supinis caret) pavens, to fear. Pecten nis, 3 masc. a comb. Pecto is,
pexi and pexui, pectre: pectendi o um, pexum u, pectens, pexurus, to kemb.
Pecus oris, 3 n. great cattle. Pecus -udis, 3 foem. small cattle. Pedes it is, 3
com. a footman. Pedo -is, pepe^di, pedre: endi do dum, pedtum tu, pedens,
pediturus, to fart. Pelagus -i, 2 masc and neut. the sea. Plural caret. Yet
Lucretius has pelage in the plural. Pellex cis, 3 f. an harlot. Pello -is,
pepuli, pelire: -- endi do dum, pulsum su, pellens, pulsurus, to drive away.
Penates ium. 3 m* household gods. Sing. caret. Pendeo es, pependi, pende^re:
endi o um pensum -tu, pendens, pensurus, to be hanged. Pendo is, pependi,
pendre: pendendi do dum, pensum u, pendens, pensurus, to weigh. Penis is, 3 m.
a man's yard. Penum i, 2 neut. all manner of victuals. Penus oris, 3 n. all
manner of victuals. Penus, i and us. 2 and 4. masc. all manner of victuals.
Perago is, pere^gi, peragre: -endi o um, peractum u, peragens, peracturus, to
finish. Percutio -is, percussi percutre: -- iendi -do -dum, percussum u,
percutiens, percussurus. to strike Perdix i^eis, 3 d. a partridg. Perdo is,
perdidi, perdre: perdendi do dum, perditum -- tu, perdens, perditurus, to lose.
of per and do. Perduelis is, 3 com. a stubborn enemy. Pergamus i, 2 f. in the
Plur. haec Pergama orum. Pergo is, perrexi, pergre: endi do dum, perrectum u,
pergens, perrecturus. to go forward: a per and rego. Perlego is e^gi; perlegre:
perlegendi do dum; perlectum -- lectu perlegens, perlecturus. to read thoroughly.
Permissu. 4 m. only in the Abl. Sing. Perpetior, ris vel re: perpessus sum vel
fui: perpeti: perpetiendi do dum; perpessum perpessu; perpetiens, perpessurus.
to suffer. a per and patior. Perplaceo -- es -- ui; e^re endi do dum;
perplacitum -- tu; perplacens, perplaciturus. to pleas very much. Persis dis. 3
f. Persis. Plur. caret. Pes dis. 3 m. a foot. Pero is, petivi, ( Sync. petii)
petre: petendi o um; petitum u petens, petiturus. to ask. Phalerae, --
alera^rum. 1 foemin. Hors-trappings; Sing. caret. Pharus i. 1 dub. a
Watchtower. Phaselus i. 2 dub. abrigandine. Philotis dis. 3 f. a woman's name.
Phoenix i^cis. 3 m. a phoenix. Phryx ygis. 3 m. a Ph^ygian. Pietas atis. 3 f.
godliness. Piget, pigebat, piguit vel pigitum est vel fuit, piguerat, vel
pigitum erat vel fuerat, pigebit, pige^re. it irketh. Pingo is, pinxi, ping^re:
-- endi do dum. pictum ctu* pingens, picturus, to paint. Pinso -- is, pinsui,
pinsre: endi do dum; pistum stu; pinsens, pisturus. to bake. Pinus, i and us. 2
and 4. m. a pine tree. Piper ris. 3 n. pepper. Piscis is. 3 m. a fish. Pix
picis. 3 f. pitch. Placeo es, placui, place^re: endi do dum; placitum u;
placens, placiturus. to pleas. Plagae arum. 3 foem. (retia) hunting nets. Sing.
caret. Plaga ae. 1 foem. a wound. Plaga -- ae. 1 f. a climate. Plaudo is.
plausi, plaudre; -- endi do dum: plausum plausu; plaudens plausurus. to clap
hands for joy. Plebs is, 3 foem. common people. Plebis is, 3 foem. common
people. Plecto -- is, xi; plectre: -- endi -- do -- dum; plexum u plectens,
plexurus (punio) to punish. Plecto is, xi, plectre; endi do dum: plexum u.
plectens, plexurus. to entangle, or to weav. Pleo -- es, evi, ple^re: endi --
do -- dum; plectum u; plens, pleturus. to fill. an old Verb out of use: but
only in the Compounds: as compleo, expleo, impleo, repleo, suppleo. Plico as,
avi (and plicui) are: andi -- do -- dum: plicatum u (and plicitum u) plicans,
plicaturus and pliciturus. to fold. Comp. applico, complico, explico, replico,
Multipli. co, supplico. Pluo is, ui, or pluvi, plure: endi do dum; pluitum u;
pluens, pluiturus. to rain. Plus, pluris. 3 n. in the plur. hi and hae plures,
and haec plura, thorowout. Poileo es, ( Praeter. caret) -- re: endi do dum; (
Sup. caret) -- ens, to be able. Pono is, posui ponre: endi o um: positum u;
ponens, positurus. to put. Pons ontis. 3 m. a bridge. Pontus i. 2 m. the sea.
Porticus us. 4 m. a gallerie. Posco is, poposci, poscre: endi do dum; ( Supinis
caret) poscens. to ask or require. Postis is. 3 m. a post Poto as, avi, are,
(and potus sum vel fui) are: andi do dum: potum potu; and potatum tu; potans,
poturus and potaturus to drink. Praecordia orum. 2 neut. the midriff. Sing.
caret. Praecurro -- is, praecucurri, praecurrre; -- endi do dum: praecursum u,
praecurrens, praecursurus. to run before of prae and curro Praelego -- is, --
e^gi, praelegre: endi o du^. ectum -- ectu, praelegens, ecturus. to read
before. of prae and lego. Praemineo es, praeminui, praemine^re; endi o um: (
Sup. caret) praemineus. to excel others. of prae and maneo. Praeneste is. 3 n.
a Town in Italy. plur. caret. Praes aedis. 3 masc. a surety. Praeses dis. 3
c. a president. Praesul ulis. 3 c. a president, or prelate. Prandeo -- es,
prandi and pransus sum vel fui, prande^re: endi do dum prandens, pransurus* to
dine. Precis, precem, prece. 3 f. only in three cases in the Singul. Number,
but whole in the Plural: as preces, precum, precibus. etc. Premo is, pressi,
premre: premendi do dum* pressum u, premens, pressurus. to press, to be
against, to pursue. Primitiae arum. 1 f. firstfruits. Sing. caret. Princeps
pis. 3 c. a Prince. Proble^ma ematis 3 neut. a demand, an hard question. Prodo
is, proddi, prodre: endi o um, proditum tu, prodens, proditurus. to betray. of
pro and do. Proficiscor, ris vel re: profectus sum vel fui: proficisci: endi do
dum, profectum -- u. proficiscens, -ecturus, to go forth. Proluo is, ui, ure:
uendi o um. prolutum u. proluens, proluturus. all-towash. ex pro and lavo.
Promineo es, inui, e^re endi o um. ( Sup car.) prominens. to hang out in sight.
Promo is, prompsi, promre: -- endi -- do -dum. promptum u. promens; promturus.
to bring forth; to set abroad. Promptu. 4 mascul. only in the Ablative case.
with readiness. Psallo is* falli, psallre: endi o um, ( Sup car.) psallens. to
sing. Puber ^is. 3 com. ripe of age. Pubes is, 3 foem. ripeness of age. Plur*
caret. Puder, pudebat, puditum est vel fuit, puditum erat vel fuerat, pudebit,
pude^re. it shameth. Puerasco is, ( praeter. caret) puerascre: -- endi -- do --
dum. ( Sup. caret) puerascens to wax a child. Pugil lis. 3 com. a champion.
Pulver ris. 3 m. dust. Pulvis ris. 3 m. dust. Pumex cis. 3 m. a pumicestone.
Punctum i. 2 n. a point. Punctus i. 2 m. a point. Pungo is, pupugi and punxi,
pungre: -- endi -- do -- dum. punctum ctu. pungens, puncturus. to prick. Pus
puris. 3 neut. filth, corruption. Python onis. 3 dub. a serpent, killed by
Apollo.
Q.
QUaero is, quaesivi, quaerre: endi o um quaesitum u. quaerens, quaesiturus. to
seek. Quatio quatis, concussi ( of concutio) quatre: quatiendi do dum. quassum
-u. quatiens, quassurus, to shake. Quercus, i and us. 2 and 4. f. an oak. Qui,
quae, quod. who or which. a pron. Rel. Quies e^tis. 3 f. rest. Plural. caret.
Quilibet, quaelibet, quodlibet vel quidlibet* every one. a Pron. Indefin.
Quinisco -is, quexi, quiniscre: endi do dum. ( Sup. caret) quiniscens. to nodd
with the head. Quisquiliae arum. 1 f chippings; or things of no weight. Plur.
car. Quot. how many.
R.
RAbula ae. 1 m. a brawler. Rado is, rasi, radre: endi o um. rasum u. radens,
rasurus. to shave. Ramex cis, 3 dub. burstness. Rapio -- is, rapui, rapre:
rapiendi -- do -- dum. raptum -- u. rapiens. rapturus. to take or snatch away.
Rastrum i, 2 neut. a rake: in the Plur. hi Rastri and haec Rastra. Raucio -is,
rausi, rauci^re: rauciendi o um. ( Sup. caret (rauciens, to be hoars. Recdo is,
recdi, recidre: endi o um. recasum su. recidens, recasurus. to fall backward.
Recordor, aris vel are, recordatus sum vel fui, recordari: recordandi -do -dum.
recordatum u, recordans, -aturus. to remember. Reddo -- is, redddi, reddre:
endi o um: reddtum u; reddens, redditurus, to restore. Redoleo -- es -- ui --
e^re: -- endi -- do -- dum; -- itum -- tu; redolens, -iturus, to give a savor.
Refringo is, refre^gi, refringre: endi o um; refractum u; refringens,
refracturus. to break open. of re and frango. Rego -- is, rexi, regre: endi o
um: rectum ctu; regens, recturus. to rule or govern. Relego -- is -- e^gi
-egre: endi o um: relectum u; -- egens, ecturus. to read again. Reminiscor, ris
vel re: recordatus sum vel fui ( of recordor) reminisci; endi o um; recordatum
u; reminiscens, recordaturus. to remember. Ren e^nis. 3 m. the kidney. Renuo --
is, renui, renure; -endi -do -dum: ( Supinis caret) renuens. to refuse, d re
and nuo. Reor, reris vel rere, ratus sum vel fui, reri, rendi o um; ratum u;
rens, raturus. to suppose. Repango is repegi, repangre; endi do dum; repactum
repactu, repangens, repacturus. to fasten again. of re and pango. Reperio is,
reperi, reperire: iendi o um; repertum -- u, reperiens, reperturus. to find:
of re- and pario. Repetundarum, genesis repetundis. Abl. 1 f bribery. Replico as,
a^vi, ( and replicui) are: andi do dum; -- atum -- atu, -- ans, aturus. to
reply. of re and plico. Repungo -is, repupugi and repunxi, repungre: repungendi
-do -- dum; repunctum repunctu; repunge^s, repuncturus, to prick again: of re
and pungo. Res, rei- 5 foem. a thing. Rescio is, ivi, rescire: iendi o um:
rescitum u, resciens, resciturus. to know again, of re and scio. Respuo is, ui,
ure; uendi o um: resputum u; respuens, resputurus, to refuse. of re and spuo.
Restis is. 3 m. a halter. Resulto as, avi, are; andi o um: resultum u,
resultans, resultaturus. to rebound. Rete is. 3 n. a net. Rex, regis. 3 m. a
king. Rideo es, risi, ride^re; endi o um; risum su, ridens, risurus. to laugh.
Ringo is, rinxi, ringre; endi do dum: rictum u, ringens, ricturus. to frett or
vex. Robur oris. 3 n. an oak. Rodo is, rosi, rodre: endi o um. rosum u. rodens,
rosurus. to know. Roma ae. 1 foem. Rome. Ros, roris. 3 m. the dew. Rostra
o^rum. 2 n. the Pulpit. Sing. caret. Rudens entis. dub. a cablerope. Rudo is,
rudi, rudre; rudendi o um: ( Supinis caret) rudens. to bray like an ass. Rumpo
is, rupi, rumpre; endi o um; ruptum tu, rumpens, rupturus. to break. Ruo, ruis,
rui, rure; ruendi do dum, ruitum tu, ruens, ruiturus. to fall. Rus ruris. 3 n.
the country: in the Plural it has three like cases. rura, rura, rura.
S.
SAcer, a, um. holy. Sacerdos, otis. 3 com. a Priest or Nun. Sacro -as, avi,
are: andi ando andum; atum u, ans, -- aturus. to dedicate. Sal -- alis. 3 masc.
sal^. and it is found in the Neuter Gender, hoc Sal. Salio is: [ pro salto]
salui, ( or salii) salire; iendi endo endum: saltum u, saliens, salturus. to
leap. inde desilio, desilii, desultum: exsilio; transilio; resilio. Salio is, (
pro sale condio, or conspergo) salivi, salire; iendi -do -dum: salitum, tu.
saliens, saliturus. to season with salt. vide sallo. Sallio -- is, sallivi,
salli^re: -- iendi do dum; sallitum u. salliens, salliturus. to salt. Sallo --
is, salli, sallre: endi o um; salsum su; sallens, salsurus* to season with
salt. Salto -- as, a^vi, -are: andi do dum; saltum u, saltans, saltaturus. to
leap or dance. Salum i. 2 n. the sea. Salus utis. 3 f. health. Pl. ^ar. Samnis
i^tis 3 m. a Samnite. Sancio is, sanxi and sancivi, sanci^re; sanciendi do dum;
sancitum -citu; sanciens, sanciturus. to establish. Sanguis nis. 3 masc. blood.
Plur. car. Sapphirus i 2 f. a sapphire. Sapientia ae. 1 foem. wisdom. Plural.
caret. Sapio -- is, sapui, sapre: sapiendi -- do -- dum, ( Supinis caret)
sapiens. to be wise, to have a taste. Sarcio is, sa^si, sarci^re: iendi do
dum: sartum tu; sa^^iens, sarturus. to patch. Sardonyx ycis. 3 m. a Sardonyx
stone. Satago -- is, sa^e^gi, agree; endi do dum; ( Sup. caret) sa^agens. to do
endeavor. Satrapas ae. m. a peer, or prince. Satrapa ae. m. a peer, or prince.
Scabo -is, scabi, scabre: -endi do dum. ( Sup. caret) scabens* to scratch. or
rub. Scalpo is, scalpsi, scalpre: -- endi do dum, scalptum scalptu, scalpens,
scalpturus. to claw or scratch. Scando is, ^candi, scandre. endi do dum;
scansum su; scandens, scansurus, to climb. Scindo is, scidi, scindre; -endi do
dum. scissum u. scindens, scissurus. to cut. Scio, scis, scivi, scire; sci --
endi do dum. scitum scitu. sciens, sciturus. to know. Scobis is. 3 f. dust.
Scobs is. 3 f. dust. Scriba ae. 1 masc. a scribe, or notarie. Scribo is*
scripsi, scribre: -- endi endo endum; scriptum scriptu, scribens, scripturus.
to write. Sc^obs, scrobis. 3 foem. a ditch. Scurra ae 1 masc. a scoffer or
jester. Secerno -- is, secre^vi; secernre: endi do dum; secretum u, secernens,
secreturus. to divide, or separate. Seco -- as, secui, secare; andi do dum;
sectum sectu, secans, secturus, to cut. Sedeo, seeds, ^se^di; sede^re: -- endi
-- do -- dum; sessum sessu, sedens, sessurus. to sit. Seges it is. 3 foem. corn
yet standing. Seligo -- is, selegi, seligre: seligendi do dum; selectum --
ectu, seligens, selecturus. to select, to set apart. Semis -is. 3 masc. ab
(...), generatim convenit cujusque rei dimidio. half. Semissis, genesis semissis.
3 m. half a pound, quasi semias, sex unciae, dimidium assis. Senecta ae 1 f.
old age. Plur. caret. Senex, senis. 3 com. an old man. Senio o^nis. 3 masc. the
^isepoint. Senium ii. 2 n. old age. Plur. caret. Sensum i. 2 neut. the sens, o^
feeling, judgment, or reason. Sensus us. 3 m. idem. Sentio, sentis, sensi;
sentire; -- iendi -- do -- dum, sensum u, sentiens, sensurus. to perceiv, or
understand. Sentis is. 3 m. a thorn. Sepelio -- is, sepelivi, sepelire.
sepeliendi -do -dum. sepultum u. sepeliens, sepulturus. to bury. Sepio -- is,
sepsi, sepi^re; -- iendi -- do -- dum; septum septu; sepiens, septurus. to
hedge. Seps ( pro serpente, scolopendra scliicet) se^pis. 3 masculine. a (...)
putrefacio, quod membra icta putrefaciat. (...) a serpent. Seps -- e^pis, vel
potius, sepes -- is. ( pro sepimento) 3 foeminine. an hedge: of sepio. Sequor,
sequris vel re, sequutus sum vel fui, sequi, sequendi o um, sequutum u,
sequens, sequuturus, sequutus, and sequendus. to follow. Sermo o^nis. 3 m.
speech. Ser Se^ris. 3 masc. One of a people in Asia called Seres. Sero ( pro
semino vel planto) seris, se^vi: serre: serendi -- endo -- dum: satum -- tu;
serens, saturus: to sow, or plant: the Compounds whereof make stum: as, Assero
( i. e. juxta sero) assevi, asstum: consero, conse^vi, constum: Dissero ( pro
dissemino) e^vi, tum: obsero, obsevi, obsitum. Sero ( pro ordino vel jungo)
seris, serui, serre: -- endi -- endo -- endum: sertum sertu, serens, serturus.
to set in order: the Compounds whereof make sertum: as, assero, ( i. e.
affirmo, confirmo) asserui assertum. Consero, ( pro commisceo) conserui
consertum. Desero ( i. e. derelinquo) deserui desertum. Dissero ( i. e.
disputo) disserui dissertum. Exsero ( i. e. extraho vel e^xendo) exserui
exsertum. Insero ( i. e. immitto vel interpono) inserui insertum. Serpens --
entis. 3 masc. a serpent. Sibilus i. 2 mascul. an bissing. in the Plural
Number it is masculine and neuter: as, by sibili, and haec sibila. Sido -- is,
se^di ( of sedeo) sidre, sidendi do dum: Sup. caret) sidens. to settle down:
Compounds assido, consido, desido, resido, subsido e^di. Siler ris. 3 neut. un
Osier. Silex cis. 3 masc. a flintstone. Sinapi. n. undecl. mustard. Sinapis is.
3 f. mustard. Sindon, onis. 3 f. fine linen cloth. Singultio -- is,
singultivi, singulti^re: -- iendi -endo -dum: singultum u, singultiens,
singulturus. to sob. Sino -is, sivi, sinre; sinendi do dum; situm tu, sinens,
siturus: to suffer. Sinum i. 2 neut. a milkpail. Sinus i. 3 masc. a milkpail.
Sinus us. 4 m a bosom. Siren e^nis. 3 f. a meremaid. Siser -- e^ris. 3 neut. a
parsnip. Sisto ( pro facio stare: Verb Active) sistis, stiti, sistre, sistendi
endo endum: statum statu; sistens, staturus: to make to stand: as siste gradum,
stay your pace. siste lacrymas, stay your tears. Sisto ( tantum pro stare; Verb
Neuter) sistis, steti; sistre: -- endi endo endum: statum tu; sistens,
staturus. to stand. Sitis is. 3 foem. thirst. Plur. caret. Soboles is. 3 f. an
offspring. Plur caret. Socrus i. 2 foem. a motherin-law. Sodalis is. 3 masc. a
companion. Sol olis. 3 m. the sun. Soleo -- es, solitus sum vel fui; -- e^re:
to be wont, or accustomed. Solium ii. 2 neut. a throne. Plur. caret. Solvo --
is, solvi; solvre: endi do dum; solutum u; solvens, soluturus. to l^os. Somnus
ni. 2 m. sleep. Sono -as, sonui, sonare: andi do dum: sonitum tu; sonans,
soniturus, to sound. Sorbeo -- es, sorbui and sorpsi, sorbe^re: -endi endo
endum: sorptum u, sorbens, sorpturus, to sup. Soror oris. 3 f. a sister.
Spargo, spargis, sparsi, spargre: -- endi endo endum: sparsum su; spargens,
sparsurus. to sprinckle. Species e^i. 5 foem. a kind. Specus i or us. 2 and 4
masc. a den. Sperno -- is, sprevi, spernre: spernendi -- endo -- endum; spretum
tu; spernens, spreturus. to despise. Spinus -- ni. ( or more rightly, mas
pinus) a sloe tree, or a pine tree. Splen -- e^nis. 3 m. the spleen. Spondeo --
es, spopondi; sponde^re: endi o um: sponsum su; spondens, sponsurus. to
promiss. Sponsalia orum. 2 n. betrothing. Sing. caret. Spontis. Genit. and
sponte: Ablat. 3 foem. of his own accord. Statuo, statuis, statui, stature;
statuendi -- do dum: statutum -- tu; statuens, uturus. to appoint, or decree.
Sterno, sternis stravi, sternre: sternendi do dum, stratum stratu* sterne^s,
straturus. to spread or throw down. Stipis is. 3 f. an alms. Stips is. 3 f. an
alms. Stirps ( pro trunco arboris) stirpis. 3 mascul. the trunck, or body of a
tree. Stirps (origo, progenies, soboles) stirp^s. 3 foemin. a stock, or
desoent. Sto, stas, steti; stare: standi -- do -- dum; statum statu, stans,
staturus. to stand. Strepo is, strepui, strepre: strependi -- do -- dum,
streptum streptu, strepens, strepiturus. to make a nois. Strido -is, stridi,
stridre: endi do dum: ( Supinis caret) stridens. to make a nois. Stringo,
stringis, strinxi; stringre: stringendi do dum; strictum u, stringens,
stricturus* to strain, to strike. Struo, struis, struxi, strure; -- endi --
endo -- endum: structum ctu, struens, structurus. to build. Stultitia ae. 1 f.
foolishness. Plur. caret. Suadeo, suades, suasi, suade^re: suadendi -- do --
dum; suasum suasu, suadens, suasurus. to persuade. Suber ris. 3 neut. a
corktree. Sublego, sublegis, suble^gi; sublegre: -- endi ^do -dum; sublectum
sublectu, sublegens, sublecturus* to steal away privily. Suboleo es subolui,
subole^re: -- endi -- do -dum: subolitum subolitu, subolens, suboliturus* to
savor, or smell a thing. Suesco is, suevi vel suetus sum vel sui; suescre: endi
endo endum; suetum tu, suescens, sueturus. to accustom. Suffero, suffers,
sustuli, sufferre: sufferendi -do dum; sublatum -- atu, sufferens, sublaturus,
to suffer. Sugo, sugis, suxi, sugre: -- endi endo endum; ( Supinis caret)
sugens, to suck. Sulmo, Sulmonis. 3 masc. a Town where Ovid was born. Sum, es,
fui ( of fuo) esse: futurus. to be. Sumo, sumis, sumsi, sumre; -- endi -- endo
dum; sumtum sumtu; sumens, sumturus. to take. Supellex -- ectlis. 3 foem. Plur.
supellectilia, housholdstuff, sed vix legitur. Suppetiae, Acc. suppetias. 1 f.
aid. Supplico as, supplicavi; are; -- andi do dum, supplicatum tu, ans, aturus.
to entreat. of sub and plico. Surgo, surgis, surrexi; surgre; surgendi endo
endum, surrectum surrectu, surgens surrecturus. to rise, of sursum and rego,
erigo. Sus, suis. ^3 com. a sow, bo^^, or hog. Synodus odi, 2 foem. an
assembly.
T.
TAceo, taces, tacui, tace^re: -- endi endo endum, tactum tactu, tacens,
taciturus. to hold one's peace. Taedet, taedebat, taeduit, or pertaesum est vel
suit, taeduerat, vel pertaesum erat vel fuerat, taedebit, taede^re. it irketh.
Taenarus ri. 2 masc. a Promontory in Laconia; in the Plural, haec Tartara
orum. Tagus gi. 2 a river in Portugal. Talio onis. 3 masc. like for like,
avengement. Talpa, talpae. 3 dub. a mole. Tango is, tetgi, tangre; tangendi do
dum, tactum tactu, tangens, tacturus. to touch. Tantundem. Genit. tantidem. as
much. a Diptote, declined only in two cases. Tapes e^tis. 3 m. a carpet, or
tapestry. Tape^te e^tis. 3 n. tapestry. Tape^tum e^ti 2 n. tapestry. Tartarus
-- ri. 2 mascul. hell. in the Plural, Haec Tartara. Taygetus -- ti. 2 masc. an
hill in Laconia: in the Plural, Haec Taygeta. Teges it is. 3 foem. a matt. Te^^o
is, tempsi, temnre: endi do dum: temtum u; temnens, tempturus. to despise.
Tempe, (...). neuter. a very fair field in Thessalie, or a place of delight.
Tendo -- is, ttendi; tender: -- endi d^ dum: tensum -u, and tentum -tu;
tendens, tensurus and tenturus. to stretch, or bend. Teneo -es, tenui, tene^re:
tenendi do dum; tentum u; tenens, tenturus. to hold. Tepeo -- es, tepui;
tepe^re: tependi endo endum; ( Sup. caret) tepens. to be warm. Tepesco is,
tepui, tepescre: tepescendi do dum; ( Sup. caret) tepens. to wa^ ho^. Ternio
onis. 3 m. the treypoint. Tero -- is, trivi, terre: terendi o um; tritum tu;
terens, triturus. to wear. Tesqua orum. 2 n. rough places. Testis, testis. 3
mascul. a witness. Teucer ri. 2 m. a king of Troy. Teucrus ri. 2 m. a king of
Troy. Texo -- is, texui, texre: endi do dum; textum tu; texens, texturus. to
weav. Thebae -- arum. 1 foem. Thebes. a city. Sing. caret. Thermae arum. 1
foem. hot bathes. Sing. caret. Thorax a^cis. 3 m. a brestplate. Thrax -- acis.
3 m. a Thracian. Thus uri^s. 3 neut. frankencense: or the frankincenstree. In
the Plural it has three like cases: thura, thura, thura. Tignum i. 2 n. a
rafter. Tignus i. 2 m. a rafter. Tigris -- dis. 3 foem. a tigre Timeo es,
timui, time^re; timendi endo endum; ( Sup. caret) timens. to fear. Timeor,
time^ris vel time^re: ( Praeterit. caret) time^ri: timendus. to be feared.
Titubo -- as, titubavi, and titubatus sum vel fui; titubare: -andi ando andum;
titubatum tu; titubans, titubaturus. to stumble. Tollo -- is, sustuli; tollre:
tollendi -- endo -- endum; latum latu; tollens, laturus. to bear or suffer.
Tondeo es, totondi; tonde^re: tondendi -endo endum; tonsum -- su; tondens,
tonsurus. to clip, or shear. Tonitru. neuter. Invariab. thunder. in the Plural
Number, Tonitrua uum, etc. Tonitrus us. 4 masc. thunder. Tono as, tonui,
tonare: tonandi do dum; tontum u; tonans, toniturus. to thunder. Torpeo es,
torpui, torpe^re: torpendi do dum* ( Sup. caret) torpen^, to be sluggish.
Torqueo -- es, torsi, torque^re: torquendi -- endo -- endum: torsum torsu, and
tortum tortu; torquens, torsurus, and -- turus. to wreath, to rest, to vex, or
trouble. Torquis -- is. 3 m. a chain for the neck. Torrens entis. 3 m. a
torrent. Torreo es, torrui, torre^re: torrendi o um: tostum u; torrens,
tosturus. to roast. Torris is. 3 m. a firebrand. Tot, hi hae and haec. so many.
an Aptote. Tracto -as, avi, are: traandi do dum: -- atum tu; ans, tractaturus.
to handle. Trado is, traddi, tradr^: tradendi endo endum; traditum tu; tradens,
traditurus. to deliver unto any one. a trans and do. Traho is, traxi, trahre:
trahendi do dum: tractum u; trahens tracturus. to draw. Translego -- is,
translegi, Vas, vasis. 3 neuter, a vessel, in the Plural Number it is of the
second D^clension, Vasa, vasorum; according to the Verse: Vas, vasis, primo;
vasorum vasa, secundo. Vates, vatis. 3 m: a prophet. Uber -ris. 3 hic and haec:
plentiful. Adj. Uber ris. 3 neut. a dug, or pap. Vectis is. 3 m. a bar. Veho,
vehis, vexi, vehre: vehendi vehendo vehendum; vectum u, vehens, vecturus. to
carry. Vello is, velli and ^ulsi; vellre: vellendi endo endum; vulsum u,
vellens, vulsurus. to pull up. Vendo, vendis, venddi, vendre; vendendi endo
endum; vendtum u. vendens, venditurus. to sell. Veneo, [ pro vendor] is,
Venivi, and venditus ^um vel fui, venire; iendi endo endum: venum -- u,
veniens. to be sold; Vero neuter Passive. Venio -is, veni, venire; veniendi do
dum. ventum tu, veniens, venturus. to com. Venture tris. 3 m. the belly. Venus
ris. 3 f. the goddess of beauty. Ver, ve^ris. 3 n. the spring. Plur. caret.
Verber ris. neut. a stripe: but it is out of use in the Nom. case. Verbris,
Genitivo and verbere, Ablativo, of a stripe: in the Plural, verbra um etc.
Vergo, vergis, ( praeterit. caret) vergre; vergendi vergendo vergendum* ( Sup.
caret) vergens. to bend. Vermis is. 3 m. a worm. Verna ae. 1 com. a slave, ^
bondsman, or bondwoman. Verres -is. 3 masc. a borepig. Verro verris, verri, and
versi; verrre: verrendi endo endum; versum su; verrens, versurus. to brush.
Verto vertis, verti, vert^e; vertendi endo endum; versum versu; vertens,
versurus. to turn. translegre; endi endo endum: translectum ctu, translegens,
translecturus. to read over. Tremo is, tremui, tremre; tremendi do dum; (
Supinis caret) tremens, to tremble. Tres hi and hae, and haec tria. three.
Sing. caret. Tribus us. 4 m. a kindred, or stock. Tricae arum. 1 foem. trifles.
Sing. caret. Triptoton ti. 2 neuter, a Triptote. id est, a Noun declined* only
in three Cases. Tros, Troi^s. 3 masc. a Trojan. Trudo -- is, trusi, trudre;
endi o um, trusum su, trudens, trusurus. to thrust. Tu. Genesis rui; thou. Pron.
prim. Tuber -- ris. 3 neut. a swelling, or a mushrom. of tumeo. Tueor, -- e^ris
vel -- e^re, tuitus sum vel fui, tue^ri: tuendi -- endo -- endum: tutum tutu,
and tuitum tuitu; tuens, tuturus and tuiturus. to defend. Tuor, ris vel re,
tuitus sum vel fui, tui, and tue^ri: tuendi -- endo endum; tutum -- tu; and
tuitum tuitu; tuens, tuturus, and tuiturus. to look. Tundo -- is, tutudi,
tundre: tundendi dendo dendum; tunsum su; tundens, tunsurus. to beat, or knock.
Tussis is. 3 f. the cough. Plur. caret. Tibris is. 3 mascul. the river Tiber.
Tibur -uris. 3 n. a town in Italy.
V.
VAdo is, vasi, vadre: vadendi, vadendo, vadendum; vasum vasu; vadens, vasurus.
to go. Valeo, vales, valui, vale^re: valendi valendo valendum; valtum u;
valens, valiturus. to be in health. Valvae arum. 1 f. folding doors. Sing.
caret. Vannus i. 2 foem. a vanne to winnow corn withal. Vas vadis. 3 m. a
surety. Vervex -- e^cis. 3 masc. a weather. Vescor, vescris vel vescre,
pastus-sum vel fui; ( of pascor) vesci: vescendi -- do -- dum; pastum u,
vescens, pasturus. to eat. Vesper ri. 2 m. the eventide. Veto -as, vetui, are;
andi o um; vettum u; vetans, vetiturus* to forbid. Vicem, Accus. vice, Abl. by
turn: but in the Plur. vices, vicium, vicibus, and c. Video es, vidi; vide^re:
videndi o um; visum su; videns, visurus. to see. Vieo es, vievi, vie^re; endi o
um; vietum u; viens, vieturus to bind. Vigil lis. 3 com. a watchman, or woman.
Vincio -is, vinxi, vinci^re; vinciendi do dum; vinctum u; vinciens, vincturus.
to bind. Vinco -is, vici, vincre: vincendi o um; victum u; vincens, victurus.
to overcom. Vindex cis. 3 com. an avenger. Vir, viri. 2 masculine. a man.
Virgilius ii. 2 m. Virgil, ^ Poet. Plur. caret. Virgo nis. 3 f. a virgin.
Virtus utis. 3 f. virtue. Virus ri. n. Acc. Voc. virus. poison. Plur. caret.
Vis, vis. 3 f. force, strength. Viscum i. 2 n. glue, or birdlime. Viscus i. 2 m
glue, birdlime. Viscus ris. 3 neut. the entralls. Viso is, visi, visre: visendi
o um, visum visu; visens, visurus. to visit, to go to see. Vitrum i. 2 n.
glass. Vivo is, vixi, vivre; vivendi o um; victum u; vivens, victurus to live.
Ulciscor, ris vel re, ultus sum vel fui; ulcisci: endi o um: ultum tu;
ulciscens, ulturus. to revenge. Unguis is. 3 m. a nail. Vocito as, avi, are:
andi o um: atum u; ans, aturus. to call often. Volo as; avi, are: andi o um;
volatum tu; volans, aturus. to fly. Volo, vis. volui, velle: volendi endo
endum ( Sup. caret.) volens. to will, or to be willing. Volvo -is, volvi,
volvre: endi o um: volutum u; volvens, voluturus. to roll. Vomer -ris A
plowshare. Vomis -ris A plowshare. Vomo is, vomui, vomre: vomendi o um: vomtum
u, vomens, vomiturus. to vomit. Urgeo es, ursi, urge^re; urgendi o um: ursum u;
urgens, ursurus. to urge. Uro is, ussi urre: urendi o um: ustum u, urens,
usturus. to burn. Utor, ris vel re; usus sum vel fui, uti: utendi o um: usum
su; utens, usurus. to use. Vulgus i. masc. and neut. the common people. Vulpes
-is. 3 masc. a fox. Uxor -oris. 3 foem. a wife.
FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed For the Use of SCHOOLS.
VESTIBVLVM Linguae Latinae: set forth by Comenius, with a Vocabularie at the
later end, for young Students in the Latin Tongue. Sold by Fr. Eglesfield at
the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard.

Janua Linguarum, by Comenius, (a new work) to which he has added his last
Hand: with an Etymological Index, out of the Janual Lexicon, Martinius, and
others: sold by John Clark, at the entrance into Mercer's Chapel in Cheapside.

Seidelii Enchiridion, for young Beginners in the Greek Tongue: sold by Andrew
Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard.

Rudimenta Graecae Linguae, by W. D. for the Use of Merchant-Tailor's School, (
London) sold by Andr. Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard.

The School's Probation, or certain set Exercises for the Use of
Merchant-Taylor's School: sold by Fran. Eglesfield, at the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard.

Rhetorices Elementa, by W. D. sold by Fran. Eglesfield in Paul's Churchyard.

Nomenclatura Anglo-Latino Graeca, for the Use of Westminster School: sold by
Ri. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane.


