THE Northern Subscribers Plea, Vindicated FROM The Exceptions laid against it
by the Non-subscribing Ministers of Lancashire and Cheshire, AND REINFORCED

By J. DREW.

ACT. 5.38, 39. If this Counsel, or if this Work be of men it will come to
naught, but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, least happily ye be found
even to fight against God.

GAL. 2.18. If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressour,

Dic quibus in terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo
Nascantur flores inscripti nomina Regum?
Virg. Eclog. Published according to Order.

LONDON Printed by R.I. to be sold by John Wright at the Kings head in the Old
Bayley.

MDCLI.

ERRATA.
BEsides some litterall Errors and false pointings in these Sheets, Page 2.
line 2. read by these, l. 22. r. have. Page 3. l. 4. r flowing. Page 4. l. 12.
r. pouring. Page 6. l. 15. put out some. Page 7. l. 13. r. as to the means
etc. page 15. l. 7. put out or a natural existence. Page 19. l. 15. r.
exultations, l. 19. r. ejulation. Page 20. l, 18. put out they have. l. 33. r.
notify. l. 38. r. prepossessions. Page 29. l. 24. r. What they non-will, they
never understand, Page 30. l. 22. r. dispossessed power. l. 35. r. charge. Page
32. l. 5. r. our. Page 44. l. 19. for vainly r. unjustly. Page 54. l. 29. for
nothing r. not King. Page 59. l. 1. put out not. Page 67. l. 26. r. falling out.

TO THE Truly Religious and publique-spirited Patriot, Sir James Harington
Knight, A Member of PARLIAMENT, and of the Council of STATE.
(...).
Honored Sir,
IT might be judged my folly, should I here take upon me to inform you; My
forgetfulness if I should mind you, that it is the commendation of those
stars fixed in the Heavens of the Nations, (in the most anomalous times) to
know no Eccentricks, nor any motion but what is direct. As the fining pot for
silver, Prove. 17.21
and the furnace for gold, so is a man to his praise. To be upright in a
warping Generation, (...). Phil. 2.15. Numb. 4.24.
and to follow the Lord wholly, argues that nature and spirit in the subject
which act's few of Adams children, and indulgeth no compliance with those
interests, which draw men aside from serving the counsel of God in difficult
and critical seasons. There is an hour of temptation now come upon the world
to try them that dwell upon the earth, and what with the divine providence,
really disserving the ends of some men, and the pretenses of others, to
conscientious dissatisfactions, such a number have shrunk from their high
callings, Psalm. 90.17
that could not the mighty God do his own work by a few as well as by many, we
might sit down and despair the establishing what by his presence for many
years with our counsels and Armies, he had in mercy wrought for us, 1 Samuel 12,
22.
but the Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake, because it
has pleased him to make them his people.

Sir,

That this God would continue you [among the rest of his called, and chosen,
and faithful Ones] a blessing to this poor Nation, that he would make you an
honor to your honorable family, and accepted of the multitude of your
Brethren, Esth. 10.3.
as he, who sought the wealth of his people, and spoke peace to all his seed,
that he would perfect your joy, and crown, and enable you to stand complete in
all his will, that an entrance may be ministered to you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is that which he
strives for at the Throne of Grace, who is

Sir, Your servant indeed, J. DREW.

The Northern Subscribers Plea, re-inforc'd.
THese Conscientious Non-subscribers, who in the Title Page of their Plea bear
the World in hand that they much desire satisfaction, and in the entry of their
Appendix seem to be very eager of it, by pointing out an expedite way to those
who may please to undertake the business; That it may yet further appear it
was not a desire to contend, but a care to proceed upon a clear ground, which
put them to a stand about the Engagement; yet these very men tell us betwixt
their Fronti nulla fides Juv.
Title and the Appendix, viz. Page 68. That now it would be construable those
courses (even all endeavors after their satisfaction) are held to defend
themselves who are pre-engaged, and to decoy others into the same trap with
them, rather then to satisfy Conscience, dashing down at once by this
profession of their thoughts, all their pretenses to satisfaction, as men
resolved to fasten the design of deceiving, as an odious Vizzard, upon the
most brotherly and Christian intendments and essays that can be drawn from
any man to that end, like those Prisoners who passionately desiring a release,
yet out of a sullen or a jealous temper do avowedly interpret every man's
endeavor to that purpose as a design upon them, to make them greater slaves.
Prepossession is a very tough and intractable humor, and Apologies sometimes
harden and inrage the persecutors of innocence; Why, what evil has he done
says Pilate? and they cried out the more exceedingly, crucify him, Mark
15.14. Now although upon this account it may be thought too late, or to little
purpose to emit any Plea for the satisfaction of dissenting Consciences in
point of submission to the powers in being over us, yet that we may not be
wanting to our own Consciences, or the submitting Consciences of our friends,
in justifying their submission as conscionable indeed, we think our selves
bound to take the weight of those exceptions laid against our Plea, by those
Classical Authors, as turning the balance clearly (in their esteem) against
that obedience which we contended for, as due from us to the present Authority;
we then professed not to undertake the (...). Athan.
satisfying of Consciences, Page 13. our end was to acquit our selves from the
imputations of time-serving, and Nil-bonum nisi quod rationabiliter bonum, Jo.
13.17.
blind obedience, in owning or taking part with those few heads and stays of
our Tribes, kept together by the Providence of God for our support in this
strait of time, those few grains not Amos 9.9.
fallen to the earth in this season of our Nations sifting, that it might not
be presumed, or concluded (as commonly it uses to be) that there is little
conscience in any, saving in those who put themselves on the suffering side,
seeing men generally at a loss, we made search after our duties, and then made
Intellecta licet pro re, pro tempore fari. Mant.
known to the world, that we found upon search to have influence on our
Consciences; how far these undertaker^ have weakened our Plea, as to its
essentials, who think they have driven conscience and reason out of every line
of it, scarce leaving one ragge to cover the Subscribers nakedness, (...).
Heb. 5.14.
after examination we shall cheerfully submit to the judgments of all those,
who by reason of use, leave their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil; sometimes we are charged as senseless, other times as religionlesse, but
to us it is a very 1 Cor. 4.3. (...). Synes.
small thing that we should be judged of man's judgment, we must stand or fall
to another Master; if we bear not the same respect and conscience to the truth
in this our defense, which these Ministers pretend to, in making up their
judgment against us, and if we labor not to approve our hearts and ways to
God in our present obedience to the Powers that be, Job 11.11:
as much as others do in dis-obliging themselves at this season, he, who is
the discerner of all hearts shall not he judge, and he who knows vain man,
shall not be consider it? We shall begin our reply where their first exceptions
are commenced, and that is against our first Argument; here we must take notice
of what they grant, which is our Argument in terminis, and what they deny,
which is our sense of it, they grant the being of these present Powers over us
from God, and the proposition likewise upon which this is built, viz. That all
constitutions of Government have their making and marring, their standing and
falling from God: This they say proves our assertion, in a right acceptance,
but not in that sense which serves for our turn. Therefore they distinguish
betwixt events following from Gods decree, concourse, or providence, and those
events which are authorized and approved of by God, we receive the distinction,
and if it be made appear, that both those senses, or distinct notions of
events are at the service of our assertion, then our turns shall surely be
served, but the latter sense (say they) concerns your purpose, therefore our
assertion shall proceed in these terms, That the powers in being are from God
by way of Authorization, or that he approves their being over us, that the Lord
appropriates changes of Government and Governors to himself, we proved in our
Plea from these Scriptures, Ezekiel. 21.27. Zech. 11.8. Hos: 13.11. And Acts
13.20, 21, 22. which these Gentlemen are content to wave as impertinent to what
we should prove:

But Sirs, if you be content that the Lord should approve of what he
appropriates to himself, they serve clearly for the proof of our proposition,
formed to your own sense, and evince the being of our Authority over us by way
of Authorization from God, if the Lord commands the diadem off men's heads,
removes the Crown, sets up or exalts him that is low, and abases him that is
high; if he cuts off those who were given for Shepherds, gives his people
Judges, raises them up Kings; grant that he never intitles himself to the
thing he dis-owns, and then all these things are from him by way of
Authorization, when God says, I exalt this man, shall we say; he approves not
of his exaltation? Jer. 27.6, 7.
I have given all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzer, and all Nations
shall serve him, says the Lord. I, but it is unlawful to serve him, says man,
for God does not approve of this his gift, does not warrant this man's Authority
as a divine Ordinance; thus man becomes more wise and jealous then the holy one
his Maker; Well, to our case then, the swaying powers amongst us, are they of
Gods lifting up or no? has he given the Kingdom into their hands, or may they
say our own hands and power has gotten us this greatness? and laid the
foundation of this eminency? not the latter, The holy one will have the living
to know that the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he pleases, and sets up over it the basest of men, Dan. 4.17. If
the Lord himself has raised them up, we dare not think but he approves his
own act, they tell us, that God may be entitled to their power, as it is a Page
2. and 8.
natural force or inergy, or in respect of its metaphysical existence, and no
otherwise, but we take Majesteriall power or dominion to be a thing of a clear
distinct nature and consideration from Physical Energy, and so we believe do
the Ministers of Lancashire too; Dominion is a judicial power, or Jus imperandi
Psa. 72.8. Gen, 1.28. (...) jus et dominium ac aeuthoritatem denotat, etc.
Mercer. (...) etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis 1. jus in creaturas Deus homini dedit and
stitit illas coram homine ut sisti sole^t subditi coram novo principe
inaugurando et accipiendis mandatis ejus atque (...) suit figonum dominii et
imperii. Polan. Syntag. li. 5. ca. 35. the word (...) speaks no less. See Genesis
42.6. with Psalm. 105.22. -- 144.13. Dan. 7.27. Eceles. 9.19. Psalm. 8.6.
moral right to rule; the Lord in translating Throns and Scepters, shifting
principalities from hand to hand, and pours supremacy from vessel to vessel,
he does more surely then give men a natural power to grow great, this he
communicates as the Author of nature, but as that God whose Kingdom rules
over all, he disposes of Dominions, modells, and breaks again frames of
Government, and still continues his Ordinance amongst the sons of men. When God
as sovereign of the world, lifted up Nebuchadnezzar over Judah, he did not only
enable him with power to conquer that people, but gave him a right of Dominion
and rule likewise, we cannot persuade our selves that he would have commanded
the remnant of his people of serve him, or have promised that it should be well
with those that did serve him if it had been otherwise; besides this,
Nebuchadnezzar made Zedekiah, Jehojachins Uncle King in his stead, 2 King.
14.17. which delegation stood approved, as his act who had royal power Nil dat
quod non habet.
to give, for when Zedekiah endeavored to shake off Nebuchadnezzars supremacy,
the Holy Ghost styles it, a Rebellion against that King, and Ezekiel. 17.16. the
Lord threatens him severely for it, as I live says the Lord God, surely in the
place where the King dwells, that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and
whose Covenant he brake, even with him in the midest of Babylon he shall dye;
So that God ownes the making men Rulers, as well as the raising of them from
the dust, 1 King, 16.2. this was his word to Baasha, I have made thee Prince
(or Ruler as the word (...) is rendered 2 Samuel 7.8. 1 Chronicles. 5.2.) over my
people Israel, and this is that we contend for touching our present Powers;
their right inforo humano, to rule, cannot be less then Baashaes was, yet he
is registered for a King of Israel, and inforo Divino, it is as great, the high
Disposer of rule and power having possessed them of dominion, which proceeds from
him by way of Authorization (as we have proved) if it be his gift, the sum
then is this.

1 That God approves of what he has given into the hands of our present
Powers, what he has given he is pleased they should have.

2 That they have more given them then a natural Power of force from the
Divine concourse, viz. Dominion, or power of Rule, therefore both the members
of the distinction (as we presumed above) are ready to serve our turns, God
having disposed of the Kingdom into their hands, has in so doing given them
dominion, yea though it be acknowledged for to gratify any man (as it might
without impeaching their power of right) that by reason of some in-direct and
injustifiable actings, or courses in themselves, or those who have been
isntrumental to their lifting up, that they are not by him, as Hos. 8.4. and
that the Lord knew it not, viz. approved not the ways of their exaltation; yet
we say, notwithstanding the sinfulness of men as to their agency in the
business, Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from
the South, but God is the Judge, be puts down one, and sets up another,
Psalm. 75.6, 7. Discernendum est inter jus Dei quod in res bonas nunquam amittit
a quibuscunque and quomodocunque teneantur and inter judicia Dei quibus bona
sua sic distribuit, ut in eorum acquisitione and usu, vitium hominis aliquando
concurrere permittat sic, igitur de acquisitione quorundam regnorum est
judicandum: Pareus.

And since we perceive the over-flowings of your Gal in this controversy fall
mainly upon the corrupt interests of persons, and their indirect ways of
compassing power and dominion, we shall propound and assert some particulars
tending to the clearing and elucidating the matter in debate betwixt us, and
which may happily make way for the breaking in of (...). Naz. Orat. 12.
convictions upon our Consciences, if you undertake to persuade us, the truth
is otherwise.

1 Our assertion is this, that God may, and often times does disclaim the
interest and aims of persons getting into power, and yet own the power in
their hands as his Ordinance. This will be evident from the instance of
Nebuchadnezzar, God gives him a charge against an hypocritical Nation, and
uses him as a rod in his hand to scourge his people; howbeit he means not
so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to cut off Nations
not a few, Isa. 10.6, 7. God by no means (...). Synes Ep. 57.
approves of that Tyrants aim or end, nor of the bitterness and hastiness of
his people, who came all for violence, Hab. 1.9. yet he approved of the power
and dominion in Nebuchadnezzars ver. 12, 17. 1 King. 16.
hand, as his Ordinance is clear, Jer. 27. where the people are expressly
commanded, to put their necks under his yoke, and to serve him.

2 We assert, That God may, and often times does disclaim the means and steps
whereby some men are raised into the Seat of Authority, and yet authorize their
being there; we have pregnant instances enough to prove this, that of Baasha
which we touched upon before may suffice, the Lord approved not of his killing
Jeroboam, whereby his way was made unto the Throne, 1 King. 16.7, yet he owned
the power in Baashaes hand as his Ordinance, I have made thee, says God, Ruler
over my people Israel, verse. 2. And hence we might deduce thus much for the
information of Gods Servants living under such dispensations, that they may
lawfully own Magisteriall power in the hands of such intruders, since the Lord
himself ownes it, and in this our new Annotations, Romans 13.1. will stand by
us, It is just and equal say they that man should approve and tolerate that
which God himself approves and tolerates; herein we (...). Chrysostom in Rom:
13.3.
acknowledge Gods supreme right, and yet we deem our selves acquitted of man's
guilt, unless we conclude the sins of Baasha chargeable upon all those that
submitted to his power, but of this we suppose the Ministers of Lancashire and
Cheshire will say, (...), God forbid.

3 Those who undertake to prove this, that God dis-ownes the aims and
interests of those now in power amongst us, must evidence their ends to be
incapable of divine approvall, and Sirs, unless you dwell in their bosoms,
your arguments will pass but for presumptions, men's actings seldom making up
more then a fallible conjecture of their ends; We have learned for our parts,
1 Cor. 4.5.
to judge nothing before the time.

4 Yet further, we conceive, and that upon deliberation too, it will be very
hard for these undertakers to find a case paralelling that capacity which our
Commons in Parliament stood in before their acting in this solitary Supremacy,
for they had then a co-equall title, at least to, and a share in that
Sovereignty, which now they are vested withal, exclusive, and if this parallel
be found upon search into some American constitutions or other, it will be as
hard a matter then, to clear the divine disapprovall of persons thus acting in
the like case, yea, or to lay down any sound rules whence by Analogy our
present Rulers actings can be concluded absolutely injustifiable, as the means
of their attaining this power.

The difficulties therefore and intricacies being very many, wherewith such as
take in hand to prove the sinfulness of the means by which, or the corruption
of those interests for which our Government has been changed, must necessarily
labor, and be entangled, and the duty of obedience to our present Governors
continuing in full force (according to our first assertions) notwithstanding
these difficulties should be broken thorough, since we say it is so hard a
task, and in our judgments infeasible, to prove the means or end of our
present establishment evil; and this done, still as difficult to prove that
obedience and subjection are not good and necessary, we conclude that our
wisdom, as well as our strength will be to sit still, and humbly to acquiesse
in the Mr. Buroughs rare jewel of Christian contentment. page 35. Prove. 22.5.
providential will of our God; Quae pertingit a fine usque ad finem fortiter and
disponsit omnia suaviter: Thorns and snares will be in the way of those
froward ones who study the intangling of other men's consciences, and the
dis-obliging their own at this season. See Pro. 28. in Romans 14.19,
Such a work will be as dangerous, as liable to the exceptions of men, and as
capable of his dis-owning, who commands us to study what makes for quietness,
and the edifying of one another, as any change of Government amongst us or our
neighbors, has been for many Centuries of years; this attempt (we think)
few quiet and undesigning spirits will be forward to engage themselves in; but
what besotting interests have wrought men to, we see, and seeing, have cause to
bewail, the fruits of their distempers, shaking and indangering the public
bottom, that has gone a nine years voyage for peace, and is now within view
of harbor, our having been wounded is not so much, as that our wound should be
perpetual, Jer. 15.18. -- 8.15.22. -- 14.19.
and still kept open by the sons of peace official healers, if here you acquit
your selves Sirs, it is well. Quisquis vel quod potest arguendo corrigit vel quod
corrigere non potest, salvo pacis vinculo excludit, vel quod salvo pacis
vinculo excludere non potest equitate improbat firmitate supportat, August:
hic (...). Clem. Alexan. strom. l. 5.
pacificus est.

We have insisted somewhat largely in our rejoinder to that exception
(commenced against our Argument) touching the being of the present Authority
over us from God, both because it is of confessed importance, and because it
much facilitates our retargation of what follows under this head. To proceed
therefore,

To this explanation of our Position, viz. That frames of Government are
resolved by God into the peoples wills, as the immediate cause of their
specification. They answer page 3.

1 That People destitute of a lawful Magistracy have an elective Power, in
the constitution of Government, but standing in the relation of Subjects, they
have not a privative, or innovative power.

We Answer, if at any time people are enabled to choose what form they will be
governed under, Grot Nunquam aliud natura, aliud sapientia dicit, Juv.
dictates to them, Necessitas enim summa reducit res ad merum jus natural:
Take away a peoples privative power in this case, and their elective power
serves only to make them perpetual slaves, before their choice of such a
Governor or Government they were free to provide for their liberties, and
natural immunities, but after their choice made, they must be content, (it
seems) with what falls out, though to the destruction of these for ever, this
is to enable people to make themselves miserable, and there to leave them
remediless, but the Lord has provided more mercifully for them, ordaining
Magistracy and Order as their accumulative freedom, not destroying by his
postuate institution, what by that general Statute, that unrestrained Charter,
the Law of Nature, he had before granted to them, yet if a people have no
greater cause to desire a change of Government amongst them then Israel had
when they cried, (...), 1 Samuel 8.19, 20. (...). Joseph, Antiq. li. 8. Act.
26.18.
Make us a King, we shall never plead their excuse in endeavoring it.

2 They say, Some kind of Governments are unlawful in their own nature, so
is that of the beast, Rev. 17. and the ten Kings giving their power and
strength to the beast, these cannot be said to be approved of God.

Answ. 1. The power of those ten Kings, or Kingdoms, is lawful in its own
nature, the text notes its abuse, and suggests thus much to those that allege
it, viz. That regal Government is apt above all other modes whatsoever for the
service of the beast; this is neither only nor also for their purpose.

2 That beastiall power they instance in, is but an equivocall power, that sway
of Satan in the hearts of the children of disobedience, is called a power too;
but what hinders this that God may not approve all civil frames of Government
upon the Earth, how various soever? every Ordinance of man, which is confessed to
be only an Application, or a Modification of the general Ordinance of God?
These are capable of his owning sure, notwithstanding this out-leape, or essay
of theirs, touching a power Antichristian in its very essence, and of an
hellish Parentage; our Position reaches to no such power, when we say, What
kind of Government a people do will for their own good, the Lord sets his
seal upon it. Their instances indeed under the next Head, and our instance in
1 Samuel 8, 9, 10, 12. Chap. prove that God dis-ownes the sinfulness of their
wills who are given to change, and transgress without a cause, not that h^
dis-approves the Government they desire. It is ordinary for m^n to abuse their
Liberty, and that latitude of choice which God allows them in things of this
kind; but to conclude, that ergo God gives not a People liberty of change, and
that he resolves not frames of Government into their wills, because some men
have, and others may sin in erecting new Models, and changing their
constitutions, is like dashing out a man's brains to cure the Megrime, or like
that practical Logic of Lycurgus, who prohibited the planting of Vines,
because men used to be drunk with the Grapes.

3 We say, That in all changes of Government the prevailing, not the over-borne
Party may lay claim to the signature of Divine approbation; this they
conceive, contradicts our former Position, which entitled the Peoples will to
the specification of Government, and the seal of Gods approvall; We all know
(say they) the Peoples wills may go one way, a prevailing Party another,
contrary to it, etc.

Answ. We need not labor much to shake off that contradiction which is pinned
upon us gratis, for though the wills of some people, yea of most people, may
go one way, and the prevailing Party another way, yet we all know that the
prevailing will goes but one way, and which way this will goes that way goes
the divine approvall, otherwise we had never been commanded to obey EVERY
ORDINANCE of man FOR THE LORDS SAKE, 1 Pet. 2.13. Though men may sin in the
motions of their wills, yet God dis-owns not the power and privileges he has
given them, but to hitch on a little.

These Gentlemen fight notably with their own shadows from hence all along,
till our second Medium (as they call it) gives them the opportunity of a new
encounter, proceeding from a supposition which is no grant of ours, nor
educible from any thing we have yet said, viz. that the prevailing Party is
owned of God quatenus prevailing, hence they frame mountainous absurdities and
lay them to our charge, as the consequences of our Principles; but we know that
supposito quo libet sequitur quid libet, if any Minister of this combination
should deliver such a Doctrine as this, The doers of Gods will, not the hearers
only may lay claim to salvation (the supposition may pass) would he think
himself fairly dealt with all, if some wild Antinomian should charge him
with teaching, that those whom God saves he saves them because they are doers,
or for their deeds? We doubt he would hardly bear such a mis-construction, or
indulge the liberty of such an interpretation as this; so we say the prevailing
Party lays claim to Gods approbation in the contests about Government among
the Sons of men, but will it thence follow that we hold God approves them
because they prevail? surely he may do it upon another account, but whatever
that be, their prevailency may bear witness that he does own them Pro hic
and nunc, whatever the ends be that his holy will makes use of those powers
for, we make God the great Arbiter in all Quarrels, and prevailency in contests
of this nature shows us for whom he Arbitrates, 1 Chro. 5.2. Judah prevailed,
Hence comes Gibbor Nimrods style, that mighty Hunter, Genesis 10.8.9.
((...) was strong) above his Brethren, and of him came the chief Rulers, but
the birthright was Joseph's, the least that we can give to Judah's prevailency
is this, to attest the Lords designement of that Tribe to bear rule, and his
actual disposition of authority to it, and will it now follow

1 That we make force the infallible umpire betwixt Parties claiming interest
in the constitution of Government? or,

2 That the same Government and cause (without any alteration of its
institution and demeanor) may lay claim to divine approbation, as its
strength varieth: That Absolons and Zimries authority were good before God
during the time of their prevailence? Sirs, those instances are not of cases
Arbitrated, but in Arbitration, David had then a considerable Army, when he
fled from his Son, with which the Lord of Hosts pleaded his cause against
that rebellious Absolon in the day of Battle, so when Zimries wickedness was
heard of, it presently came to umpeirage, all Israel made Omri the Captain of
the Host, King over Israel THAT DAY in the camp, 1 King. 16.16. and when upon
the death of Zimri the people were divided into two parts, it is said, the
people that followed Omri PREVAILED against the people that followed Tibui the
Son of Ginah, so Tibui dyed, and OMRI REIGNED, ver. 22. I wonder what
witness we have of the Divine Authorization of many that were Kings over
Israel, setting aside theirs and the peoples, prevailency that cleaved to them?
it will be easily granted that Menahem, Pekah, and Hosea, (...) Kings over
Israel, and reigned till God cut them off for their abominations; but how came
they to be Kings? what Titles had they? how near of kin to the Scepter? the
text tells us, they were Captains of the Host, men of power; and we say, God
disposed of the Kingdom into their hands; but how will this be proved? why,
they prevailed, upon what score, or to what purpose the Lord owned them we are
unworthy to know, but own them he did, as Kings, and his people owned them
too, upon their prevailency this was the needle that drew after it the thread
of Allegiance. The like we say touching Jerobohams and Omri's Enthronment,
these dissenters acknowledge, that Jerobohams reigning over the Ten Tribes was
from God, only they say, that the business betwixt them and the Two Tribes
adhering to Rehoboham was not debated by the Sword,, and so the two Tribes were
not the worsted and over-borne party, As if there could be no worsting or
prevailency unless it be by the sword. 1 Kings 12.22, 23.
True, God took up that difference by the mouth of his Prophet; he is not tied
to manifest his approvall only one way, this takes nothing therefore from our
assertion touching prevailency; it may be a testimony of Gods good pleasure in
every contest about the disposal of power (where he interposeth not more
immediately) notwithstanding this. Concerning Omri they tell us, that Gods not
approving him, and the people, is but a slender argument that he approved their
actions, God sometimes will not suffer his Prophets to be reprovers.

Answ. 1. Why then do these men take such pains to bend several Texts in
Hosea and Micah to a reproof of them? such Texts too as will then suit their
purpose, when the counsels of the house of Ahab, and the Statutes of Omri are
proved to be the powers of Ahab and Omri? the submission of Gods Prophets to
Ahab, and so many of Gods people to Omri would hardly have been gained if this
had been to walk in the Statutes of Omri, Micah 6.16.
and to keep the counsels and works of the house of Ahab.

2 Those sins in the Kings of Israel which were of such a reach and influence
upon the people under them, as to involve the whole Nation in a miserable
guilt, (never as we know of) escaped reproof, the sins of Ahab, Ahaz,
Jeroboham, and Manasseth, that were of this impli^ancy came all under the lash,
yea the sins of Omri too, 1 King. 16.26. yet he is not reproved for
usurpation, though by their principles, it involves every one in his sin who
submitted to his power.

3 It Is the abuse of Gods patience, and that line upon line he has given them,
which causes him to stop his prophets mouths, I will make thy tongue cleave
to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a
man reproving, for they are a rebellious house, Ezekiel. 3.26. this sin, these
Ministers lay not to the charge of the people, who chose Omri for their King,
as we can see:

In the close of their exceptions against our first medium, though they think
they have us fast enough, yet they complain they know not where to hold us, we
do so contradict and thwart our selves here only (say they) we wish them to
consider if the superinduction of a power against the wills of many; yea of
most men (which in our plea we justify) be not a selfe-contradiction in
reflection upon that position of theirs, viz. Frames of Government are by God
resolved into peoples wills? And in answer hereto we wish them to consider,
that this contradiction vanishes as easily as the former, if the case prove
ever such, as that the will of the most people happen not to be the prevailing
will; it will be hardly proved that that half of the people which made Omri
King were the greater half, though they were the prevailing half, thus we see
this other contradiction falls into accord without any help from Sancta clara,
or Scotus de duno.

And now having sufficiently (as it should seem) broken the bones of our first
argument, brought to prove the being of these present powers over us from God,
they proceed to give their sense on our second, taken from Romans 13.2. and then
discant upon it.

First they tell us, if the word (...) here used for Divine Ordination be any
where used for the Lords Ordination of a power, which is as to the persons
coming in, and sustaining it unjustifiable (as it is Hab. 1.12.) then it
cannot make the Text pregnant to our purpose.

Answer, We neither say, that the word makes the Text full and pregnant to our
purpose, the Scripture indeed we say is so, nor do we deny but our present
powers may be ordained for judgment, and (...) etc. (...) ((...)) (...). etc.
Eusebius. praepar. Evangel. li. 8.
established for correction. Lord (says the Prophet) thou have ordained them
(the Chaldean powers) for judgment, this Text therefore confirms what we have
to prove, viz. That the Powers in being over any people, are Gods Ordinance,
though they may be (as most commonly they are) both attained unto, as to man's
agency, and sustained unjustifiably thus they have not dis-favoured our
argument at all by this septuagint-allegation.

After this velitation anent the word Ordained, they come to a proposition of
ours, which (they say) we formed out of it, viz. In what ever series of events
God manifests his special concurrence or appearing, that cause he ownes, and
authorizeth man's Agency in it: This they deny, But before we join issue, we
must needs gratify them with some what, which they would feign know from us by
the way, and it is this, why we call the powerful working of God unto events,
flowing from the efficacious decree, his special concurrence or appearing,
after we had thus paraphrased the words, the Powers that be, are ordained of
God, as the first and chief cause of all Beings, but all Beings are not by his
special concurrence?

Answer, All those beings we speak of are, viz. All positive futuritions
determined by him, and well pleasing to him. Is it another contradiction to
say, the chief cause of all Beings may both generally and specially concur to
the production of the same event? When we look back unto the years of the
right hand of the most high God, and consider what great things he has done in
England, Ireland and Scotland, and by what means, we conclude thus, Not by
might, nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord, and cry grace, grace to
them, intituling the special outgoings, Isa. 41.15.
and unbareings of his holy arm to these effects, wherein he made the worm
Jacob a threshing instrument with teeth to beat the mountains like chafe;
every work morally good, all the gracious actings of his Saints and Servants
are drawn forth and his creatures enabled to them by a twofold divine
concourse, Twist. vindic. Gratiae li. digres.
or assistance, the one Physical the other supernatural, but that we shall
make use of in this debate, is only the special exertions of his divine
power, and the might of his arm unto natural effects with his general
providence in the support of instruments, these signal and observable
exercions of his might in weak means, we call his special appearings, or
efficiency; Now to the business.

We must needs tell them they do us wrong in assuming that for the sinews of our
argument which neither the argument it self, nor our judgments any way
befriend, viz. That Gods efficatious decree, and hand in powerful working is
conversant or operative in no human affairs or actions, but what are in man
lawful or agreeable to the rule of Gods word; and therefore this elaborate
digression of theirs touching the Metaphisicall derivation of all Actions, and
Beings, with their moral state and qualifications; and touching Gods agency in
all the affairs and actings of men, without the least (...), etc. (...) Synes.
tincture of sin, might have well been spared: we acknowledge with them that
if the present power over us have no more from God then a Metaphisicall
existence, or a natural existence, or a natural power and production by his
concourse, or cooperation with second causes, it is dis-owned by him with
abomination, we plead not Gods ordinary workings, but his special appearings,
in favor of our present Authority, as by our above mentioned proposition
appears, though they would cajole it to speak their sense, who make no
distinction betwixt Gods ordinary operations, and those workings of his which
are mavelous in all men's eyes. Surely Sirs, you may acknowledge some kind of
language in Gods lifting up of his arm to a wonder, as well as the Psalmist
does in all the works of his fingers, day unto day utters speech, and night
unto night tells knowledge, there is no speech nor language where their voice
is not heard, Says David: and if his wonders upon earth, speak any thing, it
is the might of that God whose works they are, and his favor toward that
people on whose behalf, and that cause in which they are wrought; Has God
essayed (says Moses) to go and take him a Nation from the midst of a
Nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty
hand, according to all that the Lord did for you? and what follows? because he
loved thy Fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee
out in his sight, with his mighty power out of Egypt. Moses argues from the
great things God did for that people to his owning of them, as about seven year
ago these Ministers, at least some of them, made no bones to do, when God
showed us any great salvation, or gave us any notable victory over the late
Kings forces, though now the same presence of God with our Counsels and Armies
speaks nothing at all, yet we confess this Plea of Gods mighty workings
toward a people would be very weak if it went alone, but we plead the Law and
Testimony for Gods owning our present Authority and their cause, as the
witness beyond exception. His works we mention in the second place as a good
comment upon the word only. Having thus righted our selves, we need say little
to their needless and exhojudiciall digression, only it seems strange to us
that they should insinuate, as if our present Powers derived from God only as a
Metaphysicall entity, when as his giving a Kingdom into any men's hands imports
clearly another thing, viz. Gods making them Rulers, which in so doing he
ownes, notwithstanding he may dis-owne their interests in grasping of power,
and the sinful or indirect courses whereby they may become possessed of it.

It creates us not any careful thoughts, that in taking their leave of our
second Medium they call our Paraphrase, or gloss on Romans 13.1. a wide one,
unless they could make it appear we restrain Gods Ordination of the Powers
that are to Divine concourse, we have showed that our Powers are, from God by
way of Authorization, and that his disposal of the Kingdom into their hands
(conferring thereby his right unto them) has made the Authority lawful in the
Subjects wherein it rests, let us see now how it fares with our third Medium.

Their third Medium (say they) to prove that the present Powers are from God,
as approving and legitimating them to the Persons, is divine Providence, the
conduct thereof, and the Lords presence, with the instruments in his hand for
effecting this change of Government, his wonderful appearings, his hand lifted
up in breaking Conspiracies, disscipating numerous Bodies, preventing
confusions, un-interrupted continuance of his goodness, all these make up an
evidence of Gods signal owning that Power in being over us, which is the
product of these Wonders; not to quarrel with their Short Hand in cramping our
Argument thus, they tell us, we are so passionately confident of this Medium
from providence, that we pronounce them more deeply baptized into the spirit of
Atheism then the Egyptian Sorcerers, and declare a curse of God surely to
come upon them that confess not what we think undeniably inferres our
conclusion.

Answ. Now let the world judge what passion or confidence our words have
bewrayed, he that considers the works done in our days, pondering them well,
and yet confesses not Digitum Dei hic and hic, the Arm of the Almighty made
bare for us, we cannot but think he is more deeply baptized into the spirit of
Atheism then the Egyptian Sorcerers, which withstood Moses, Exodus 8.19. If
the falling of a Sparrow to the ground, though worth but half a farthing, has
something of Providence in it, much more those wonderful appearings of God,
anticedent, concomitant, and subsequent to our change of Government: Have not
the hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, Psalm. 97.5.
at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth? God will surely curse that man,
and his house, who says, it was an arm of flesh that did what was done in
England, as making way for this change, or what has been done in Ireland
since, P.W. Generals Letter from Ireland, December. 1649.
Surely these men are angry with Providence, or they would not call our taking
notice of it passion, but yet it seems they are not desirous to come under the
curse of those who will not see, for we acknowledge (say they) the hand of God,
and his providence to have been operative, yea visibly and wonderfully working
in these changes; neither are they willing to deny what we think inferres our
conclusion, so that (our premises passing current) we must needs judge of this
their Reply, as a battery raised only against our conclusion. But the
Judgments of God are a great deep, and without the Cynosure of his Word they
find no safety, or warrant to lanch forth into them; neither do those whom
they jerk at, as hardy Steers-men, or bold Adventurers, when they take us
without a sure word for our Chart and Compass, let their little fingers be as
heavy upon us as their loins have been; but shall we through a ferulary awe
of any men's threats or censures, suffer the Lords workings, those perfect
Eccho's of his Word, to vanish into air, or abstruse nothings? All his ways
are judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.4. must we therefore look into none of them? shall not
the just walk in them because transgressors fall therein? Hos. 14.9.

2 Men used not formerly in the heat of our late dissertation betwixt King and
Parliament to be so nice and squeamish in this particular, but could venture at
interpreting the mind of the Lord of Hosts from events of War; most, if not
all the Thankesgiving Sermons preached before the Houses are yet living to
attest this? it seems we can tell how to blow both hot and cold, Providence is a
Topic which must serve only at some seasons, and that for friends too; in
short, Tertul.
Si Deus homini non placuerit Deus non erit. God must not be seen in that which
suits not our interests, nor pleases us; we dare not adventure to interpret
that so, which we have no mind should be so, yet let us take heed, dislike of
persons or instruments may keep us from seeing God where he is, at least, be a
temptation to hinder us from acknowledging him there.

3 Gods Judgments we conceive in their more dark and hidden dispensations are
a great deep, but to call his Providence so at all seasons, so that nothing
may be learnt from them, no discoveries of his mind at all, we see no warrant
for, Habac. 3.9. Job 36.24, 25.
when his arm is made bare, and his bow made QVITE NAKED. Surely these
appearings of his, may be soberly adventured on without lanching into Gods
secret depths; they are brutish who understand not the obvious purport of his
workings; thou have made me glad through thy work, says the Psalmist, and
they are not only eyed, Psalm. 92.4, 5. 28.5.
but sought out of all those that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2. may we
not by observing them understand the loving kindness of the Lord? Psalm.
107.43. A Law shall proceed from me (says God) and I will make my Judgment to
rest for a light of the people, Isa. 51.4.

4 They tell us, that the appearances of Gods hand in the advancement and
successes of men, wipes not off the least spot of that grand guilt which rests
upon their persons, much less, etc. We plead not Patronage, or justification
to any men's cause, much less to their persons, from Providence alone, all
that we draw from the pre-mentioned great works of the Lord, in order to that
great change of Powers over us, is, that be deals not so with every people,
that he showed himself so in effecting it, as he uses to do in the
production of those events which are of special complacency to him; and
certainly he that undertakes to prove that God uses to do such things, for
the Managers of that Cause which he abominates, will find it very operous; It
is not a supercilious non sequitur therefore, that shall beat us off from
taking comfort in Gods Works, nor from glorying in the operations of his
hands; neither will that which follows prevail so far upon us, where we are
put in mind of the usual lot and condition of Gods Church, viz. A low degree,
a state of oppression, a Wine Press of troubles and wrongs to be bowed down
and made a footstocle or street for the enemies of God and his Church to set
their feet and walk upon, to have men to ride over their heads, to plow and
make long furrows upon their backs, to be made to turn back from the enemy,
to be spoiled of them that hate them, to be given like sheep appointed for
meat, and to be scattered among the Heathen, etc. and on the contrary, earthly
power, pomp and triumph, outward illustriousnesse, and victoriousnesse, to be
destroyers of Cities, shakers and overturners of Kingdoms; are more frequently
the Characters and Equipage of God-lesse and notoriously wicked men, and
practices, then of them that are better.

Answ. We grant they are so, such have been the ways of Providence God has
walked in toward his Church and chosen hitherto, Psalm. 71.20:
yet sometimes he has lifted them up as well as cast them down; here are many
of Sions complaints and lamentations gathered together, and it were easy for
us to collect as large a bundle of her Hymns, Hallelujahs, and triumphant
Exaltations, when God has given her the necks of her enemies to tread upon, but
these gleanings on either hand, only show how and in what manner God dealt with
his people, at such and such seasons, Heb. 3.1.
calling them to Songs upon Sigionoth, sometimes to rejoicing, sometimes to
ejaculation; they only prove that it has been thus from the beginning, but are
not standing or perpetual rules of Divine administrations toward the godly,
nor prove that it shall be so unto the end; if we look upon those gracious
promises drawing to the birth in these latter days, we may conclude, Zion
shall be comforted according to the times wherein she has known adversity, and
that she shall not be trodden under foot still of the wicked; so that
prevailency and outward illustriousnesse, though Characters of the wicked race,
till their day be done; shall Characterize the Generation of the just, when
their day begins, and the acceptable year is proclaimed; The Sons of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee (says the Lord) and all they that
despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and they
shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Zion of the holy one of Israel;
whereas thou have been forsaken, and hated, so that no man went through thee, I
will make thee an eternal Excellency, a joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.14,
15. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
Lords House shall be established upon the top of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, Isa. 2.2. And the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey
him, Dan. 7.27.

What though prosperity spoke against the Church of old, may it not therefore
now speak for it? an argument from this Topic, viz. successful providence,
is of that purport and force in these days of ours, which it was not of in
ancient times, it is very considerable (in our case) now those promises are
fullfilling, though when they were but in making, it looked another way, yea it is
a thriving argument, and will gather yet more strength and weight, in favor of
the Church, before it come into the mouths of our children.

Had these Ministers but heapt together as many promises of what the Churches
condition shall be, (and which we see have taken effect in some comfortable
degree) as they have done testimonies of what its lot was of old; it is likely
they would have seen they have very little ground for such an odious
untheologicall insinuation, as that of theirs in this paragraph is, viz. That
the mighty presence of God with his Saints and Servants, who bend themselves
against the usurpations of Antichrist, and labor his dethronment in these
days, is no otherwise to be accounted of, then his providence toward the
Babylonian, Seleucidan, and Roman Tyrants were of old, in effecting their
enslavements of, his Church and chosen. Now to go forward, In driving on their
Answer, to that use we make of providence a little further, they charge us as
counterfeiters of the broad se ale of heaven, by making that a sign of Gods
mind, which he never instituted to that purpose, but presumption is a
groundless charge, we have told them once and again, and now tell them once
for all, it is Heterodoxie in our judgments to affirm, that the Lord has
ordained Providence, and prevailing successes Yet see what single providence
once did Jona. 1.15, 16.
solitarily to nolifie his approving or dis-approving will, yet providence in
conjunction with the word, gives effectual notice and sound conviction, yea,
the Lord many times by Providence alone gives a check to the censorious and
unadvised harshnes of men's spirits, against a people or cause, Dan. 3.25, 26.
and boring through their propositions, makes way for a more impartial
judgment, and charitable persuasion in them, Paul's shaking the Viper off his
hand without harm, Act. 28.6.
made the Barbarians think otherwise of him then before, thus cross and
adverse providence in a good cause strike many heartsearchings, Jos. 7.8.
and staggerings into the stablest and best balanced leaders, Lord, says
Joshua what shall I say when Israel turns their backs before their enemies?
success has light, as well as heat and comfort in it to Gods people, and
adverse occurrences, darkness as well as trouble, the Lambs conquering the
Kingdoms of the World, will so clear the promises that all Nations shall come
to the brightness of Zions rising, Christ gets up to his Throne by pulling
down the Principalities and Thrones of others, present proprietors no doubt,
Hag. 2.21, 22.
and if prevailencie, help not the Sons of men in discerning his title to
dominion, the promises of his success (such is the hardness of men's hearts)
must stand still for Ciphers, and it is to us altogether inconceiveable (Si prae
scriptio malefida in omni foro procedat) how he will ever find a vacant or
empty Throne upon the earth, or how he shall get possession of what his Father
has given him, if his way be not made by notable shakings, See Mr. Owen's
Sermon on Heb. 12.26, 27.
and translations of the customs, and the constitutions of Governments in the
World, A dead woman, says the Proverb, will not be carried out of her house
under four men.

Their comparison betwixt Providence, as we use it, Page 14.
and Lot, seems to us a very poor one, we never looked at Providence as an
Ordinance of God for the determining a Right, but seeing the hand of the
Almighty in important events, we think our selves bound to acknowledge it, and
to conclude as much from it as his Word will give us leave, which in a
righteous cause amounts to a testimony that he ownes it, if he favors and more
then ordinarily succeeds the managers of it, for God is in the Generation of
the just, Psalm. 14.5. Psalm. 41.11.
And by this I know says David thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not
triumph over me; if the Army have tempted God, by casting themselves upon
Providence, and by their appeals to his Majesty in courses injustifiable (as
they here tell us) we shall in no case stand by them, but leave them, as they
desire to be left, even to him that judges righteously, their sin no doubt
shall find them out, and are there not with us, even with us, sins against
the Lord our God, 2 Chronicles. 28.10. In the next place they thus documentize us,
the argument from Providence is ab eventu, or from the issue of a thing, they
then that will conclude from this Medium (say these Cunctators) must tarry a
while longer, even till the end be seen, and the winding up of Providence,
etc. God has taken time to visit the iniquities of them that hate him to the
third and fourth Generation.

Answ. The text says, God is a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate him. Here is nothing about his taking time to punish, this Scripture
speaks forth Gods just resolution to protract his Visitations to posterity,
not to suspend or withhold them from the first Generation, he will begin with
the sinful Fathers (according to his Oath) and that betimes to, Bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. Behold, the
righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, much more the wicked and the
sinner, Prove. 11.31. What mean ye that ye use this Proverb concerning the Land
of Israel, saying, the Fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the Childrens teeth
are set on edge? As I live says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any
more to use this Proverb in Israel: behold! all souls are mine, as the soul
of the Father, so also the soul of the Child is mine, the soul that sins
it shall dye, Ezekiel. 18.2, 3, 4.

Again, Glorying and boasting of an outward happiness, and successefulnesse,
is the usual effect which such prosperity has upon a wicked heart; this is
another of their documents to us, or rather a charge breathed indirectly upon
those in power over us, as if success had fly-blowne their spirits with pride,
and wrought them to unseemly glorying, it is true, Providence may be wrested to
the support and strengthening of men in evil ways, so may the Word of God, but
those who fear the Lord make not this use of either; for our parts, we are as
shie and jealous of opening providence without the key of the Word, and as
fearful of inconsequentiall deductions from them, or of abusing them, as
those are who seem to account them most sacred; and could we judge the
Parliament or Army (which here they strike at) to be haters of God, or men
counterworking his great design in these latter days, did we hear them boast
of their hearts desire, or the glory of their successes and achievements
otherwise then in humility, to the praises of the most high God, we should
look to have the wheel brought over them, and that soon, for a short work
will the Lord make upon the face of the earth; we should think that he had
lift them up to cast them down, but if they continue to exercise that
dependence upon God they have hitherto professed to do, and pursue those ends
which they hold out to the World in their appeals to the Majesty of Heaven, we
are confident that the winding up of Providence will be more comfortable to
them then the beginning has been, and that they shall have the thanks of that
very people, whose curses and reproaches they lie under at this day; and had we
only Providence for the bottom of our persuasions, we might in likelihood
change our minds as the people of Melita did, Act. 28. but we have a sure word
of Prophecy, by which examining and trying their state and agency in the work
of this season, we conclude that these and these Providence are the issue of
former promises, and though God carry them back, yet that their cause shall go
forward, till such a top stone be laid upon it as the people of God shall cry
Grace unto; and now let us see how our second argument for engageing is dealt
withal.

The mutual relation of protection and Allegiance presses us to an owning and
realliance with them (our present Powers) as our actual Protectours, every
benefit requiring some duty: Our argument proceeds in these terms, these
Non-subscribers deny that protection, and allegiance, are propter, or secundum,
else relatives, (we can scarcely guess at what they here mean, considering
what they grant by and by) Magistracy and Allegiance indeed they say, are
Relatives, but protection in actu exercito, is not simul natura with
Allegiance, and in actu signato is separable from Magistracy, so that they
cannot be said properly to be Relata.

Ans. We shall not break with our Brethren for a Logical notion, supposing
they have found a flaw in our Logic, we do not rixari de lana caprina, fight
for Goats Wool, and in case our expression makes but way for our Conceptions
into the minds of men, we use not ( vervecum in patria crassoque sub aere, in
the coasts where we live) to subtelize our notions; we presume from what they
here yield, that our proposition is Theologically true, we grant, say they, in
some sort a relation, and so a mutual connectednesse betwixt Protection and
Allegiance; this connectednesse serves our turns fully, He is the Minister of
God to thee for good, says the Apostle, WHEREFORE ye must needs be subject,
etc. and FOR THIS CAUSE pay you tribute also, render THEREFORE to all their
dues, etc. Romans 13.5, 6, 7. So that had not they granted this relation, we
should have forced it.

But in accommodating this their general deliberative to the business, they
strive to husband their Allegiance due from them by reason of this acknowledged
connectednesse to our present rulers, forcing it by a set of niggardly
distinctions in Stillicidia, into syllabicall and wary concessions, such as is
the protection (say they) such only can the Allegiance be required to be, now
the protection is or may be deemed

1 But voluntary (supposing the power to be intruded into, not lawfully
possessed) and not of Magistraticall duty; we say this exception, as to our case,
vanishes upon our proving the powers that are, to be Gods Ordinance, furnished
and instructed with rule and dominion or Magistratical Authority, which we have
done already in its place.

2 But actual, not fixed or settled, it being (as we suppose) without any
Basis of a regular vocation to it, Answer.

1 By actual we guess that they mean temporary, and if they scruple not
temporary allegiance, we conceive it may come off as conscionably from them
Nusquam and nunquam licet quod semper and ubique non licet. Tertul. de Specta.
all the while they receive protection.

2 For the Basis of a regular vocation, they suppose our Rulers have none, and
we on the other side suppose they have such a call as may satisfy the
submitting consciences, if they mean by a regular call, such a call as our
Parliaments ab initio used to have unto their supreme trust, we conceive they
have it, but if they mean such a call as is every way incorrupt and complete in
all circumstantiall requisites, Pind.
and formalities ((...)) such a call as few Magistrates (sovereign ones at
least) have among any people on the earth; lastly, such a call as no man can
except against, or find fault with, this we say is not necessary for the
justifying of the powers that are over us in their claim of Allegiance from us.

3 Protection may be but partial, they say, or in some things, for it cannot
be that where an arbitrary, or usurped power is erected, there should be
universal protection. Answer,

1 If you have not protection in Lancashire and Cheshire, where is the fault?
is this mutual connectednesse you speak of verified among you? if you have
protection (as for ought we know you have) remember what Job says, Loweth the
Ox over his fodder? Job 6.5.

2 We cannot skill of this partial Allegiance, if it be confessed due in some
things, viz. any one duty, we shall desire no more to drive you to an
acknowledgement of a due in all, to whom Tribute is due, honor, fear, and
obedience, is due likewise.

3 This usurpation is but a thing supposed, if applied to our case, a mere
peradventure, and they say, Fortasse ita soluiturper forte non; these
foundations proving thus succumbent and infirm, what they build upon them
against engaging must needs fall, as that Allegiance is to be but of choice or
prudence, not of duty, actual only, not fixed and engaged; and lastly
partial, which they thus restrain.

1 That it entrench not upon another right, but if the present Authority be
lawful, and authorized from above, Conscience puts no man upon the inquest
after another right, or upon the search into any man's pretentions, to
Sovereignty over us.

2 That it be so far as is lawful; they are afraid of the Usurpers guilt it
seems by what follows, but usurpation is only presumed by them in our case,
we must see the question otherwise mooted then we have done yet, before we
carry Coals over the same bridge with them in this point, but though this were
out of debate, yet we have showed the lawfulness of obeying Usurpers in
licitis and honestis, and that it may be done without participating in their
sins, Christ Jesus himself would never have paid tribute unto Caesar had it
been otherwise, and we desire no easier a task then to prove, that the Roman
Eagles preyed upon the Jewish State, and got their Authority indirectly. To
conclude therefore they tell us, that to engage is to pay too much Allegiance
to our present Rulers, let allegiance, (that is, an acting in conformity to the
Command, and submitting to the power of the Protectors) be qualified as above,
and what is this to enga^ing, say they, it falls short of it by many miles; the
compensation will overweigh the favor.

Ans. 1. It is easy to undervalue what we receive from our Protectors, if we
have a mind not to be over lavish in our (...). Chrysostom in Romans 13.
returns, or responsals.

2 If any duties answer the claim of protection, besides a thankful owning of
those Persons, and Powers, by whose means it is dispensed unto us, and a
cheerful submission to them, let it be showed us; if these tenatious
Non-subscribers will give any thing, let it be seen, if to be true and
faithful to the Powers as now established, be of too high a size, and
finednesse, what they will allow them sure is next to nothing, but a small Wax
Candle may serve the turn now, it seems, though in our stormy times, when the
proud waves reached even unto our souls, we stuck not to promise one as big
as the Mast of our Ship, to those that should help to shore us; to live and
dye with our Protectors then was a small matter, now to be true and faithful
to them is a monstrous courtesy; In taking their farewell of this Argument
they plead the Parliaments Declaration of Febr. 9. 1648. and tell us how far
the State shall be beholding to them; that which these. Ministers plead runs
thus: We are fully resolved to maintain, preserve, and keep the fundamental
Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the preservation of the Lives,
Properties, and Liberties of the People, with all things incident thereunto;
that which they Promise, or resolve to do, is this, to live and conform
themselves according to those Laws, and in so doing apprehend that they should
enjoy the protection of them, Act for subscript. Ian. 10. 1649.
especially since the DECLARERS make their protection an Argument for their
demand of subjection.

Ans. 1. Subscribing the Engagement we take to be the giving of an assurance of
this their resolved subjection and conformity, to plead any thing in their act
without performing the condition of it, is to say, the Parliament must do
whatsoever we claim from them, although we refuse them in every thing.

2 The House declared their resolutions, Febr. 9. 1648, but we see not how such
as dis-owne the Power, and the relation of the Declarers over them, come within
the compass, or under the benefit of those resolves, If I acknowledge not this
man for my Father, how can I expect or beg a Fathers blessing from him, or
look for a child's portion?

Our third Argument follows; We know not how to approve our hearts before God,
if we should put our selves out of a capacity of serving his providence, while
he offers us opportunity thereunto, as we should do by refusing the
Engagement; now every man almost cries out, MAKE ME NOT A RVLER TO THIS PEOPLE,
let me not meddle, this breach shall not be under my hand, Ezekiel. 13.5.22.30.
Psalm. 106.23.
we think it most seasonable standing up in the gap (as our callings may
require) and offering our services to the God of our lives and comforts. This
argument the Ministers turn off with a Nil probat, serving God and his
providence, standing up in the gap, and going after his conduct (say they) are
very necessary and goodly Pleas, when they are not mis-applyed, but how do
they prove that taking and observing the Engagement is a work of this nature,
etc. This they touch not upon, we are persuaded to enter the Engagement would
be a dis-service to God, a breaking down the gap, etc.

Ans. 1. This persuasion of theirs they let alone to shift for it self, and
win upon the Reader if it may be, without any reason to make way for it; they
only tell us their mind, and that we knew before; we shall make bold therefore
to cast their persuasion over the bar, and number it amongst the dead, as
they do our assumption, they teach us an easy way of answering.

2 It lies not upon us to prove, Honest succumbit qui servit tempori, Sen.
that taking the Engagement is a work of that nature they speak, goodly and
necessary in it self; it is only conditio sine qua non, a door or inlet at
this season to that service which is always good and necessary, it is not for
us to account that no service of Providence (as those Non-subscribers do)
which we cannot perform in our own way, or at our own liberty; never man
fell off from the Lords work upon any temptation whatsoever, but he would tell
us, he could not conscienciously go on, it would be dis-service to God, etc.

3 Though sometimes their sagacity Caetitatis duae species facile oecurrunt, ut
qui non vident quae sunt, and videre videantur quae non sunt. Tert. Apol.
creates an object, yet they seldom see what they had as leive were not to be
seen, Isa. 42.19. the owning that power which God himself ownes can be no
conscientious Plea, for declining a Moral duty; somewhat of this purport they
might have taken notice of in our Argument, as the proof of our assumption,
which we speak more to (according as we there refer them) in the beginning
of our Plea; we are sure that whatsoever is a standing up in the gap, the
laying a man's self aside, or stepping behind the hedge in a surly discontent,
(...)? Them. in A^chy. 1 King. 19.4.14.
that is not; though the Children of Israel had forsaken the Lords Covenant,
thrown down his Altars, and slain the Prophets with the sword, yet Elijah
was not to be excused in making request, that God would take away his life, so
ridding him of his ingrate and troublesome service.

4 They require a commission from God for the service they are to do; this is
good, we suppose they are Ministers, they write themselves so, hence it is
presumed they have a commission from God for all Ministerial service, and no
man (for ought we hear) goes to take it away from them; if any thing be
required of them which they cannot do by virtue of that commission, they may
look into these Scriptures, Psalm 75.3. Mic. 6.8. and furnish themselves with
another; we conceive they need not fear a design here, or any danger in our
advice, though we are told, they cannot but fear our stiling what we have
done, and would have others to follow us in, A STANDING UP IN THE GAP, will
prove a dawbing them with untempered mortar, who are like Wolves, ravening the
prey to get dishonest gain, Ezekiel. 22.27, 28.

Ans. Prove. 25.15.
1. What! Iracundiores Adria? soft words will sooner break the bones, here is
another goodly insinuation, they lift up their voices like Trumpets indeed, but
Non refert tales versus qua voce legantar, had we any list to recriminate
directly, or indirectly, we could tell them, that (...) Cyr. Hier. Cat. l. 1.
Wolves were on both sides, some they say ravening the Prey, others we see in
Sheeps clothing, these look to their own way likewise, every one for his gain
from his Quarter; the design is noble on neither side, if filling their own
bowels be the end, if such interests be yet, though disadvowedly, driven on
amongst us, we shall patiently wait for him, Esa. 56.11. Ezekiel. 22.25.
who with righteousness shall judge the poor, and argue with equity for the
meek of the earth; who shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips shall slay the wicked, Isa. 11.4.

2 Fear is wonderfully jealous, Quod timet esse putat. Ovid.
and makes the worst of every thing, so do these Ministers; we dare not
account them amongst those which the Psalmist speaks of, that fear where no
fear is; but unless they had showed us some real ground for their fears, or
proved our Mortar untempered, they might have spared their application of that
Scripture, Ezekiel. 22. and their pointing it against Engagers, it suites those of
the Lanca shire Association better, and gives a fuller blow to the Statists of
their temper, and interest, who were tooth and nail for dawbing up a bargain
with the late King at Newport, against Covenant, Conscience, and Religion, as
the Scots could tell us, for if that lift were not to get dishonest gain we
may stand and admire, but shall never be able to make any tolerable conjecture
what the men's aims should be.

In answer to an Objection, page 13. of our Plea, we say, Tha subscribing to
the present Authority, concludes neither our approbatio^ of what has been done
in order to the change of Government, no nor ye of the change it self. To this
Declaration of our judgments touching that consequence from the Engagement,
which ex professo most of all pincheth them, their reply is this; How a man can
engage in the form prescribed, and not approve of, or consent to the
establishment of the new, and the exclusion of the old (form) is beyond us to
conceive.

Answ. What, will they never understand? Chauce^
the form prescribed (so far as we can see into the words, or they either
for ought that yet appears) neither requires our consent to, nor approbation
of the antiquating King, and House of Lords, tying us only to subjection, and
from a subversion of the establishment in esse, and therefore they might easily
conceive the dis-engagement of a man's consent as to the change, notwithstanding
his personal engagement of submission to the Powers changed. To the proof of
this:

They say, We shall yield all that they allege of the English submitting to
the Normane yoke, and of the Duke of Braganre to the Spaniard, but deny their
inference, which should be a parallel, but is not at all in the thing wherein
they stand against us, which is the point of approvall of the change, for the
English, and the said Dukes submission was a consenting to the change made by
their respective invaders.

To this we answer, It was indeed such a consent as these Ministers yield to
our present Powers, per force majore as the Dutchman calls it, there was a
yielding to the change, but that action, or rather that passion flowing from an
il-logicall principle, constraint implies the inward dissent of the submitters
will, which if prevailed upon to a consent, it had been done with other manner
of Weapons then those the Conquerours used; there can be no proper consent
without a precedent ground of conviction upon the Judgment, but neither the
Norman, nor the Spanish Knapsacks afforded any arguments congruous to such a
purpose as this.

But, say they, Those Cases and ours are widely different in point of
conscience, to whom was the wrong done by the invading Parties? surely to none
(so far as those replyers represent) but to the Parties submitting or
swearing Allegiance, who could remit the wrong done to themselves respectively,
and transfer a Right over themselves to their respective invaders, but in our
case the wrong redounds not only to our selves, but to the Nation in general,
and to the dis-possessed power, etc.

Answ. 1. Who authorized you Sirs, for Advocates of the Nation in general?
surely the Subscribers are a part of it; or for the disposed power! have you
the broad Seal of Scotland for this? but,

2 Those who submitted to the Norman yoke were no other then all the people,
and that under a pre-establisht Magistracy, to which they were bound up no
doubt, and pre-engaged by Oaths of Allegiance; ask the Elders, and they will
tell you: could these Ministers make the contrary appear, they might plead a
difference in the case, we know of none in Authority that receded from their
own rights, to give way or place to the Conqueror in England, therefore if
engaging in our case would be a participation in sin, by consenting to, and
establishing the change, theirs could not be without such an accessarinesse.
But well may the Ghosts of our Grandfathers rest till such a change as this
find them out; they knew if this Governor, or Government was dis-enabled from
giving them protection, they were free for another, Supremacy being ambulatory,
Salus Populi.
but the supreme Law fast fixed.

3 Who can believe that the Dukes of Braganre Philippus secundus qui neque ex
Lusitanorum voluntate, neque ex justo bello poterat in Lusitania regnare, etc.
D. Anton. de Sousa, Hist. li. 2. c. 3.
consented to their own dethronement? Ingens telum necessitas, to this they
gave way, or that the Portugoes approved Castiles usurpation over him and them,
if the present King of Portugals Grandfather had given away his right to the
Crown by swearing Allegiance to the Spaniard (as these rejoynders intimate)
how could here-assume it as he did about 1640, and yet be justified? surely in
both these cases wrong was not done only to those who of right were possessed of
power, which wrong they might release the usurpers of, but to the Nations in
general, over which the pre-authorized persons could not transfer any right
of power to those who conquered and vassaliz'd them, so that our parallel yet
holds good; to go on therefore we insist, that Powers irregularly and
disorderly changed, may be lawfully and conscientiously subscribed to, and
owned as powers ordained of God: And here the whole Classes Votes with us, We
say so too, if they have besides that disorderly entrance (say they) a lawful
calling or title conveyed to them.

Answ. We conceive a perfect implicancy in what they here would seem to grant
us, for the condition which they annexed to their grant, makes submission to
powers disorderly changed, an absolute impossibility (saving their own
principles) this we prove thus; To submit or give any countenance to persons
irregularly possessed of the seat of Authority brings men under a participation
of their sin, for (say they, page 22.) anent engaging to a changed power, We
do insist that it does necessarily carry in it an express consent to the
essentials, or executive acts of the change; it is impossible therefore that men
thus persuaded should furnish disorderly intruders with a postuentionall power,
and not sin against conscience; to countenance them at all levels their
principles, they cannot call any to authority without sinning, who have no
Basis for their Authority before their call, and by this means Gods supreme
right to a disposal of the Kingdoms of the world becomes altogether null and
vacated, and by consequence the very Ordinance of Magistracy, when we cannot
persuade our selves of man's right (as the case now happens) for if this power
be by the providence of God dis-enabled from affording us protection, no other
power (unless of the same right, constitution, and formality with that to
which we were pre-engaged) may be lawfully (by these principles) submitted to
as his Ordinance; Homo jam Deo propitius esto, no doubt Sirs, but ye are the
people, and wisdom shall dye with you. Job 12.2. (...). Diog. Laerr. de Gysip.


To this one persuasion, viz. That neither Gods commands touching subjection,
nor the Parliaments Act for subscription, puts the submitting conscience either
upon the approbation or dis-approbation of the equity or iniquity of this
change of Government wrought amongst us, etc. They say, Here is a strange
confused Divinity, a conscientious acknowledgement of a thing, and yet no act
of conscience exercised either by way of approbation, or dis-approbation, etc.
ye that built this labyrinth, lend your clue to lead us out.

Answ. In return to this wonderment of theirs, we must say, that had these
smart Casuists but taken notice, of the sentence immediately preceding that
they here allege, they might happily have avoided the charging confusion upon
us, or of confounding themselves, and have driven this case of conscience to a
clear and more satisfying issue then they have done; but seeing they have
intricated themselves, we shall endeavor to extricate them (as they desire us)
step by step.

1 The first step is this, Governing Powers may be irregularly changed, and yet
conscienciously submitted to, this is their own acknowledgement at the top of
the Page, if therefore they know the print of their own feet, this step they
may safely take without our conduct.

2 The second step, it belongs not to persons of a private sphere in times of
contest about Sovereignty, decisively to determine of the right, that
pretenders to supreme power in the world have over us; conscience cannot be
supposed to demand that of every man, which is beyond the abilities and helps
of most men, to attain unto any certainty or exactness in, viz. the knowledge
of every parties pretention to Government, or the grounds of their claim.

3 The third step, if the title or tenure of Magistrates concern not private
consciences, then the innovation and antiquation of this or that order in
public Government, or the change of persons in power with the equity or
iniquity of either, concerns them as little.

4 The fourth step, wher-ever men live and enjoy protection, the proper fruit
of Magistracy, there the Ordinance of God is in being.

5 The fifth step, this Ordinance of God which they see ministering to their
good, they are bound to acknowledge, and (in whatsoever persons it is seated)
to pay homage unto it, Romans 13.1, etc. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. etc. this binds
Consciences to a changed power, and yet puts it not upon the examination of the
equity or iniquity of the change, as out of duty, much less upon the approvall
or dis-approvall thereof, where we see the end of Magistracy performed, there
Magistracy is in being we conclude, and where this power resides we cannot be
long ignorant, if we see who they are that minister to our good in this nature.

But let us hear what they say against these things:

Where God commands subjection, beyond all doubt he requires the conscience to
approve, or dis-approve, the assent of conscience must be of faith, and this
cannot be without its inquiry into the equity or iniquity of the thing
proposed; this is the substance.

Answ. The assent of Conscience as to submission is of faith, when we see those
over us are Ministers for our good in a judiciary, irreprovable orderly way, if
we find this inquisition after the titles of men in power to do us good, or
to command us in order thereto, is not necessary for the binding of Conscience;
we hear very much of duty pressed by the Apostles upon the primitive Saints,
private Christians, toward those empowered over them, obedience, prayers,
honors, fear, tribute, etc. but not a word about disputing or questioning
their titles who were in civil supremacy; had Conscience been so much
concerned herein, could they not have submitted, and that out of faith too,
without canvasing the titles of the great ones in the world to Authority over
them, or searching into the Right of their claims and pretenses to power, the
Apostles no doubt, who instructed them fully to every good work, would have
left some light that they might not be at a loss in their search after just
titles in men to rule and command them, especially considering how easily they
might be benighted ere they could make up a judgment of faith in such a
difficult matter (Soldiers Ab eo tempore status Reipublicae fuit eo redactus
ut penes exercitum atque legiones populi Romani esset crean Caesarem; hunc ad
modum factus est etiam Caesar Vespatianus, etc. Sleid. De quatuor sum. Imper.
ita and Justinius, etc. Evagr. li. 4.
using now and then to carve out titles ill-favouredly for their Emperors with
the sword) and so they might be in danger of blind obedience, but not a word
of this that we see; all the help they had for the discerning to whom they
owed and were to pay obedience was this; they are for the punishment of evil
doers, and the praise of them that do well, revengers to execute wrath on them
that do evil, etc. These are their administrations, not their titles.

To the case they put, to clear the business; we say, Conscience is oftener
resolved in its doubtings from the cause, then the titles of persons, or
parties commanding both at once, as we believe most private men's Consciences
were in the case betwixt King and Parliament, 2 Chronicles. 13.
their Cause gained them more abettours then a knowledge of their competency to
command and do what they did; and this is the way we intend to take for the
resolving our own Consciences under such scruples; If the title on one hand be
not such as that he who runs may read the justice of it; and,

Here they do not take a case, but make a case, for,

2 The case they mind us of, runs but half parallel with that which we shall
mind them of in the application, and it is like we both mean the same case,
viz. our own at this present; there may be granted two Parties claiming a
title to rule over us, but there are not two actually commanding (as they
suggest in the Hypothesis) if the King of Scots Warrants come amongst them into
Lancashire, and Cheshire now, (as sometimes the Kings and Parliaments they say
did to the same place formerly) it is more then we know, or hear of, and so can
say little to it; we are sure the Parliaments Warrants or Commands do, though
they find not so much as a Potentia obedientiali, amongst the Classes there;
and supposing the said King does send any of his injunctions or prohibitions
thither, we are sure likewise that they are such solitary wouldings, such
Personal commands, or scar-crowes from a non-King'd man, as would not have
been owned by them from the late King in times of War before he was unking'd,
unless they were then Prerogative sticklers, the contrary whereto themselves
profess; we shall only say this more, that if a scrupling their title who now
solely command (notwithstanding their pretense to a title as fair as any
others claiming) may absolve or exempt the conscience of any man from the tie
of obedience, we must be forced at this time to deny many men's competency to
the performing several such moral duties, as they are at no time bound up
from exercising themselves in, but at all times tied to be doing, so long as
the Lord continues them to serve their Generations; now to proceed, We have
said enough before (say they) to disprove the challenge of Authority upon mere
present possession.

Answ. The claim of those Powers over us being not thus bottomed, viz. merely
upon the presentnesse of superiority, whatever they have said against such a
challenge hurts us not, and that which they have fastened upon our Authority to
this purpose gratis, has met with an answer in its proper place; There is yet a
knot remaining which they cannot untye, and that is, how the act for
subscription should bind us to be true and faithful to the Commonweal as
now established, etc. and yet not put the Conscience upon approvall, or
dis-approvall of the change. We have led them already out of the maze wherein
they professed themselves lost touching Gods command, for subjection binding the
Conscience without putting it upon the approbation or disapprobation of the
equity, etc. of a changed Power; and being helped out of that labyrinth, we
doubt not but they will loose this knot with much ease.

In the next place, supposing this consequence good (say we, P. 14.) That
Subscription drew with it a consent to the change of Government, and an
approbation of what was done in order to it; we conceive that both of these,
without any injury offered to Conscience, may be approved, the Parliaments
Declaration, March 17, 1648. renders the former approveable to us, and as to
the maine things done in order to this change, we shall speak our thoughts in
particular; This Declaration these Ministers tell us, is neither in their
hands, nor allowed to be under their consideration, yea they affirm that some
in high degree and office amongst us have declared in open Court, that there is
no change of the Government made.

Answ. Peradventure the King of Scotland has bound up his forward faithful
ones in this Commonwealth, under the forfeiture of their Allegiance from
looking into any such dangerous Declarations, otherwise they might come into
Lancashire, and Cheshire surely; and these unsatisfied ones might have
allowance to consider them, being published for the whole world to consider of;
and for what was declared in open Court concerning our Government's being not
changed, we suppose these Gentlemen believed it not, for some of them declared
the contrary as openly in their Pulpits (we hear) to the faces of those high
officers, which we conceive they here relate to.

Touching that discourse of theirs unto which we are referred for the
disapproveablenesse of this change amongst us, etc. we must tell them, as they
do us; it is not allowed to come under ours, or any men's consideration, we
dare only take the boldness, being particularly concerned, to vindicate our
own grounds, for submission from their confident exceptions, under which yet we
conceive the substance of their Plea, against the lawfulness of our present
Authority is brought in, which how substantial it is, we refer to the
judgments of discerning spirits for a sentence. Concerning the maine things
done in order to this change of Government we speak our thoughts, and they
speak theirs: As,

1 Touching the Parliaments declaring the People to be the original of all
lawful power; To this indeed they say nothing, not reckoning it happily
amongst the essentials, or executive act of the change.

2 Touching their laying aside the House of Lords, which in effect they had
done seven years before, in declaring, That if their Lordships refused to
join with them in settling the Militia, they would proceed to do it without
them. To this their Reply is;

1 That they are not clear in the truth of this Report, and if they be not, we
say, there are several of their corresponding friends the Ministers of London,
who after conference had with them by some of the Members touching that
business, did approve of it, as a thing lawful and necessary to be done;
these men, we doubt not, will abundantly clear them.

2 But thence we cannot infer the justness of an act, viz. because it was
done many years since; It Is truth we confess, in case there was nothing else
to justify the thing but only the doing of it, but it was accounted an
wholesome resolve, and justified then, therefore the same thing cannot in it
self be unjustifiable now.

3 But supposing it to have been done, and just in the doing, yet (as their
last and surest hold) they difference what the Parliament did in laying the
Lords aside then, from their laying them by now, by this distinction,
Co-ordinates may exercise (say they) a cumulative or suppletive power upon the
defectivenesse of one another, but they cannot put forth a privative power to
take away one the other, which was done in this case.

Answ. Nobis non licet esse tam acutis.

We cannot possibly divide the hair betwixt that suppletive act which the
Commons did put forth, and that privative act which they tell us, is not
allowed them to put forth, we think them tantamount or equipolent, and cannot
but so judge of them till these distinguishers, or some other, show us a
difference betwixt co-ordinals acting without, and against the consent of those
that stand in an equality of power with them (this the Commons did) and their
putting forth a privative power against them; if it be said, This was but once
or twice done, and in case of necessity too; we say, if the same necessity
revert over and over, the Lords might be laid aside again and again, and if
by their delays and Negatives they continue to show their implacable bent (as
they did do) against the sense of the Commons, upon that account they were
laid aside temporarily, or at such a season; upon the same account they may be
laid aside for ever; To their illustration we say, that the Lords were not
TRVSTEES, but sat in Parliament for their own interests, and as
Prerogative-supporters, thus much we are told by such as understand Parliaments
better then we do, in the Declaration, March 17. 1648.

2 But what if the Lords laid themselves aside (as some say they did, by not
meeting upon the period of their adjournment) then they have no injury, if they
receded from their own right, what are we concerned in their being unhoused?

3 Lastly, supposing there has been injury done unto the Lords (for we make not
our selves Judges of their Privileges and Rights) yet we understand not how
that injury can take away a Right from the Commons, or absolve us of our
subjection.

3 Touching their bringing the late King to a Trial, sentencing him, and
taking him away; this we mention as approveable by conscientious men, and
instance in Knox, etc. but for the rendering this approveable, they say, our
sole reason is, Fiat justitia ruat coelum; God is no accepter of persons, he
has strictly commanded that we take no satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer, Numb. 35.30, 31, 33.
etc. Who has he commanded, say they? all those who are called to execute
wrath upon evil doers, say we; and it stands every man in hand to see that
they do it, for at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of
man says the Lord, Genesis 9.5. After some preparatives of this nature, they come
to state the point in debate, the question betwixt us will be (say they) not
whether some are exempt from the sentence of the Law or no, (this it seems must
needs be granted) but, who they are who sitting in the highest chair of
Magistracy amongst us, have none placed by God above them to take cognizance
of, and unsheath the sword of Authority against their offenses? upon this seat
they would prove the King to be set, from the Oath of Supremacy, and the words
of both Houses of Parliament thus declaring, Exact. Collat. Page 727.
We did, and do say, that the Sovereign Power does reside in the King, and
both Houses of Parliament.

Answ. 1. It would be known indeed who they be that are elevated to such a
seat of eminency as that no hand may touch them? or whether there be any such
menin the World or no? what they here allege looks another way; they should
prove the King to be unaccountable, and they prove him only the supreme
Officer of State, Ignoratio Elenchi, unaccountablenesse is not a necessary
adjunct of Supremacy, the highest in the world do, or should Minister to
others, as Trustees for the Public, and this implies their accountablenesse;
the wise King does not say, Princes may not be stricken, but it is not good to
strike them for equity, Prove. 17.26.

2 Upon this ground they give us for the-Kings impunity, (if it hold good) both
the Houses of Parliament, and every individual Member of both come under a
necessary unaccountablenesse and impunity likewise, as having (confessedly) all
of them a share in the Supreme Power; if the residence of Sovereign Authority
in any person or persons makes them Justice-proofe, and this Authority resides
where we heard, in the Houses as well as the King, then we understand not the
legality of questioning and condemning Strafford, Laud, Hotham, etc. or how any
the Members of either Houses during their Membership, should be questioned by
any persons whatsoever; and so the Houses of Parliament might become Cities of
refuge, or Sanctuaries to the vilest of men, who could get within those walls,
as well as to the King. Who can take away his Privilege, or Prerogative, that
is chosen to a share in the supreme Authority? This is well argued Sirs, and
if any one say the Major part of either House may question the Minor, we
conceive not, if the residence of supreme Authority in that part conjunctly
with the other, renders it unaccountable, as we are taught it does, and as it
must needs do, if any man whatsoever by reason of his share in Supremacy
becomes invulnerable, as anointed with the sovereign Oil of impunity;
therefore we contend, that no man whatsoever is thus placed above the reach of
Justice, and consequently, that such as are empowered by a call to judicial
Authority, may and ought (as the case may be) to execute Gods Judgments upon
the King. See what the rational Scotch-man speaks to this purpose, and if he
speaks not truth believe him not; he proves by various arguments that the King
is under the La^, as King; amongst which arguments one is this, Lex Rex, page
183, etc.
Else the Lord in making a King to preserve his people, should give liberty,
without all Politic restraint, for one man to destory many, which is contrary
to Gods end in the Fifth Commandment, if one man have absolute power to
destroy souls and bodies of many thousands. Again, That the King should be
under one Law of God, to be executed by men (viz. the Guardian Law of property)
and not under another Law, Royallists are to show a difference from Gods Word,
Deuteronomy. 17.20. The King on the Throne remains a Brother, Psalm. 22.22. and so
the Judges, or three Estates are not to accept of the Person of the King for
his greatness in Judgment, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. and the Judge is to give out such
a sentence in Judgment as the Lord, with whom there is no iniquity, Page 235.
etc. Again, page 235. If God have provided that the King, who is a part of
the Commonwealth shall be free of all punishment, though he be an habitual
destroyer of the whole Kingdom, seeing God has given him to be a Father,
Tutor, Savior, Defender thereof, and destinated him as a means for its
safety, then must God have worse, not better, provided for the safety of the
whole, then of the part.

Again, if all the sins and oppressions of the Prince be so above the
punishments that men can inflict, they are not sins before men, by which means
the King is loofed from all guiltiness of the sins against the second Table,
for, the Ratio formalis, why, etc.

And lastly, the Prelate takes it for confessed (says our Author) that it had
bin Treason in the Santiedrin and States of Israel to have taken on them to
judge and punish David for his Adultery, Page 241.
and for his Murder, but he gives no reason for this, nor any Word of God,
and truly though I will not presume to go before others in this: Gods Law, Genesis
9.5. compared with Numb. 35.30, 31. seems to say against them, nor can I
think that Gods Law, or his Deputies the Judges, are to accept the persons of
the great, because they are great, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. and we say we cannot
distinguish where the Law distinguishes not; the Lord speaks to under
Judges, Levit. 19.15. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor
honor the person of the mighty, or, of the Prince, (for we know what these
words (...) and (...) mean) I grant, it is not Gods meaning that the King
should draw the Sword against himself, but yet it follows not that if we
speak of the DEMERIT OF BLOOD, that the Law of God accepts any Judge, great
or small, and if the Estate be above the King, as I conceive they are, though
it be an humane Politic constitution, that the King be free of all co-action
of Law, because it conduces for the peace of that Commonwealth, yet if we
make a matter of Conscience, for my part, I see no exception that God makes,
if men make, I crave leave to say, A facto ad jus non sequitur, thus far that
honest public Advocate. We see all Scotch-men are not of the blood Royal,
and when we hear this man's reasons, Junius Brutus, (...). I. M. senure of
King, etc.
and those which other men have brought against exempting the King from the
Co-action of the Law, answered, we shall then think men have some cause and
ground for their heinous resentment of the proceedings against the late King,
and for that great stir they make in the world about them.

But suppose (say they) the King notwithstanding his place to be liable to
capital punishment by the Parliament, it remains to be clearly proved that
they who did it were qualified with that power.

Ans. We must conceive (plowing with their own Heifer) that by that power,
they mean Parliamentary power, and this is the power that they who did it were
chosen to, and enabled to act till they dissolved themselves; that they are
essentially Judges, and so men competent and quallified to do Justice is
solidly asserted and demonstrated by the above cited strenuous Author, Lex Rex.
and though the House has been dismembered (for that we know these Ministers
hint at, taking the excluders for Presbyterian, when indeed they were royal
Martyrs) though it be not so full and formal a power as we could wish; yet we
say again, an injury takes not away a right; the remnant of them, after the
seclusion of some, and the defection of others, far exceeding that number
which by Law (as we are informed) makes an house, and till they unhouse
themselves, retain that authority to which they were elected, supposing the
proceedings were in some respect extraordinary, yet here again the Scotch-man
(who echoes well in Lancashire) will help us out; Elias causes to kill the
Prophets and Priests of Ball, says he, 1 King. 18.19 according to Gods
express Law; it is true, it was extraordinary, but no otherwise extraordinary
then it is at this day, when the supreme Magistrate will not execute the
Judgment of the Lord, those who made him a supreme Magistrate under God, who
have under God Sovereign liberty to dispose of Crowns and Kingdoms, are to
execute the JVDGEMENT OF THE LORD, when wicked men make the Law of God of none
effect; so Samuel Killed Agag, whom the Lord commanded expressly to be killed,
because Saul disobeyed the voice of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.32.

But in the last place, if this be made to appear (say the Ministers) yet by
virtue of religious Oaths and Vows which have been taken, we conceive the
King ought to have been exempred from that proceeding.

Ans. It was the Kings choice See his answer to the Pet. of Right.
Maxim, that he owed account of his actions to none but God, and these men
swallow it roundly of late, but this Prerogative being destructive to the end
of Magistracy, and rendering it an inconceiveable discommode (considering the
corruption and temptations of great ones) rather then an advantage to any
people, is absolutely incompatible in its own nature to any man's person though
in supreme trust, this being clear, the supervention of Oaths for the
preserving his person alters not the case, if any such Oath or Vow be lawful,
we conceive it must be conditional, since the declared mind and Laws of God
are the boundaries which men may not step beyond; In priviledging their Kings,
if they lift them up by Oath higher then they ought to do, or invest them with
impunity whatever their demerits and mis deserts may be, even by destroying the
Nation habitually; the matter of that Oath we do insist is, res illicita, and
so it falls a pieces, but surely no man can be so irrational as to deny the
latent vein of a Vide Ames Cas. Cons. l. 4. cap. 22. Quest. 8.
condition running through every promise or Covenant where the contrary is not
expressed; if therefore we Covenanted for the preservation of his person
conditionally, it is all one as if we had not covenanted at all, the condition
proving apparently impossible and inconsistent with what we promised, streines
upon the promise and revokes it, if absolutely and in express terms excluding
all condition (as surely we never did) the Covenant were unlawful, setting man
up above Gods Ordinance, and so has no obligatory power at all in it, but
enough of this: seeing these Ministers in this page call the Kings death an
impertinency, we shall now be content to let it pass for one, after this
foreign velitation anent it, which we could have waved likewise very
contentedly had we not been charged, as having said little in our Plea to
render it approveable, besides fiat justitia ruat coelum.

They tell us, page 26. That they will only touch upon what we say is, and they
judge it not to be approved in order to the change of Government, yet here
(forgetting themselves surely) they bring in somewhat as introductory to it,
and charge the maintaining of it as approveable upon us, which we neither grant
properly introductory, but forinsecum quid, being not done by those who changed
the Government, nor yet that we touch upon it as approveable, for the contrary
might be seen in the page immediately preceding, where we presume that the
Parliament end Army might do some things in order to the change, which
themselves hold only justifyable upon the plea of necessity; this it seems
could put no stop to their fury, but they will needs have the Engagement (from
what cogency of Reason we cannot see) to draw in the Engagers to a necessary
approbation of the supposed miscarriage, viz. The breach of Parliaments
privileges, by forcing the House, excluding the Members, etc. for, that which
I promise to be true and faithful to, I must needs suppose and avow to be just
and good; but we say, that by this rule all our forefathers that swear
Allegiance to the Conqueror, must be supposed to avow his Authority just and
good, which these Gentlemen will implead, unless their consent made it so.

2 That the authority may be owned as just and good (the Lord himself owning
it) we have proved before, notwithstanding the means of attaining it, as to
man's acting in them be justly disavow'd and abhor^'d, (...). Chrysostom.
we can distinguish the Powers that be, from the sinfulness of their
introduction, therefore fupposing the truth of what follows; That our present
Rulers entrance into, and continuance in power, depends upon these two
con-causes, their own and the Armies force, what is this to the submitting
conscience, who knows of no other powers that be? (however these came to be)
and therefore concludes, If he resists the power, he resists the Ordinance of
God; unlawful introductions, neither taking away the being of the Powers, nor
dis-obliging conscience from obedience.

But let us examine their assertion a little, it is strange that the Parliament
and Army should act as they did, without the consent and concurrence of any men
besides themselves, if their Authority depends merely upon their own and the
Armies force it should needs be thus; but we can tell them of a great number
that concurred with, and consented to, what they did antecedentia, and of many
more that gave their subsequent consent (which was sufficient (they say) to
make Leah, Jacobs Wife) to the change of Government, and so espoused the
present Authority. Peradventure few did, or do consent to it in Lancashire,
what then? sure the Classis of Ministers there, is not like the Frogge, who
thought the Ditch he lived in was all the World, thus the fire-edge of their
assertion is taken off.

3 Suppose a man gets that which he has a right to, and keeps possession of it
by force, does this denude him of his title? Is it unjust in him after this
force, which before he used any force he had a just claim to? especially if it
be no otherwise recoverable, as it is usually with public liberties, where
Prerogative has once fastened its claws in them, making that its freehold or
inheritance which was originally in the peoples power to dispose of? now let us
mind you of a pretty Allusion; Two Sons of a loving Mother, hear her cry out
in her Bedchamber, as likely to be abused by vile Fellows, one of these Sons
strives to unlocke the door and cannot (the key having contracted a seven
years rust) the other unhinges, or breaks open the door, and comes in timely
to rescue her, is be justifiable, yea, or no? certainly though force he not the
arbitor of right, yet it follows not, that whatsoever is gotten by force is
vainly gotten, the possession of our powers may depend upon force, and their
cause be never the worse for all this.

3 It would be known what these men mean by that which they term their own
force; If the prevalency of our present Rulers Judgments, it is an allowable
force, but an improper one, if we indulge them not the liberty of Voting their
sense, they must be all (as the Lord Faulkland said of Finch) silent Speakers,
if we allow thus much to them, then what is this force still? A power or
competency for the managing and carrying on their Votes and Orders, if we
gratify them not with this force, the freest Parliament that ever shall sit in
England will be Vox and praeterea nihil, therefore*

4 It must needs be the Armies Force which adnuls, or makes our present
Authority base-borne, if any force do it, the former force (say they) could
give no just title, See the Declar^t. Febr. 17. 1648. page, 15. and Declarat.
March 17. 1648. page 22.
and without this could not avail to their advancement. But Sirs, if the Army
acted gratis or without command, in this heavy business of secluding some
Members, this being an extrinsicall force could not possibly denude the
remaining numbers of a right to act authoritatively; the Kings routing of five
Members did not break the House, and if five do it not, an hundred and fifty
will not; if the Army in this doing acted the Houses pleasure, or by the call
of the House they acted as servants, and is this that which unauthorized the
House? Suppose the Parliament had called Sir William Waller, Stapleton, or
Balfore, to their door, upon the refusal of many to swear the vow, 1643. and
had commanded them to seculde those who then were secluded for disgusting that
Engagement, and their renitency to the work of that season, would this have
vacated the power of that remnant? Surely no, the House it is granted may
prescribe conditions to it self, and the Members which refuse them are ipso
facto unmembred, so that the outing or secluding them is at most but aggravated
by the Soldiers interposition, it is not made another thing; such the case may
be therefore, as that men may enable themselves by force to act
anthoritatively, and possess themselves of Authority by force, and be
justified; such we insist was that our case in debate, but upon supposall it
was not so, we say again, that sinful means or introductories render not an
authority incapable of a conscientious man's owning; yet it should seem by what
follows, that those Ministers Boanerges like (out of a pretended zeal to the
Covenant) could willingly sound an alarm to the undertaking, -- Nimium placet
ipse Caton^ -- Si bellum civil placet -- Lucan.
viz. the dis-possession of our present Powers, a good mind they have that
War should be raised in behalf of those who remain yet Confessors for the
Covenant, in a certain sense, and they would not stick to call it, an (...).
Clem. Adm. ad Gentes.
holy War, what else means this Divinity of theirs? A present impediment or
privation of the act, creates not an impossibility in the thing, and so
dissolves no Oath; some the Covenant binds to counsel, command, pray, and
pay, others to hand force. for the remedying the breaches of it; half an eye
may see the drift of these insinuations. But it would be canvassed a little,
whether the Covenant gives them a call to endeavor the subverting our present
Parliament to redeem Parliament privileges, yea, or no? (this they must needs
plead for here, otherwise they beat the air, their argument is dissolute, and
does them no service at all) if it indeed gives them a Call, and Commissions
them to this work, viz. the breaking our present establishment, this
Commission is conveyed to them by some Mediativa, for the Covenant has War
in it but vertually, and therefore is no formal warrant for the raising of
Arms; now we cannot think that the Parliament (as we call it) will thus
mediate, or Commission any persons to such a Project, or that the King (as they
call him) can do it of himself, (unless he must be a Sultan, Mogull, or
Though in Scotland an Ahenian royalty serves his turn. (...). Syn. de regno.
absolute Lord over us) his Fathers Commissions of this nature during our late
Wars used not to be much owned in Lanc^shire, nor his Commands obeyed being
solitary, personal, and Anti-parliamentary, but peradventure they may expect a
call in its season from the Scots Kings Divan, or a confluence of those Attoms
which were swept out of the Commons House for making such a dust in the year,
1648. from some Juncto or other, of hot Covenanteirs, called by the name of a
Parliament; if so, they exclude these in place, and null their Commissions by
the heinous sin of our present Rulers, usurpation; yea, if ever they command
they must be enabled to it by some force too, still worse; if force when it
serves men's turns have not the happiness, as it usually has, to pass for
no force, or else to be adjudged Orthodox, necessary, and legal, could we but
see therefore how the Covenant-Commissions run, it is ten to one but we should
find them capable of some exceptions.

In the next Paragraph we find what we last spoke to verified (by the
Judgments of these Ministers touching a certain force upon the Scotch
Parliament when time was) viz. Force when it (...). Tatian: Assyr.
befriends us, and our interests, is no force; You tell us (say they) of a
force in Scotland, by which the Power there in being was brought in, which was
greater then ever our Parliament groaned under here; they say, It is not
congruous to conclude others by those presidents which we our selves will not
receive a bound from; cannot we mention such a thing then without concluding
others by that president? far be it from us to conclude this Classis by a
Scotch president, though we think it would go farther then a better argument,
and do more toward the concluding of very many amongst us, who doat upon
Scottish modes exceedingly, and hang upon the lips of their Mufti, and oricular
Consistorians; but these Gentlemen are not clear in the matter of the Fact
there; We tell them (say they) of a force, and truly we conceive they need not
be told any more of it; yet they do not believe that we can allege that the
Parliament there was called, chofen, and conveened, or has sat and acted
under, or been dismembered by any force, nor that we have heard of any actual
force upon any Parliament in Scotland, since the Covenant here was first taken.

Ans. These words are very warily packt together, here are creepes ^now if ever
they should be put to a start, and it concerns them in this point not to lie
too open, not an actual force, but what if we can tell them of a force which
wrought as strongly Per contactum virtualem, as that force of the rude
Apprentices did upon our Speaker in 1645? not upon any Parliament, what if it
was upon the Committee of safety? their Parliament contracted? will not this
serve the turn? this is a force in Scotland sure, and that is it we undertake
to tell them of; now to the thing in question, they cannot believe that there
was ever a forced or dismembered Parliament in Scotland since, etc. what think
they of the Parliament which sent Hambleton into Lancashire in England?
resolved into a Committee of safety? routed head and tail, branch and rash by
Arguile, with some other unauthoriz'd persons? This was the only National
Authority then in being, and if that be a force in Scotland which is accounted
so in England, out of doubt this was a force, the Notoreity whereof gives not
any latitude of dis-beleefe; true, this assembly was not dis-membred, it was
utterly unbodied, and the Parliament next surrogated, or succeeding, was chosen
by Rules, framed and prescribed by the prevailing Arguile and his Party,
countenanced and managed herein by the power of an English Army, that this was
not only a force, but a greater force then ever our Parliament groaned under,
will appear by this Parallel.

1 Scotland had none of those who were Members of the old Parliament (not
garbled, but routed) sitting and retaining their Authority after the force,
England had a Parliamentary number.

2 We called not in a Foreign Power to disband our Authority, but it is very
well known Scotland did.

3 Our Parliament Members which sat and acted, after the force, were all
chosen (by ancient rules) and that long before the force too, those in Scotland
who then stepped into the Seat of Authority, were not only chosen De novo, but
chosen by rules newly framed, the very framing of which was so arbitrary and
violent a fact, that in England those who had come in upon such a score should
never have been acknowledged the Ordinance of God.

4 Their routed Members were dis-enabled from sitting any more in their former
capacity, ours have the liberty to resume their places if they please, as many
have repented and done, so that the Scotch Authority does not only depend upon
a Force, but upon a greater Force then ours in England, (...).

Our in ference from this Force in Scotland, so useful to the Kirk there, and
so in-offensive, as it seems, to the Ministers in Lancashire and Cheshire that
they judge it no force, was this; Hence we conceive that Parliament privileges
may be sometimes looked at as formalities, rather then sacred and indispensible
rights, viz. when the greater number of Parliament men set themselves in a way
of utter ruining, rather then of building up and establishing a Nation on the
sure foundation of peace and righteousness. Certainly Sirs, if any Privileges
should enable a Parliament to ruin us, as good we sat content under the
mercies of a Lawlesse-Royall-Prerogative as of a Parliament so privileged, yet
this inference of ours the Gentlemen take too much to heart, that even --
(...). it stirs them out of measure, Theecr.
so that incontinently they fall into a fierce Parexysme. This gloss (say
they) calls not so much for an answer as for admiration and execration, and
ask, Is this all the reverence and force which we give to Vows,
Protestations, and Oaths? truly as little as they say we reverence them, we
yet reverence them as highly as the Kirk of Scotland does, which are sometimes
(we see) dispensed with in its respect to Parliament Privileges, we Covenant
for them as servants, not as Masters to the Public good, though they be not
such light formalities but they may be lawfully Covenanted for; what is a
sacred thing in its place, becomes a shadow if mis-plac'd, and unduly
preferred, it may be Sacrilege to pursue that, which zeal and duty well
informed let go, as inconfistent with what is most sacred; the Scots allow of
a subordination in the matters of the most solemn Covenant (as we showed in
our Plea) and subordinates, we know are in a sense formalities, dispensable
withal, surely if set in balance with the more sacred and superior ends
encovenanted for; so are Parliament Privileges (though in themselves grave and
grand realities) if they stand in competition, or be compared with reformation,
public liberty, and safety, those SANCTA SANCTORUM of the Covenant. And now
let wise men judge whether this inference or gloss of ours (as the Ministers
call it) be such an execrable heinous one, as they would render it, and whether
it be a dangerlesse and religionlesse excuse of the Armies force?

1 Is there danger in preferring public good, before the privileges of any
particular men, or any sort of men whatsoever? this would implead not only the
Armies force, but also the Selfe-denying Ordinance, Sirs.

2 Religion lets us not know to give flattering titles to men, Job 32.21, 22.
much less to indulge them with undue Seraphicall inrespective privileges,
this is real and transcendent adulation; how comes it to be religionlesse
then, to give public weal and safety an higher room in our Covenant, then
Parliament Privileges? every public spirit savours such ir-religion as this,
Covenants are conservatories of these Privileges, whiles improved to public
service, otherwise men might ruin a Nation cum privilegio, and plead Covenant
for their justification; but this is prevented by that limitation in our
Solemn League and Covenant, viz. in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom; This we allege in answer to that
question of these Ministers, whother there be such a condition (as we speak
to) reserved out of the covenanted preservation of Parliament privileges yea
or no? The letter of the Covenant notes out this reservation or condition,
providing for Parliament Privileges as things subordinate and sub-servant to
Religion and Liberty; but (say they) Do we find any where in Scripture that
subjects are dis-engaged from subjection to, and maintaining of the rights, or
the Authorities lawfully placed over them in case of their maeleadministration?

Ans. There were many such texts of Scripture to be found eight or nine years
ago, when men cried out, To thy tents O Israel, and Ministers cried, Curse ye
Meroz, etc. Subjection was not with drawn from King Charles, nor Arms raised
against him, and he beaten from one place to another without some Scripture
warrant, but if men vomit up their principles and build again what they
destroyed, they are to be dealt with upon another score.

2 There are some rights or particular privileges belonging to Magistrates in
all constitutions (we conceive) which may undergo a dominution yea be
pessundated, Salva authoritate, personal rights may at some feasons interfer
with common safety and peace, which authority never does, therefore in the
question propounded there is fallacia compositionis. But

3 It Is a thorny solemn point, and we dare not rush on unheedily in it, let the
grave and bold Lapinian lead us the way, in his Treatise touching peoples
withdrawing subjection from their King, or otherwise called the Sovereign
power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, he thus expresses himself, it can hardly
seem probable, much less credible, that any Negari non potest quin populus
aliquis necessitate coactus possit se vendere Regi, ut omnes sint pl^ne servi
ipsius, Genesis 47.23. sed neque hoc unquam praesumi debet, quando non est
manifestum, quia contra mores est, and contra naturae inclinationem, neque
licite honesteve ab ullo principe quaeri potest, quia ejus officium est
communem utilitatem populi praecipue spectare; neque denique civitas aut
politia esset quae illum in modum constitueretur, sed herile dominium and
servitium monstrosum. Ames. cas. consc. lib. 5. cap. 25.
free people whatsoever, when they voluntarily at first encorporated themselves
into a Kingdom, or set up an elective or hereditary King over them, would so
absolutely resign up their sovereign, popular, original authority, power and
liberty to their Kings, etc. as to give them an absolute irrevocable,
uncontrolable supremacy over them, superior to, irrestrainable, irresistible,
or unalterable by their own primitive, inherent, national sovereignty, out of
which their regal power was derived, for this had been to make the creator in
ferior to the creature, etc. a most brutish, sottish, inconsiderate, rash
action, not once to be imagined of any people, and had our Ancestors, or any
other nations when they first erected Kings, and instituted Kingly government,
been asked this question, whether they meant thereby to transfer all their
National Authority, Power, and Privileges so far over to their Kings, etc. as
not still to reserve the supremest power and jurisdiction to themselves to
direct, limit, restrain, their Princes supremacy, and the exorbitant abuses of
it, when they should see just cause; or so, as not to be able ever after TO
ALTER or diminish this form of Government upon any occasion whatsoever? or if
their Kings should turn professed Tyrants, etc. patiently to submit themselves
to their destructive proceedings without any restraint of them, or calling them
to account for those gross irregularities? I make no question but they would
have jointly answered that they had never any imagination to erect such an
absolute irresistible unlimited Monarchy, or plain Tyranny over them, and that
they ever intended to receive the absolute original sovereign jurisdiction in
themselves, as their native hereditary Privilege which they never meant to
divest themselves of.

Well therefore, presuming the truth of this doctrine, as being true yesterday,
and coming from the pen of one so Orthodox; and which is more, a
Non-Subscriber, a Martyr for the Cause of the Covenant (as they call it) we
shall add but little, the maladministration of Monarchical authority may be
such, says Mr. Prynne as that it may dis-ingage duty-bound Subjects from
submission, and make them resume their own native original sovereignty; and
if this hold true against Kingly power and supremacy, it holds true against
power in any other form whatsoever, though lawfully placed over a people: in a
word, if that sovereignty or Power concredited by a Nation to any person or
persons as Trustees, be forfeitable (as our abovenamed author will affirm and
avow) then there may be such a thing as a dis-ingagement from subjection in the
people, so far as any authority is limited, it is resistible. (This we dare tie
our selves to make good) and then the case is clear, the dissolution of
subjection necessarily follows, but if our supposition should prove
groundless, and our assertion weak, if Power or Authority be an unforfeitable
freehold, and absolutely irresistible all our laws for Public Safety,
Advantage and Freedom, which any way tie the hands of our Rulers, are mere
mock-guardians of property, and most perfect nullities; yea, we may then write
folly upon the very wisdom of our Progenitors, their capitulations, and taking
security from Princes and Magistrates for their good behavior by any Parchment
devices, this would be but ridiculous vanity, if the persons empowred or
entrusted may not be withstood in their encroachments, exorbitances and
wretched expilations, wherewith they exercise the people under them: Yea, if
they may not be unpowred, as the late King was some years before he dyed, in
case they persist in a ruining way; He (viz. the Magistrate) is the minister of
God to thee for good, says the Apostle, And if he ministers to our ruin,
whose vicegerent is he in that ministration? Must we needs be held under the
bond of duty, notwithstanding he thus ministers? yea, and that habitually and
inflexibly too? our paying Custom, Honor, Tribute, is enforced (as we have
noted before) from the Magistrates Ministering to our good, and if this
argument be taken away, his claim to subjection is a poor seeble thing.

Thus we have reinforced our Arguments for engaging with the present Authority
over us, and past the brow of the hill, the heat of the Encounter, it remains
only that we see how their Reserves against engaging will stand the dispute. We
examined the validity of these in our Plea, to that purpose they are urged
against us.

One of them, viz. The Oath of Allegiance we found had no life in it, and with
the other, viz. the Covenant after some short debate we parted friends as we
met. But these men putting life into the one, and emnity into the other against
us, press them into their service a new, and give them the advantage of a full
blow at the Engagement, leaving it not any shift or guard at all to save it
self by, not any salve invented (as they say) by us to clude the force of
these Oaths. Well,

First, Touching the Oath of Allegiance, We do still insist, that the ground of
it is our protection, and that it binds us not but to our actual protectors
successively. They acknowledge That Protection is a secondary ground of
Allegiance, and consequently of the Oath, But contend that Gods ordination and
image imprinted upon the Magistrate as his deputed Vicegerent: is the first
and chief ground.

Answer, What if this be granted? their advantage against us will not be much
greatned, in applying these notions to our present purpose, we ask, Where is
that Magistrate, that bears this image spoken of? is he in being amongst us or
not? And how shall we know this? Why, do we receive due and legal protection?
and by whose mediation is it conveyed to us? Now by satisfying our selves in
these last Queries, we come to a resolution in the two former; We cannot
separate Gods Ordination of any person or power from that which is the very
office and end of that power, nor understand the impression of his image any
where without some argument of it. Feign would we see some Rules that may
instruct and enable us to judge of Gods ordinance, or help us to find it out,
when there is no ministry for a peoples good: We are utterly to seek how to
discern this image they speak of, without its shining forth upon us by
protective emanations; it is to little purpose to tell us of a man in the clouds,
a deputed vice-gerency, if we have no feeling at all of its activity, as to our
well-being, nor see any thing like the beamings forth of Gods image upon us in
goodness and righteousness.

Metaphysicall Magistracy is a thing we cannot skill of, and the case which
these Divines put, viz. Of Subjects rising up in arms and dis-inabling the
Magistrate from protecting them (and so freeing themselves from Allegiance)
helps us very little in the business, it is a thing begged of us, not following
upon our Principles, that a people in so doing discharge themselves of the debt
of Allegiance, if they fall under the Magistrates captivating power, in this
case they loose the benefit of Subjects, we affirm, but not that the
Magistrate looses his title to their Allegiance, because they put from
themselves his supposed Protection, which if they may have it, is all one to
conscience as if they had it: But now they must show us how we may come by
protection from any other powers then those that are over us, or else they say
nothing to our case? nor convince us that the debt of our Allegiance is due to
any other, but those to whom we pay it, notwithstanding the Oath urged against
us; it is not any man's pretended power or obligation to protect us, that can be
satisfaction to us in the condition we now are; we say, That people is in
danger to be very miserable, whose well fare is no otherwise secured then by a
Kings obligation to protect them. In Answer whereto instead of showing us the
compleatnesse of this provision for a peoples safety, they shoot at Rovers, and
tell us that by the Oath of Allegiance, the King not the people is secured.
Truly we never thought that this Oath was provided for the peoples security,
but being told that the Magistrates obligation to protect us, is all the
provision God has made for the securing our properties, liberties and lives,
this we impugn, and there may be other security for our welfare, though the
Oath of Allegiance be none of it.

Secondly, they retort upon us, miserable is that Prince, or that Power, whose
title to Allegiance depends upon his actual protection, etc. true, if they
intend to be Nero's, Caligula's, Heliogabula's men of wildfire spirits, who (
L. Catelina in Senatu, M. Cicerone incendium ab ipso incitatum dicente; sentio,
inquit, and quidem illud si aqua non potuero, ruina extinguam. Val. Max. e
Sallust. (...), etc. Syn. See Prove. 16.12 20.28.31.3. Prove. 29.14.
Cataline-like) care not to sacrifice Nations at the Altar of their ambition
and tyranny; if their aims be to make their Houses great, and to that end do
trample upon the poor, if they leave off to do Judgment, and are as roaring
Lions, and ranging Bears, pity but they should be miserable, but if their
deportment be as becomes Gods Vicegerent, their Titles are well enough
secured, the Throne shall be established by righteousness, shall thou reign
because thou closest thy self in Cedar? (says the Lord to Jehoiakim) did not
thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well
with him? what better security can be given to Princes then this? what
destroys their Title and right in Scripture account, but unrighteousness,
tyranny, and wickedness, Ezekiel. 21.25.27? and thou profaine wicked Prince of
Israel, whose day is come when iniquity shall have an end; thus says the Lord
God, remove the Diadem, etc. I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it
shall be no more until he come WHOSE RIGHT it is, and to him I will give it.

Kings (say we) have got a knack to dis-oblige themselves, etc. but say they,
It Is impossible they should be dis-obliged in conscience, and yet remain
Kings, and for fact how can they do it?

Ans. 1. Did not the late King profess, that he could not in Conscience yield
to many things which the Parliament declared it his duty to grant? as the
abolition of Episcopacy, Litturgy, the punishing of Delinquents? etc. but
perhaps they will say, being thus dis-oblig'd of his duty, in Conscience he
remained nothing, if so (as they seem plainly to suggest) we shall kiss their
lips for giving so right an answer.

2 What de facto Kings have lately done in this point, Europe's sad experience
shall speak, where Laws have been too short Beds for Monarchs to stretch
themselves upon, and scarcely in any corner is there a ragge of freedom left
the Commons, unless empty formalities (such as, will you have this man reign
over you) pass for freedom indeed, and as little security, unless written
Laws will secure them, which is all the defense and shelter we see these
Ministers allow them; but the Parliament was more favorable and good when time
was, Declarat. March 4. 1647.
and more Orthodox in our Judgments. We shall offer to the consideration of
all Englishmen (say they) that however they may please themselves with their
Magna Charta, their Courts of Justice, high Court of Parliament, etc. all this
signifiesnothing, etc. Ridiculous are those Laws which may be violated by
force, and by force shall not be defended, etc.

3 Their complaint of Subjects dis-obliging themselves is a wide retortion,
this they say, many now do (for their pleasure and advantage) but, such a
Buskin will fit any leg, we believe that if ever these men dis-obey'd the
late Kings personal commands, or dis-own'd his Warrants in Cheshire, etc.
other men have said as much of them as now they say of others, so that for
their advantage they could dis-oblige themselves of Allegiance too, if to tell
them so was to prove it; we discharge our selves of no homage due to any set
over us by God, any that afford us, or in likeli-hood may afford us quiet and
legal protection, but because we refuse to espouse the Scots Kings quarrel
for Dominion and Lordship here, which was to put our Sickle into another man's
Harvest, therefore they tell us, we dis-oblige our selves, etc. But content
your selves Sirs, for until you can persuade us, that the Powers which ARE NOT
are ordained of God, (...).

4 The next thing they find themselves agriev'd withal, and think good to
take notice of is, our apprehension touching the Coalition, or the mean of a
People and their Rulers closing together; we conceive in this transaction a
mutual stipulation betwixt Magistrate and people, they say, it is not always
mutual, but since they grant that it is so with us in England in a sense,
which we take to be our sense, we shall proceed to examine their exceptions
against that rule, which we assumed withal as a safe and true one, viz. That
if he who promises mutually will not perform what he promises, our
obligation is not binding, this (say they) is no true rule.

1 First, Because what the Prince and people promise or swear to each other,
they were bound to by the Law of God and Nature before such Oaths; This they
dictate to us, telling us it is evident, but we see no such thing; sure we are
it is none of those principles that are (...) carrying their evidence in
themselves, neither do they offer us any proof of it. Besides this, in our
case (say they) this is evident by the constitution, Law, and continual
practice of the Kingdom, which to us is ignotum per ignotius, and did we know
it, it would not sway much with us, unless we could come acquainted with the
(...) as well as the (...) thereof, yet we shall be content to suppose it; well
therefore, be it so, Subjects cannot be conceived bound without all condition.
It Is presumed surely that they shall receive protection if they stand bound,
for the Magistrates debt is every whit as due as the peoples, and if so, our
Oath cannot render that absolute which before was but conditional, unless in
the letter of it, it excepts against all condition; let us hear their other
Argument.

2 Secondly (say they) Because the Covenants between Prince and people are
absolute and irrespective, they are not as two parts of one and the same
convention or Covenant, they make not one Indenture interchangeably sealed on
both sides, etc. How prove they this? why forsooth, first, because they swear
at several times, a proper Argument to prove an Independent Covenant, may not
many men promise the same thing under a condition, and yet tie themselves to it
by Oath, some at one time, some at another, and he to whom the promise is made
engage himself at a distinct time too, to all those who shall so swear?
people cannot be so formal and punctual in indenting with their Princes as
they may be one with another, yet this makes nothing against the cogent equity
and necessity of a Relative covenant. Secondly, because they swear to perform
a Moral duty of the fifth Commandment; here it is presumed that all Moral
duties are to be performed ir-respectively, and without condition; we deny this
latent proposition, we conceive a debt of Moral duties as justly due and
payable from us, to those who are over us in the Lord, as to our Civil Rulers,
yet we are not tied to pay it but upon condition, viz. of their labor amongst
us, or for their works sake, 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17. in case our
Shepherds be Idol Shepherds, is their claim to maintenance and esteem from
us valid? we are told the contrary by a Dr. Ames. Haec non debentur ratione
tituli, sed propter ordinationem divinam, and operam impensam; idcireo neque
hominum creaturis dedeptur neq, prorsus indignis. Cas. consc. li. 5. c. 24.
faithful Shepherd, and we think there are Idol Shepherds of two sorts, viz.
Politic or Genes. 49.24. Psalm. 78.71, 72. Zech. 11.8.17. Thus the Graecians
entitle their Prince, or Ruler, (...), the Peoples Shepbraid.
Magisteriall, as well as Ecclesiastic, or Ministerial. Time was when some of
these Ministers of Cheshire and Lancashire accounted disobedience a Moral duty,
viz. when the late King was beside himself, or under an incapacity of
commanding; this makes us think that (whatever they here speak) they never
swear irrespective allegiance. It somewhat startled us to see them parallel
Allegiance with conjugall duties, and to offer it as the proof of their
argument, making the relations betwixt Prince and People, as infringible as the
relation betwixt Man and Wife, we presently expected that they should prove
Magistrates and their people to be one flesh, as they twain are, but failing
in our expectations, we shall let the lame allusion go, and tell them in
answer to what follows, that, Non entis nulla sunt accidentia, the King of
Scotland never promised any thing to us, nor was called so to do that we know
of, and therefore cannot be said to refuse performance; if this rule that we
have vindicated dis-obliged us from Allegiance to the Father, the Sons claim
to Allegiance, or his putting in for it shall not much trouble us.

Next, they lift up their hands to cripple an Argument, which (they say) is
lamely propounded, viz. the formal cause of a promissary Oath ceasing, the
Obligation it self cease, but the formal cause of Allegiance is protection,
therefore we conceive our selves loosed from Allegiance, according to that
Oath, its correlate and foundation being taken away, etc.

Here they cannot see our reason for want of Logic, and quote Dr. Saunderson
(their familiar in this point) to prove the formal cause of an Oath to be the
invocation of Gods Name; It is not a Punctillio, or formality of Logic shall
break them and us if reason do not, they might easily have seen what we
meant by the formal cause of that Oath, viz. the foundation or reason of it,
and that this is proper speaking, yea and Logical too; Dr. Ames, and old
Henderson, quoted by us in that very Page and point, will maintain, so that if
we may be admitted to take Causa formalis for that which we do, and may take
it, their reasons from the relation betwixt forma and formatum, to invalidate
our assertion do them very little service; and something we could bring out of
Dr. Saundersons Prelections which would not please their Worships neither very
well in the application.

But we are told, It Is a wide oversight to say that the formal cause of
Allegiance is protection; and we tell them again, that we are not tentativi
Dialectici, pickeering Logicians, neither do we dispute or contend about
formalities, it suffices us if the reason or foundation of Allegiance be
protection, this is it which we speak to, and this they speak nothing
against, when they prove Allegiance to be due where protection neither is, nor
may be had, or which is all one, where the Magistrate is no Minister of God to
a people for good, and so indeed no Magistrate, then we shall acknowledge that
they enervate our reason, till then they do but scratch the face of our
Logic, and in so doing, Job 15.2.
utter vain knowledge, and fill their bellies with the East Wind, which wise
men should not do.

The Northern Subscribers go on thus; When we swear homage to our Lord and
Superior, who afterward cease to be so, the obligation cease; can this
Oath bind us now our Superior is not? however taken away by might or right,
Caveat actor. The Northern Non-subscribers reply thus; That the Party sworn
to is not, or that his superiority is not, we neither of our selves see reason
to judge, nor in these Authors find we any argument to prove.

Ans. 1. It seems then that they have sworn Allegiance to another since the
King was taken away, for sure we are be is not, and his Superiority is not; if
so, Valeat quoad valere potest.

2 Because they complain for want of Arguments to prove the dis-obligation of
this Oath, or that our Liege Lords Superiority is expired, we shall direct them
to one which they went round about, and yet it seems had not the good hap to
light on, and it is this: If we swear Homage to the Kings Successors, they
must either succeed him before we can pay or perform it, else our Oath ties us
to his Children, or Heirs while he lives, as well and fully as when he is
dead, etc. This they will not aver, therefore failor in succession proves the
expiration of the supposed Superiority, and renders the Oath dis-obliging.

But how comes the expiration of the interest of our late Kings Children about?
First, mere absence out of the Realm (say they) cannot debar his title who
is next Heir to the Crown, our English Chronicles gives us many presidents of
Princes coming to the Crown by the death of their respective Predecessors,
who (though absent at the commencing of their title, were acknowledged, and
their regnancies embraced during their absence, as Edward the first for
instance, etc.

Ans. But they should have instanced in one who was not acknowledged, and had
Allegiance paid him though his regancy were not embraced, and that would suite
our case indeed, this which they allege proves that Edward the first did de
facto succeed Henry the third, notwithstanding his absence, etc. but they
should prove that Charles Stuart which now it does de facto succeed Charles
that was in his Government, notwithstanding his absence from us, (and then as
we told them) we shall yield our Allegiance due; but,

Secondly, no act of them that possess the place of power, they insist, can
put an end to the title and being of that Sovereignty sworn to in this Oath,
as to conscience; this they tell us is largely argued in their first part.

Ans. 1. Whether they could of Right put an end to that Sovereignty or no,
concerns us very little, unless by the Engagement we should be drawn to a
participation in the act (which they neither prove in the first nor second part
of their Discourse) certain it is that they have done it, and consequently
either these Gentlemen's Allegiance is expired, or else if they continue to pay
it, and pay it not to the Powers that be, they pay it to a Non ens, or an
Jshbosheth, a King without a Kingdom.

2 We are so fully persuaded of their power and competency to dis-mantle, and
lay aside King-ship, so fully instructed in their sufficiency who have done it,
that if engaging be a guarding the door, that none enter into that Office more
(as they insinuate) we dare stand in that door to guard our present Rulers,
and in so doing, think our Allegiance duly paid. We never swear Allegiance to
Kingly Power, but to our Royal Protectours, neither can we be termed his Liege
people, who is not actually our Liege Lord.

Touching that Maxim, viz. The King cannot dye, we thus express our
dis-relish; A King dethroned is dead in Law, and a King laid aside, or dead,
dies in Law; otherwise there could be no such thing as an Inter-regnum, etc.
but we are told hereupon, that such as the laying aside of a King is, such is
the inter-regnum which happens by that means, viz. it is de facto, and not of
right, and therefore alters not at all the point of title or property, when you
make good and lawful the present laying aside, then we shall embrace the
inter-regnum.

Ans. 1. We affirm not that there is an inter-regnum now, and never may we
have more cause to call it so, nor are they desired to own the present
Authority as a Chas'me or intervall of regal power, a Commonwealth sounds as
well as a Kingdom every whit, and may we live under a Democracy we shall never
much lust after Faelicitatem ego sic definio, reditum uniuscujusque rei ad suum
principium. Mirand. Heptap.
the happiness of a Monarchy again; we know that the kinds of (...). Diog.
Laert. in Plat.
Magistracy are humane Creature for the Creators glory, one of them as lawful
as another, and that successive Royalty is next of kin to tyranny; neither do
we believe any of the Royal Progeny to be such Du Plessis progres. 62. ex Abb.
Urspurg.
Zisca's that we should deem our selves Orphans without them.

2 We told them in our Plea that the Parliaments Declaration satisfied us
touching the equity, and necessity of the change of Government amongst us, we
judge it needless and mis-becomming us to meddle any further then we have
done, What can the man do (says Solomon) that comes after the King? Eccles.
2.12. yet we trust that ere long we shall see their cause pleaded better, and
far more convincingly then they themselves have pleaded it: But to go on; We
ever thought the Kings Coronation to be his actual investiture with power,
etc. this the Ministers say was but a Complement, then say we, his Coronation
Oath was no more, and thus it seems we were complemented into Slavery; but
Sirs, from the beginning it was not so, all the antiquity in Bodley's Library
will attest this, yet being they so please, let it pass for a complement now,
since we are like to have no more such fooling or complementing amongst us,
till Vrsa Major, and Vrsa Minor meet together.

Lastly, Page 22.
If any of the Kings Children do de facto succeed him as King (say we) or
Heir his Power, we shall be their Liege people, but for a succession DE JVRE,
as we are made no Judges of any such thing; so, etc.

Hence the Replyers draw mickle advantage, and sugaciously redargue us of
sinning against Conscience, in keeping our Allegiance we know not from whom, If
we be the Liege People of any of them upon such a succession as you express
(say they) is it because your Allegiance and Oath would bind you to it?
Assuming this as granted, they conclude from it, that the Oath of Allegiance is
acknowledged in force by us.

Ans. 1. In case any of the late Kings Children should de facto succeed, they
will be then the powers that are, their regnancies being embraced by our
representatives would create them a title to our Allegiance, till then their
claims (if ever they had jus ad rem) are dead as dead can be, that Sovereignty
to which they pretend, having lain in the Grave several years already.

2 It Is none of our Callings to judge of that succession de jure, to which any
great ones of the world may pretend for rule over us, neither does the Lord put
submitting Consciences upon such an Inquest, as we conceive; It Is not morally
possible, says one, for private men to have a true insight into such a
business, because all claims amongst men depend upon the concurrence of many
circumstances which in the way of justice give to one, and take away from
another, a right to the same; the incidences of which circumstances, changing
the nature of rights and claims to places, private men cannot possibly in
their ordinary way (wherein they are bound to stand, and walk) come to any
certain knowledge of; and consequently such rights cannot be supposed to fall
under their Umpirage. But waving this Plea at present, (as being a reserve
whereof we stand in no great need) these two particulars (the sum of what we
have dogmatiz'd in this point) are to us clear as the day.

1 The foundation or reason of our Allegiance as payable to Kings or Queens of
England cease; we receiving protection from no such persons

2 The Relativum formale of that Oath is extinct, that Sovereignty under which
the Oath was exacted, being devolved into their hands who neither own the name
nor thing of Kingship.

Hence we conclude our selves alleviated and assoil'd of its obligation,
unless by that Oath we stand bound to make a King or a Queen to heir our
Allegiance, which design, the letter of the Oath is no whit guilty of forcing
upon us.

Now in the last place we must re-examine how wonderfully the Covenant
befriends these Royalists, That (...) behind.
and whether Monarchy, the Goard they are so fond of, grow in this Garden or
no? formerly when this Covenant was entered into, Monarchical power humbled,
and prostituted, cried out thus: Call me no more Naomi, Ruth. 1.20.
but call me Mara, and Covenanters were then its bitterest enemies, how come
they now so passionately to court this Helena, and make the Covenant serve for
a Spokesman? is Monarchy another thing, or is there a fresh gloss now upon
neglected Royalty? Juven.
surely -- Facies non uxor amatur; well, we shall not ask why Spaniels when
they are beaten fawn upon us? but how the Covenant comes to strike up a Match
betwixt Presbytery and Monarchy? if it provides indispencably for Kingly
Government in the letter of it, we are satisfied; but we see these Gentlemen
quit the letter, and retire to the preface of it, certainly Sirs, Ad^triarios
deventam est, you are shrewly thrust at, if none of the Covenants Articles will
stand by you, but you must needs fall unless the Preface lend you an hand,
it is a pretty kind of argument this; The Kings Posterity is mentioned in the
Preface, ergo Kingly Government is provided for in the Covenant, or that which
is to be seen in never an Article of the Covenant, yet must needs be there,
because something which sounds like it is in the Preface. How could the honor
and happiness of his Majesty's Posterity be before our eyes in Covenanting
(say they) if they were no where included in, or provided for, by the Covenant?
Now instead of asking this question, they should have argued thus, viz. the
happiness of the Kings Posterity is provided for in such or such an Article,
therefore its certainly covenanted for; and this would have stricken us stone
dead; we think the Articles of the Covenant are the Covenant, and the Preface
only an introductory, no essential part of it, the frame thereof (being only
declaratory of the Covenanters then conceptions, and resolutions) not running
like an Obligation (as the Covenant Articles do) inforceth to a grant of this;
but since we are put upon answering an Interrogatory instead of an Argument,
this shall be said to their question.

1 It is not necessary that whatever men have before their eyes in Covenanting
(especially when the subject is Arbytrary) should be provided for, or included
formally in their Covenant; put case a man be highly injured by some unworthy
person, and having him under his power, promises to deal as favorably with
him as may be, out of respect to his Family and Posterity, because if he falls
they are like to fall too; now though the Promiser has before his eyes, the
happiness and welfare of his Posterity, in whose behalf he makes the promise,
yet his Posterity is not formally and expressly concluded, interessed in, or
provided for, by that his promise.

2 Let us grant for this once, that provision is made by the Covenant for the
honor and happiness of the Kings posterity, it cannot hence follow (which is
the point in question) that Monarchy comes within the compass of the Covenant,
or that it makes provision for the everlastingnesse of Kingly Government, for
the Kings Posterity or Children may be both honorable and happy, and yet
neither Kings nor Queens.

3 But in case provision be made for King-ship by the Covenant, yet this
provision cannot be deemed absolute, (...) Medit. on the Covenant.
but conditional, so the late Kings person, and personal Authority were
provided for, and yet both of them now laid in the dust; Salvo foedere
Nationali, that clause in the preservation of Religion, etc. which the King
said, was of a dangerous limitation as to his Person, must be acknowledged of
as dangerous a limitation as to King-ship, the being whereof maybe supposed as
much inconsistent with Religion, Liberty, etc. as the late Kings personal
safety, so that still we are where we were.

The Preface thus shrinking from the service it was called to, one help at maw
they have yet left, and that is the Declaration of April, 1646, which without
fail will make the Covenant open its mealie, mouth, and speak aloud for
Monarchy; but as we insisted in our Plea, so we do still, that we are not
bound by the Covenant to maintain any thing besides the letter, and obvious
sense of it, it being unreasonable to fasten any Post-nate, or occasional
Declarations upon men's Consciences in this case. Here these Ministers find out
two contradictions (sure they are very full of contradictions Ictericis
quibusdam lutca videntur omnia, item vertiginosis omnia circumagi -- cui amarer
in lingua est, amara videnter omnia. Seal. Exercis. 265.
within, that they thus pluck the straitest lines without to make them lie
cross) but these aeriall crosses vanish like Antipherons Image, which had a
being merely in his fancy. First, say they, This seems to us not only to
cross what the Commons in their Declaration (April 17. 1646.) assume to them
at their peculiar, viz. That the Covenant in case of any doubt arising, is only
to be expounded by them, by whose authority it was settled in this Kingdom.

Ans. 1. What makes this to the weakening of our Position? We suppose that the
sense of the Commons expounding the Covenant otherwise then the Letter will
bear, may without presumption be deemed unreasonable, and their exposition,
(especially if it be postnate) unreasonably imposed upon the Consciences of
Covenantiers, will these Ministers judge themselves reasonably bound by any men's
sense, when in Conscience they conclude it not the Covenant sense? we conceive
no, because

2 They will not admit the present sense of our Commons touching the Covenant,
notwithstanding they are as authentic Interpreters of it as any we know, or as
any they tell us of.

Secondly, We contradict our selves (page 18.) where for the sense of this very
clause (say they) you will not leave men to their own judgment of the Letter,
but refer it to the Parliament to unfold it. Deal ingeniously Sirs, did we
so? we speak indeed there to this purpose, viz. That we account not our selves
but the House of Commons competent Judges, whether the Kings Person and
authority could have been preserved, and the maine ends of the Covenant
obtained, yea, or no? Is this to allow them a power, or latitude of binding
men's consciences to what sense of the Covenant they please by a postnate
Declaration? Here is an unpardonable sailing in this deduction, we speak
nothing at all in that place touching the sense of the Covenant, our words are
these: If the Kings preservation was conditional, we must leave it to the
determination of those who are chosen to judge, and conclude what is consistent
with our Liberties, and what not, whether the things mainely Covenanted for, or
the condition of the Covenant could have been obtained, and preserved, with the
preservation of the Kings Person, yea, or no? And now Sirs,

Let the world know upon your second thoughts, whether in these words by our
own confession, we can be concluded to judge it reasonable that the Parliament
should fasten postnate, and occasional declarations upon men's consciences
touching the sense of the Covenant? we conceive you will find your selves
heavenly wide and besides the book in raising the inference, that which
follows therefore in these authors (instead of an answer to what we aver,
touching the alterable nature of Declarations) is full as wide from the
business they had to speak to, they say the sense of an Oath, or Covenant is
unalterable, and we say the letter of the Covenant (no after-declaration) makes
that sense out to us, here is no clashing betwixt these propositions: Therefore
hastening toward a conclusion, we shall briefly vindicate, what we sub-joyned
in our Plea, for the clearing our Averment touching the alterablenesse of that
Declaration 1646. viz. The obligation of a promise must needs cease, if the
state of things and persons be so altered, as that in the judgment of wise
men, those who promised or declared ought, cannot be thought to have willed the
including such or such an event in the promise: Here, say they, is a little
missing the mark.

Answer, Not of the mark we aimed at, the frame of that objection, to which,
in our Plea we undertook a reply, forcing us to speak both to the Parliaments
interpretation of the Covenant in reference to Kingly power, and likewise to
their Promise, that they would maintain the government of the Nation, by King,
Lords, and Commons, as to the former of these, we affirm, that no postnate
interpretation (that may be supposed to have more or less in it then the
letter of a Covenant) can be reasonably imposed upon the conscience, neither do
we see cause to judge that the Parliament by their above named Declaration
intended to elucidate or interpret the letter of the Covenant. To the latter,
we say, that although such and such things were declared for, yet declarations
(as they here acknowledge) are alterable pro re nata and therefore are of no
perpetual obligation.

Let us hear what they say, to our reason or evidence brought to prove this,
viz. The obligation of a promise must needs cease, if the state of things and
persons be, etc. after a distinction premised (to very little purpose) about
Touching their instance in the case of the Gibeonites, Jos. 9. see Ames Cas.
consc. l. 4. cap. 22. Quest. 9.
particular and general willing the inclusion of an event in any promise, they
come to this conclusion Such events as may make the performing of the promise a
sin in the Promiser, infringe the obligation, these in the judgments of wise
men are deemed to be excluded to the Promiser, but the event brought in by us,
as falling out in the Parliaments case, viz. The Kings implacability and
inexoriblenesse (as we grossly enough style it) they say, is not to be ranged
amongst events of that nature, they might have performed their promise without
sin, and it seems they did intend to include the Kings persistency (thus
they mollify our expression) not excepting against it, after several of those
addresses made to him, diverse of them before the Covenant, most of them before
the Declaration, April 17. 1646. so that the greatest part of his persistency
was precedent to the making some of those promises, etc.

Ans. 1. If after all their experience had of the Kings presistency in a
ruining way, and all their hopes of bowing him to a compliance with their just
desires, extinct, the House of Lords by their delays and Negatives in matters
of highest moment making it appear too, that they drew the same way with him;
if after these sad experiences the Parliament had sacrificed the peace and
welfare of the Nation to the interests of King and Lords, we cannot but deem
it had been a very sinful thing, a betraying their trust, a ruining the
Nation, a giving us up to a seven-times worse slavery then at their first
convention they found us in; and we can see nothing here alleged by these
Divines, though we look longly for it, to persuade us of the contrary; they
only say, it had not been matter of sin in the Commons to have made good that
Declaration of which we are speaking, but for this we want evidence.

2 The Kings persistency in his way was that very event which put the Commons
out of a capacity or possibility of serving the Public with his advancement,
an event to be wondered at by all wise men; Declar. of. March 17. 1648.
and therefore in the judgments of wise men not includible in the promise: The
Commons themselves tell us, that upon their making that Declaration they were
confident the King would have conformed himself to the desires of his people
in Parliament, and that the Peers who remained with the Parliament would have
been a great cause of his so doing, and therefore certainly they intended not
to include his presistency, or the House of Lords declining the public cause
in their promise, Si aliquid incautius aliquem j^^^sse contigerit quod
observatum inpejore^ vergat exitum illud salubri consilio mutandum noverimus,
etc. Soter. Epist. ad Episc. Ital. Charsum. Council. Ann. 163 Council. Toler. 8.
Can. 2.
we conceive they were not bound at that instant expressly to except these
events, they showed what their exception was, very reasonably when (after all
their fruitless endeavors to win the King) they voted no more addresses to
him; peradventure this vote is interpreted one of the Parliaments swervings
from their principles which these Ministers mind us of, but we cannot so judge
of it, that principle which respects the Kings Person and Authority, having an
express condition joined with it, ever since the Covenant was entr^d into,
therefore, for ought we know, they might have voted no more addresses sooner
then they did, that famous and safe limitation saving the Covenant harmless
had they done so, and the emergency of an event (as if confessed) a warranting
the change of Laws and Declarations, may justify the Commons in receding from
what they had declared about governing the Nation by King, Lords, and Commons,
yet these assaylants have not done with us, but ere they leave us will get
betwixt the joints of our harness by a pretty slight blow, a pure subtilty,
the Kings inexorablenesse was not any change, say they, but a going on in the
way he was when the promise was made, and therefore cannot be urged truly as a
change of a person or thing, to release the Parliament of their promise in his
behalf, truly this is subtle nihil, for we must tell them, that, as to our
case, in the judgment of wise men, there is not any imaginable difference
betwixt the failing of an event fully and confidently expected, and the failing
out of an event utterly unexpected, the Kings flexiblenesse was the event
confidently presumed, and made the ground of what was declared concerning him
by the Parliament, and his not changing to their mind, together with the House
of Peers changing from their minds, (viz. their sense) may be tollerably
called a change of Persons, (subverting the foundation of that promise) the one
not doing what was expected, the other doing what was not expected; but the
King was not so stiff as is pretended it seems, for he did not hold out after
seven addresses; We suppose, say they, that Treaty at Newport was one of the
seven, no Sirs, it was the eighth, Declar. March. 17. 1648, p. 12.
if they keep a true account who declare it so to the whole world; neither was
he then inexorable, but contrarily yielded to more then had been desired of
him, in former addresses to him: Did he so? well, but did he grant enough?
peradventure those who treated with him had no mind to ask what they should
have asked, so we are told, those Members proceeded to make such Propositions
to the King at the Isle of Wight for a safe and well-grounded peace, D^clar.
Jan. 15. 1648.
as if they had been granted and kept (of which there was no probability) would
have returned the people again to their former slavery, etc. yea, this Treaty
was entertained upon such Propositions as the King himself also should make,
which was formerly held to be so destructive to any well settled peace, as
neither the Houses of Parliament, nor the Commissioners for the Kingdom of
Scotland did think fitting to admit, when he was in his greatest height of
power; whether now is here seen the Kings bounty to the Treaters, or their
prodigality to him; he never would yield to recall Ormonds Commission (as we
are informed) granted in the time of the Treaty, nor that Episcopacy should be
abolished, only suspended: (Oh! royal bounty) nor lastly, that any one
Delinquent should be capitally punished, one only (according to the Covenant no
doubt) being offered unto him, namely poor David Jenkins; in the mean time,
the worthy Treaters let him alone with his negative voice, and Book of Common
Prayer, etc. brave daubing; so that the Scottish Consistories had cause to lift
up their voices against acquiessing in the Kings Concessions at Newport, as
being destructive to Religion and Covenant: But, the House voted these
Concessions a ground to proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of the
Kingdom.

Ans. We have heard of such a Vote indeed, but 'twas to us a mysterious Caball,
we could never get acquainted with the reason of it, no more then with their
reasons for re-calling those Votes of non-addresses to the King, made upon such
and so many reasons of great weight, unto the least of which there was never
any answer given; designing Statists use not it seems to play above board, but
the reasons of adnulling that Vote (for proceeding upon the Kings Concessions)
are visible, Parliament Votes and Parliament reasons do well together, unless
we should deny the goodness of our Cause (says the Parliament) which God has
adjudged on our side, Declar. Jan. 15 1648.
by the gracious blessings of so many signal Victories, unless we should
betray our friends, who have engaged with us upon our Votes of Non-addresses to
the hazard of their lives and fortunes, unless we should value this one man,
the King, above so many Millions of people whom we represent; and unless we
should scorn and contemn any peace which the great God of Heaven and Earth,
(our assured help in our greatest distresses) has given us, and that we must
rely only upon such a peace, which the King (a Mortal man, and our implacable
enemy) shall allow us, unless we should give up our selves to the slaughter,
and suffer our own Members to undermine the Parliament and Kingdoms Cause,
unless we should stake all to the Kings nothing, and Treat with him who has
not any thing to give us, etc. And lastly, unless we should value the blood of
so many Innocents, and the Army of so many Martyrs, who have dyed in this
Cause, less then the blood of a few guilty persons by what name or title
soever styled, we could do no less then repeal those Votes before specified,
as being highly repugnant to the glory of God, greatly dishonorable to the
proceedings of Parliament, and apparently destructive to the good of this
Kingdom.

And here we should cut off our Web, but that for a close we must needs
remember what in a margicall note they tell us we forgot, viz. That Scripture,
Job 34.18. and that Moral rule, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, and why? because we
call the Kings persistency by no softer a name then inexoriblenesse, and
implacability; plain dealing is a jewel Sirs, the vile person shall be no
more called liberal, nor the Churl said to be bountiful, Isa. 32.5.

1 Therefore we did not forget that text in Job, but these gentle Doctors
forgot to take in the 17 verse. with the 18. we read them both together, and
then they expound one another, and chide the Classis for putting them asunder;
Job 34.17, 18.
Shall even he that hates right, govern? and will thou condemn him that is
most just? Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, ye are
ungodly? If Princes be just, God forbid they should be evil spoken of, It is
not fit to strike Rulers for equity; but what if they hate right, must no
Prophet come within the Princes Chapel? must not Kings know their Names? Am.
7.13.
Thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, says Ezekiel. Thou and thy Fathers
house has troubled Israel, says Elijah; Ezekiel. 21.25. 1 King. 18.18. 2 Chronicles,
16.9 1 Samuel 15. Luke ^3.32.
Herein thou have done foolishly, says the Seer unto Asa; this is plain
dealing. Did Samuel spare Saul when he rebelled against the Lord? Did our
blessed Master the Lord Jesus spare Herod? In a word, did the general Assembly
of the Kirk of Scotland spare King Charles, or might they charge him as a
Sabbath-breaker, an Idolater, a Murderer? and is it a Piaculum, or any
blasphemy for us poor Mortals to call him an inexorable man? the Heathen
Lawyer Papinian boldly reproved the Emperor Caracalla for his Parricide, and
are Kings yet more sacred? We are persuaded that sometime within the memory of
Man, diverse Ministers of Lancashire and Cheshire, (though they opened not their
mouths as Papinian did against Caracalla) yet have spoken as grossly of King
Charles as ever the Northern Subscribers did, Non enim Sacerdotale est, quod
Sentias non dicere, Ambros.

2 Neither did we forget that saying, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, to speak the
truth of the dead is to speak what is Bonum et verum convertuntur.
good, and if we have spoken otherwise, let the World bear witness of the
evil; that rule requires Charity, but not in dispendium veritatis. The names
of the wicked shall rot, says the surer Word; so did the names of Ahab, Omri,
and Jeroboam, though Kings; and how unsavory does the Spirit of God make the
memory of Ahaz by that brand upon his bones? that inscription upon his Grave, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is that King Ahaz? these Ministers we presume are no
strangers to Nazianzens invectives, where the deceased (...)etc Orat. 3.

(...). ibid. Paulo post. (...). Orat. 19.


Julian is drawn to the life; to flatter the dead is to wrong the living, and
to strengthen the hands of wicked men in evil ways (the great discommode of
funeral Panegyricks) were it not better that a Spade were called a Spade, then
to say, King Charles of blessed memory, unless there was cause for it? truly,
this Princes Fate is observeable, for many who made no more of him (either in
Press or Pulpit) when he was alive, then one would do of a dead Dog,
Panaeb. Regis defuncti corpus terra condunt, caput abscindunt inaurant, in
sacris collocan^, Causs: Hierogl. l. 5 c 58.
now can hardly bear a word spoken against him, See Prove. 24.24 Suet. in Otho.
-- Quiescat Obba parum, Mantu.
but upon all occasions rise up as his compurgators, but there is no new thing.
Thus Suetonius tells us it was with Otho; Magna pars hominum incolumem
gravissime detestata mortuum laudibus tulit; but we shall provoke these
Royalists indignation no further. Here let our Pitchar stand, farewell.

Now the Lord of peace himself give us peace always, by all means, 2 These.
3.16.

FINIS.

