A DOZEN OF PRINCIPAL POINTS. fit for every honest Englishman's wearing.
I. GOD is the Original fountain of all power, Therefore, every just power
derives from God, Therefore no power is just that cannot derive from God.

II. Every just power is derived from God by just means.

Noe means is just, (or can Justify an ordinary continuing power) but the
Commission given by Gods will revealed in his Word.

Therefore every ( ordinary continued) power that has not such Commission is
unjust.

III. We are not bound by Gods Law to obey the power of Man, save only when
it is the power of God committed to his dispensation by the direct Ordinance of
God ( and then it is said, to be for Gods sake, and for Conscience sake.)

Whosoever demands, or exacts obedience from man, not having such a Commission,
is an Usurper, an Unjust person, the Child of Rebellion.

Therefore neither ought any man without such commission to assume such a power
( upon the pains by St. Jude rehearsed) neither is any man bound to obey such
an usurped power ( but on the contrary we are bound to detest, at least not to
converse with such, For, he that says but Good speed to such ungodly
proceedings becomes partaker of their Sin. Which well agrees with that of
Solomon, My Son fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change, for their destruction draws nie. etc.)

IIII We can no way honor God, so much as by obedience [ First to himself) 2.
To that power and person he has set over us.

We can no way dishonor God, more then by disobedience ( in both these Cases)

Therefore whosoever obeyes not the Lawful Magistrate ( as being set ever us
by God's Ordinances) dishonors God, and denies him one principal part of his
honor, and our duty.

V As to deny God his due is sacraledge, so to give God's due to man [ without
his appointment] is idolatry.

Whosoever gives obedience to man that God has not authorized gives God's due
to another ( and surely God is a jealous God and will not give his honor to any
other nor will he hold him guiltless that dares do so without his Warrant.

Therefore he that usurps or assumes such an unwar ranted power, is
sacralegious, and he that obeyes is his accessory, and an Idolater.

VI The persons directly trusted by God with his power (and therefore to whom
only we do directly owe obedience] are these five, the Husband, the Father,
the Master, the Priest, and the King. [ And though this last the King,] be
sometimes called Judge, Captain, Prince, Patriarch, or the like, yet they all
signify the same image of Gods power given by God to those persons by his
direct Commission [Some being effectual only, as Moses, Giddeon, Samuel, etc.
others both formal and effectual, as Saul and David, Ahaz and Hezekiah,
Manasseh, and Josiah, Nebuchadnezer, Cyrus and Neroe etc.

There is no other continued power of what name, or nature soever can be by
direct commission derived from God's grant ( nor any such grant or commission
showed, save what is subordinate and inferior to these.

Therefore these and only these are the powers authorized by God's direct
commission, to which we ow and must pay an active (or at least a passive)
obedience. And the greatest obedience to the greatest power ever] and we are
not bound to any or either sort of obedience to any other persons or power
whatsoever, but to abhor and resist the same as the power of Satan and
Antichrist.

VII By virtue of the power given by God to the King, the King ordains other
inferior powers who have their Commission from the King.

But as the King then forfeits his power to God that gave it, and to none
other, when he renounces God, and makes himself his enemy by flat Rebellion,
So also those powers made by the King, then cease to have power, and forfeit
it to the King that gave it, and to none other when they rebel against him,
and make use of the power given by the King in a flat opposition of the King.

Therefore no longer then they acknowledge the King's power to be just and
superior, and their own to be derived from him, and so inferior, and
therefore their obedience to be necessary and humble, have they any more power,
or owe we any more obedience.

VIII. (Next under God, and the King) all Ecclesiastical power is by Christ
and his Apostles established by a perpetual succession on the (Lawfully
called) Priests or Ministers of the Gospel.

Noe humane power ought, neither can oppose the divine institution, or
demollish what Christ and his Apostles have erected. Therefore the Office it
self (of A Bishop, A Doctor, A Deacon, etc.) is by direct Commission derived
from Christ and his Apostles, and so of divine right clearly, and the form,
and choice of the person is in the King as Gods Deputy, and therefore (at
least) of the best humane right that may be.

IX. The heart of Man cannot be converted by any outward means, but only by
the preaching of the Gospel (for the Priests lips do (or should do) both
keep and speak knowledge.

But how shall they preach if they be not sent?

Therefore all that are the true Priests or Ministers of God's Word, are sent
duly and visibly, and he that is not visibly and duly sent is not the true
Priest or Minister of God, (But as Nadab and Abihu presumptious, or as Korah
and his accomplices ambitious, and A Rebel to the truth. If he preach another
Doctrine, though he seem to be as an Angel of light, let him be accursed; If
he seem to be in the right, yet because he came not in by the Door, (viz.
Christ and his commission) ^^e is A Theife and shall surely come to naught, and
all that follow him, since though he may seem to allow some truths at the
present, it is but to allure to greater errors afterward, as practicing by the
subtilty of Sathau that sets all such a ^ork to disturb the true Church.

X. In no age since the Creation, has it been allowed to any people under the
Sun that did rightly know and were known of God; to choose their own
Governor, or way of Government without first obtaining Gods visible consent.

For a people without any visible commission to do so, is not only to rebel
against the present established Government and lawful Authority of their
Sovereign, but to oppose God and usurp his power.

Therefore let noe people or Nation that pretends to fear or obey God once
think of such a course, (least happily) they be sound to fight against God, and
that God set himself to fight against that Nation, and so they perish
inevitably, eternally.

XI. If a Nation might choose their governor or way of government, yet could
they not be innocent in rejecting Gods way, and taking that of his Enemies.

But Monarchy is indeed the form by God invented and ordained. And
Aristocracie, Democracie, Anarchy, etc. was devised (at best by Philosophers)
by heathens, Gods Enemies.

Therefore to refuse Monarchy (or the Government by one man as supreme, which
now is, and so many ages has bin in this Kingdom established (this being Gods
way) and to set up Anarchy, or the like so newly thought of in this Nation by
the Sons of Beliall, so repugnant to the very fundamental Laws of this Nation
(it being the Devils own way) were profane and damnable.

XII By all Laws of God, Nature, or Nations, and by the principles of all
governments under Heaven [especially of this Nation] That which requires the
whole power to set it up, or establish it, requires also the whole power to
take it down or revoake it, and both to be done in love, order, and peace.

But the Regal, the Episcopal, the Peerall, the ministerial powers, and
functions, and the Book of Common Prayer were set up and established by the
whole power of this Nation in love, order, and peace, and [so far as his maine
power has to do with them] could not have been otherwise established.

But this (for it is pride and covetousness only, unparalleled pretended
parliament, (the Kingdoms Masters as they think) and this impudent,
Independent, presumptious army, (I mean the greatest part, and persons thereof,
for as for many of the Common Soldiers, I rather pity their unhappy ignorance,
and incline to pray that their eyes may be opend to see the Kingdoms present,
and their own suceeding misery (the Parliaments Masters, as all men may plainly
see) had no just beginning, wants, nay despises their Head the K. their Neck
the Bishops, their Shoulders the Nobility, the greater and better part of their
bowels the Gentry even of those that are more truly members of that now so
much Idolized House of Commons, and of the people (their legs and feet) that
make up the rest of the Body Politic. And were never yet, (and now refuses to
be established by the whole power of the Nation, in love Order, or peace, Nor
will acknowledge any greater power but themselves, nor any Creator of their
power, but that they have created one the other. And are therefore doubtless
such monsters as this Nation never knew, nor heard of, till this present age.

Therefore the Kings power (as being supreme least of all) nor the Bishops, nor
the Nobilities (as subordinate to the Kings) nor that of those just
Parliaments, that have or shall know the way to preserve, inviolate their duty
to theit God, their allegiance to their King, and their Love to their Country,
cannot by any known Law of God or Man, be taken away, by such an unjust,
imperfect, pretended part of power in malice, disorder, and War.

But on the contrary, let the King, and all that fear God and the King, trust
in God, and in the Assurance of his never failing promise [expect deliverance]
that these (as Iannes and Iambres that with stood Moses) shall proceed no
further then God has appointed, and that then their folly shall be made
manifest to all men: And let all faithful English men say Amen.

FINIS.

