A Pastoral ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF Mr. THOMAS CREECH.

DAPHNIS: OR, A Pastoral ELEGY Upon the Unfortunate and much-lamented DEATH OF
Mr. THOMAS CREECH.

-- Negat quis Carmina Gallo?
Hunc etiam Lauri, hunc etiam flevere Myricae.
Virgil. LONDN, Printed for John Deeve at Bernard's Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1700

DAPHNIS, etc.
THYRSIS. ALEXIS. THE Rosy Morning with prevailing Light
Had now dispelled the humid Shades of Night,
And smiling Phoebus spread his Thirsty Beams
To drink the Dew, and taste the Silver Streams:
When on a rising Mountain's fragrant Side
By Flora decked in all her gaudy Pride;
The mourning Shepherd, young Alexis lay,
Sickning at Light, and weary of the Day:
On conscious Heaven he fixed his weeping Eyes,
Daphnis in the Skies.
Daphnis, who from the Earth was lately fled;
Daphnis, (he living) loved, and mourned for Daphnis dead.
When Generous Fortune kindly brought that way
Sad Thyrsis to assist the pensive Boy,
To be the kind Companion of his Woe;
That both their Tears might in one Current flow:
Thus then the Youth began a doleful Strain,
And thus bespoke the Sympathizing Swain.

Alexis. Ah Thyrsis! have thou heard the dismal Tale?
Daphnis died in yonder Gloomy Vale!
Say, could thou think that he, whose Verse could move
A Rock to Pity, or a Stone to Love.
Who could, like Ovid, tendrest Thoughts instill
Should fall a Victim to a Woman's Will?

Thyrsis. Yes, Shepherd, yes; the Story is too true!
Look, how the Groves have changed their verdant hiew!
The withered Leaves lie scattered all around,
And blasted Flowers disgrace the sacred Ground.
Yes, he is dead! the poor unhappy Swain,
LALAGE, but loved in vain;
Fantastic, proud, and conscious of her Charms,
She scorned his Love, and fled his wishing Arms.
Naught could prevail, though all Loves Arts he tried:
She sacrificed the Shepherd to her Pride.
Ungentle Nymph, to thee we owe his Death,
'Twas LALAGE that robbed poor Daphnis of his Breath.

Alex. Ah cruel Nymph! we have lost the learned Swain
That ever sung on our Arcadia's Plain:
What sprightly Thoughts, what Joy did he inspire!
Roman Lyre?
What tender Pity did our Souls invade,
When he bewailed the Royal Grecian Maid?
How well his Muse the fatal Story told,
When she the poor Lucretia's Fate condol'd?
When Daphnis Sung, how did our Groves rejoice,
And Grottos Echo to his charming Voice?
How slow did silent Ousa roll along,
When Daphnis taught us great Lucretia's Song?
Where wandering Atoms in Confusion hurled,

Whilst Nervous Numbers with harmonious Feet,
In such a soft, and tuneful Cadence meet;
As (to his lasting Honor) fully prove
Chance could not in such Beauteous Order move.
Then, Cruel Nymph, how could thy Pride refuse
So soft a Lover and so sweet a Muse?
Had thou but yielded to our Daphnis Love,
On every Green, in every blooming Grove,
The Nymphs and Swains had blessed thy happy Name,
LALAGE, and Daphnis filled the Mouth of Fame.
But now both Nymphs, and Swains unite their Breath,
To Curse thy Scorn, and mourn the Shepherds Death:
Whose Shade now wandering in the pensive Grove,
Still, still complains of LALAGE, and Love.
Daphnis farewell, farewell unhappy Swain!
May thou in Lethe's Lake forget thy Pain,
And in oblivion sleep, till thou no more
Remember what thou did, or what thou were before.

Thyrsis. See yonder Sheep, how ragged now and bare,
Daphnis Care,
But now they mope, and straggling over the Plain
Lament all Day, and mourn their absent Swain:
No more they Joy to Crop the tender Buds,
Nor seek at Noon cool Springs, and shady Woods.
In neither Sun, nor Shade, they now delight,
Nor dread the Foxes, or the Wolves by Night.
here pined to Death, a harmless Lambkin lies,
And there for Grief his bleating Mother dies.
As if she did with her departing Breath


Alex. And Pan will sure revenge the Shepherd's Fate
Although perhaps his vengeance comes but late.
Last Night returning home, in yonder Grove,
Where we were used to sing, and talk of Love,
I heard great Pan, and all the Sylvan Train
Of Daphnis Love, and Daphnis death complain.
The weeping Heavens a Shower of Tears distilled,
And all the Woods were with loud Sorrow filled.
Whilst mournful Echoes all their Sighs rebound,

Pan most of all the Shepherd's Death deplored,
He Daphnis loved, and Daphnis him adored.
Oh (my dear Boy) he cried, why would thou dare
To view a Face so tempting, and so Fair?
Why, why did thou indulge the secret Fire?
Ah! why would thou admit the fond desire,
And hope the imperious LALAGE to move?
Why did thou dye? (alas!) why did thou Love?
But it is in vain to ask; 'twas so decreed,
Syrnix chased, and caught a trembling Reed.
Fair Fatal Sex! who can our Souls surprise
With tender Looks, and soft bewitching Eyes,
Were you but half as pitiful and kind,
The God of Love had not been counted blind.
On you we Gaze, and feel a pleasing Pain
Steal to our Hearts, and glide through every Vein.
Till drunk with Love our weakness we betray;

More had he spoke; but Words began to fail,
And breathless Echoes murmured in the Vale;
Convulsive Sorrow swelled his throbbing Breast,
Adieu! adieu! he cried, and sighed the rest.

Thyr. But say what chance, what luckless Fortune drew
The scornful Virgin to the Shepherd's View?
Where did his fatal Passion first begin?
Ah! Where was she by wretched Daphnis seen.

Alexis. Beneath a Shade to shun the Heat of Day,
On Ousa's flowery Banks our Daphnis lay;
Whilst his glad Flocks around their Master feed,

Of Chaos first he sung, and boundless Space,
Before the Birth of Matter, Time, or Place;
Before Old Night had felt the piercing Ray
Of Light, and yielded to invading Day.
Then, how the wondrous Universe began,
What Order through the new-made Structure ran;
The Birth of Nature, and the Birth of Man.
Then changed his Subject, and in softer Strains
Discovered Grecian Loves, to British Swains.
Whilst LALAGE from an adjacent Glade,

With Pleasure listened to his warbling Airs,
And drunk the pleasing Tales with greedy Ears:
Then over the Lawns she trips with nimble Feet
To know who 'twas sung so divinely Sweet;
And as she past along, the impatient Maid
With curious Eyes each secret Place surveyed,
Still following Echo as a faithful Guide,
Till she at distance had the Shepherd spied.

Thyrsis.
Had thou but fled from that unhappy Place,
And never seen her fair enchanting Face,
Thou yet had been the Lord of all our Plains,
And we yet heard thy soft harmonious Strains.

Alexis. But Daphnis to his Fate with Pleasure run,
He saw the Nymph, he loved, and was undone.
With haughty Looks, and a disdainful Mien
Apace she walked, and crossed the shaded Green;
The Shepherd viewed her as she past along,

With wishing Eyes he gazed upon her Charms,
And would have died to have died within her Arms;
Deep draughts of Love he drunk, and strong desire,
His Breast, like Etna, glowed with inward Fire,
Which when the Nymph perceived, more proud and coy
She looked, and smiled with a malicious Joy.
Nor could he since the cruel Tyrant move
(Obdurate Maid) to Pity or to Love.
The sad, the direful Passion still increased,

His Flock and darling Muse no longer were
His dear delight, his Pleasure, and his Care;
The Nymph, the Nymph, he thinks of naught but her.
But hapless Youth! --
The more he loved, the more she scorned his Flame,
And seemed to hate both Love and Daphnis Name.
Then from our Groves to yonder Wood he flies,
(Strange Power of Love!) and there despairing dies.

Thyrsis. The last time I the wretched Swain beheld,
Aegon's Field;
All Fire himself, he minded not to shun
The Heat of Day, or fly the scorching Sun;
Wildly he star'd, his Face looked pale, and wan,
He sighed, and languish'd like a dying Man.
When to him thus I spoke --
Unhappy Youth! -- and can there be no Cure,
What Tortures do thou feel, what Pains endure?
Whilst by a cruel unrelenting Maid,
Thou art to Misery, and Death betrayed.
Ah, can thou not forget her fatal Charms,

Return, return to our abandoned Grove;
And there thou may be happy in thy Love.
For thee in amorous Fires Lycoris burns,
For thee the lovely Galetea mourns.
Were thou from this inglorious Bondage free,
A Thousand Blessings wait to fall on thee.
The Jolly Troops that used to hear thy Lays,
And crown thy Brows with Wreaths of verdant Bays:
In Sighs and Tears of thy hard Fate complain,

Which holds thy Heart; and thy sweet Muse restore;
That thou may charm them, as thou did before.
Thy scattered Flooks too over the Forests roam,
Wanting their Shepherd to compel them home.
Rise then dear Daphnis, give this Fondness over,
And think of cruel LALAGE no more.
Thus I -- and thus replied the sighing Swain,
Ah Thyrsis, if thou would remove my Pain,
Give me my Love, so may I sooth my Grief,

For though so proud, disdainful, and unkind,
Without her I can hope no Peace to find;
My wandering Thoughts her Form does still pursue,
And still my Soul has LALAGE in view.
Ah savage Fair, would thou this bounty give,
(For since thou will not Love, I cannot Live)
Would thou but deign to close my trembling Eyes,
Or drop a Tear or two, as Daphnis dies:
With Joy, I Would meet the cold Embrace of Death,

Did thou but Rage with such a fierce desire,
I Would rush through foaming Seas, and Storms of Fire,
Attempt the greatest Dangers, and not grieve
To part with Life, so LALAGE might Live.
But thou malicious fair one, with Disdain!
Laughs at my Grief, and smiling mock'st my Pain.
Be gone ye Quacks, your Arts no longer boast,
In spite of all your Medicines I am lost;
Be gone ye Cheats, who with vain Charms pretend

Be gone ye Zealots, who at Altars bow;
The Gods are deaf, and cannot hear you now.
I rave, I rage, I burn, oh! let me fly
To some dark desert Place, and there I Will dye.
Thus spoke the Swain, and acted as he said,
Raving to yonder gloomy Wood he fled.
Where, for a while, with piercing Sighs and Groans
He fills the Shades, and his dire Fate bemoans;
Repeating still the cruel Charmer's Name,

Till quite overwhelmed with Woe and drowned in Grief,
He thus gave up the sad remains of Life.
Farewell ye Swains! to Death's dark Courts I go
To mourn amongst the weeping Shades below.
Farewell ye Streams, and conscious Groves, he cried:
So did the dreadful work of Fate, and died.

Alex. Unhappy Youth! What could the Fates design
To bless the World with such a Muse as thine,
Yet suffer Death to ravish her away,

What Star, what baleful Planet ruled thy Birth?
Shedding malignant Rays upon the Earth,
That thou should dye amidst thy Vernal Bloom,
Before thy Muse had brought her Harvest home!
But 'twas a dismal, sad, untimely Death
That robbed so soon the Shepherd of his Breath.
Thus blooming Trees are nipt with killing Frost,
Thus budding Flowers harsh Mildews often blast.
Had thou survived, what Wonders had we seen!

Upon thy Voice the Nymphs and Swains had hung,
As when before great Tytyrus sweetly sung.

Thyrsis. But Tityrus is gone, and Daphnis fled,
And all our Hopes are with the Shepherds, dead.
Farewell dear Youth, so fast my Tears do flow,
That Words are wanting to express my Woe.
As Hebrus stopped for Grief his golden Side,
When on it is Banks the tuneful Orpheus died;
So do our Groves, and Rivers seem to mourn,


But thou can never return --
For thou have crossed the irreameable Lake,
And Charon's Boat comes always empty back.
Here did the Swains their mournful Theme give over,
Sighs stopped their Words, and they could speak no more.
FINIS.
Lately Printed, Henry IV. with the Humors of Sir John Falstaff. A
Tragi-Comedy, as it is Acted at the Theater in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
Revived, with Alterations. Printed for John Deeve at Bernard's Inn-Gate in
Holborn: Where you may be furnished with most Plays.


