Droytwich CASE.
KING John Granted to the Burgesses of Droytwich and their Heirs, the Salt
Springs there, rendering the yearly Fee Farm Rent of 100 l. Sterling, and the
Salt Water has ever since been divided into Four Hundred and Four Shares
called Bulleries.

The Grantees of King John and their Heirs have aliened and sold their whole
inheritance in the Salt Springs to several persons, who at this day stand
seized in Fee of the same, and pay the Fee Farm Rent according to their
respective Shares, and from the time of King John's Grant, to the Reign of
Queen Mary the Inheritors of the Salt Springs governed the same, and were
deemed Burgesses of Droytwich, and whoever sold his Inheritance, ceased to be a
Burgess.

Queen Mary Incorporated the Borough of Droytwich, by the Name of Bailiffs and
Burgesses, but takes no notice of the Salt Works, nor is there any Order, or
Direction given by King John's Grant, or any subsequent Charter for the
Governing, or Managing thereof.

There are but Nine Persons who inhabit within the Borough of Droytwich, who
with the Assistance of thirteen others, they have admitted into the
Corporation, pretend to the Power of Governing, Managing, and taxing the
Inheritance in the Salt Springs at pleasure; excluding the real Owners thereof
from Voting, or Acting therein.

And although the Proprietors of the Salt Springs are undoubtedly Burgesses of
Droytwich, and consequently Members of the Corporation; yet by this Bill they
do not seek any relief therein, but only that they may have a Vote in the
Managing and Taxing of their own Estates.

It is alleged the present Members of the Corporation of Drotwich have 150
Shares in the Salt Springs.

Note, The Persons following are Members of the Corporation, and have a Hundred
and Twenty of the Hundred and Fifty, and are for passing the Bill.

Earl of Shrewsbury. Lord Coventry. Sir John Pakington. Sir Walter Blount. Sir
Thomas Cooks. Sir John Talbot. Sir Harry Conningsby. Edmund Wyld, Esquire John
Winford, Esquire Robert Steynor, Esquire John Newport, Esquire Thomas Lench, Esquire Mr. Thomas
Rastel. Mr. Jos Butler.
The Persons who Oppose passing the Bill are Twenty two, of which number Twelve
have only the bare Qualification of a Pepper-corn; and the other Ten have 22
Shares and a half in the Salt Springs and no more.

The Remainder of the 404 Shares are given to Charitable Uses, or vested in
Widows and Infants, or persons who live far remote.

Shares. The Persons above Named have 120 The Persons who are excluded from
Ordering and Managing their own Estates have 174 The Persons for the Bill have
294 The Persons who oppose the Bill 22 and a half.


