Vox Populi, EXPRESSED IN XXXV. MOTIONS TO THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT.

Being the general voice and the humble and earnest request of the people of
God in England to that most Honorable and Religious Assembly.

For reforming the present corrupt State of the Church.

Published by Irenaus Philadelphus.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

MOTIONS FOR REFORMING THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
I. THat since the first Reformation in King Edwards days, was rather of the
Doctrine, then of the Discipline, and of the Rites that were palpably gross,
which yet were retained, with a purpose they should be removed afterward, and
for to unloose by degrees, the fast holds to the Romish Church: now since every
Protestant is well informed of the change made in Religion, that whatsoever in
Religion is Popish, or tending to the disturbing of the peace of the Church,
and maintaining of Heretical doctrines, be redressed.

II. That in that great work of Reformation which is of moment and
consequence, far beyond the settling of civil affairs, there be appointed by
both the Houses, a Committee or convocation and meeting of 40. or 50. English
Divines, men that were not of, and did no way favor the late Convocation, and
such as be unpartiall, learned, and incorrupt in their lives and Doctrine, such
as Dr. Usher Arch. B. of Armach, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Twisse, and the like, with
10. Scots Divines, to which be called 8. Foreign Divines of the most learned
and famous; such as Rivetus, Primrose, Diodati, Moulin, and the like, who may
treat and agree upon a settled platform of Church Government, suitable to the
Monarchy of great Britain which ought to be ratified, and enacted by Parliament.

III. That since our neighbor Churches have enjoyed more peace and safety
under their discipline, our discipline be framed upon the patron of theirs,
which hitherto has not been subject to the inconveniences that ours is; such
are: To be rent with schisms, and poisoned with heresies: to have the whole
people of the land and the greatest part of the Ministers liable without any
redress, to the unjust usurpations, vexations, and censure of some few
Bishops: To have in great many parochial Churches, a want of a profitable
Minister: To have in some of them either seldom or no Preaching at all: in
others, little or no maintenance: and in most a disproportionable maintenance:
Besides the manifold altercations and quarrels about trifles and toys, that
our discipline is attended with: It was never heard that any man living under
our neighbor Churches discipline was ever so braine-sicke as to moove
questions, whether of the Table, Pulpit, and Font, deserves more reverence and
bowing at; or that their Synods or Consistories made Canons and Constitutions
about placing and railing the Communion Table: about Hoods and Surplisses, and
such needless orders, which bring rather striving then edifying. Since then
our neighbor Churches discipline is obnoxious to less disorders, that a
discipline be established in England, that be approaching unto theirs, yet a
sensible difference kept between theirs and ours.

IIII. That the Churches Discipline being established, a National Synod be
convocated, that may frame a Confession of faith, to which may be called a
competent number of Foreign Divines. However, since so many have been so
earnest of late, to be in charity with the Roman Church, that they have been
uncharitable to the Reformed Churches: Let Canons be made in the Synod, and an
Act of Parliament for union with other Protestant Churches in matter of
Doctrine: and all the firebrarnds of these late innovations in the Church, that
have made us a laughpng stock to the neighbor Churches, be sharrcly censured,
if not cut off as banes of the Church, especially the first raisers of Altars,
such as Heylin, Pocklington, and the like.

V That in that Synod, if the English Liturgy be retained, to the end it be
received all over England without exceptions, it be reformed and repurged from
many corruptions, and from a great deal of dross among the gold, and the good
matters that are therein contained, as it appears; First, in the vain
repetitions of the same thing. Secondly, in the uncouth expressions, as the
name of Epistle when it is Prophecy, and misaplying pieces of Scripture to the
days for which they are appointed. Thirdly, in the reading of the ridiculous
stories and fables of the Apocripha books, such are the Stories of Tobit and
his dog and the like. Fourthly, in the unsutablenesse of many collects and
prayers to the matter and intent they are prayed for: such are the Collect
before the Ten Commandments, and the prayer for the Ministers of the Gospel, O
God Almighty that workest great marvels: which, if the words Bishops and
Curates be taken out, may be applied to any purpose: And last of all, in the
unsound Doctrines; As that Sacraments are absolutely, necessary to salvation,
and that Infants have Faith in the person of their Godfathers and Godmothers,
which is as much as to believe by a proxy or by an Attorney.

VI. That in that Synod it be determined what Popery is, and Canons made where
those errors where of the people is with good reason afraid, be named and
condemned.

VII. That above all the holy doctrine of Justification by Faith only, which is
the maine hinge of salvation, be strongly established by an especial Canon
according to the tenets of all Protestant Churches, which Canon be sworn and
subscribed unto, by all that have taken, and hereafter shall take orders or
Ecclesiastical promotions. This being the greatest plague of the Church of
England, that many men dignified in the Church, and Masters of Colleges,
fellows and Scholars in the Universitie, defend openly the justification by
works, which is flat popery, and the ready way to bring in indulgences,
auricular confession, Purgatory, and the tyranny of the Clergy over the
consciences.

VIII. That likewise the Doctrine of the Necessity and effecacy of the
Sacraments, especially of Baptism be mainely and distinctly established and
explained according to the Tenets of all the other reformed Churches; since it
has been of late very usual among our timeservers, and those Ministers that
are as much taken with conformity as they love non-residencie and plurality
of livings, to be enamoured with all the Popish and Arminians opinions, and to
hold and teach Baptism of water to be of absolute necessity to be saved; that
it does blot out sins, and regenerate Ex Opere operato and vinudamactionis by
the bare strength of washing; and works necessarily in the Baptized party,
faith and the habit of true sanctification; and have grounded their poisonous
Tenets upon some passages of the Liturgy that were not dashed out* nor explaned
by the reformers of the Roman brevlarie in King Edwards days; As be the words
in the Catechism, The Children Baptized have all things necesary to salvation,
and are undoubtedly saved. And in The Prayer after Baptism, where thanks is
given to God for regenerating the Infant with his holy spirit. Since then such
places have been a stumbling block to weak ones, and have given fair
opportunity of erring to malicious spirits, that in the task expected of
reforming the English Liturgy, they be corrected and amended.

IX. That bowing before of the Communion Table, or toward the East, be
forbidden under the punishment of deprivation of benificed men and expulsion of
Scholars out of the Colleges, and the Communion Table be kept in the Vestery
and removed from the eyes of the people but in the time of the Communion, to
avoid the creeping idolatry.

X. That the Crucifixe in a piece of hanging and other superstious figures
which sometimes in the year are set over the Communion Table of many Churches
and Chappells, be removed and abolished; and that the Authors or renewers of
that superstition be severely punished.

XI. That the authors of Popish and Arminian books be called in question, and
that the pleasure of our late Sovereign King James of blessed Memory, be
executed, who sent his Divines to the Synod of Dort, that the Church of
England afterward should be bound by the decisions made there, and that Canons
be made conformable to the determination of our Divines in that Synod.

XII. That if Bishops are thought fit to be retained, there be no more such
distance between a Bishop and an ordinary Minister; and that Bishops be no
more called Lords, and that they be enjoined to preach diligently, as is the
duty of their place and office.

XIII. That if some of them sit in Parliament, it be upon Wool-Sacks, and have
no more privileges by their office and places then the Judges, the Lord Keeper
and Treasurer: and that a certain number of Deputies from the National Synod,
whether Bishops or other, be assisting both in the higher House and lower
House, for delivering their advices upon any clauses of Acts, that may entrench
upon the Churches privileges, or are contrary to Doctrine or good manners.

XV. That the principal defect of our Discipline, and the spring of all
errors in Doctrine and Practice, which is the want of Synods, be mended and
hereafter all Visitations of Bishops be Synods, as by right they ought to be,
and according to the ancient Constitution, as it appears by the Synodalls
which Ministers pay in every Visitation, and that at Synods all Parish
Ministers be sitting and covered, and have their voice in the discussing of the
affairs of the Diocese, and making orders which may not afterward be altered
by the Bishops, but only by the National or Metropolitical Synod, which for
the public Union, is to be kept once every two years, neither was ever the
Church of late without Synods, but but in England.

XVI. That besides national Synods there be provincial Synod convocated in
each Diocese once a year; and that every month there be a meeting of
Ministers within the Precinct of six or seven neighbor parishes through the
whole Diocese; to which the first citations, complaints and processes within
that precinct be carried, and in which the incident controversies without
further delay be composed, and that what soever is judged within that precinct
be censurable again by the provincial Synod of the Diocese, and that only
causes of high moment, as deciding controvesies of faith, and matters which
does concern the whole nation be removed from the the Provincial Synod to
the National.

XVII. That the election of Presidents, Assessors, and other members of the
National Synod, be in the power of the Deputies, whether Bishops or others,
appointed for that purpose by each respective Provincial Synod: And that in
Provincial Synods the election of them, be in the power of the Presbytery
within each Diocese.

XVIII. That the presentment of causes and persons to the National Synod be
made by the Bishop of the Diocesse*g

XIX. That in every Presbyteriall meeting within the Precinct of neighbor
Parishes the Bishop shall have power to assist in his own person or by a
Commissioner of his, and have his voice as others.

XX. That the citations and presentiments from these Presbyteriall meetings to
the Provincial Synod beenot made without the knowledge of the Parish Minister,
who ought to present the delinquent, and have his voice in the censure.

XXI. That the Bishop be censurable by the Synod, whether it be provincial or
national, and that it be no more in the power of Bishops to impose what they
please upon the Clergy with such rigorous penalty as they have lately used
for the oath of the sixth Canon.

XXII. That the power of Ordination be not stronger in Bishops then in other
Ministers.

XXIII. That no Scholar shall enter into the holy Ministry without a
certificate from the University, and from the Parish wherein he has been
commorant of his life and Doctrine, and without further trial and examination
of his gifts and learning and soundness in Doctrine by six Ministers, or at
least five, and that none shall be ordained Ministers except presently upon he
is to be invested with a Cure of Souls.

XXIIII. That Minister be ordained at least four times in the year, and that
a record be kept of the Parishes void of Ministry, that in the time of
Ordination they may be supplied accordingly.

XXV. That it be lawful for Students in Divinity and having good report, to
Preach, but not to exercise any other part of Ministerial function, to the end
they may exercise their parts, and give a taste of their abilities to the flock.

XXVI. That before they be permitted to Preach in public, they be exercised in
private by way of Sermons to handle and expound the word of God before the
neighbor Ministers where they are co^morant, or before the heads of the
College where they are members; And that their Sermon ended, the matter and
manner of their handling the word be censured and examined by those Ministers
that are present.

XXVII. That another course be taken for maintaining Ministers and Bishops,
then that of Tyths, which are the cause of endless suits between the Minister
and the Parishioners, the Patron and incumbent, keep the Minister from his
Church, while he follows suites in London, and bring the holy Ministry into
obloquy and contempt. But an honorable competent proportion be appointed for
the maintenance of each Parish Ministers by the Parishioners, and rated by the
Parliament or Synod, and that the distinctions of Deane, Archdeacon, Person,
Curat, Vicar, and Reader be taken away, but let them be coequalls, and more or
less in number in one Parish, according to the greatness or wealth of the
Parish.

XXVIII. That as Bishops in height of Jurisdiction and place, by act are to be
shortened, so an act be made that from henceforth, all ordinary Ministers, which
are too much vilified, shall have more respect and honor then heretofore was
given unto them, and that of well deserving Scholars, the Ministers sons be
preferred to the fellowships of Colleges.

XXIX. That the power of Ecclesiastical Keys, such as belongs to Bishops and
Ministers, be restored unto them, according to the ancient constitutions of the
primitive Churches: and that there be no censure past upon the Clergy or
people from Synod, Bishop or Presbytery, but such as is Spiritual, and that
the usual penalties of imprisonment and fine be rendered again to the right
owner, viz. to the civil Magistrate, and the commutations of bodily penance
into pecuniarie, and the abuse of excommunication, and the Oath Ex officio
abolished.

XXX. That the Clergy of the Diocese; shall choose their own Bishop, or
present to the Kings Majesty two, who may choose of them whom he pleases: and
that every Parish be Patron of its Parish, and have the presentation of as many
Ministers, as the flock requires, to the Synod or Bishop.

XXVIII. That Bishops be more in number and their Diocesses of less extent
then hitherto it has been.

XXXI. That in stead of Chancellors, Officers, Apparitours, Registers, and such
like Grasshoppers, there be some Lay Elders, that may sit in Provincial
Synods, and have their voice in matters of Discipline and Church-goverment, and
that in National Synods, there be some Laymen likewise appointed by the
Parliament.

XXXII. That a better course be taken for providing for the poor, and that
both Ministers and Chief of the Parish be overseeing, how Churchwardens do
dispose of the Church-Treasury, and that they be not permitted under crime of
Sacrilege to spend it upon themselves, and that every month they give an
account of whatsoever is received and laid out.

XXXIII. That the griping of Church-duties and buriall-costs, exacted oftener
more rigorously of the poor then the rich, be restrained, and that the
Minister be contented with his yearly Salary, performing all the branches of
his calling, as baptizing, burying, visiting the sick without any further
recompense, but such as is tendered to him.

XXIIII. That the Fountains of Learning, Cambridge and Oxford, be purged from
superstitious Rites and Popish doctrines, and Orthodoxe Readers be provided.

XXXV. That no public University readers be admitted, but such as are either
allowed or named by the National Synod, or such as out of the Convocation of
the Natioall Synod are presented to the Kings Majesty by the heads of the
University and afterward approved by the next ensuing national Synod.

FINIS.

