A DECLARATION Concerning State-Farthings; OR, Certain Remonstrative Reasons
for the allowance thereof;

Wherein is comprised, 1 The Honor of the States vindicated, 2 The Peoples
hearts contented, 3 The Commonwealths good propagated, 4 The Relief of the
Poor increased.


By Thomas Dunstervile, Citizen of London.

Imprinted for the Author, 1654.

A Declaration concerning the allowance of Brass-Farthings, etc.
TO the never-dying Honor of the Council confined for the Mint Affairs, every
man that petitioned for State Farthings had a fair hearing: their Honors
diligent inquiry into, and care to preserve his Highness and the Councils
Honor, and the Commonwealths good, cannot but speak their praises to all
posterity: This was not all, but their Honors management of this subject was
clothed with humility and patience, or rather a patient humility, fit
qualifications for persons in place and honor; for these and the like Graces
shine more gloriously in their Honors, then the most purest Jewel that ever
was, could shine in the dark Ear of the blackest Ethiopian: These are graces
indeed, which if they were resolved into one (I humbiy conceive) they may not
be unfitly called the Daystar of the State; or if you please, the States
Day Star. Why should any man then presume to insert into any Diurnal things
their Honors never did, punishment rather then mercy were a just Reward for
such a person: But I humbly leave that.

There are five principal Reasons urging the necessity for State-Farthings.

The first is, the States Honor. Secondly, the Subjects content. Thirdly, the
Commonwealths profit. Fourthly, the relief of the Poor. Fifthly, the
suppressing of Abuses now practiced.
And this last is done by several sorts of men that stamp Farthings; not so
much for their own use, as their own profit: so that it is as clear as the Sun,
that his Highness and the States dishonor, the Commonwealths disprofit, the
Poor's misery, and the Commons discontent, are all foulded up in the
non-allowance of State Farthings; the Poor crying out for mercy, the Commons
for redress; and this insufferable abuse cannot easily be corrected, until it
shall please his Highness, with his Council, to supress the former, and to pass
an Order for the allowance of State Farthings: And I verily believe this would
be an Order of such honorable and necessary concernment, that there is scarce
any Order of Grace so like as that, not only to make the three Commonwealths,
but even Posterity it self, his Highness and Councels Debtors.

And yet as this may conduce to an honorable and necessary use: so (if not
rightly stated) it may bring with it great inconveniences: To prevent which, I
hope. and my charity tells me, that the Council will at last make choice of such
a Metal as shall be most honorable to the State, most profitable to the common
wealth, hurtful to none, but a general good to all; And sure that must be such
a Metal as is not easy to be counterfeited; and not to be counterfeited at
all by Founders, Braziers, Pewterers, Tinkers, or any Mechanics at all; And
such a Metal now lies before their Honors relating to the Mint.

There are other pretenders of the Commonwealths good too; the Metals are
these, pure Copper of an intrinsic value, Copper and Brass mixed of the same
value, Tin of the same value; and another white Metal cozen jerman to Tin
itself: In show, all these are Pretenders of the Commonwealths good: These I
desire to discourse on, that all the people of the Commonwealth may
understand, that if His Highness and Council shall allow of any Farthings, it
shall be for the States honor, and the Commonwealths good; or else there will
be none at all: And that I may the better undeceive the judgment of ordinary
and common men, that either out of ignorance cannot, or out of partiality will
not take notice of that which most conduces to their own, and public good,
both of State and Commonwealth. But before I show the use and abuse, give me
leave to answer two main Objections, which some men make against the allowance
of State Farthings, their fears and jealousies arise from their former
sufferings by Farthings made in the late Kings time; the Proverb is, the burnt
child dreads the fire.

The first Objection is, the danger of glutting the Commonwealth with
Farthings.

The second, the prejudice poor Laborers will have by their Work-masters, who
will pay them most of their money in Farthings.

I answer, that there will be great danger of glutting the Commonwealth, if
their Honors allow of Copper or Brass, or Tin, or any thing that is easy to
be counterseited; for such will be obvious for every man to stamp, and it is
probable, there will be more stamped in every City, Corporation, Town, and
Village, then shall be by the command of the State: for, indeed, it is the
community of the metal that loads the Common wealth with these inconveniences,
upon this account the Metal is prepared to their hands, let men get but the
stamp fixed the work is done: we have had sad experience of this, by those
practical abuses that overspread the Nation, when Farthings were made in the
late Kings time: But of that more fully anon.

In answer to the second Objection: There are two ways to prevent those abuses
that may accrue to poor Laborers. The first is, If please his Highness to
command that no Work-master shall pay a Labourer above 12 d. in 20 s. a poenal
Order would curb those wicked ones, that in this way would eat the bread out of
poor men's mouths.

Secondly, if the Council order that no allowance shall be given in the
exchange of farthings for money, then every one will buy them as his necessity
shall require, and no further: Yet for the Poors sake, I could heartily wish,
that since the first way might be binding enough to prevent poor men's
sufferings for their Labors, that the condescensions of the States love and
charity to the Poor, might appear in the allowance of twelve pence in twenty
shillings change, and upon this account of charity to them, Charity it self
would seem to be a fair flower in the Garland of the States honor: To both
which, I humbly submit.

The truth is, I am a Commoner, freeborn within the Bounds of Englands
Commonwealth; and being so, I owe all my abilities, cares, and years, to the
service of the Commonwealth.

I thank God I have passed through some employments for others and my self, in
the course of my life, I have had interchanges, the World it self stands upon
Vicissitudes, and it has pleased the eternal God to weave up my life in
prosperity and adversity; and yet my prosperity was never so high, as to
provoke an ill eye: Nor I praise God yet, nor I hope never will be, so low,
that I shall be wholly trodden under feet: My afflictions are more my sorrow
then my shame; because I find, and verily believe, there is no such happiness
as to enjoy a little with peace of an honest heart: The Worlds disfavours as
they have minded me more of my Duty to my GOD, so have they made me not forget
my Duty to the State, and love to the Commonwealth, under whose Hemisphere (I
bless God) I have yet a low Being. But whither do my wandering passions lead me.

Gentlemen, and Fellow-Commoners,

Pardon me, and I will endeavor to make good my Arguments, I hope without any
just offense to any: Indeed, as I am a man, I was not made for contemplation
only, my part was to do, as well as understand: in Earthly things I have been
an Actor; in Heavenly things a Spectator: Upon the first account, I have
studied the States Honor, and the Commonwealths good, and my endeavors has
produced a proper production to both if it be rightly understood. And yet such
is the uncharitableness of men, that because I was bred a Silk-man, and lived
twenty years or thereabouts in Cheap Side, and Paternoster-Roe, a Master for my
self: The World is so full of aspick Tongues, that those that hate me without a
cause (God forgive them) report, and so would persuade the World, that the
artifice Metal I have prepared is made by another, and not by my self, I shall
but desire these men to produce that man that either does or can make it
besides my self: else let them blush at their own Errors: But they will say I
was a Silkman, and therefore it is unpossible: Oh man! Do thou think that
man's weakness proves any impossibility to God, No, no, let not Gods goodness be
evil spoken of, because thou art evil: Let not thy Eye be evil to me, because
God has been good to me: for I must confess and say it is the Lords doing;
therefore to him be glory.

Now I beseech you give me leave to unfold what will be honorable for the
State, and what will be profitable to the Commonwealth if farthings be
allowed: this I will prove a contrary, by discovering first what will be
dishonorable, and disprofitable.

There are three forts of Metals offered to the States Farthings to be made
intrinsicall.

The first is pure Copper, the Author petitions to have it intrinsic. The
second is Copper and Brass sememented together, he calls it a high intrinsic,
which is too high for me to understand. The third is Tin intrinsic too.
All which, I will prove, if they be allowed, nay any metal whatsoever, that is
easy to be counterfeited, of what weight or bigness soever it be, will be
disprofitable, pernicious, destructive, and dishonorable to the State and
Commonwealth; and that which aggravates it the more, it would bring with it,
that most pernicious thing called, a Monopoly, which all men that love the
Commonwealth, do so much abominate. First, I will prove it disprofitable,
because if Farthings be made of an equal value, then the State must necessarily
pay the petitionary pretender of the Commonwealths good, his Relatives their
charges, with all the Vtenciles thereunto belonging, which will amount to three
or four thousand pounds a year at the least, and this is not all, though it be
too much, but the allowance of any intrinsical metal, will obstruct the
bringing in of five thousand pounds a year, all charges borne: so that here
will be eight or nine thousand pounds a year loss to the Commonwealth, if you
consider the out-going and the income thereof; thus it appears clearly to be
disprofitable. Secondly, It will be pernicious and destructive, I prove it
thus: The more impoverished the public Treasure is, the heavier burdens by
way of Taxes, all men must undergo, therefore pernicious, and generally hurtful
to all: Can any man think it equal, that your purses shall, or ought to be full,
and the Public Treasure exhausted? God forbid.

Secondly, it will be hurtful, because it will be subject to every man's
counterfeiting; I need not refresh the memories of any one, it is well known
that there was scarce any man, but was a loser by those farthings formerly made
of Copper and Brass; those formerly made were Copper, with a small coar of
Brass on the one side, these now offered, are Copper in the middle, with
Brass round about; as the former were counterfeited with so many hands, that
they crowded the Commonwealth so full of them, that they surfeted on a glut, by
these all men may expect the same effects, because they differ only in form,
not in quality; so that it is clear, that there is no safety at all, to allow
of any common metal. But it may be you will object, That if they be made
intrinsical no man will counterfeit them: I pray you deceive not your own
judgments, to an unrepairable loss; for if you make any common metal of an
intrinsical value, then every five shillings worth must weigh six or seven
pounds weight, which will require very strong pockets, and if that were all, it
were well, but a Tinker, or any Mechannick, shall gain three, four, or five
pounds in making twenty shillings worth; and who shall disprove him? except men
do carry weights in their pockets to weigh them as they do gold. This is not
all neither, but these metals are in general use throughout the three
Commonwealths, and can any reasonable man think that it will not exceedingly
advance the price of that metal that should be so allowed of? Be not mistaken,
for as sure as may be, you will find it a very hard bargain to gain a farthing
and lose a shilling. Again, there is another inconvenience, for it is verily
thought by some knowing men, that there is not Copper and Brass in the
Commonwealth, to supply so great a work: take heed of a foreign glut, and it
is the more to be feared, because they have copper and brass at a far lower
rate than we in England: But now me thinks I see and hear the Gentleman that
petitions for Tin to be made into farthings of any intrinsic value, to boast
and say, that Tin is the only firsubien for farthings, saying, we have enough
in England, not only for our selves, but to supply others. Grant this, yet be
not deceived, for it will be generally hurtful, if my first Arguments cannot
convince your judgment, through your self ends; yet if you will not be angry
with me, I will prove it a Monopoly, and consequently generally hurtful: I must
be bold to tell all you Gentlemen, that pretend the Commonwealths good, and
petition for farthings to be made of an intrinsic value, you all sue to be
Monopolizers: I will prove it thus. A Monopoly is, when a general or common
commodity, of what nature soever it be, shall be sold unto one man, and he shall
ingrosse that Commodity into his own hands, for his own and only profit, to the
loss of many, this is a Monopoly: but this will be aggravated by the extent of
it, for the loss will spread it self over the bounds of the three
Commonwealths, and over all those places over which the States power extends;
and therefore it clearly appears to be very pernicious, and destructive, and if
so, then it must needs be very dishonorable to the State to allow so great an
evil.

These things then, being so clear, does it not visibly appear, that these
intrinsical petitionary pretenders of the Commonwealths good, do only intend
themselves? they would very fain cure a wound in the thigh, or leg, and make a
mortal wound in the head of the State and Commonwealth; it is a great courtesy,
from which good Lord paeserve us; I wonder they are not ashamed at their own
understandings, except they could draw some reasonable arguments in defense of
themselves, which I am confident they cannot; Oh yes, one boasts of powerful
friends, another of his great service he has done, and that the State owes
him four or five thousand pounds; Methinks these are but weak props; for can
any reasonable man think, that his Highness and the Council, who have
hazzarded their lives and fortunes, and all that is pretions to their Honors,
to regulate all abuses, and qualify as much as in them lies, all the
distempers of the nation, will wonnd their own Honors to the worlds end, and to
allow an order to any man to have the making of farthings, either in regard of a
near relation, or otherwise, it being so pernicious and destructive, as it
clearly appears? no, no, do not believe it, that God that has made them
honorable, will doubtless cloth them with integrity, which will balance a
just and innocent cause against all powerful opposers: But stay a little, I
had like to have forgot the Gentleman, that presented the white artified
Metal, Sir I pray you pardon me, I must and will tell its faults, it is as bad
as bad may be: Sir, that metal will be a rare metal to make counterseit
twopences and pence, which are now too many abroad, who would not only convert
farthings into twopences and pence, rather than twopences and pence into
farthings: and indeed Sir, your metal is for the present, so like these
counterseited two pences, that what mischief it would bring with it, and hurt
to the Comwealth, my pen is not able to express, therefore I conceive not worth
the owning.

Thus I have according to my duty to the State, and love to the Commonwealth,
showed the inconveniences that will arise by any common metal, or any metal
that is easy to be counterfeited; by your favor, I shall humbly offer to you a
metal made up by art, and it is such a metal as the earth it self cannot
afford in nature, neither was it ever Kalender'd in any Chronicle or History,
that such a metal was ever made before. Give me leave first to tell you the
properties of it. 1. It bears in it two colors, the one a pale faced red,
imbodied with Azure throughour', so that it is different from all sorts of
metal in color, 2. It is hard and beautiful like silver, in its own kind. 3.
It is in color as durable as silver: 4. It is much easier to counterfeit silver
than the same metal; which last well weighed, will take off the fear of
counterfeiting Farthings, because (I conceive) no man will counterfeit
farthings, that can counterfeit silver with more ease, provided the State make
a penal Order against it, as in like cases it is for silver and gold.

The properties thus opened, give me leave to show the inconveniences that will
(if allowed) come with it: And,

1. I will make it appear clearly to be no Monopoly, but that it will be
honorable to the State, profitable to the Commonwealth, and generally good to
all people.

1. I will make it appear to be no Monopoly, and that in a threefold
consideration. 1. Consider it in its essentiallity: 2 In its materiallity. 3.
In its adjuncts.

1. Consider it in its essentiallity, it is shapeless and immaterial, and
therefore can be no Monopoly.

2. Consider it in its materiallity, and it is a new invention which differs
from all sorts of metal, and it cannot profit or disprofit any man to have it,
or to be without it; as it is simply material, it is not common, but a new
invention, and therefore in that regard, good for nothing but farthings, and
yet if it were common as copper and brass is, it would be good for several
things, but then it would not be good for farthings, because it would be a
metal made up to all men's hands, that would counterfeit the Commonwealths
coin; so likewise it is no monopoly in regard of its materiallity, neither was
it ever known, that any new invention could be a Monopoly. Lastly, consider it
in its adjuncts, it will be honorable to the State, profitable to the
Commonwealth, harmles, innocent and generally good to all. 1. It will be
honorable, because that if his Highness and the Council please to allow it for
farthings, it will set foath to the world how willing his Highness, and their
Honors are, not only to preserve good Laws, but to confirm them, such an Act of
Grace was made in the one and twentieth of the Reign of James concerning new
Inventions, and in a another kind confitmed upon George Manby, Ano, 1650. which
Acts are extant concerning new Inventions, which Statute Law is so clear, so
honorable, so just, and grounded on such good reasons, as namely, to cherish
arts, especially when these Arts conduce to the States Honor and the Public
good, therefore I hope I shall find the like favor in the behalf of the
Commonwealth.

Secondly, it will be honorable, because it will be profitable, as appears
before, it is the honor of a State to have the Public Treasure flowing and
running over, it is likewise profitable to all forts of men, for the benefit it
will bring to the public Treasure will ease impositson of taxes, which otherwise
it would fall more heavy on every man; so that it is clear, this is harmless,
innocent, hurtful to none, but generally good to all, High and Low, Rich and
Poor; then if a Monopoly be generally cvil, and this generally good, this can
be no Monopoly. I have no more to say, but I pray the eternal God, the mighty
Lord, the great Counselor of the whole world, to infuse such wisdom into the
hearts of his Highness and Council, that they may act without delay, those
things which may most conduce to Gods glory, the States honor, and the
Commenwealths good, and I believe, when it shall please their Honors once really
to consider of this very thing, it is a business of such honorable and
necessary concernment to the Commonwealth, that their Honors will be loath to
lose a day in the promoting of it; for sure it would be a day of Glory to God,
a day of Honor to the State, a day of gladness and rejoicing to the poor, and a
day of content to all people. In fine, the allowance of State-farthings will cut
off those pernicious abuses practiced against the States honor and
Commonwealths good: I wish that it may be fix'c where the merit of the cause
most depends, and no otherwise:

FINIS.

