A Cluster of Grapes Taken out of the Basket of the Woman of Canaan. OR,
COUNSEL and COMFORT FOR BELIEVING SOULS, Coming to CHRIST and meeting with
Discouragements. BEING The sum of certain SERMONS Preached upon Matthew 15.
from Verse 22. to Verse 29. Wherein among other things, is declared more
particularly, I. What seeming harsh entertainment the soul may find from
Christ. II. What holy, and humble behavior the soul ought to have under that
entertainment. III. How blessed and comfortable a conclusion Christ will make
with the soul at last.


By JOHN DURANT Preacher of the Gospel in CANTERBURY.

London, Printed for L. C. and are to be sold by H. Mortlocke at the Phoenix
in Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door. 1660.



This shade 's the Authors outside: but this book
his inside opens. prithee do not look
Admiringly one either; Pass them over
as emptye shadows, for they are noe more.
Both books, and writers (y'ea, and all things else)
at best are shadows: but the bodye's Christ.
Soul art dejected! Christ a lone can ease thee
and give both comfort, and council to raise thee.
A. P

Durants Counsel and Comfort for Believing Souls.

To the Right Worshipful Thomas Bonner Esquire Mayor, the Recorder, Aldermen, and
Sheriff, etc. With the Reverend the Ministers, and the Saints, and Faithful
ones in Christ Jesus, in the Town of New Castle upon Tine: Grace and Peace be
multiplied.
THat Dedication of Books has been wretchedly abused, is a thing past doubt.
Holy and wise men, in all ages have complained of it, and some of late years
have scrupled it. But yet that Books may be dedicated, is to me beyond
controversy. Such Books as carry in them any thing besides what is truth, and
of concernment, gain no patronage by a Dedication (no persons being great
enough to patronize error or vanity) And such Dedications as are only stuffed
with applause and flatteries, as they have not been owned by any wise Patron,
so they have been rejected by every understanding Reader.

When Writings, as Vessels, are fraught with rich and necessary things (and
such are all spiritual Truths,) with which kind of Treasure I have endeavored
to fill this Tract; And when Dedications are designed rather for service than
for ceremony (which is my design in this) then without doubt they may pass
without stop or Scruple, as Ships consigned to particular Ports and persons:
Nor can such Dedications be suspected as a precarious policy to seek patronage
of what is written. ( Certainly Luke never intended that, when he dedicated
his Gospel to Theophilus) Neither may they be accused of Patent Monopoly, (as
if they only intended, the persons to whom they are directed.) Without doubt
the same Evangelist Luke intended the General good in his Gospel, though he
sent it first to the particular hand of his most excellent Friend, as he did
also his History of the Acts.

The following Sermons are intended by me for the general good of many. But I
thought it more than meet to consign them particularly to your Port and
persons, which when you have received, may pass further, as Commodities of
price and profit to many souls.

Now if I be demanded a reason of this particular Assignation unto you, spare
me to say the truth, which is this, I do heartily desire, 1 to witness how
much I honor you whom God has honored: And 2 also to acknowledge a debt,
wherein (with and for my Brother jointly, and my self singly) I am engaged unto
you, which albeit I cannot repay, yet I must remember. I know your Virtue and
Prudence will not bear those worthy words of your own worthiness, which yet may
be spoke concerning you with truth and soberness. And I can truly say, I never
loved to rub their itching ears, who count no sound sweet, but what trumpets
their own praises: Upon this account I shall forbear to speak that of you, to
your selves, which yet I think, I am bound (for the benefit of the example) to
tell others. Yet this I must needs crave your License to print, that having
heard of you much by the hearing of the ear, I saw more by the seeing of my
eye, when I was amongst you. And though my stay was not long, yet my
observation was such, as that I must say, that those good reports of your Town,
do not (like the bad rumors of the times) exceed the truth. If fame be found
so faithful in its reports of all persons and places, as of yours, henceforth
It will be a Slander to call her Liar. You are indeed as you have been famed,
persons fearing God, doing justice, holding forth the truth, and practicing
godliness. I must say of many Towns which I have seen, The fear of God is not
in those places; but of New Castle, I may say in a sober sense, JEHOVAH
SHAMMAH, the Lord is there.

For you, Right Worshipful Magistrates, suffer me, though not to applaud, yet
to approve, (how much soever you are above my approbation) your worthy doings
in the management of your power and places, wherein if you have any equals, I
am sure you have no Superiors. I could wish others did imitate that, wherein
you excel. You are found to be Ministers of God to such as do good; for good;
and those that do evil, Know you bear not the Sword in vain. Sabbath Breakers,
Swearers, (but why should I instance in particulars?) all sorts of vicious
persons feel your Sword sharp, and you a Terror to them; whereas your eyes are
upon those that are faithful: Ministers and people, fearing God, and doing that
which is good, have of you the praise of the same. I beseech you give me
leave, (not to praise your selves, but to provoke others to a godly jealousy)
to tell these Southern parts, that there is fair weather in the North; And if
in any place in England, certainly in your Town, and under your Government men
may and do lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And
this one thing I must needs say, Were all the Ministers in England so carefully
and tenderly provided for, and encouraged, as they are in New Castle, there
would not be that complaining in our streets, as there now are upon that
account. Indeed the Ministers of your place have their double honor; Your
encouragement of them, and provision for them is such, that I know not whether
I should entreat other parts to imitate your Bounty or Wisdom most: Certainly
both are laudable; You know not any Minister among you by any Character, but of
Christ. To preach and practice the power of godliness, is the work you equally
countenance and encourage them in: and though there be (as where is not?) some
difference amongst them, yet that makes no difference of them to you, who have
the like care of all. What can I say of this? Spare me to take up the
Psalmists words, For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be
within thee, yea, the peace of God (which the Learned know to comprehend in it
all blessings) be for ever upon you, and yours, for your unparalled care and
kindness to Christ's Ministers amongst you.

And for you (my Reverend Brethren) Let me beseech you to improve so choice a
mercy, as you have under your Magistrates. I know you desire not (how much
soever you deserve) praise: yet let me say, you are to be praised, for that
you are of one heart, (though in all things not of one head) you mind and
speak the same things of faith and life; Though ye disagree in some things of
Church-rule and Order, your public worship is in the same place, and with the
same Spirit. There is not heard in your Pulpits (where you preach by turns) the
noise of Axes and Hammars; Heats, Debates, Disputes, are exiles at your
Assemblies: you fast and pray together, your design is the same, and your
endeavors are joint, to convert sinners, and to establish Saints. Those loose
and vain opinions which have pestered and plagued many places, by your zeal and
unity for truth, are (through Christ's blessing) marvelously prevented in your
Congregations: and as for those unchristian Divisions and Animosities (which
are elsewhere the sin and shame of dissenting Professors) by the Spirit of
Love and Peace, (which rules in your hearts, and appears in your labors) they
are either not at all, or not prevailing in your place. But that I may not
trouble you with more, I will only add this further, that I perceive ye have
well studied that Text, Psalm. 77. which speaks of this, as Isreal's happiness,
that God led them by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Surely the people of your
Town seem to be led but by one hand: Indeed Moses goes before, (as it is but
fit) and Aaron comes after: Your Magistrates in Civils, and your selves in
Spirituals, are so one in hand (and I hope in heart) that though you have
offices distinct, yet your endeavors are joint, and both make up one great
mercy to the people under you. As they encourage you, so ye reverence them:
They are not such who assume power in Spitituals, but leave your work to your
selves, and ye, (I hope none of ye) are as those who despise Dominion, nor
intermeddle with the politic affairs. Let that heart be filled with sorrow,
and that hand and head be cursed of the Lord, that endeavors (in the least)
the breach of that holy and righteous harmony that is betwixt you: I presume,
ye will say, Amen, to my prayer for you in this particular.

To you then (holy and beloved Brethren) Who fear God, and have faith in Jesus,
and are blessed by, and a blessing to such a Magistracy and Ministry. Let me
speak also a few words, I bear you witness to others, that there is amongst
you, the Spirit and conversation of the good old Puritans, (whom I mention with
honor) it is your credit that you are not in this day of reproach and
blasphemy, (which is upon profession for Professors faults) a shame to that
worthy name wherewith ye are called. The itch of novel opinions, the botch of
vain fashions, the plague of neglect of duties, and slighting Ordinances and
Ministry, these are not seen amongst you, or on you. I verily saw much of
Christ in you, your carriage was seeming exact, and I hope your study is to be
what you seem for. Woe be to Hypocrites and Sinners (hollow-hearted Professors,
or ignorant and profane persons) in New castle. They that are bad under
Magistrates and Ministers so good, will be damned without mercy under two of
the greatest witnesses that can be against a people. But I hope better things
of you, though I thus speak. I beseech you so live, that by your good examples,
(concurring with the power of your Magistrates, and preaching of your
Ministers) ye may help to convince and convert evil doors, at least, to put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men.

To you all, Magistrates, and Ministers, and Saints, jointly and severally, let
me return my hearty and humble thanks for that singular respect, which for many
years ye have expressed to my ever dear and beloved Brother, whose lot is cast
among you. It is to me matter of joy and praise before the Lord, that since it
pleased God (who disposes of all our persons and places) to carry him so far
from all relations, that he did vouchsafe to fix him amongst your selves, who
abundantly make up all relations, in your care and kindness to and for him. Now
the blessed God for ever reward your love to him and his. Let your goodness
accept of me (who am obliged in and for him) this short, but sincere
acknowledgement for the same. I shall not trouble you with the remembrance of
that kindness, which (when by the good hand of God I visited my brother, and
saw ye,) you were pleased to express. It is your goodness you had rather show
kindness than hear praise. Therefore I judge it would trouble you, if I should
blaze that, which yet was such and so great, as I have and must speak of to
others, and before the Lord with thanksgiving: your receiving me, and love to
me, was in the Spirit of the Gospel; ye did receive me in the name of a
Prophet, and in the name of a Disciple, (howbeit I am unworthy that honor.) Oh
that he who rewards a cup of cold water, given upon such an account, would
abundantly reward your large and loving respects to me (even poor me) in that
way, and upon that score. My gratitude would overflow, did not the
consideration of your Modesty (which loves not to hear its own applause) set
me bounds. I will therefore conclude thus, May your Persons, your Government,
your Labors, your whole Town, and your Universal All, be always under the
special favor of the blessed God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
I remain,

Right worthy, Reverend, and Beloved Sirs, Your most obliged, and most
affectionately humble servant, JOHN DURANT.

To the Reader.
TO serve the counsel of God in a man's particular Generation, is a duty
incumbent on all that profess themselves the servants of Christ: and to be
sincere and diligent therein, is to be in the exercise, and partake of the
sure mercies of David. But to be willing to do any thing which may be service
to Christ in another Generation, and to be indeed successful therein, is a
blessing which few attain unto. And yet though such a blessing be obtained but
by a few, I persuade my self, it may at least be desired and pursued by all.
For as we are to covet earnestly the best gifts: so are we to aim at, and
endeavor the best service; and such is that which lasts and lives, when we
are gone, and fallen asleep in our Graves.

I hope I shall be freed from the crime and censure of pride, if I say, that my
aim in these small pieces, which I have been pressed formerly to print, was to
serve, not only my present, but the next Generation. And I must acknowledge to
the praise of the glory of Christ's grace, that my experience of the good liking
and acceptance of my Labors this way, gives me grounds to hope, that my
service may extend it self beyond my own age. Certainly books last longer than
men; and they speak when we are dead and gone. Hereupon I am encouraged once
again to appear in the Press for the same service, which is only to subserve
the counsel of God for the good of thy soul, (Christian Reader) by the
following Sermons; concerning which, I will only preface a few words, about
their Occasion, Scope, and Mode.

1 For the Occasion, take that thus; there is extant among those choice labors
of that Man of God, Mr. William Bridge (now of Yarmouth) one Sermon (pity it
is there, were no more) upon the story of the Woman of Canaan. This Sermon, I
had a Child (who is now with him who gave it) that was much taken with it. I
perceived she read it often with savor and delight; whereupon it was in my
heart, to enlarge a little more upon that subject, which certainly is sweet to
all those who have spiritual senses exercised to discern the glory and relish
of Gospel discourses. This was indeed (Reader) the occasion of these Sermons.

2 The Scope of them is, to do good to many, who are the sons and daughters of
Mystical Canaan. In the History of the example here opened, we may observe,
what ought to be the carriage, and what may be the comfort of any soul, that
has or shall come to Jesus Christ. Indeed the way of coming to Christ, I have
not enlarged in, (having formerly done that in my Ministerial course) the
special thing attended and aimed at, is, to direct and help poor souls, who
know and are in the way to Christ, but lie under temptations and troubles, by
reason of some seeming harsh, delatory, and denying entertainment, which they
meet withal. And therein I hope this work will be unto thee (Reader) of
advantage.

3 Concerning its Mode, or the manner of handling these Sermons; truly it is
without affectation or curiosity, either as to phrases or fancies; and in the
same plainness wherein they were preached (and taken) are they now without any
further polish printed. And truly the bread of life is best, when it is plain.
Experience has put it beyond controversy, that the truths of God take and
work most sweetly and soveraignly, where they are delivered most plainly and
simply; Not in the wisdom of man, but in the simplicity of the Spirit, and in
that ordinary language wherein the Lord gives to each man utterance. The way of
such men's preaching is exceeding bad, (albeit the matter may be truth and
good) who rather tickle the ear, than touch the hearts of their hearers. This
last I studied, and therefore that other I neglected. And (Reader) if thou
affect words, thou may spare thy pains, for upon that score the ensuing
Sermons will yield thee no pleasure. But in case thy heart be set on things,
which may concern thy soul, read humbly and seriously, and I dare (under
Christ) promise thee profit for thy pains. My desire was, and is, to serve
poor, humble, hungry souls, that will be glad of any of the crumbs which Christ
gives: and if thou be such, fall to, and the Lord be with thee in thy perusal
of these Sermons, which (with thy soul) I commend to the blessing of Christ,
desiring thee (Reader) in thy prayers to remember him, who is

Thine in soul-service for Christ's sake, John Durant.

THE Woman of Canaan coming unto Christ. The First SERMON.
Matthew 15. from verse. 22, to verse. 29.














IN all our addresses unto Christ (which is the great business of our Life and
Happiness) it concerns us, not only to know the great Precepts that should
guide us: and the gracious Promises that may encourage us; But also to be well
acquainted with all those Patterns and Examples of any that have gone to Christ
before us; and likewise with those occurrences which they did (and we are like
to) meet withal in this work: Now (my Brethren) unto this purpose I know no
one story in all the New Testament, which speaks of any coming to Christ, like
that which I have read, to acquaint us a little by way of Pattern, what we
should expect when we come to Christ. In the coming of this Woman to Christ,
we have something very patternable for us to mind. And in the carriage of
Christ to her, we may see what we may expect at the hands of Christ, even
then when we come to him. There are fix heads unto which the whole story, as
it is here recorded, may be reduced.

First, You have the coming of the Woman unto Christ, in verse. 22.

Secondly, You have the seemingly harsh entertainment that Christ gives her at
first, for he answered her not a word, and though his Disciples spoke on her
behalf, he puts them off.

Thirdly, You have the Woman's good behavior, notwithstanding all this, verse.
25. She worshipped him, saying, Lord help me.

Fourthly, You have the Repulse that Christ does give to that, in verse. 26. But
he answered, and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast
it to dogs.

Fifthly, You have her yet renewed recourse to Christ after that repulse, in
verse. 27. Truth Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their
Masters table.

Sixthly and lastly* You have the blessed issue of all, in verse. 28. Then Jesus
answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith: be it unto thee even
as thou will, etc.

My intention is not to confine my self to the Method, but to the Matter: In
which you have,

The Coming of the Woman.

The Entertainment of Christ.

The Carriage of the Woman under all.

And the blessed Conclusion wherewith all is ended.

At present we shall consider the first of these, The Coming of the Woman of
Canaan.

And behold a Woman of Canaan came out of the same Coasts, and cried unto him,
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil. This Note Behold, is observed to be a Note of Attention,
and it is put in, to usher in some matter that is more than ordinary
remarkable, and to be minded by us. Here is a Woman, and a Woman of such a
Country, and so coming, and that upon such an account, that both the one, and
the other, and altogether, may very well be brought in with a Behold. I have
formerly spoken at large of souls coming to Christ, how God leads them, and how
by Faith they are brought to him; and therefore shall not handle that now.
Only, there are here three heads of Observation, to which I shall reduce all
at this time; And as sometimes I make three Sermons upon one head or point, so
at this time I shall make one Sermon upon three heads. And the order in which I
shall proceed to speak of them, shall be this:

First, We will a little consider the party coming.

Secondly, The manner how she comes.

Thirdly, The occasion, or the account upon which she comes at this time.

To begin with the first: Behold (says the Holy Ghost) A Woman. You will be
ready to say to me, What shall we see in her? why truly in this Woman coming
to Christ, you shall see this Truth.

That the way to Christ is very free for poor souls of any place, in any
condition.

Here is a Woman (I list not to quibble upon that) but here is a Woman of
Canaan. Canaan of all the places at those times had a mark upon it, to be most
opposite to goodness, and it may be said of it, as once it was said of another
place, Can any good come out of it? But of what place of the Country? she was
a borderer to Tire and Sidon; Now Tire and Sidon were the worst places of that
Country. They were in a sense the Sodom sinks of Canaan. The Salvage places
(as we say of some Sea-Towns) the most notorious Cities of all that Country;
and yet now a Woman of this bad Country; the door is open, and she comes to
Jesus Christ. You read of some (in John 12.20, 21.) that came to Philip, and
said, Sirs, we would see the Lord, etc. Why my Brethren, It is a certain
truth, whatever Country you are of, whatever place, sex or condition, the way
is open, and you may freely come to Jesus Christ. This truth is so general in
all the Gospel, and so frequently preached, that I shall not need to stay upon
it. You read that Christ freely invited, and lovingly entertained all that
came, even Publicans and Harlots, Sinners and Rebels, Enemies and ungodly ones;
I say not, qua tales, but qui quondam tales, i. e. such as once were so vile,
and therefore unworthy and unlikely to come; yet come they did, and the way was
not hedged up, nor the door shut against them.

There are three ends why I touch upon it, and for which I desire you to Behold
this truth in this woman.

First, Behold this Woman, and truth for this end. To let you see The certainty
of that great truth, That some of all sorts shall be saved. Is the way to
Christ open and free for any sex, of any condition and Country? then some of
all sorts and Countries shall come in, Rev. 7.9. you read besides the sealed*
ones (of the Jews) the Holy Ghost takes notice of an innumerable company of the
Gentiles, and they are thus set out, to be of all Nations, and Kindreds, and
People, and Tongues. My Brethren, I do not intend so much as in the least to
prop the opinion of general Redemption; but this I say, that since the way to
Jesus Christ is so free, and so open unto all, that therefore some of all,
though not all, may come to him, and shall be saved at last. I say not that
all shall be saved, (I could wish that error had died with Origin) but I say,
some of all, i. e. some of all conditions, Countries, Kindreds, etc. shall be
saved by Jesus Christ. And why O soul, may not we be of that some?

But secondly, See (my Brethren) what an encouragement here is unto Faith. The
poor soul would come, and when he comes he must believe (your Faith are your
feet by which you must come to Christ.) But now the great question is, When the
soul is upon his way going to Christ, or upon his feet (It is such a sinner)
that the question is, May he come? yes, he may, the way is open and free to
any. In Luke 7.37. You read of a Woman that came to Christ, that is called a
sinner, etc. What ever Country you are of, I pray mind me, be it never so
barbarous and base: Be thou, O soul, a sinner of any City, suppose Sodom,
there is this ground for your Faith to build upon, and if you could (as it
were) peep and look within the Veil, you should see that there are some of your
Countrymen and women in Heaven. Father Abraham was in an Idolatrous Nation, yet
in the 51. of Isaiah, says the Holy Ghost, Look to Abraham; consider what he
was, etc. and Behold (says my Text) A Woman of Canaan came to Christ; take
notice of her well, for this end also, to strengthen my Faith, you may come
what ere be your Country.

Thirdly, Behold withal, How inexcusable poor creatures will be, that do not
put forth endeavors to come to Christ. What will you have to say? will you say
you might not? this truth will tell you there is a way open for any of you.
This story, as it is in Mark 7.24. says, Christ would have hid himself, but
he could not. Therefore, as it is an encouragement to Faith, so it will leave
unbeleef without excuse. This poor woman will condemn thee, poor Christless,
careless Creature; Behold her coming, and tremble to think of thy tarrying
away. To terrify all poor negligent souls, that mind not, seek not, come not
to a Christ, is another end why I would have you all behold the Woman of Canaan
coming: When she is gone before, what will become of you, if that you follow
not after? certainly her coming will be your condemnation. So much for the
first head, the party coming.

Secondly, How does this Woman come?

Why truly, my Brethren, you must keep Behold in your hand all along. Behold
how she comes, she comes crying, and saying, Lord, thou Son of David, have
mercy on me. Verily (my Brethren) this manner of her coming deserves a Behold,
as the very coming it self. There are three circumstances in the manner of her
coming.

First, It is said, she cried.

Secondly, She cried, Have mercy on me.

And thirdly, O Lord, thou Son of David.

First, She cried unto him.

The word does denote a very passionate cry; the Syriack does use a word which
does signify such a cry, which is as a beast that does low after its Calf.
She cried unto him, that is, She came with abundance of affection and of
intention of spirit. The Evangelish Mark tells us, she fell at his feet. I
cannot better open this, than by turning you to that which is (as it were) a
parallel, 2 King. 4.87. where you have a poor woman, whose soul was bitter,
coming to the Prophet, and so soon as she came to him, she fell down and
caught him by the feet. I pray behold and learn, in all your addresses unto
Jesus Christ, put forth the highest affection, put forth the most intenseness
of your spirits that may be, cry, and get hold of him, Christ will not charge
thee with unmannerliness. She cried, it notes the Agony of her spirit that
she was in. Oh that our drousie careless souls would but learn of this Woman!
Many are so far from crying, that they scarce lisp. But remember it (Sirs) when
you come to the Lord Jesus, stir up all your souls, let all your affection then
go out: Oh! when should we ever let out all our souls to the utmost, if not
then when we come to close with Jesus Christ? There is a lawful and laudable
passion to be manifested in this matter. Christ loves and likes to hear our
cries: O let not this poor woman's crying, cry any of us shame, who are so far
from a crying after Christ, that we do almost cry away Christ: Well, behold
her praiseworthy passion, and go thy way (soul) and imitate her therein. Never
approach Christ, but with much passion, with most earnest and ardent affection.

Secondly, She cried, Have mercy on me.

Poor Woman, she speaks as one poor in spirit, (that is) rich in Faith, (as
Christ calls her afterward) she had no Merit, but she knew the Lord had
Mercy, Behold it, and know this as a lesson to be learnt hence, viz.

That when you approach Christ, let it be by Mercy, by mere Mercy. That same
poor Publican in the Gospel of Luke cries, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
My Brethren, right closing with Christ, right saving justifying Faith which
carries the soul to Christ, eyes nothing but Mercy. This is the main
encouragement that keeps up Faith, yea, and this is the great Motive that does
still prevail with the Lord, therefore we should take hold of it; in Ephesians.
2.4. It is said, But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, etc. Thou have misery that pincheth thee, but the Lord has mercy
that will pity thee, and thou that say thou have no works, know this, the
Lord has much grace. Behold the Woman of Canaan, and see how she does, and
we ought to eye and plead mere mercy, and that only, and always when we
come to Christ.

Thirdly, Observe a little further what she says,

Lord, thou Son of David. She speaks in language beyond the learning of the
Scribes and Pharisees; though they were great Doctors of the Law, yet they had
not learned this mystery, to look upon Christ, as the Lord, and as the Son of
David. It was indeed a miracle, that a Woman of Canaan should have this
knowledge, and we might say (as it was said in another case of Christ) whence
has this Woman knowledge? why my Brethren, what could any of us have said more
to Christ, to speak out our Faith, what is it? but that we do believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ: This phrase speaks Faith. Learn hence, In all your addresses
to Christ, to come in the language of Faith, and speak to Christ as becomes
Jesus Christ. Still know, he is the Lord, David's Son, the promised one indeed.
When you come to deal with Jesus Christ, be not hasty, consider who he is
(he is the Lord) and he is the Son of David, the true and the only Messiah.
Remember this lesson in all your addresses to Jesus Christ, remember this good
example; it is a Saints pattern.

There are two sorts of people I would desire to look upon this pattern.

The first are those, who it may be are but now beginning to close with Jesus
Christ.

And secondly, Those who it may be have revolted and back slidden from Christ,
and are now returning again. I pray (Sirs) make as much haste as you can, but
observe how you go. Go to Jesus Christ with much affection, with much humility,
renounce Merit, and cry Mercy, and still give the Lord his due: So you see this
Woman of Canaan does, and go thou O soul, in any case, and do likewise. That is
all I will speak to the second head.

To proceed to the third and last thing, Behold once again the occasion of this
Woman's coming, It was, That her daughter was grievously vexed with a Devil.

The Evangelist Mark says, she was vexed with an unclean spirit. The one is a
general, the other is a particular expression of it. I do not think it worth
the while to dispute about this infirmity, or this possession under which her
Daughter lay, what it was; All that I shall note, shall be not of a Physical,
but rather of a Spiritual and Theological Nature, -- from this Mothers coming
to Christ upon this occasion. In the general, she takes her child to be
possessed with a Devil, she goes not to a figureflinger, not to any cunning
man (as simple ones use to say) she goes not to the Devil in a Doctor, to cast
out the Devil of her Daughter, No, but she comes to Christ.

I pray, in the general, Learn in all cases, distempers, diseases, etc. to go
first to Jesus Christ. You may go to men, to Physicians (though not to Wizards)
but you must go to Christ, and behold the Woman of Canaan to establish you in
that good Christian custom, of having recourse to Christ on all occasions, in
all necessities, whether for yours, and your selves. But this is general. There
are two things in particular.

The first particular thing I would have you learn out of this Mothers coming
upon this account, Is, Parentive pity in compassion on children. This Woman of
Canaan pitties her child, and cries, as if she her self felt her Daughters
pain, and though she was not sick simply, yet she was Sympathetically; thou
that can let the little one cry, and it may be perish while thou art fooling
abroad, Oh remember the Woman of Canaan, have pity on your poor children, and
for their sakes go to Jesus Christ. And do I mean only you should go to Christ
for them when they are sick? no, but Oh pray for thy childs sick soul. It was
a notable speech of one of the Ancients, said he, Will thou mourn over a body
from whom the soul is gone, and not over a soul from whom God is gone? Oh show
that you have spiritual sympathy; many of you have a natural sympathy, if you
see the child burn and snake, etc. of a Feavour, thou can pity him; but it
may be thou see him shake and reel with drunkenness, and not pity them at
all. It is Motherly pity to sympathize with sick bodies, but Christian pity
to sympathize with sick souls. Friends, put on bowels (as the Elect of God) as
the Woman of Canaan, and have compassion on your children; In all their
afflictions be ye afflicted, with all their sorrows be ye affected, and go
to Christ, on their behalf, but not only for bodies, but also and especially
for their souls. This is the first particular.

But the second is that which I would stand upon. Considering that this
distemper upon the Daughter, did bring the Mother here unto Christ, I would
especially speak to this, and entreat you to Behold this occasion of her
coming, and it will afford us a very profitable Note. The Note is this.

Behold what occasions the Lord sanctifies sometimes to bring souls to himself:
What is the occasion? My Daughter is sick.

The particular Doctrine is this, That sometimes the Lord does sanctify
corporal, or external occasions, and afflictions, to bring souls home to
himself.

The great means, the standing Ordinance by which the Lord brings souls to
himself, is the Word, and the Word Preached. But yet I say besides that, the
Lord is pleased sometimes to make use of other means, and among the rest,
sometimes the Lord does sanctify external afflictions to bring home poor souls
to himself.

There are two things in all external afflictions that I would have all to
mind.

First, God sending.

Secondly, God sanctifying of these afflictions.

First, You should observe, That God sends them. Afflictions do not arise out
of the dust; if any evil be in the City or Family, it is the finger of the
Lord, it does not come by chance or fortune, it comes from God, and we ought
to behold him in it.

But then secondly, Observe the Lord sanctifying afflictions. The Lord does not
always sanctify affliction where he sends it: But sometimes God does
sanctify it unto many good and gracious ends and purposes; and in particular,
I say, God does sometimes to some souls sanctify afflictions to this end, to
bring home the poor soul to himself.

There are three Comings unto Jesus Christ, in all which the Lord does
sometimes, to some persons, make use of corporal afflictions.

First, There is that which we call our first fundamental Coming to Jesus
Christ; when the soul does first come to Jesus Christ from his wandering
rebellious estate and condition, when it is first brought out of the wilderness.

Secondly, There is our gradual Coming to Christ; When the soul that is come to
Christ in a good measure, comes a little nearer, he comes from strength to
strength, and so by degrees appears before God in Sion. Jacobs Ladder had many
staves, and coming to Christ has many steps and stairs: Therefore besides our
prime, or first coming unto Christ, there is a perfecting progress, or
ascendent going to, or growing up in Christ higher and higher, which is, (as it
were) our coming nearer and nearer.

Thirdly, There is our Coming to Christ, which is our Return after some eminent
Revolt, when a soul has left its first love. Now in all these, and unto all
these, the Lord does sometimes sanctify external afflictions; the Lord does
sometimes sanctify external afflictions, to bring the soul home to himself; As
Poverty, The Lord makes many an one poor, that they may look after a rich
Christ. And Disgrace from creatures the Lord permits, and sanctifies that to
make the soul long and labor, that they may be precious in his sight. And
Sickness upon us and ours; the Lord does sometimes kill the childs body, to
save the Mothers soul; take away the husband, the he may bring the wife home
to himself; we might give many notable instances. As in Matthew. 8.2. There you
find a Leper came to Christ, and what occasion brought him; truly this man's
Leprosy brought him to Christ, and for ought we know, had not this man been a
Leper, he had never come to Christ. In Matthew. 9.27. There we hear blind men
calling after Jesus Christ; but why? you shall see in that place, their
blindness upon their eyes, make them look after Christ. And Matthew. 21.14. The
blind and lame came to him to the Temple to be healed, etc. Thus it pleases
Christ sometimes to sanctify corporal afflictions to bring us home to himself.

There are two Reasons why the Lord does this.

The first relates to us.

The second, unto himself.

First of all, I say, The Lord does sometimes take this course, upon our
account; considering us, the Lord works thus on us; In Jer. 9. says the Lord
there, I will melt my people, for how else shall I do for the daughter of my
people? i.e. As if he should say, I cannot tell else what to do for them. Oh
my Brethren, the Lord sees sometimes nothing else will do it but affliction.
Me thinks I hear the Lord sometimes speaking of a poor creature after this
manner, There is such a one, who so long as he can be well, and do well, as
to externals, I shall not hear of him, I must therefore take some other course
with him; well, I will go and melt him, etc. Oh Sirs! this is our folly, that
(whatever Arminians dream) we are so backward to come to Christ, that except
he draw, we will not go; nay, except he drive, we will not stir, nor step
forward; all the persuasions of the Lord, they will not work us up to free
will, except he make, he add power to persuasion: Indeed in the day of his
power, we are (potentially, not perswasively only) made a willing people, as
Psalm. 110. Upon this account it is, that Christ is, as we say, fain to use the
Rod sometimes to bring us home to himself. How often does Christ say, since my
Pipe will not, my Rod shall fetch such a sheep, and such a sheep? ( i. e. It
may be thy soul, and thy childs soul.) I will make it a day of power, and by
grace I will follow them with one means after another. You know what is said by
the Lord, of a backward people, in Hosea 5. verse the last. In their affliction
they will seek me. In 2 Samuel 14.30. You read, Absolon sent for Joah to come to
him, and he would not, but Absolon sent and fired his fields, and then he
comes. My Brethren, we may very well parallel it; God says sometimes, go
Minister, preach to him judgment, and threatening, and that will not do; and go
mercy, that will not do; then go sickness, and Oh! sickness must preach a
Sermon, before many will hear a word. Well, here is the first Reason (which as
I said, relates to us) Afflictions are sent and sanctified to bring us to
Christ, because often nothing else will. Truly, I say, this is our naughty
Nature, that fair means will not work upon us, and this is our Fathers grace,
that he will take other means, but he will effect his work.

Secondly, The Lord does it upon another account, which relates to himself; To
show us, That he is not tied to means, but can work by any providence if he
please. The Lord has more means than one, and he is a free Agent, he can use
which he pleases. If Onesimus, a naughty and bad servant, will not be wrought
upon at home under a good Master, he shall be brought to the Gaol to hear a
Sermon there; you have that intimated in the Epistle to Philemon. The account
of it take in brief thus, Philemon was a godly man, and a good Master, and he
had 2 Church in his house; but Onesimus was naught for all that, his Master
could not by any means work upon him, but he breaks out and away, (it is
likely) he runs: And by the hand of Justice, (God ordering of it) is brought
to a Gaol, where a Prison prepares him to hear, and a prisoner is provided to
preach, and now he is wrought upon. God has many ways, if we run from one,
he has another to meet with us in. If a Pulpit do not, a Prison shall; if a
soft word win not, a hard shall; he will have us see that he is not tied to
any means, and therefore sometimes will by a sickness, a loss, etc. bring us
home, as well as by other ways.

There is only one Objection that must be answered.

Object. But does not his seem to give some advantage to those who cry down the
preaching of the Word? It has been a seemingly fair, but a really poor
Argument of those to tell us, that God can make any thing an Ordinance, and
therefore they cast off preaching, and say, what need that? cannot, and does
not God work sometimes without that?

Repl. I answer generally; My Brethren, One good means may very well go hand in
hand with another: And my Brethren, none of the Lords means are Yea and Nay;
destructive one of another, or inconsistent one with another: All may, and all
shall stand; and in vain do we think to make one an Argument against the
other. It is certain God can always, and he does often work by afflictions;
But yet the Word is the chief, known, tried, and standing means: And after all
that has been said to the contrary, I still think, that though the Lord may
make use of, and sanctify afflictions (as sickness upon us and ours) to bring
us home to himself, yet it is very rarely without the Word.

There are two Considerations in particular, that I would have you mind.

First, Many times Afflictions (as poverty and sickness) do make a word to work
a word that we have heard. The words of the wise (says Solomon) they are as
Nails fastened. Now it may be the Lord fastens, or rather puts in a Nail in
the Assembly by his Word, and the poor soul runs away; now the Lord sends an
affliction after him, to fasten the Nail, and the man is cast upon a sickbed,
and now says he, I remember such an instruction. Affliction brings home, and
drives home a word formerly preached unto us, which we heard, and did not
regard or remember, but now by an Affliction are made to do both. I have
thought Affliction does that which Posset Drink does in Physic (it is a plain
similitude, yet mark it) A man takes Physic, and it works not, then give him a
draught of Posset Drink, and that makes it work, that helps it on; so it is
here. A Word is given out, and it works not, then the Lord sends Affliction,
and that makes it work: But still it is the Word that works, the Word formerly
heard, etc. You know what is said, in Psalm. 141.6. It is said there, when they
are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words, for they are sweet.
Why the words were sweet before, and heard before; but then they shall be made
to relish, and then they will mind them. Well, mind this, though Affliction
work, it is rather as a help to the Word, than of it self without the Word.
This is one Consideration.

Secondly, Another Consideration is this, That mostly the Lord makes use of
Afflictions (if not to) back what we have heard, yet) to bring them to hear.
Mind it; Many a time the poor Creature has lived without Sermon-hearing all
his days, and Affliction comes, and that drives him to the Word: Now the soul
will go to Lectures, now the soul will wait on the Ministry; so that
Affliction does rather bring him to the Word as the means, that work, and be
an effectual means without it. I pray then mark these Considerations, to keep
up your highest thoughts of the Word, and that preached as the prime means;
verily experience seals to these two things, that the work of Affliction,
rather seconds a Word heard, or brings the soul to hear the Word, than simply
works without it.

Now then for the Application of this.

There are five Uses that I shall lay before you.

First, Does the Lord this way use and sanctify sickness and affliction
sometimes upon us or ours? Then look about you, and see whether God has
sanctified any affliction upon you. We live in a sickly time, it may be
sickness has been in all your families; has this (like the Woman of Canaan)
brought you to Christ? did the sickness of thy body, advance thy foot to Christ?

You will say, We are like the Woman of Canaan, and God forbid but we should
go to Christ when we were sick.

But did it bring you to Christ in a soul-way, in a soul saving-way?

Quest. How shall I know that?

Answ. Let me propose two things to you, to let you try.

First, When any affliction brings a soul to Christ (besides the material
sickness or affliction that is upon the outward man) the soul is sensible of
something like it, lighted upon the inward Man. There is a sense of the same
spiritually, as well as corporally. As now, when sickness brings a man to
Christ, he speaks thus, I am sick, my head aches, I, and says the man, my
heart aches too. Oh wife! I am a poor sinner, I cried first out, I am sick in
body, but now I am sick in soul; still the soul sees something like it in
spirituals, if his sickness brings him to Christ. If thou only art sensible of
a corporal disease, and go to Christ for that, then it is but a corporal
coming, not a soul, nor a saving coming unto Christ: but when thy sick body
leads thee to the sense of a sick soul; when thy Feavour, thy Ague, brought
thee to feel the like distemper in thy soul, and thou thereupon wentest unto
Christ for that, then was sickness indeed sanctified in a soul-saving-way.

Secondly, Observe this, He that by any affliction or sickness is brought home
to Christ, whatever the issue of the affliction may be, his heart is for
certain moving still toward Christ; even after the sickness is gone. You may
have a man while the sickness is upon him, then he may be up in prayer with
his Lord have mercy, etc. but when it is gone, his sickness is gone, and
devotion is gone too: But if this bring him to Christ, though the sickness be
gone, yet the man follows after Christ still, and minds him. The soul after
sickness is as he, Luke 8.38. who besought the Lord that he might be with
him. O soul! if thou came to Christ sick, thou desire to be with Christ
well; I pray then look to it, see if your afflictions have been sanctified, and
if they have brought you unto Christ. That is our first Use.

Use 2. Then secondly, Let this teach us all to prize those afflictions by
which we can say, the Lord brought us home to himself; I say, learn to prize
such an affliction: Never speak ill of that sickness, by which the Lord Jesus
brought thee nigh to himself. You say it has been an hard time with you,
sickness has been sore in your families, but did Christ bring thee nigh to
him? never speakevil of that affliction more. Mind Psalm. 94.2. Blessed is the
man whom thou chastenest, and teach him out of thy Law. Have thou been
afflicted? has that taught thee something of the bitterness of sin, of the
necessity of Christ? and has it taught thee to look after thy soul, to look
after a Christ? happy man art thou. Oh my Brethren, many a man has said to the
praise of God, blessed be God for such a sickness, etc. I have heard of some
that have blessed God for plundering, for poverty, for such and such a sickness
on themselves and theirs, etc. And truly well they might so do, because it
brought them home to Christ. Christ has saved a parents soul by taking away a
childs life; Oh therefore, if God has done so by you, you may sing, happy
time, blessed affliction. I pray speak well of all things which help you home
to Christ.

Use 3. Thirdly, This point will give us a Lesson of Hope in the behalf of any
of our Relations, whose souls we love, and labor with, till Christ be formed
in them, but at present is not. Sickness, Loss, Affliction are a way sometimes.
Now hope in the Lord; if thou that have done thy endeavor upon thy poor
Relation to bring him to Christ, and yet he is not come, thou little know
what affliction may do. It may be that which thou could not work upon thy
child with all thy instructions, that God may do with an affliction. I cannot
advise you to pray; as I have heard of one (who it may be, spoke it honestly,
though not handsomely, Lord break a leg or an arm, etc.) Lord send him a
Feavour, an Ague, etc. I cannot advise you to that. But this I can say for your
encouragement: God can send, and sanctify an affliction to bring home thy
child at last. Christ's Rod can do that which yours cannot; Oh therefore pray
and hope, endeavor and hope, yet God can work and win upon thy yoke fellow,
thy child, thy brother etc. For God sometimes you see sends and sanctifies
afflictions, to bring in to Christ.

Use 4. Fourthly, Let this teach us patiently to bear any affliction that may
be upon us for present; why so? because for ought we know, God may sanctify
it to bring us nigh to himself; should not we then be patient? Possibly thou
art a poor creature, that have been but a Talker of Christ, only a mere
pretender, but yet to this day did never really come to, nor rightly close
with Christ, and now thou art sick, and weak. Free Grace may design, and intend
thy real, experimental and truly saving knowledge of, and laying hold upon the
Lord Jesus, and to that purpose it may be (I say) that God brings affliction,
O therefore learn patience; who can tell but the Lord will be gracious, and by
this affliction bring thee home to himself, he is chastening thee here, that
he may not condemn thee hereafter. True it is, that no affliction (as the
Apostle says) for the present is joyous, but afterward it may bring forth the
peaceable fruit of righteousness. Oh therefore, I say, beware of repining and
murmuring, for possibly the Lord afflicts thee, that he may bring thee, as
this woman, to himself.

The last Use, Let all your hearts run out after this in all your afflictions,
that (if it be the Lords pleasure) it may work upon you, ( as it did upon the
Woman of Canaan) to bring you near to Jesus Christ: Mind and desire is then in
all afflictions. This is that you should look after in your afflictions, not
only to consider that God sends it, but to observe how God sanctifies it. Say,
Oh Lord, thou have afflicted my body, do good to my soul; say, thou have
afflicted me, and mine, thus or thus in body or estate; oh that indeed thou
would work upon mine heart thereby. Consider, to move you,

First, It is your soul-concernments that do most of all ly upon you to
consider in all your afflictions. It may be God has taken away all thy
estate, and thou art considering how to make it up again, why know, it does
more concern thee to consider how thou may be rich in Faith, and come to a
good estate in Christ, rather than to vex thy self about thy estate and how to
recover thy loss: Or else it may be you are ill, and now your great care is to
be well again; Oh thou ought rather to consider thy soul-sickness, thy
spiritual illness, and endeavor to get that cured in Christ, than thy poor
carcass. I beseech you beloved mind, (as you use to say) the main, and know,
that it is the soul that is that main, and do no^ altogether mind your bodies,
but sometimes mind your souls. Oh that God would make people, but to mind
their souls more (I could wish) but as much as their bodies!

Secondly, To move you, Consider, whatever the issue of any affliction may be,
blessed are you if your souls are brought to Christ, It is well indeed if
closing with Christ be the conclusion. Let child live or die, estate go or
come, so thou and Christ meet together, all is well. Blessed is the man that
can say, I lost my estate such a day, and I found my Lord Jesus such a day,
etc. Therefore suffer the word of Exhortation; Above all things see how your
souls are brought to Christ in every Affliction; and make it your grand work to
observe and obtain that, by all the hand of God at any time upon you or yours.
But before I conclude, I must answer this case of Conscience.

Case. But will some poor souls say, Alas, If I should go to Jesus Christ upon
such a carnal account, shall I be accepted? Because my husband, wife, or
child is sick, will he hear me? Is this a fair foundation, or a good first
Motive to bring me to Jesus Christ?

Resol. I answer, Truly my Brethren, If thou go only to Jesus Christ upon a
carnal account, or occasion, I cannot say Christ will bid thee welcome; But if
thy carnal occasion be but a Motive, to bring thee upon a higher account, thou
may go and find entertainment. Although a dirty shoe bring you into your
Fathers house, yet your Father will make you welcome. Therefore I say in the
Name of the Lord, do not stick at this case, but rather bless God that has
sent an affliction to awaken thee, to bring thee home, than question whether
you shall be accepted upon this account. Let me therefore end as I began.
Behold the Woman of Canaan, for it may be her condition is yours (in a sense)
you have a sick child, as she had, etc. I pray thereupon go to Christ, as
she did; verily Christ will in no wise cast you off, in case you come. Suppose
the first Motive be low, and corporal, yet the Matter may prove high and
spiritual. Who knows but the Lord has sent diverse sicknesses up and down for
this end, to bring diverse souls to Christ? I pray therefore mind it, and in
all affliction look and long that it may have the same operation on you, which
it had on this Woman, who was by this means brought to Christ. And this shall
suffice for this verse.

Christ may seemingly entertain (at first) very harshly. The Second SERMON.
Matthew 15. from verse. 23, to verse. 29.












BEsides those Many Men, which upon an eminent account are recorded in the
Gospel; there are also sundry Women, who are in an eminent manner recorded
likewise; and concerning whom the Holy Ghost has noted something for our
special observation, and imitation. Among others, there are Two Women in the
Gospel, which are very remarkable: The one is the Woman (that you read of, in
Luke 8.) who is called, a sinner; And the other is the woman commonly known by
the name of The Woman of Canaan; and both these women are recorded for eminent
coming unto Jesus Christ. We have here in this place the story of The Woman of
Canaan; and indeed it is a very holy History, and many things are in it which
are to be heeded by us. The last day I gave you an account of the Method in
which the Holy Ghost does here record it. But letting pass the Method, I told
you I would stand upon the Matter of the story, wherein you have four heads.

First, The coming of the Woman to Christ.

Secondly, The entertainment that Christ. does give her.

Thirdly, You have her carriage under that entertainment.

Fourthly and lastly, The blessed issue of all.

We began the last day with the first; The coming of the woman to Christ, in
verse. 22. And behold a Woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried
unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil.

There are three Circumstances in her coming that we stood upon.

The Party coming.

The Manner of her coming.

And the Occasion of her coming.

The Party coming, It was a woman of Canaan, A Woman of Canaan, near Tire and
Sidon, of a bad place in a bad Country. (But we told you the way to Christ is
open to all.) But then how did she come? She came with much affection, she
cried, Lord, and she came for mere mercy. ( Justifying Faith still goes to
Free Grace, and Mere Mercy.) And she came to him as he was the Messiah, the
Son of David; she did, and we must eye Christ as he is, in all our addresses.

Lastly, But what brought the good woman here? Why truly it was a sick child
at home, that was sore sick, that brought her to Christ.

Whence we observed, That sometimes the Lord does sanctify sicknesses, and
other afflctions upon us and ours, to bring us home unto himself. I pray mind
it, For, (My Brethren) we have lived for some months under one sickness or
other: But now let me ask you the question, Have you done like the Woman of
Cannan? have you gone to Jesus Christ, not only for them, but have you gone
for your souls to Jesus Christ? Mother, has thy sick child brought thee
savingly to Jesus Christ? or husband, let me ask thee, has the sickness of
thy wife done a cure upon thy own soul? can any of you say, blessed be God,
the Lord took away a child, or husband, but that was a strange cord that drew,
and brought me to himself; Oh! blessed is that sickness upon you, or any of
yours, which (as the Woman of Canaans) brings you home to Jesus Christ;
Therefore I shall press it home a little further in four things, by way of
consideration, for you to take the more special heed unto the things which I
then spoke, and you heard, viz. The improvement of all afflictions to bring
your souls to Christ.

Consider first, Possibly, yea probably, the Lord did therefore send such a
sickness to thy soul, that he might bring thee home to himself; The Lord saw
nothing else would do thee good, and therefore sent that: Thou were, it may
be, a poor vain creature, that could scoff at a Sermon, and no preaching
would do thee good; now it may be the Lord sends sickness to bring thee in:
He does by sickness, as by a special servant, send for you, and it stands you
upon to go to him; therefore now Brethren look about you, if ever God send a
Messenger of a particular Errant, if the Messenger have not his answer, woe be
to you. It is a great evil to neglect any of the Lords Messengers.

Secondly, It is certain, we have all more reason to go to Christ for our
souls, than upon the account of any sickness for our bodies. Our souls are our
highest concernment; and there is more sickness, and more danger, in and upon
your souls, which should carry them to Christ, than can be upon your selves
and families: There are but a few whose souls are better than their bodies.
Indeed we read of one, he had a holy soul, but a weak body; holy Gaius, in
the third Epistle of John; but generally our souls are worse than our bodies,
and therefore we have more reason to go for our souls. The Feavour it may be
is upon thy body, and is it not in thy soul? the Devil possesses thy childs
body, does he not possess thy own soul? Oh therefore considering you have more
reason to go for your souls, than your bodies, set every thing be sanctified
in you, and have that work upon you.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus has more bowels, and he is easier prevailed withal
to do for the soul, than in any case for our bodies, or for the bodies of our
Relations. You never read of any that came to Christ for their souls, that
Christ did cast them off. The Lord Christ may in wisdom and grace deny you,
when you come for your body; he may say, it is not good you should be well,
but he will never say, It is not good your souls should be well.

Fourthly and lastly, The person that goes to Christ in, and for his soul by
any affliction, gets more by the affliction, than he could get by all things
else. Mind it, I beseech you. Oh my Brethren, what do you get when you come to
Christ? why says Christ, He that comes to me shall never hunger nor thirst
more; that is, in his soul; And he that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out: you get soul-satisfaction, and soul-enjoyment, and is not that above all
bodily gettings? And therefore I beseech you upon these accounts, look about
you, how the hand of God is sanctified to you by the afflictions which are,
have been, or may be on you. But we shall now proceed.

How does our Lord entertain this woman? which is the second thing we are to
come to, Christ's manner of entertainment: Why truly my Brethren, very
strangely, very harshly, we may speak it with reverence, very harshly. In
verse. 23. He answered her not a word; and though the Disciples spoke on her
behalf, verse. 24. He says, He was not sent, but to the last sheep of the
house of Israel; though she worships him, and renews the request again, he
tells her, It was not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it to dogs,
verse. 26 From the whole carriage of Christ to her, observe this,

Doct. That sometimes the Lord Jesus is seemingly harsh to some poor souls when
they come to him.

Or if you will thus, Christ sometimes very roughly entertain^ poor souls. Mark
the point well.

Indeed it is a strange point, A point that seems to c^oss all the Gospel:
What, that Christ, whose Name is Love, and whose Nature is Love, that Christ,
who is rich in Mercy, who is full of pity, who has made sweet Promises, to
invite, and left great presidents to encourage us to come; that ever he should
entertain us with frowns, with harshness, with severeness, this is strange: Yet
sometimes this is true. We have a great instance of it here in this poor
woman, and we shall endeavor to open it to you; only before I proceed to the
proof, I pray consider, and remember how I express the point, to prevent
mistakes. It is easy to misunderstand this unto the dishonor of Christ, and
our own disturbance, if we mind it not well: Therefore consider how I word or
phrase the point. Now there are three words which I put into the doctrine,
which are as so many limitations or cautions, that neither you, nor I may
mistake Christ, nor the text, nor the president; when ever we speak of it.

First, I say seemingly.

Secondly, Some times.

Thirdly, I put in, to some souls.

First of all, I say, Christ is seemingly harsh in his entertainment. My
Brethren, Jesus Christ is not really so, but a man may seem to be that he is
not. It was said of Paul ( Act. 8.17, 18.) this man seems to set forth strange
doctrines, which yet he did not, he preached true doctrine, viz. The right
way of the Living God. It was a slander of him that said in the Parable, of
Christ, that he was a hard Master: But yet it is a real truth, Though Jesus
Christ be not so, yet he may SEEM to be so; Jesus Christ may seem to be,
and to do, that which neither he is, nor will do. It is said in Luke 24.38.
that Christ made as though he would have gone further. Christ really did not
intend it, but made, as we say, a show of it; and so here; Christ does not
intend to deal harshly with any that come (no, certainly Christ intends all
Love, and all sweetness, etc.) but yet he may seem so to do. Mind that word,
it is seeming, or in show, Christ carries it harshly.

But then secondly, It is so but sometimes, it is not always; The Lord will
not chide for ever, as David said. And so in Isa. 57.16. he will not contend
always, nor be wroth for ever. My Brethren, Jesus Christ may seemingly carry
it so sometimes, but not always. As first meeting, in John 20.15. when Christ
and Mary met in the Garden, Christ ar first carries himself strangely, but
afterward he opened himself sweetly, and clearly to her; and so Christ may
for a while carry himself seemingly, harsh, or rough, it may be for a moment,
a day, a year, a few years, but not always: Christ cannot always restrain his
bowels, nor cast off for ever.

Take these two truths as everlastingly and undoubtedly true.

The first is, That Satan will not always spare thee.

And secondly, Christ will not always chide thee.

Satan for a while will give a soul good words, to tempt him to sin, and folly,
and to that end may speak fair and smooth; but at last Saran will be like
himself, a Devil, a dread and terror: And Christ may for a season carry it
harshly, but he will not, indeed cannot do so for ever. To the end he must
be (as he is) very kind.

And then thirdly, It is but to some persons, not to all. My Brethren, all that
come to Jesus Christ are not entertained alike; the most are entertained with
present love; but a few, some there are that he does seemingly for a while
entertain with frowns. I do not read of any such story in the Gospel as this.
We read of many who came to Christ, and all entertained by Christ sweetly,
none but this poor woman is left as a president of this point; but yet one
clear President is enough for proof. And there are only two things we shall
do in the amplification of the Point.

First of all, We shall show you, How Christ may seemingly carry it harshly,
and strangely to poor souls, when they come to him.

Secondly, Whence it comes to pass that Jesus Christ, thus strangely carries
himself seemingly harsh?

For the first, How does Jesus Christ discover any seeming harshness in his
carriage to those that come to him? I will go no further than to the instance
of the Text. I will gather six things out of this story, wherein you and I may
learn and see, that sometimes Christ may discover, as if he were unkind,
harsh and severe.

First, It appears upon the first view of the whole, He did not entertain her
presently.

Secondly, Possitively, He did not so much as give her a word. So it is, verse.
23.

Thirdly, When others spoke to him on her behalf, he refuses to hear. Verse.
23, 24.

Fourthly, The Lord does reject her, though she does renew and reiterate her
motion again to him. Verse. 25.

Fifthly, He hints that, which might as one would think dash the poor
creatures hope. Verse. 26.

Sixthly and lastly, He may keep us long ere he send us away, with that we
come for; As he did her.

Now soul mind it, and if Christ seem to frown, and to carry it strangely, let
it not seem strange, for it is no new thing.

First, The Lord Jesus Christ does not entertain her presently. One would
think, I say, one would think, (especially considering the many former
Presidents of persons coming to Christ) that this woman should have been
embraced presently: How lowly does she come? how loudly does she cry? in the
language of what Eaith does she speak? yet Christ does not answer her.
Remember ye, the Lord Jesus may let a soul sometimes long lie before him, and
never take him up. You indeed read of the Prodigal, who when he fell upon his
face, the Father fell upon his neck; but beware thou promise not thy self this
presently. Christ may let thee fall upon thy face, and not fall upon thy neck.
In Matthew 11. verse last, You have there a sweet call, Come unto me ye that
are weary, etc. Now I pray mind it, a poor soul may go to Jesus Christ very
weary, and heavy laden, and the Lord may let it lie a great while under the
burden of filth, under the burden of guilt and of fears, and may seem, for a
while, not at all to mind it. Certainly, it could not be a little while, that
David lay under the burden of Gods absence, after he had sinned against him:
See Psalm. 38. and the beginning; where he complains, That his wounds did
fester, and were corrupt. David was like a man going to a Surgeon with many
wounds, and the Surgeon lets the wounds stink, before he gives a plaster
to him. Sinners, look about you, The Lord Christ may let you lie without a
plaster many a day, without washing your wounds many a day. Paul prayed three
times for one thing, and that thing denied him. If ever you come and knock, and
cry, and call, and the Lord does not presently open, do not say, never one was
so dealt withal as I am; the Woman of Canaan was so before thee, that is
clear, she was not presently made welcome.

Secondly, The Lord did not only not entertain her, but did not speak a word
to her. So it is expressly, verse. 23. The Lord answered her not a word. Oh my
Brethren, how harsh was this? what, not a word? O! not a word? Why, if the Lord
Jesus will not presently give the balm that the wounded soul does beg, will he
not speak? No, not a word? And yet it is noted, She cried after him; yet not a
word, not a word. It is upon record as the case of Saul, setting forth the
greatness of his distress (when God did most severely deal with him) That he
Lord did not answer him by dreams or visions, nor by Urim nor Thummim; that is,
God did not speak a word.

And my Brethren, let me tell you, It is a harsh dealing, when the Lord shall
let us lie crying, and he be dumb, as if he did not hear. It is harsh not to
be heard.

There are two ways by which the Lord speaks, viz.

1 By his Spirit.

2 By some actual dealing with the soul.

1 Sometimes Christ says by the Spirit, Soul, be of good comfort, thy sins
are forgiven.

2 At other times he gives good signs, by supporting and refreshing the soul;
but it may so fall out, as that he may carry it so seemingly harsh, as not to
answer a word to the soul either way. And this is no new thing, we read in
Psalm. 22.1, 2. David there (who was then a type of poor souls) cries out there,
Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? O God I
cry, but thou hear not. So in Job 30.20. says Job, I cry unto thee, and
thou do not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest it not. He says, God
did not so much as regard what he said. If the Lord Jesus would not presently
entertain us, to do as we wish, yet certainly one would think, a word were but
little; but sometimes Christ will not speak a word.

Thirdly, The Lord carries it so seemingly harsh, that when others speak on her
behalf, he refuses to hear. Mark it; here were (as we say) good spokesmen for
this woman. Verse. 23. His Disciples besought him, saying, send her away, for
she cries after us, i. e. As if they should say, Lord, the poor woman cries
very loudly, she cries after us, as the beast after the Foal, etc. What says
Christ? why, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. He
puts them by, he gives them a denial, and something more, as we shall show by
and by. In Numb. 12. you read a sad story of Miriam, Moses his Sister, she had
provoked God, and God had smote her with a Leprosy, and Moses cried to the
Lord for her, says the Lord, If her Father had spit upon her face, should she
not be shut out of the Camp seven da^es? Oh my Brethren, sometimes the
Minister may, the Father may pray, and the Mother may pray for the child, and
yet the Lord will not speak, but put them off. If Moses and Samuel should speak
to me for this people, yet my mind could not be toward them Jer. 15.1. Oh
my Brethren, It is no new thing, for the Lord to carry it so seemingly harsh,
as not to hear others when they speak on our behalf. Possibly the soul may say,
I am unworthy to speak, but had I some friend to speak on my behalf, certainly
then he would hear; why, they may all speak for thee, and yet Christ may put
them all by.

Fourthly, The Lord does reject her, though she does renew, and reiterate her
motion again to him. This is harsh; And pray mind how she does it, She came,
and she WORSHIPPED him, saying, Lord help me. It is not said in verse 22.
that she worsh^pped him (or that she fell down) But here it is said, She
worshipped him. She renews her request with vehemence, and with reverence; and
here was her humiliation put forth. Weigh it but a while. Lord help me, etc.
My Brethren, she speaks at this rate, as if she should say, Lord help, if
thou do not help me, I perish; Lord help me, if thou do not help me, vain
is the help of Man. She adores him as the Lord, But does this prevail? nothing
less; though she renews her cry, yet the Lord turns her off. It is harsh not
to be bid welcome, not to have a word not to have others heard when they speak
for us; but when the soul shall repeat, and reinforce, and as it were heighten
her humiliation and prayer, then to be rejected, this is an addition to all
the former; yet sometimes the Lord does thus. And we find a like instance to
this in others; says Job, in chap. 16.6, 7. Though I speak, my grief is not
assuaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased? but now he has made me
weary: thou have made desolate all my company. The Lord may as it were tire out
the soul, and make it weary. And so in Psalm. 69. and the beginning, I sink into
the deep, I am weary of crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while I wait
for my God. The Lord may let the soul cry again and again, till the very
moisture is dried up, and yet to put it off; so that the soul may cry out with
Job, Job 23.13. he is of one mind, who can change him, etc? Therefore the
Church has a remarkable expression ( Lamentations 3.8.) Also when I cry and
shout, he shuts out my prayer. Shouting, it is an addition unto crying. Why
here is the poor woman crying, in verse. 22. I and she cries and shouts, in
verse. 25. and yet the Lord puts her off.

Fifthly, The Lord Christ may carry it so seemingly harsh, that he may hint
that, that may seem to dash the poor creatures hope. Oh this is sad, and sore
indeed (Beloved) That the poor creature, who it may be came with a little
Faith, and a little Hope, should be entertained so harshly, as the soul may
be ready to say, Now farewell Faith, and farewell Hope, etc. Thus the Lord has
carried it to some before; as if he had cut off all their hope. It was a very
sad expression that they used, Ezekiel. 37.11. Then he said unto me, Son of Man,
these bones are the whole house of Israel: Behold they say, our bones are
dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. Why truly (poor
soul) Jesus Christ may so speak to you, that you may say, Now our hope is gone;
and we, for our parts (whatever may be the portion of others) for our own
particulars, we are cut off, and cast off; And Christ may carry it so, as if
he gave, (I say as if (not that he does really) but I say) as if he gave us
ground so to say; that he has cut off all our hope, and destroyed all that
upon which our expectations were bottomed. You have Job complaining of this
himself, Job 19.10. Mine hope has he removed like a Tree. But of all
expressions, that is the most remarkable, which you have in Lam. 3.54. The
waters flowed over mine head, then I said, I am cut off. Oh Sirs, Jesus Christ
may for a while so speak, that the soul may say, now my hope is perished, and
now I will sit down and despair. And mark it but a little in this great
instance of this woman of Canaan: For here are two words that Christ uses to
this woman, which indeed did seem (for it was no more than a seeming) to dash
all her hope in pieces.

First, The^ one is, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, i. e. As if Christ should say, My good friends, my dear Disciples, you
pity the woman, so it may be do I, but what shall I do? I cannot go beyond my
commission, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; this
woman is none, she is a Canaanite. Now how might the poor woman complain
sadly, Oh Lord, are none of the Canaanites in thy commission? am not I in thy
commission? then farewell Lord; He speaks a word that might even dash all her
hope. So say some souls, Christ is only for the Elect, I am no elect one; and
thus the soul goes away hopeless.

Secondly, And the other word that Christ speaks, which might dash all her
hope, is in the 26. verse. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to
cast it to dogs. Oh what a killing word was that? poor heart! she might
rather have expected that the Lord would have looked upon her, as upon a silly
Lamb, as upon a trembling Dove, that he would speak softly to her; but how
roughly does he speak? And how might this poor woman have mourningly muttered,
and in secret sighs have hereupon spoke thus in her self? What, must not dogs
have childrens bread? what said he? etc. Ah my soul, did thou mark it?
Dogs, and childrens bread, and I none of them, and it is not meet, etc.
Brethren, Christ may call a Lamb a Dog; this seems to be very harsh. It was a
harsh speech that the Lord did use to his people, when he cried, Go to your
Gods that ye have served. Christ may say, you are a dog, get you gone.

Quest. But how could Jesus Christ speak thus? we know he did account her
Israel in the Spirit, though not in the Letter, as a Lamb, not a dog; how did
Christ then say, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep, and thou dog must not
have childrens bread?

Answ. There are these kind of Answers.

First, Some there are that say thus, Christ speaks after the manner of Men, as
a Minister in the way of his Ministry, guided by his Commission. So Mr.
Cartwright, those that were not of the Jewish Church, either by birth, or
proselitism, they were out of the commission, that seems to satisfy some. But
I will tell you what satisfies me: The Lord speaks two ways.

1 Either plainly, and positive, as he intends, and as things are.

2 Or by way of Trial, probationally, to try us. Mark it, The Lord may speak
that to try us, that he does not intend; neither does he mean as he speaks.
The Lord may bid Abraham go offer Isaac, yet he meant no such thing. John 6.6.
When Christ spoke of buying bread for the multitude, it is said, this he spoke
that he might try them: Thus the Lord speaks, that he might try us. The Lord
may speak doubtingly, and hint heavy words, not that he has hard thoughts,
but only that he might try us. He may speak doubtingly of our Election, that
we may make it sure.

Sixthly and lastly, Herein Christ may show himself seemingly harsh, in that
he may at last keep us long, ere he does send us away with that we come for.
This woman had at last her request, but it was long first (as we say.) Christ
may entertain us, and not speak any way, so as to trouble us, yet for all that
he intends not to give us presently the thing we come for. My Brethren, the
Lord Jesus may make us wait days, weeks, months, and years, (though he let us
within his house, and speaks to us now and then) and yet he may not presently
give us the particular thing that we come for; this is usual for Christ, to
make some tarry, which yet he turns not away. And truly we that are hasty,
count this harsh: Christ may make us wait a great while, and that we esteem,
and it seems to be very harsh: But this is a known thing, and I shall not
enlarge upon it at all; Therefore thus much of the first thing, wherein Christ
may seem to carry it harshly toward those that come to him.

The second thing is, Whence comes this to pass that Christ does so carry
himself?

Truly my Brethren, It is strange, after so many clear Prophecies, after so
many comfortable Promises, after so many experiences of Christ's kind dealing,
that he should with any soul, at any time, upon any account, carry it thus
harshly to them. I shall give you an account of this in general first, and in
particular afterward.

My Brethren, In the general you must know this, That Jesus Christ is not so
tied by Prophecy, nor obliged by Promise, but that in all his dealings he may
act as in his Prerogative. He is the freest Agent that is. It is prophesied of
Christ, That he will gently lead those that are with young; and promised, that
those that come to him, he will in no wise cast off. Now Christ is not so
bound up by this Prophecy, or Promise, but that he may act his own
Preregative.

And there is a double Prerogative Christ will maintain.

First, Of his Absolute Will.

Secondly, Of his Infinite Wisdom.

First, The Prerogative of his Absolute Will (I say) Absolute Will.

My Brethren, Jesus Christ may give Mercy to whom he will, and he may give
Mercy how he will. I find our Lord and Savior, two times in particular
standing upon the Prerogative of his Will; And let us in a word consider them.
One is in Matthew. 20.15. where he speaks of himself in a Parable, May not I do
with mine own what I will? The other is in the last of John 21, 22. where Peter
asks Christ, Lord, what shall this man do? says Christ, in verse. 22. If I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Christ will have all to know
his will is free; He wills as he wills: What if God will show mercy this way
to one, and another way to another, he has his Prerogative Royal? what if he
will when Jairus comes for his Daughter, go presently? and what if he will
dispute it with the Woman of Canaan? Christ will still so act, as to maintain
the Prerogative of his Will.

Secondly, He will maintain the Prerogative of his Wisdom; Though he come
with a commission, yet he is to act as his Wisdom is. And thus, though he
be a servant (as he is the Fathers servant) sent with absolute command, to
receive poor souls when they come; Yet how, and when, and what way, is left to
his own Wisdom. Rejoice, and be of good comfort; Christ is bound to receive
all that come to him, I but how he should receive them, that is left to his
Wisdom; And it may be much wisdom in the Lord Jesus Christ to receive some
harshly, and some sweetly. Two boys go to School, the one is of a rugged
nature, and the other of a sofr nature; The Masters wisdom knows how to deal
with either of them: So that now, this is the general account. Jesus Christ
being left to the Prerogative of his own Will and Wisdom, he does therefore
sometimes entertain some souls harshly.

There are six particular accounts of it that I cannot now name, but must leave
to be enlarged the next time.

Use, Only for the Use of this; My Brethren, you have heard a strange, yet a
certain Truth, That the Lord Jesus does sometimes seemingly entertain some
souls harshly.

Now all that I would say is this.

1 Do not Mistake me.

2 Do not Mistake your selves.

3 Do not Mistake this Truth.

There are these three Mistakes that all our hearts are liable to, either the
one or other of them; one while they mistake the Preacher, and say, he spoke
that which never entered into his heart to speak; Another while they mistake
themselves, and a third time the Truth it self. Now I pray thee take heed of
all these.

Therefore first, Do not Mistake me.

Though I tell you the Lord Jesus may entertain some harshly, I do not this to
keep you off from Christ. Oh, the Lord knows here is my heart, and this must
be my labor while I live, to draw you to Jesus Christ. But what said Christ,
in John 16.3. having before been telling them of great persecutions they must
go through, says Christ? These things I tell you, that when they come, ye
might not be offended. Oh soul, that is my aim, intent, that if thou art a
poor soul coming to Christ, thou may not be startled; I tell you
beforehand, Christ may frown, he may turn the deaf ear, not that you should
keep off, but that when these things come to pass, that you should not stumble
nor be offended, but that you should go on. And therefore is there ever a poor
soul that says, God has wrought upon me lately, but I have been going to
Christ, and I have knocked, and he speaks not a word? Oh be not discouraged,
the Lord sometimes will do thus.

Secondly, Do not Mistake your selves.

Poor sinners are apt to mistake themselves, as now, when they hear of Christ,
that Christ is ready, and willing to receive, us what use do they make of it?
Why say they, then we may go when we will, and so live as they list, and
think to go to Jesus Christ. No, mistake not, Christ may receive thee harshly;
do not deceive your selves, Christ is a Lion, and he can roar; though he will
not tear you to pieces, yet he knows how to carry it severely sometimes. There
is Hay and Stubble laid upon the foundation, and yet they are saved, but how?
but as by fire. Sinners, sinners, you may be saved coming to the Lord Jesus,
as the Woman of Canaan, but believe it, you may be saved by fire, he may call
you Dog, before he gives you the childrens bread, and make you wait long
before he answer. Do not mistake your selves, and provoke Christ to make you
know this truth to your cost and sorrow.

Thirdly, Do not Mistake the point.

A mistaken truth is the ground of some great errors; as well as any thing
else; indeed many errors are truths mistook. And there are two Errors, that
people may run into, if they mistake this point.

First, Does the Lord Christ deal thus with some? Therefore (what therefore?)
Why I was mistaken, the Lord never dealt so with me; therefore I am not right.
Nay stay there, I did not say the Lord dealt so with all, nor always, but with
some at sometimes, there are some the Lord kisses presently. Two humors coming
to the Physician, have not the same kind of Physic: Fine or thin humors, and
rough and strong humors are not alike purged; the one is, and may be purged
more gently, the other more roughly. You have an instance of two in one place,
viz. Lydia and the Jailer, Act. 16. Fine Lydia (as I may so call her) of a
tender spirit, the Lord takes up the latch, and enters softly, silently,
without any great noise, without any rough hand, but the rough Jailer, he has
an Earthquake, etc. Do not say, I am not right, because the Woman of Canaan was
so dealt with, and I am not.

Secondly, Do not mistake the point, and say, Well, it is true, and the Lord
deals thus with me, and I think it will never be better. Oh say not it will
never be better; No, my Brethren, though the Lord deal harshly with thee, yet
he will use thee better: Cry not, Oh the Lord has entertained me harsh, and
has been silent, and not spoke, and that which he has spoken has been in
wrath, he has called me dog, and therefore I can expect nothing, etc. Why
know, the Lord does do it but sometimes, and know, that that God that speaks
harshly to thee now, will speak sweetly afterward. Note that place, Judges 10.
The people of Israel there cry to God, deliver us this once, what says the
Lord, in verse. 13. You have forsaken me, go to your Gods, I will deliver you
no more; get you gone, says God, and yet mark, they follow on their cry, save
us but this once, and it is said, in verse. 16. his soul was grieved for them.
Oh my Brethren, though the Lord do seemingly entertain you harshly at first,
yet be of good comfort, he may yet speak well to you, yea he will at last.

Only let me conclude with a little piece of the story of Joseph. It may be
there are some of the women of Canaan, that have cried long; pray remember
Joseph, and Joseph's Brethren came down to him, My Lord (say they) we are the
children of one Man, and we come to buy corn, and Joseph answered them
roughly, by and by he lays one by the heels; he lets them go, and keeps but
one; Oh the poor Brethren of Joseph might think, what shall we do? we are
come into a strange Country, and we meet with strange language; we came to
buy bread, and we are made prisoners; you all know the story, how Joseph
entertained his Brethren at last.

Three things are in Joseph's story, in the book of Genesis.

First, Though he speaks roughly, yet his bowels were toward his dear
Brethren.

Secondly, Though he spoke roughly, it was that he might have Renjamin.

And thirdly, Though he spoke roughly, yet at last he entertained them
royally.

Jesus is our Joseph, and we go to him for corn, the Lord may speak roughly to
us, as Joseph did to them.

But first, He has bowels when he speaks roughly. Oh Jesus his bowels did
roll to this poor woman, when he spoke roughly. When I spoke against him, my
bowels were turned within me, says God of Ephraim. Oh thou child of Canaan,
thou say he has called thee Dog, believe it, he is grieved for it at his
heart. Oh the sounding of the bowels of Christ are often toward us when he
seems to carry it harsh.

And then secondly, Why did he speak so harshly at first? it was all to get
Benjamin; let us allude to it, and apply it to you: You have a Benjamin, the
Lord loves, your hearts, your soul, your spirit, that is your Bejamin; the Lord
speaks roughly, that he may have Benjamin, and when once that Benjamin comes,
a living heart is brought to him, he will quickly make friends.

Lastly, Joseph made a large recompense for all; and truly so will the Lord
Jesus make a large amends for all. Oh children of Canaan in the Promise! and
thou woman of Canaan in the letter! though the Lord seem harsh at first, yet at
last he will be sweet; they shall have corn and money too, they shall have
enough to bring them where they shall have all the Land. Thou shall have soul
and body-mercies, mercy for the way, and mercy for the Country. The Lord Jesus
will deal bountifully. The Lord may deal roughly, but he will yet deal
royally. How did he deal with this woman? Oh Woman! be it unto thee even as
thou will. Jesus did never speak so to any body. Christ may say at last, Oh
soul, go to the pot of Manna, and take and eat what thou want, what thou
wishest. And, poor soul, be it to thee even as thou will, for soul, body,
daughter and all. Though the Lord Christ may speak roughly at first, and
entertain seemingly severe, yet he does end really sweet. Thus much at present.

Reasons why Christ at first seems to be harsh. The Third SERMON.
Matthew 15. from verse. 23, and so on.








BEsides those things which are commonly experienced, and which must be
certainly expected in the coming of every soul to Christ, besides those, there
are some RARE extraordinary things, that now and then fall out upon some souls
in their coming to christ: And my Brethren, it concerns us to be acquainted
with them, that in case they should befall us (as others) we may know what to
think, and how to carry our selves. Now in this story of the Woman of Canaan,
we have some of those rare and extraordinary things, which may befall some
souls when they come to Christ. Indeed we have not the like History in all the
New Testament unto this; you read of many that came to Christ, and you read how
Christ did entertain them, but you never read that Christ did carry it so to
any, as he did to the Woman of Canaan.

There were four heads of matter unto which I said we might reduce this story.

First, The coming of the Woman to Christ, that we have dispatched.

The Woman came upon a low account at first, she had a childe-sick, possessed
with Satan, and her sick child did revive a dead soul, and brings her to
Christ.

But now the second head we are come to, It is Christ's entertainment of this
Woman.

How does Christ entertain her? she comes with much affection, she speaks
with great humility, how does Christ welcome her? truly very strangely, he
answers her not a word; And when the Disciples spoke on her behalf, he seems
to reprove them; when she renews her request, he puts her off with a dreadful
answer; so strangely does Christ sometimes carry it to poor souls.

The Doctrine we are upon from the carriage of Christ to the Woman, is,

Doct. That Jesus Christ is seemingly harsh sometimes to some souls when they
come to him.

We expressed the Doctrine with more caution, because it is rare, and it must
not be mistaken; Therefore we told you the l^st day, those three expressions
are boundaries of the point.

1 It is but seemingly; There is harshness in the carriage, when none in the
heart,

2 And that sometimes.

3 And but to some persons; we do not read of any more but this one, to whom
Christ did carry it so.

There were two things I said I would open, in the doctrinal part.

First, Wherein Christ might show some kind of harshness sometimes to poor
souls.

This we opened by this instance of Christ's carriage to this Woman.

1 He does not entertain her.

2 He does not speak to her.

3 Puts off them that spoke for her.

4 When she renews her request, she is not the better.

5 Nay, he speaks that as might dash her hope.

6 And at last he does for her, but upon a great dispute, and after denials
and delays.

Secondly, But whence is it that the Lord should thus sometimes, unlike himself
(as we may so speak) carry himself thus to poor souls? The Prophecies speak
contrary, the Promises speak fairer, whence is it the Lord whose Name, and
whose Nature is love, should deal so harshly with any when they come to him?

I answer, Though God will fulfill the Prophecies, and make good the Promises,
yet he will keep up the Prerogative both of his WILL and of his WISDOM, that
in the general I spoke unto the last time.

But there are six particular Reasons that I shall give of the point; Christ
may have six ends, or six Reasons why he will deal, it may be with you, as
with the Woman of Canaan.

First, Christ has a design to further humiliation.

Secondly, Christ has a design to make a little trial upon the poor soul.

Thirdly, Christ has a design to caution many, by dealing harshly with some.

Fourthly, Christ has a design fully to bring the soul to Gospel self-denial.

Fifthly, Christ has a design to heighten himself in the heart.

And sixthly and lastly, That the soul may catch more hastily, and keep more
closely hold of Christ. Now pray mind it, possibly this afternoon I may give
an account of Christ's dealing with some of your souls; it may be some of you
are like the Woman of Canaan that have gone to Christ, and found hard
entertainment, and you are ready to say, Lord, why do thou do so? such a one
went and found thee friendly and favorably, while I come and cry, and have no
kindness, Nay, seemingly, and to my sense, much harshness. Consider now what I
shall say to satisfy you in the Reason of this strange carriage of Christ.

And first, It may be Christ intends to humble thee. Jesus Christ does indeed
humble all, but not all alike, nor all in the same manner, Now by thus dealing
with the soul in this manner, he does humble the soul in the best and sweerest
manner, viz. in an Evangelical way. Legal humiliation, it is just as a Father
deals with a very untoward child, he will not be ruled, and the Father sends
him to the Magistrate, that he may go to Bridewel; But Gospel-humiliation is
just like a Father dealing with his child by himself. The Father looks
strange, and speaks hard, and thereby humbles the child; so, Christ will not
turn us over to Satan, to buffer us, and fear us, and as it were break us; but
himself by a little unusual, strange, and rough carriage will that way humble
us. And truly what will humble us, if that will not? There are but three heads
unto which humiliation does relate, and you shall see, this same harsh dealing
of Christ with us at first, will tend very much to the accomplishment of them
all.

First, Humiliation relates to sin, that sin may be exceeding bitter.

Secondly, It relates to self, that the soul may be exceeding low.

Thirdly, It relates to Christ, that a soul under the sense of the bitterness
of sin, and the lowness of self-thoughts, may think of Christ very highly.

Now observe, when Christ shall deal roughly with a sinner coming to him, all
these three are effected.

Oh now! First, Sin is made bitter by this dealing of Jesus Christ: The Law
made sin bitter, but the Gospel makes it more bitter. Oh! says the soul, mine
iniquities make Christ look frowning, they separate between God and me. A
tormenting Devil with a fiery face, does not make sin so bitter as a frowning
Jesus Christ with a harsh countenance, when Christ looks angry; thus says the
soul, Oh that ever my sins should make my Father frown, that is all love. I had
once thoughts that sin was that which would make the Devil roar, and speak
terribly, but now I see it makes Christ himself harsh, and speak roughly. Oh
vile sin! Oh great evil! now thy sin appears (Oh my soul) to be indeed
exceeding sinful, the sole and principal evil that is; for it makes my Savior
carry it sadly toward me.

Secondly, By this harsh dealing of Christ, the soul is humbled in it self: If
Christ frown, self must down and kneel. It may be the soul comes conceited,
he is not so bad as the Preacher would make him; but when the soul shall come
to Christ for mercy, and Christ shall frown, and call him Dog, Now, says the
soul, though I thought Preacher, and Father, and Mother made me worse than I
was, yet now I see I am very bad, Christ he calls me Dog, and he says, it
is not fit I should come in house with the children; and makes me to see, that
for all my daintiness, and high thoughts, I am no (...) than a Dog. Oh self!
how poor, and mean, and exceeding vile art thou?

Thirdly, Christ is mightily exalted; this carriage makes thee more to prize
Christ. Poor creatures only thought Christ a common person, one that might be
easily come and spoke unto, yea and prevailed with. But now, when Christ
carries it a little high, and speaks something harsh, bidding us as it were
keep off: Now he comes to be heightened in our heart, and by casting us down,
he does lift up himself, that now we come with more reverence and fear, with
more self-abhorring, and Christ-admiring thoughts, than possibly we did at
first. So that Christ by this carriage, rendering sin more vile, and self more
base, and himself more precious, does hereby sweetly and surely humble us; and
this may be one reason of this strange carriage to us.

Secondly, The Lord intends to make a trial upon the soul by this harsh
dealing. I pray mind it (Beloved) That Jesus Christ, that will never burn the
soul to ashes, does yet intend to make a trial of the soul in fire; And my
Brethren, the harsh dealing of Jesus Christ it is a shrewd trial to us.

Two things I shall intimate in this, the Lord by harsh dealing makes a trial
of two things.

First, Christ will make a trial of the reality of our humiliation, and hunger,
by which we pretend to hunger after Christ, and to pant for him, as those who
do heartily prize him.

And Secondly, Of the reality of our Faith too.

First, Christ by this makes a trial of the reality of our spiritual hunger, by
which we pretend to long after Christ. All is not hunger and thirst for Christ
which seems so to be. The soul comes to Christ, as a man that is a hungry,
comes to bread, and Oh, says the soul, I am hungry; and now ^^^ist will try
him; He comes and says he thirsts for Righteousness, and Bread of Life; now,
says Christ, I will try him a little, will he lie by the cupboard-door? and
if I say bread, will he say a crumb? If I call him Dog, and bid him be gone;
will he yet lie at my feet? A hungry man indeed will do so, and I will try if
this soul be (as he says) really hungry: So Christ hereby tries our
spiritual longing. Many pretend to long, who do not so much as love, (for
longing is the strength and height of love) Many, say they hunger, who yet have
not a spiritual stomach at all to Christ, the Bread of Life: They ask bread,
but it is only an asking. Now Christ will try us, and by this strange carriage
he tries us indeed. And for us to continue begging, crying bread, after
Christ has spoke to us, as to this woman; After he has said, I am not sent
for you, it is not meet to give unto you; be gone, what, should a Dog have
childrens bread? after this, I say, to wait, and worship, to beg, and reiterate
cries for bread, this will make Christ say, this longing is sincere, and
strong, believe it, here is a hungry soul indeed. Many wish for Christ, who do
not heartily hunger for him.

Secondly, Christ will try Faith too, and it is good for us to be tried in our
Faith. Says Christ, Here comes a soul to me, he looks as if he would take
hold of me, I will try whether he be one of Jacobs children that will
wrestle a fall, and keep his hold when I seek, and seem to cast him off. I will
see if I call him Dog, Whether he will trust and believe he may be a
Child. It was a trial and demonstration that Jobs Faith was right, when he
would trust in a killing God, and it will try our Faith indeed, to wait upon,
and cling to a seemingly rejecting Redeemer. And this was the great matter in
the case of this poor woman; Oh Woman! great is thy Faith: Jesus Christ did all
this to try the woman's Faith. God will see whether the soul will take hold of
an angry Christ, and run after a going-away Christ. In 1 Pet. 1.7. says the
Apostle there, That the trial of your Faith, being much more precious than of
gold that perishes, etc. It is not spoken of Faith in it self, that that is
more precious than gold that perishes, (though that is precious) but of the
trial of it; The very trial of Faith is a precious thing. Now that Christ may
try our Faith, as well as our Hunger, therefore he deals a little harshly with
us.

Thirdly, The Lord has this design too, By his harsh dealing with one, he
will make many wise. When two or three of the younger boles shall see the
Father deal something harsh with the eldest, it teaches them all something. The
Lord help us, we are a company of mad untoward children, we neglect many a
precious opportunity; Christ calls, and we will not answer, etc. Now when
Christ shall deal harshly with some, then we shall be made wise to hearken
when Christ calls. How many have preached this truth from that experience?
Children (have some Parents said) take a Christ while he smiles, take a
Promise when it is tendered, you do not know what it may cost you; I neglected
my seasons, and I found it a hard matter for me to close with Jesus Christ.
You have a great word, in Heb. 3.7, 8. Wherefore to day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation
in the wilderness, etc. What does he allude to? he alludes to the story of
the children of Israel in the wilderness; and of Gods harsh dealing with them,
and all because of their unbeleef. The Lord Jesus Christ, he does deal harshly
with many, leads them through wildernesses, stings them with Scorpions, to make
others wise to accept of mercy, when and while it may be had. Ah! how many
think it an easy matter to come to Christ, and have bread presently; and
therefore defer and delay, put by (at best) lay by many a choice tender till
another time, as they think wherein they may at pleasure take it: But now, when
they shall see such examples as this, that a man or woman may come, and call,
and crouch, and worship, and beg, and yet be put off, yet have no mercy, No,
nor no kind word (as was this woman's case) this will make them wise to take
heed how they refuse that which afterward they may request with tears, and yet
be rejected.

But besides, fourthly, The Lord Christ does deal thus, that indeed he may
bring the soul to Gospel-self-denial. I say unto Gospel-self-denial.

The Lord is resolved, that whosoever will be his Disciple, must deny himself;
Now some have observed, that nothing does so much tame any, as hunger. The Lord
Jesus Christ will take the soul upon the hip, and make the soul fully deny it
self; and now, says God, If thou will come to me in my way, well, otherwise
no bread: Bread, bread, says the hungry man, if I may have it this way, or
that way, any way, I will take it; well, says Christ, I see the soul is come
pretty well too (as we say) I will keep off a little longer, make him fast a
few days more. Deny him till he is ready to dye for hunger, and then I shall
make him deny himself in his honor, in his inheritance, in his very
birthright: I shall make him say, what profit will that or any thing do me,
if I dye for hunger? and I am at the point of death. Therefore whatever the
terms are, I will deny all, part with all for this Bread of Life. So that real,
universal self-denial, is by the Lords grace effected through this delaying,
and seemingly-denying carriage. And to this end, or for this reason, does
Christ sometimes deal with us, as with the woman of Canaan. He will seemingly
deny us, that we may really deny our selves. He will tame us, and then put
his own terms upon us, and for that end carries it so strangely to us.

Fifthly, Christ does intend to heighten himself in our hearts: Before Christ
give us himself, he will greaten himself. And my Brethren, it is our sore
misery, that we are too apt to have slight thoughts of Jesus Christ; Now
Christ will make us prize him very highly, and therefore we shall come by him
very hardly. It is a Rule, and a general Observation, That we prize that
highly, which we come by very hardly. Oh Sirs! the Lord Christ knows how to
heighten himself in your hearts, by deferring to grant your request. Possibly
thou art a poor ignorant creature in thy first coming unto Christ; one who
think well, but not well enough of Christ; Thou valuest him a little, but
not as the chiefest: Now Christ is resolved to heighten himself in thy heart,
and will therefore keep off so long that thou shall come thereby to prize him
at a higher rate than all the world, and shall have cause to say, I value him
much, and love him dear, for I came by him very hardly, and was fain to wait
long before I did enjoy him.

Lastly, The Lord Christ may have this end, Namely, That the soul might catch
at him more hastily, and keep him more fastly; therefore he does hold off
thus, and deal thus harshly; we are not eager enough in closing with Christ.
My Brethren, the soul is apt to linger in the matter of taking Christ, but when
Christ shall stand off, that will make the soul come on more hastily. Jesus
Christ does catch us by craft, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.16. Truly Christ
does catch some poor souls by craft, as the fisherman does the fish, you know,
or may have heard how that is; The fisherman lays the bait, and draws it as
it were away, he draw it before the fish, and when the fish is ready to take
it, he does make as if he snatched it away, and why so? truly that the fish
may catch at it more eagerly, and be held by it more surely. So does Christ
with us, when he shall offer, and seem to draw back, when he shall come near,
and suffer us as it were to touch him, and then snatch away again, this will
make us come on more earnestly, and close with him more eagerly. The soulby
this means takes the bait, I and the soul will hold it too when it has it;
believe it Sins, the Lord Jesus Christ is kind to catch by craft. Well, this
is the account of the Reason, wherefore it is that sometimes Christ is
seemingly harsh to some souls.

There are but three Uses I aim at in this Doctrine.

Use 1. The first Use is, To let us all see that Christ is not so easily come
by, as the generality of people do think: All have Christ freely, but not
easily. Mind it. My Brethren, I think, and I will tell you my thoughts,
because it may awaken you, and do you good. I think many will go to Hell as
upon other mistakes, so upon this, that they do think it easy to go to Heaven,
and easy to come by Jesus Christ. But if it be true, that Christ stands a
loof off from a poor soul, then it will appear to be a hard work to come by
him. Remember this, you will find three things will make it hard work ere
Jesus Christ and you be brought together.

1 The backwardness of your own hearts.

2 The many hinder ances and puts in of Satan.

3 And the seeming backwardness of Jesus Christ.

First, Your own hearts will be backward. Ah soul! unless the Lord make it a
day of his power, they are not a willing people, Psa. 110. he that talks of
free will, I am afraid, was never sensible of freegrace, nor of the
backwardness of his own heart.

Secondly, The Devil makes it hard work too: Verily, when the soul would go to
Christ, the Devil will hinder, and set one to hinder another, to keep the soul
off from going to Jesus Christ.

But thirdly, and especially, The seeming harsh dealing of Jesus Christ, makes
it very hard work. Oh, say some poor souls, My thinks the Lord makes me
willing, and hungring after a Christ, but when I come to Christ, Christ hangs
off; My thinks God the Father is willing I should have Christ; he has sent
him, the Spirit is willing, he has revealed Christ to me, and my heart is
willing; but I come to Christ, and he does not hear me; verily here you will
find difficulty, and it will much pazzle and try Faith, to believe upon, and
close with a Christ, who seems to stand at a distance: His seeming harsh
dealing will make it real hard believing.

Use 2. The second Use is of Caution. I pray learn by this, to take heed how
you provoke the Lord Jesus Christ to deal thus harshly with any of you. My
Brethren, the Lord Christ can frown, and look bitterly, and deal severely, etc.
and beware how you provoke him so to do. The truth is, there be some souls
that rationally (I mean religiously rationally) cannot expect otherwise, that
if Christ do receive them, he should receive them very harshly. Let me in a
word touch upon this, and do you remember it.

Two words I would speak my mind in, that I may not be mistaken.

First this, I do not say that there are any souls that have reason to think
Jesus Christ will reject them. Whatever you are, Canaanite, Perisite, or
Jebusite, etc. Whoever you are before the Lord, I do not say, there is reason
for you to conclude that there is no coming to the Lord. But

This I say secondly, That though you have no reason to think he will cast you
off, yet you have reason to think he will deal harshly with you; you may have
reason to fear he will not presently entertain you.

First, I think there be some souls that may verily expect God may make them
stand at the door, and wait till they cool their heels, and though Christ will
let them in at last, yet he may set them stand all night: Some souls Christ
may let them be hoarse with crying, and yet Jesus Christ may stand off.

Secondly, There are some souls that may expect, that though he should let
them in, yet it may be with them, as with some child, the child is let in,
and he sits at the table, but the Father looks so strangely and harshly on
him, that his meat does him no good; thou may never relish mercy sweetly,
till thou come to Heaven, it may be.

Thirdly, There are some souls that may expect, that though Christ will give
them mercy, yet he will dispure it out with them; that they shall wrestle a
whole night, as Jacob, and go limping all their life time, and be called Dog
many a time, and as it were threatened with a cudgel, before ever he give them
childrens bread. Therefore I beseech you for the Lords sake, souls, look about
you.

Now there are three sorts of people that have thus reason to think, that
though Christ may receive them at last, yet it may be very harsh at first.

First, Those that have dealt very harshly with Jesus Christ: With the froward,
I will be froward, says God. Grace will receive froward ones at last, yet he
will be harsh. Why, what was the matter Joseph looks so roughly upon his
Brethren? their consciences could tell them. We had not pity upon our
Brother, Genesis 42.21. Sirs, there are many poor souls deal harshly with Jesus
Christ; I say, deal harshly with Christ; is there any deals harshly with him
(you will say) how can that be? why be not mistaken, as you deal with Christ's
members, so you deal with him. You scoff at poor Saints, and Christ takes it as
against himself. O mind it! you that have been, or are, the persecutors of the
Lords people; you can expect no other, but that Christ should deal harshly with
you, since you have done so by him; It may be there is a poor man or woman by
thee that has precious Faith, I say, that has precious Faith, thou dealest
hardly with them, and so thou dealest hardly with Jesus Christ in them, and he
may do so with thee.

Secondly, Those souls that have lived in any more notable profaneness than
others, may expect if Christ receive them, it should be, as the woman of
Canaan, harshly. Take a plain similitude; Let two men go to a Physician, the
one has a little knock on the crown, a little dressing, a little washing does
cure it; another has a wound in the thigh, or the arm, that must have a great
deal of lancing, and washing ere it be whole. Oh! sins are wounds; the least
vanities are knocks on the crowns; but there are blasphemies, and
uncleanness, and unrighteousnesses (with a witness) and the Lord must deal a
little harshly with thee, how else should he deal with thee? Tremble at every
little sin, but tremble especially at great sins. I say not that great sins
shall hinder us from Christ, but upon the account of them at our first
believing, we may meet with harshness in Christ; The deeper our wounds, the
sharper our cure always.

Thirdly, There are a third sort of people that cannot but expect Christ will
deal harshly with them. Those that do neglect many a sweet and gracious tender
of mercy, and salvation by Jesus Christ many a day. Suppose two people in the
same Congregation, one is crowded here, that never heard the Gospel all his
days; another is here that has heard the Gospel many years; you that have
neglected sweet calls, and precious opportunities, if Christ receive you at
last, it will be rich mercy, but it will be harshly. I have often thought of
it; young people do not know how much bitterness of spirit they avoid by
closing with Christ betimes. My thinks I see some souls under such a condition,
you have stayed out all day, and come home at midnight, I do not say you shall
not be received when you come, but you may be received with a whip, and go to
bed without a Supper, as we use to say to some children. Now I am afraid of
one snare of the Devil. My thinks I hear the Devil whispering to some souls,
well, be it so as you say, so long as Christ will receive you at last, so long
as I shall not go to Hell, so long as I shall have mercy at last, then I will
go on, etc. I will speak three words to this.

First of all, It is more than you know; I say, it is more than you know, that
you shall be saved at last. I say, it is possible Christ may receive the soul,
but how do you know it? who did tell thee, that it thou did sin so many
years, after all thou should have Christ with a whip and a knock?

Secondly, It is a thousand to one that it shall be so. The soul that puts off
closing with Christ upon this presumption, that he shall have it at last, and
will presume to tarry, because he persuades himself of a sure reception,
though it may be sore; I say, these of all persons, in my judgment, have
ground to fear lest the Lord give them to a deluded heart, to damning dreams,
and soul-cheating hopes. I fear if any be thus Christ will not receive them,
no not at first, nor last, neither sweetly, nor severely; therefore take heed
of this delusion. But let me add,

Thirdly, I will suppose this, that thou shall be saved at last very harshly:
Consider the terms, do thou know how harsh they will be? Do thou know what
terrors of the Lord may be upon thee? what terrors of Hell may be in thee,
etc? Oh Sirs, who knows the power of Gods wrath? who knows the terror of a
wounded conscience? can you live seven years under the apprehension of Gods
wrath? fourteen years under terror? and every day to walk up and down under
everlasting burnings? Beware how you go on upon those terms, but let every
soul be wise now, beware now, be watchful now, that since the Lord, though he
be sweet, can be bitter, beware how you provoke him to be so to you.

Last Use, The third and last Use, It is for Exhortation, to exhort you all to
receive this truth, so as not to be offended with it. I say, so to receive
this truth, etc.

I remember our Lord and Savior, in John 16. preaches the truth of persecution
upon this account; These things (says he) I speak, that you may not be
offended etc. My Brethren, this Truth, this great Truth, this strange Truth
(that Christ may deal thus hardly with some souls that come to him) I preach
it, and tell you of it, that you may not be offended; not offended when it
comes to pass as to your particulars.

There are two offenses, one is, therefore to say I will never go to Christ;
The other offense is, I find it so, that Christ is harsh, and therefore I will
go no further. I pray be not thus offended.

First, Do not stumble upon this as a rock of offense, and say, I will not go
to Christ; this is but to some, I do not say the Lord will deal thus with all;
say not, were I in the Woman of Canaans condition, I could never hold up, and
therefore I will stand off. Do not say so, who are you that walk uprightly, and
avoid sin, and snatch at a tender of mercy, and are willing to come at a call?
go to Christ, and you will find that he will entertain you friendly, or
suppose it be seemingly harsh, yet remember, better be entertained by Christ
seemingly harsh, than not to go at all, and be shut out for ever; be not
offended therefore, do not stumble at going to Christ.

Secondly, Let no soul be so offended at this dealing, as to say, I will be
gone, I will be gone, I will wait no longer. By Brethren, it may be there may
be some poor soul here before the Lord, that may say, I am a second Woman of
Canaan, a woman of a bitter spirit, of a grieved soul, because I have gone to
Christ, and am not entertained. I have got Father, Mother, Minister, child to
pray for me, I am not yet answered. My beloved, for all this, thou art but a
Woman of Canaan, and the Lord may deal with you as such; what though he speak
not at all, or but harshly, this is not new, neither do thou so wonder at it,
or be offended by it, as to think of drawing back, or going away from Jesus
Christ. Therefore let me speak two words to thee. 1 One is, Be advised. 2 The
other is, Be encouraged.


The first word is of Advice; I pray take advice O poor heart. Thou say thou
have gone to Christ, and he frowns; thou say thou have looked up to the
brazen Serpent, and yet the sting of the fiery Serpent abides; thou say thou
have called for a crum of bread, and no answer comes; be advised to look about
you, to see why God deals thus with you; you may be bold with the Lord Jesus
(he never checked the Woman with boldness) ask Christ, Lord, is thy design to
humble me? then do so; or, Lord what is thy design? is it to try me? then do
so, but support me. Is it to heighten thy self in my heart? Lord, what is thy
design? look about you and consider for which of all the Reasons it is, that
the Lord deals thus with you.

Secondly, Be encouraged to wait upon the Lord yet a little longer. Tarry thou
the Lords leisure yet a while. In Psalm. 40. says the Psalmist there, I waited
for the Lord, and at last the Lord heard me, he brought me up also out of an
horrible pit, and he has put a new song into my mouth: Oh it is a blessed
Scripture, wait thou yet for the Lord, thou art yet in a horrible pit of sin,
and filth, fear, and doubt; thou cryest, yet the Lord does not hear; I but yet
he may hear, this is no strange thing; indeed the soul is ready to say as the
Church, Oh all you that pass by, is there any sorrow like to mine? Lam. 1.12.
So it may be your soul is ready to say, was there ever any sorrow like mine?
my conscience disturbs me, Satan disturbs me, I go to Christ, and he does
not hear me, he will not answer; Oh be of good comfort, and wait still, he
that calls thee (as the Woman of Canaan) Dog now, will say to thee, Go thy
way, great is thy Faith, Indeed my Brethren, when I was drawing up the
conclusion of this, by my self, I thought I should meet with a Woman of Canaan,
and I was bid to encourage her thus.

First, All this harshness it is but in show. As we told you the last day;
Joseph had bowels though for a time he dealt roughly.

Secondly, All this will not last, Joseph will speak peace, and the Lord Jesus
that seems rough now, he will speak to thee in soft language at last:
Therefore you that are as the Woman of Canaan, waiting upon Christ, and yet
hearing nothing from him, be comforted, and counseled.

First, Be comforted, your condition is blessed; Blessed are they that wait at
the posts of Wisdoms gates, Prove. 8.34, etc. This may be the condition of a
believer, and it is blessed.

Object. I says the soul, If I did but know that, or think that.

Repl. Did Joseph's Brethren know he knew them? did they think he wept, and
his bowels yearned? It was their happiness Joseph knew them, though they knew
it not: And it is comfort Christ knows us, when we are, and may be as
ignorant of him, as they of Joseph. That is the foundation of our life and
comfort, that the Lord may, and does know us first, before we know him; and
he still knows us, even while we know not him. Mind that, in the second
Epistle of Timothy chap. 2. verse. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. Let that
word be for thy comfort. But then

Secondly, Be counseled to carry your selves very wisely. Carry it well, and
it shall be your wisdom. I know indeed, my Beloved, we need much wisdom to
carry it wisely when Christ does frown.

Oh! we are apt to have impatient spirits, murmuring spirits, rising spirits;
nothing is so provoking as unkindness from Jesus Christ. I look for no better
from the Law, or from the Devil; but that Christ should speak death, or Christ
call Dog, or that he that was sent to give the children bread, should say he
was not sent to me, Oh this does wound me, this does kill me, (says the
poor soul) Well yet be counseled to wait: Do not think evil of, nor speak
hardly concerning Jesus Christ. He knows (as we say) what he does; there may
be many reasons of this carriage of his; and therefore whatever be his
carriage to thee, let thy carriage to him be good; if Christ deal with thee as
with the Woman of Canaan, do thou deal with him as she did. Now what that is,
we shall come unto next.

Souls must still carry it well to Jesus Christ. The Fourth SERMON.
Matthew 15.25. and 27. verses.




AS a fine Copy fairly written (which does attract the eyes of all to look upon
it, and stir up the spirits of ingenious Scribes to imitate it) Such (my
Beloved) is the Example of the Woman of Canaan; (the history whereof is here
recorded, and which we are now handling) It is a fine Copy, and fairly written.
Here are great things, glorious Mysteries held forth, and you and I should look
upon them, and endeavor to read and imitate them.

There are four heads unto which we did reduce the whole matter of this
discourse.

First, The Coming of the Woman to Christ.

Secondly, The Carriage of Christ to the Woman. We were ending of that the
last day. The Woman she came with much devotion, in much affection; The Lord,
contrary to what he was wont, turns away, makes as if he did not hear, he
would not vouchsafe to speak a word, and when he was entreated by the
Disciples, he puts them off, and when she renews her request again, he
speaks harshly, etc.

The Lesson we then did go upon from the whole, you know was this, That
sometimes Christ is seemingly harsh to some souls that come to him.

We opened it, and gave the Reasons of it, and applied it. And that which we
did aim at, truly it was principally two words.

The first was to exhort you all, that since Christ does sometimes seemingly
entertain some souls harshly, That you would not provoke him so to do. As the
Lord lives, and as your souls live, if you stand out too long, if you put off
Christ too often, though at the last he may save you, it will be by fire:
Therefore I beseech you (especially you that be young) take a Christ while you
may have a Christ; while Christ knocks softly, and speaks sweetly, and wooes
lovingly, entertain him, lest he go away, and make you come after him crying,
and it may be a great while ere he come back again.

The second word was, To you poor souls that may be the children of this Woman
of Canaan, (that have gone to Christ, and have found him stand at a distance)
Do not despair, no new thing is fallen upon you. The Lord Christ does sometimes
use so to deal with souls. And (my Brethren) as you shall see afterward
(though he stand at a distance now) he will in time embrace you sweetly. The
Woman of Canaan that was entertained harshly, went away joyfully.

But how did she carry it under this harsh dealing? That is the third head we
are now to speak to. Here the carriage of the Woman is set out in these two
Verses, the 25. and 27. verses. And mark it, in verse. 25. It is said, She came
and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me.

My Brethren, As the Lord said to Peter in another case, we must say of the
Woman in this; Flesh and blood has not revealed this to you. Flesh and blood
could not teach, nor help the poor Woman to such a carriage. What, for the Lord
to turn away, for the Lord to put off? and for her to reinforce her devotion,
renew her suit afresh, and to come and worship him, etc.

The 27. verse, Truth Lord: yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from
their Masters Table. The Lord had in a manner called her Dog, and said, it was
not for dogs to have childrens bread; she does not deny it, but she grapples
with grace, and says, Truth Lord, yet dogs may have a crumb, etc.

I shall put all that is spoken here of her carriage into one Lesson; but
before I do that, I shall name two other observable points.

The first is this, A right Faith coming, and carrying of the soul to Christ,
is a resolute Faith. That is one point I would name, pray mark it, The Lord
Jesus seems to put her off, he gives her nothing that was a visible
encouragement, yet she will go on, and yet she will not be put off. When the
soul comes to Christ, he comes as one that needs a Christ, and wants a Christ,
will have, and as one that must have a Christ; and what then? he will have a
Christ before he goes away. Though he have not evidence, he will have
adherence; though the soul can see nothing, and though no hope, yet he will
be resolute; although Christ will not smile, though conscience is not quiet,
though the wound be not healed, though the Lord put off angrily, yet the soul
keeps resolute to him, and will not be sent away empty; Faith, if right, is
still resolute.

The second Point that I shall name, is this, That a right Faith knows how to
confess, and believe at once. A true Believer will not conceal his sin, yet
will close with Jesus Christ. A right Faith will deny nothing, and yet it will
believe all things. My Brethren, mark it a little, there are a company of vile
people that are (as they say) all for Faith, and nothing for confession, and
what say they? believers, it is not for them to come and confess sin. Why, a
believer will confess sin; does the Lord say dog? yes, truth Lord, I am a
dog, will the soul say, as this Woman did. There are others that will confess,
and not believe. Oh, they cry out, they must confess, and bewail, and lie low,
and humble themselves, etc. but they cannot believe, they dare not believe;
confession is their work, etc. Why poor hearts you may do both; you may say,
Lord, I am a sinner, yet I believe, for mercy is for sinners; I am ungodly, yet
I believe, for Abraham believed in him, who justifies the ungodly: I am a dog
(as thou say Lord) yet I believe a dog may gather up a crumb. Well,
remember it, True Faith does not hinder confession, nor confession should not
hinder Faith.

But the particular Lesson of the place is this, Namely, That it is the duty,
the wisdom, the glory of poor souls, to carry it holily and humbly unto
Christ, when Christ seems to carry it harshly unto them.

So does this poor Woman; or if you will take it shortly thus. It becomes
Christians to carry it really well, when Christ carries it seemingly ill.

I know, my Brethren, this is a hard work, but as hard as it is we must learn
it, and I will assure you, if ever God intend to do you good, though flesh and
blood murmr, yet the Lord will whip you into this Lesson, but he will make
you learn it, Namely, to carry it holily to him, when he carries it seemingly
harsh to you. I remember that passage, in 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants be obedient to
your Masters; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. It is
the duty of a servant professing the Name of God, though he have a froward
Master, yet he must carry it well. Now mark it, Is it the duty of a servant to
carry it well to a bad Master, and is it not the duty of Saints to carry it
well to Christ? we are the servants, he is the Master. So in Heb. 12.9. Mark
the Apostles argumentation, says he, We have had Fathers of our flesh which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in
subjection unto the Father of spirits, and l^ve? Mark, there is life in this,
our life depends on our reverent carriage in this case. Alas! if Christ be
gone, our life goes with him; carry it well therefore, if thou love thy life;
you must be subject and submissive even when he seems to be sharp, otherwise
death is at the door. Mind it then, would you have a pardon? and does Christ
seem to deny you? where can you go for it but to him? and when you come, if you
submit; there it is; soul, in the point is your life; Therefore mark the lesson
well; It is the duty, wisdom, and glory of Saints, to carry it well to Christ,
when he carries it seemingly ill to them. There are four persons in the book
of God recorded, that God did seem to deal very hardly withal; and of all of
them, this Woman of Canaan was most rare. Good old Aaron, holy Job, the Virgin
Mary, (the Mother of our Lord) and this Woman in the Text. But truly, as the
Apostle said, now remains Faith, Hope, and Charity, the greatest thereof is
Charity; so of these that are upon record, the greatest of these is this Woman;
she seems to excel in good carriage under hard usage.

For Aarons carriage you have it recorded in Lev. 10.3. The Lord had dealt very
severely with him; Nadab and Abihu (his two sons) were consumed with fire from
Heaven before the Lord. Ah Lord! how harsh was this to flesh and blood? what
mere man, having nothing more than man, could bear it! a good Priest has two
sons taken away suddenly. But how does Aaron carry it? The Lord spoke to Moses,
and Moses to Aaron, saying, This is that the Lord spoke, I will be sanctified
in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified; and
Aaron held his peace. The Lord seemed very severe against the old man, he took
away two of his children at once, when they were about his work the Lord
satisfies him by Moses, and he held his peace. A blessed behavior it was,
well-becoming him, and very patternable unto us.

The second is that of Job. In the first and second chapters, you may read and
see that God carries it strangely to him, yet it is said, in all this Job
carries it very well, so well, that the Holy Ghost bears him witness, He
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. And when his Wife put him on to curse
God, Oh says he, Thou speak like one of the foolish women; what? shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and not evil? There was a carriage indeed very
good and right, according to our Doctrine.

Thirdly, Our Lords Mother carries it well to the Lord, when he seemed to
carry it harsh to her. In John 2.3. There you have our Lord and his Mother at a
Wedding, and there was wanting some Wine, and the Mother said to Jesus, they
have no Wine; says Christ, Woman, what have I do with thee? mine hour is not
yet come. What do thou call upon me for Wine in the middle of the feast?
she was taken up, as we say, sharply; I but how sweetly does she carry it?
In verse. 5. says she to the servants, Whatsoever he says unto you, do it.
Truly a very sacred speech it was, and argued that her soul was really good,
and would appear so to Christ, even when his carriage was to appearance very
cross to her.

Lastly, You have this story in the Text, which in a sense (as I said) is the
greatest of all four; for, believe it, God never dealt so with Aaron, Job, and
Mary, as he did with this Woman, nor in some respects ( consideratis
considerandis, as they say) did they carry it so well as she: There was
something in those children of Abraham (for so they were) which did oblige, and
enable them, to carry it better than could be expected from this stranger,
this Canaanite, yet she transcends in her holy, humble, sweet behavior to our
Lord, as I shall open by and by.

Well, There are two things to be opened for the explication of the point.

The first is, How the soul should carry it well to Christ, when Christ carries
it ill to him. Wherein does this good behavior lie? Let the Lord carry it how
he will, what is our good behavior? I say, what is our good behavior which
we should show to him?

And then secondly, Why we ought so to carry it? what are, or may be the
reasons and grounds of such a carriage?

I begin with the first, And shall not instance nor enlarge in any particulars,
but what we may find in this pattern, and pray mark it well. For my thinks in
this Text there are six things (in this Woman's good behavior) showing, and
evidently teaching all of us, what should be out carriage when we come to
Christ, etc.

First of all, Though the Lord dealt roughly with her, she kept up honorable
thoughts of him.

Secondly, She does not suddenly, nor sullenly go away, but tarries and waits
upon Christ.

Thirdly, She speaks to Christ, as professing her only hope in his help.

Fourthly, She denies nothing of what the Lord seems to charge her with.

Fifthly, She does gather upon Jesus Christ (as it were) and catches bold of
that by which Christ would cast her off.

Sixthly and lastly, She was content to have a little in the lowest manner,
when she might not have her first and great request in the highest manner.

First of all, This good carriage the Woman had, She thinks honorably of
Jesus Christ. The Lord puts her off hardly, what does she do? does she in a
carping censorious manner, revile and speak evil of Christ? Cries she out, oh
pride, O stateliness, O sour man! Does she say, ye followers of his, is this
your good Lord and Master? whatever he may say, or you think, certainly he is
an austere man, and believe it, he is a surly Master, etc. not a word of this,
but the Text says, She came to him, and worshipped him, and said, Lord, help
me. If Jesus Christ had dealt never so well with her, she could not have
dealt better with him. It is the Royal Carriage of the Spouse of Jesus Christ
(The ^ueen, in Psalm. 45.) when she was brought into the Kings presence, and
dealt withal best; All that is advised and required of her, is this; He is
thy Lord, worship thou him. But this poor Woman when she is turned off, she
comes to him, and worships him, and says, Lord, help me. When the Lord seems
to deal harshly with a soul, the Devil is at hand to put on a poor soul to
think hardly of Jesus Christ. Oh Sirs, Experimentally souls know this to be
true, that they can hardly keep down murmuring thoughts, when Christ does not
entertain them presently. I remember it was the speech of Mr. Calvin,
intimating the moderation of his spirit about Luther, says he, Though Luther
should call me a Devil, I would honor him as a Saint. So truly do thou,
though Christ call thee a Devil, do thou honor him as the Messiah. In Psalm.
22. you have a very remarkable passage, Why art thou so far (says the
Psalmist) from the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the day time, but
thou hear not, verse. 1, 2. It was harsh dealing for God to let David cry all
the day long, and not to hear him, what then? Read the 3. verse. But thou art
holy, etc. Oh Sirs, Sirs, look about you, and learn your Lesson well, you must
carry it well to Christ; though he deal harshly with you, you must speak to
him, and think of him honorably; you must beware of blasphemy. The Devil
thought Job would curse God, if God carried it cross, but he was deceived; and
set Satan be deceived so in you; he will tempt and put you on to entertain
dishonorable thoughts of Christ; and if it may be, he will make you charge
God foolishly, and speak of Christ foully; but take heed, see your pattern of
piety in this woman's practice, and carry it as she did. Whatever Christ do or
say, though he put thee off, and call thee dog, yet come near, and bow,
worship him, and call him Lord, Say, he is holy and honorable, and thou will
still count him so; this is thy good behavior which will be thy wisdom and
glory to strive for, and to come up unto. This is the first thing in this
Woman's carriage. I proceed.

A second thing in her good behavior, is this, She does not suddenly, nor
sullenly go away from him; She goes not away in a fume, or a pet, as we use
to say, No, but as the Disciples said, Master, She cries after us. Poor souls
may come to Christ, and cry, and he may go away; knock, and he not open;
call, and no body answer; what shall you do? Oh, take heed of going away
grumbling, and sullen. The Woman she renews her cry, she comes and says,
Lord, help me. Truly, my Brethren, it was a proud speech of those, in Isa.
58.3. that said, Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge, etc? And my Brethren, it
is spiritual pride for us to say, Lord, why do I cry, and thou not hear? keep
on crying, (Soul) that is thy duty. We are apt to be very sullen, though the
Lord be very wise in not hearing what we say. It was a strange piece of
sullenness in Jonah, in Jonah 4.8. when he wished in himself to dye, and said,
It is better for me to dye, than live. It will argue much hypocrisy in your
coming to Christ, if (although Christ do deny) you do not tarry and wait upon
him begging. In Job 27.10. It is said of the hypocrite, Will he cry always?
Thou say thou do hunger for Christ, thou do thirst for Christ, thou have
a hungring and thirsting for righteousness; well then, because you have it not,
will you go away? it is but an hypocritical hunger; were it cordial, it would
continue. It is an Argument of spiritual pride, for us not to wait and tarry
begging, though the Lord seem to keep off, denying. It was a proud speech of
the King of Assyria, in 2 King. 6.33. Behold, this evil is of the Lord, what
should I wait for the Lord any longer? Nay, he should have said, it is of the
Lord, and therefore it is meet, I must, I will wait; so this Woman did, and so
must we, wait, and not go away. Many a soul is apt to give all over, to cry, I
will pray no more, seek no more, this is evil, and must be watched against. An
humbly wise soul will wait, and we ought so to do, for that is another piece
of this example, and another part of our good behavior. But then

Thirdly, A third thing I do observe as the good carriage of this Woman (that
should be ours) to Christ, is, That she does really tell the Lord, that her
only hope was in his help, LORD, HELP ME, etc. The Lord seems to put her off,
she comes and worships him, etc. and cries out, Lord, help me; a
comprehensive speech it is. My thinks there are three things in that
expression, which I shall briefly open unto you.

First, It is as if s^ee should say, Lord, thou alone can help me.

Secondly, As if she should say, If thou will not help me, no body will. And

Thirdly, It is as if she should say, Lord, If thou will not help me, I am
resolved is go no where els^ and therefore O Lord help me.

Well, mark it, It is your Copy you must (...), if thou will carry it as thou
ought, and therefore lay it up in thy heart.

First, Though the Lord reject thee, tell the Lord, yet he is thy help; there
is no other Name whereby I can be saved, but thine, no other Physician, but
thee, no other balm, but thee, no other help, but in thee; this is good
carriage.

Secondly, We must not only look to Christ as the helper, but as he alone
that will do it. Tell Christ, that if he do not help thee, none will;
therefore Lord help. That speech is spoken out, to that purpose, Psalm. 69.20.
Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of bitterness: and I looked for
some to take pity, but there was none, etc. This poor woman might have said,
as the Woman with the bloody Issue, I have been with all the Doctors, and none
can cure, none cast the Devil out of my child. O soul, it is a savoury speech
to say, Lord, all help but thine is in vain. I have gone here and there, to
this and that creature, but all are empty, all are hopeless, all are helpless.
It is thee alone (O Lord) that I see can help; therefore O Lord hear, and O
Lord help. And then consider it further.

Thirdly, She holds it out as one resolved to go to no body else, Lord help,
she will not leave him. It is said, They that forsake thee, and go a whoring,
they shall all perish; But it is good for me to draw nigh to God, as he said,
Psalm. 73. verse. last. I have thought this to be a part of the intendment of
that expression, in Psalm. 16.1* 4. Preserve me, O Lord, for in thee do I
trust. Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another God: their
drink offerings of blood I will not offer, nor take up their names into my
lips. I have, I say, thought it to be, as if he should say, Lord, help me, I
will go no where else, I will not go to an Idol, thou can do it, and thou will do it, and no body else can do it, and I am resolved to go no where else;
here I lie, here I will dye, if I must; none can, none shall be to me a
helper, but thy self alone, and therefore Lord help. Well, that is the third
thing in this Woman's carriage, which is our Copy. But to proceed.

Fourthly, Mark it a little, This good Woman carries it well to Christ, in that
she does not d^ny what the Lord did hint about her unworthiness. Christ calls
her dog, and she does not at all deny it. Oh Sirs, a believing soul acts
highly, but it goes humbly. Mark but a little the phrase; My thinks our Lord
and Savior does speak two sad things to her in one word; It is not meet to
take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. In this speech it is evident
that Christ,

First, He calls her Dog. And

Secondly, He tells her, It is not meet for Dogs to have childrens bread; yet
how humbly does she carry it! She says, TRUTH LORD; As if she had said, I
may be a Dog, and am so, and it is not meet for me to have childrens bread,
etc. Oh Sirs, if the Lord Christ in the day of your distress, (when you shall
go to him under the sense of your sins) if then, I say, he rip up, and charge
upon us our sins, and shall say to thee, but thou were a drunkard, but thou
were a swearer, etc. then know how to he have your selves, and say, Truth Lord,
it is so, I dare not, I do not in the least deny it. It is good carriage to
confess the truth of what Christ lays to our charge. I meet with two sad
examples of the Lords own people, that were got upon so proud a pin, that they
did deny what God charged them with. In Jeremiah 2. God charges them with
fooleries, and going away from him, says God in verse. 23. How can thou say I
am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? see thy way in the valley, know
what thou have done: thou art a swift Dromedary, traversing her ways. Now mark
in verse. 35. Yet thou say, because I am innocent, etc. That God should
charge them with Idols, and they say that they are innocent, it argues a very
proud heart, and it was very ill carriage, a behavior which did not become
them; yet so it was. And just so bad a behavior is theirs, in Malachy 3.13.
says God there, Your words have been stout against me; yet ye say, What have
we spoken so much against thee? Oh Sirs! souls that are in a saving condition,
do know this that I am going to say, when the conscience accuses, flesh and
blood will go to put all off; what I a drunkard, I a swearer? etc. I, thou art,
and if God charge it upon thee, it is, and must be thy good carriage, in all
humility to lie down, and say nothing. You have a notable word, in Lam. 3. It
is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth, verse. 29. He puts
his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. Oh, do not deny any sin
the Lord charges thee withal; if there be any hope, it is in this, putting
thy mouth in the dust. But of all examples, I will commend you to that, in
Jeremiah 3. says God, in verse. 20. Surely as a wife treacherously departs
from her husband: so have you dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel,
says the Lord. What then, do they deny it? No. A voice was heard upon the high
places, weeping and suppl^cation of the children of Israel: for they have
perverted their way, and they have forgotten the Lord their God. Oh, here is
good carriage, when the Lord shall deal harshly, bring all thy sins to
remembrance, rip up sin here, and fin there, Oh with a voice of weeping say,
truly it is so. Let God charge any thing; Let Christ say what he will, he
cannot lie, whatever his language be: If Christ say Swine, Dog, reply
nothing, only say as this Woman did, Truth Lord. That is the fourth thing. But
then again

Fifthly, This Woman's good carriage lies in this, She does gather upon Jesus
Christ (as it were) and catches hold of that, by which Christ would seem to
cast her off, and does take an argument, from his harsh speech, to plead for
her self. It is not meet to give the childrens bread to Dogs. See how she
takes hold of it, Truth Lord, But the Dogs may eat of the crumbs that fall
from their Masters Table. Does Christ say, go Woman, dog Woman, say thou, I
will take hold of this word, a crumb Lord. It is good when a soul can catch
hold upon a Christ* even by that with which he would put it off. For instance;
suppose Jesus Christ should say to thee, thou art an ungodly wretch, come not
to me, catch hold of that, and say, thou art a God that justifies the ungodly.
Says God, thou art a Rebel, get thee gone? catch at it, and say, truth Lord,
it is so; but the Lord Jesus Christ ascended to give gifts to Rebels. Does the
Lord yet say, thou art an enemy? answer, true Lord, but there is reconciliation
for enemies in the blood of Christ, etc. Learn to catch at that hand by which
Christ seems to thrust thee away; hold that. It is indeed a Mystery, but so is
all godliness, and we must learn it; and out of this Woman's example we may
be helped therein. That is the fifth. But not to enlarge, I will come to the
next.

The sixth and last thing in her good carriage, is this, That she is content
with a little in the lowest manner, if she may not have a great deal in the
highest manner. For mark her expression, A crumb Lord, there is little; and
under the Table, I will be glad to stoop so low, and lick that which lies
there upon the ground. Oh that this frame of spirit were in us! surely it is a
blessed thing to be thus bowed in our hearts, to stoop thus to Christ. We
cannot enough admire, nor (I fear) imitate this Woman, pray look upon her,
listen to her. Truly my thinks the poor Woman says thus, Indeed I am a poor
Canaanite, I am not one of the children of the house of Israel, I may not sit
down at the childrens table, nor take of the bread so soon as cut from the
Loaf, but I will be content to take it under the table, there I will lie, etc.
And truly (my Brethren) this was the good carriage of the Prodigal, mark how
the Prodigal comes home. Father, make me one of thy hired servants. He does
not say, Father, remember, I was a child, and let me come in for a portion,
etc. No, but make me but a servant, and what servant would he be? a hired
servant; the household servants had a privilege that the hired servants had
not. I shall turn you to a Scripture for it, Exodus 12.44, and 45. verses. The
hired servant might not eat of the Passover, when the household servant might.
He would be a hired servant, that if his Father would not take him into full
grace, and give him a childs place and portion again, he would be contented
with any thing. Now the Lord help you and I to think of these things; here is
good carriage. Here are six things you see wherein she carries it well. But now

In the second place, I should give you the Reasons why this same good carriage
should be, notwithstanding Christ carry it harshly.

There are three heads of Reasons.

First of all, If you consider who Christ is, to whom you come

Secondly, If you consider what your selves are who come to this Jesus Christ.
And

Thirdly, If you consider the Errant for which you come to him at any time; you
will find in all these three, Matter; and Motive enough to make you carry it
thus well to Christ, though he carries it ill to you. The Woman considered who
Christ was, the Son of David, the Messiah; and she considered who she was, a
Canaanite; and she remembers that she had a child under the power of the
Devil; and let us touch a little upon them.

First Consider who Christ is to whom you come. I shall hint out my meditations
as to this in four particulars, who Christ is.

First of all, He is the Lord; God blessed for evermore; Therefore worship
thou him (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 45.11. FOR he is thy Lord; and because he
is thy Lord, therefore worship thou him. The Lord Jesus, to whom you and I
come, he is the Lord Jehovah, God blessed for evermore, and should we not
carry it well to him? were thou to come to a man, but a mere man, upon a
weighty affair. though he were a little cross, thou would carry it well;
and should thou go to the Lord God, blessed for evermore, and carry it ill?
Surely the consideration of a God ought to fill the soul with all reverence in
every approach unto him, and with all humbleness of carriage in our dealings
with him. If thou art an Arrian, doubting and denying Christ's deity, there
might be the shadow of a Plea for an irreverent deportment; but being thou art
one who call Christ Lord, and professest (at least) to acknowledge him God;
this very thing obliges thee to demean thy self well, however he deals with
thee.

Secondly, As he is thy Lord, so he is thy Life; My meaning is, thou go to
him, without whom thou can not live; and therefore thou had need to carry
it well. Whither should we go? (says Peter) thou have the words of eternal
life. Christ is your Physician, for that you must carry it well to him; you do
carry it well, and wait upon a Doctor fairly, because your life lies upon it,
and will you not deal so with Christ, when the life of your souls lies upon it?
I knew a Physician that was of great Name and Practice, a man of a very cynical
spirit, as rugged, crabbed a carriaged person as any of that Profession; he
could scarce give a pleasing look, and would often give course, cross, indeed
very bad language; and yet I have heard him so reverently spoke unto, and so
patiently waited on, that I have admired it; but what was the reason? Oh he
was a Doctor, and they came to him knowing his skill; and therefore it made
them carry themselves so respectfully to him. Oh soul! Christ is thy sovereign
Physician, thy only Doctor; upon that account let him do or say what he will,
as he will, be it never so seemingly cross (for really ill he cannot carry
it) it becomes thee to have a good behavior.

Thirdly, He is Wisdom, infinite Wisdom, one that knows what he does. Alas
my Beloved! if the Lord Christ were capable of folly, we might charge God
foolishly; but Job knew Gods wisdom was infinite, and therefore he would not
charge God foolishly. When he rips up thy sins, be still, he knows what he
does. When the Lord Jesus shall lance the wound, and cut conscience, and tell
thee of sin, and rip up unworthiness, lie still, carry it well, he is very
wise. How often does the Surgeon bind the Patient, and cut, and lance it?
How often does he search the wound, and gash the flesh, yet still is the Patient
quiet, he silently submits? why, he knows the Surgeon is wise, and one
that understands both what, and wherefore he does so. Truly (Beloved) Christ
is infinite in wisdom, does nothing but what we need, and he can (yea and in
time will) give a good reason why he carries it thus or thus unto us (as I
formerly told you in the second Doctrine) therefore we ought to be silent,
and carry our selves reverently, and well unto him.

Fourthly and lastly, Consider further who the Lord is; why truly the Lord
Jesus is so generous, so gracious, that he cannot be angry if we stoop; He
cannot carry it ill, if we carry it well. The Lord Jesus is of so sweet a
disposition, of so tender bowels, that when he sees us weep, his bowels turn
within him. Christ, though he roar, and make thee tremble, yet if thou bow,
and fall, and art silent, he will (as they say of the Lion in such a case)
Lick and love thee. It was the glory of the King of Israel, that when Benhadads
servants came to him with ropes about their necks, he was overcome with it, 1
King. 20.32, 33. Oh you know I have once, yea twice told you of Joseph, I must
tell you once more of him. Joseph speaks rugged, very roughly, yet at last he
bowed, what was the cause of it? Look upon the story. In Genesis 45. you have that
which does usher in his speaking kindly. In the first verse. Then Joseph could
not refrain himself, etc. when was that? Look into chap. 44. from verse 18.
downward. Then, when Reverend Judah, his Elder Brother, and the rest, with
bended knees, and doubtless with weeping eyes, lay at his feet humbly under
all, and yet earnestly supplicating, Oh how does his bowels yearn toward them!
So then, when thou shall lie at his feet humbly supplicating, laying out thy
misery, and what thou do expect, he cannot hold out; witness this Woman of
Canaan unto whom at last Jesus Christ sweetly condescended (though at first he
carried it toward her strangely, as you have heard) Truly as she found, we
may expect even the same condescension, if we have the same carriage. Christ
has that innate sweetness, that infinite grace, those soft affections, that
however he begins roughly, he will conclude comfortably (as I shall show when
I come to it) Remember Christ's Name is Love, and Lovingness is with him. The
consideration of his Nature calls upon thee, O soul, for such a carriage as I
have opened; therefore study it. If thou well know Christ, who he is, thou
can not well forget what carriage is suitable to such a person; so that if
you consider who Christ is, to whom you come, and withal if you do not forget
your selves, and the Arrand you come to him about, you cannot but carry it well
to him, though he should carry it seemingly harsh to you. I should proceed to
open these two other things, viz. The consideration of our selves, and our
business to, and with Christ, are grounds for this good behavior, but I see at
present I must end here: Therefore now I shall only name two words of Use.

First, I will ask you a Question.

And secondly, I will give you a word of Advice.

First, I will ask you this one Question, If it be our duty to deal well with
Christ, when he deals ill with us; What shall become of those that deal ill
with Christ, when he deals well with them? If when Christ frowns, we should
worship him, if when Christ puts us off, we should then draw near to him, if
when Christ calls us Dog, we should worship him as our Lord, What shall we
think of those, who when Christ smiles, invites, does them good, they do ill to
Jesus Christ? Oh my Brethren, Monsters they are, and not Men, and yet I must
tell you, we need not go to Africa to find these Monsters; people professing
the Lord are apt to deal ill with Christ, when he deals well with them. In
Jeremiah 2. says the Lord there, Testify against me what iniquity have your
Fathers found in me? etc. Is there any such before the Lord? Oh let me
testify for the Lord against you; what evil did Christ do to you? why then
do thou blaspheme the Name of God? thou have often hea^d by his servants, I
lay down my life for sinners, and yet thou will swear by the Life of Jesus
Christ. If the Lord had spoke angerly, thou sho^ldest have blessed him, and
will thou now curse him, when he speaks kindly? In Malachy 3.13, 14. says the
Lord there, Your words have been stout against me; wherein have they been
stout? In that you have said, it is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinances? etc. Mark it a ^i^tle, I gather out of this
Scripture this truth, that whoever speaks slightly of the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, his words are stout against Jesus Christ. Have you not spoke slightly
of prayer, praying, breaking bread, of Church Fellowship, as if these were
vain? your words are stout against Jesus Christ. Sirs, If the Lord Jesus should
make every hearing of a Sermon twenty pound, yet you were bound to honor him
by hearing a Sermon: And if he should make breaking of bread, fire and faggot,
you were obliged notwithstanding to engage in that duty. But now you have all
sweetly, why are your words stout against the Lord? you may have Ordinances
free, and worship with peace, and yet your words are stout against Jesus
Christ. Christ will say one day to such, There was a Woman of Canaan that
carried it well when I dealt crosly with her, but you carried it cross to me,
even when and while I was all kindness to you. Oh Sirs, think not that Christ
can take it well; nay, he must needs take it ill. If this Question I hint
fasten on thy heart (O soul!) and find thee in this fault, O humble thy soul
for this thy sin. Thy carriage is quite contrary to this point and example
which I have opened to you.

The second word I would speak, is a word of Advice; and that is but this one
word. Who are you before the Lord, that are of this house, that this good Woman
was? That are under the frowns of Christ at present, that have heard Jesus
Christ call you Dog, that have prayed often, and been put off always? I pray
take a word of Advice, carry it well even now unto Jesus Christ. You know what
the wise man tells us, in Eccles. 7.14. In the day of prosperity be joyful,
but in the day of adversity consider. I would but a little allude to it. It may
be there sits a soul, but it is a day of prosperity with him, he prays, and
the Lord hears, he looks, and the Lord smiles; But there is a Man or Woman,
with whom it is the day of adversity, thou call, and Christ does not answer,
it is thy day of adversity. Now consider, consider what, consider how thou
carriest thy self, Look to thy lips, do not sin, do not murmr, though thy
wounds stink, though thy conscience burn, though thy soul tremble, it is thy
day of adversity, and therefore consider. Oh, consider how the Lord eyes thee
to see how thou will carry it. Take heed the Lord do not see a cursed
Canaanitish carriage in thee; here is a good Canaanitish carriage in the Text.
I remember what a godly man said, within these seven years, lying under a great
pain of a great grief, of which he died; as he groaned exceedingly, says
one, you groan much, I, replied he, But though I groan, I dare not grumble.
Though Christ keep thee a little at staves end, and carry it harshly, yet be
of good courage, and confidence; will thou but wait a little? wait the Lords
leisure, carry it well, he will deal well with thee. Be therefore advised how
thou behave thy self, surely a waspish spirit, and a murmuring tongue, argue
one is not well advised (as we say) in his carriage; Therefore go home as an
advised Christian, let the Lord Jesus do, or say what he pleases, hold thou
thy peace, suppress thou thy passion, and in all things show a humble,
reverend, blessed behavior to him. But of this more in the next.

Reasons why we ought still to carry it well to Christ. The Fifth SERMON.
Matthew 15.25. and 27. verses.




AS to be entertained by Christ really and readily, is a great mercy; so to
be rejected by Christ (though it be but seemingly) must needs be a great
misery. Indeed there cannot befall a poor soul a sadder evil, than to come to
Christ needing, and expecting relief, and to receive either an absolute denial,
or unusual delays at the hands of Christ. And yet my Brethren, this is a case
that sometimes has befallen many, and may befall us; We have a notable
instance of it before us, in this story of the Woman of Canaan. There were four
things I told you that we would principally speak unto in the handling of this
story.

The first was the Coming of this Woman.

The second, is, the Manner of the Entertainment that she had by Christ, which
was very sad, not an absolute denial, but a strange and unusual delay.

Thirdly, Now we are considering the Carriage of this Woman under this strange
and rough entertainment that she received from Christ. The point is of
concernment for us to consider, that whenever it will befall any of us, upon
any account, we may know how to carry our selves as she has done. In these
two verses we have her Carriage, and after we had opened that, we gathered
up all into this one Observation, viz.

Doct. That it is the duty, the wisdom, the glory of a Christian, to carry it
unto Christ very holily; when he seems to carry it to the soul very harshly.
Or shortly thus, We must carry it really well, when Christ carries it
seemingly ill.

There were but two Principal things, which I said were necessary to be
handled in the explication of the Point.

The First is, What this good Carriage is, wherein this holy, and blessed
behavior to Jesus Christ does lie.

And secondly, Upon what account it is our duty, and glory, to have this
Carriage. Now for the opening of both of these, I did only confine my self to
the example in hand, to see how the Woman carried it; and to see from her what
were the Reasons that did prevail with her to carry it thus to Christ.

Here are six things wherein this good thing, viz. this good Carriage of this
good Woman, appears.

First, Though the Lord dealt roughly with her, she kept up honorable
thoughts of him.

Secondly, We showed she did not suddenly, nor sullenly go away, but still
she cries after him, And,

Thirdly, She speaks to Christ as professing her only hope in his help.

Fourthly, She denied nothing that Christ speaks against her. Christ seems to
say to her,

First, That she was a Dog. And then,

Secondly, That she should have nothing. Truth Lord, says she.

Fifthly, She does gather upon Jesus Christ, and by that very hand which he
thrust her off, she gathers hope.

Lastly, She was content to have a little in the lowest manner, when she
might not have her first and great request in the highest manner. We did the
last day open these more largely. But now, whence is it that we must have, and
labor for this good Carriage? or what is the reason we should carry it thus
holily to Christ, though he seem to carry it roughly to us? I referred the
reason of it to three heads. I told you, if we do consider either Jesus
Christ, or our selves, or the Errand upon which we come to him at any time,
we shall see great reason to carry it well to Christ, howsoever he may seem
to carry it ill to us. And all these three considerations we have here in the
Woman.

First, Consider who Jesus Christ is, when you go to him. Why truly my
Brethren, he is the Son of David, and our Lord; Because he is our Lord,
therefore we must worship him. It is because Masters are Masters, therefore
servants must carry it well; we did open that, and therefore shall not repeat
it now. But,

Secondly, Consider we our selves, who we are that go to Jesus Christ; and
(my Brethren) you will see that such as we are, coming to Christ, should carry
it very well to him, though he should seem to carry it ill to us. Alas, what
was this Woman? Certainly the Holy Ghost did help her to look within, to see
her self as she was, viz. a poor Woman; A Woman of Canaan, of Tire and Sidon,
a Woman that was a Dog by Nature; such a Woman had need to carry it holily
when she comes to Christ. And my Brethren, if you look upon your hearts (as
she was, so are we) you will see all the reason in the world, to carry it
holily and humbly to Jesus Christ, though he should carry it seemingly harsh
to you.

First, My Brethren, we are poor Creatures, and certainly our poverty does
speak for our humility. Indeed, we are beggars, and you know the speech of
Solomon, in Prove. 28.23. The poor uses entreaties. It is but meet that those
that come a begging, and are poor, that they should use entreaties. And my
Brethren, let me tell you, it is an argument that we have not the blessing of
spiritual poverty, if we do not carry it well to Jesus Christ, however he
carries it to us. Indeed it is observed, as the very natural disposition of the
Spanish Nation, that though they be beggars, yet they be proud. I wish in a
spiritual sense, that were not true of the most of us; we carry it too
proudly, and that because we forget what we are. I remember Solomon, when he
would strike fire out of the flint (as it were) (that is reverence, out of the
hearts of irreverend ones) falls upon this consideration; He is in Heaven, and
thou art on Earth, Eccles. 5.2. Ah! it is folly (as Solomon there intimates)
for us who are upon Earth (we dust and ashes) to carry our selves hastily,
irreverently before the God of Heaven. Our poor condition prompts us on (were
we wise to mind it) to a good Carriage. This I find to be the proper reason
of that good Carriage which we opened, from Psalm. 22. You find there the
Psalmist crying out, Oh my God, why have thou forsaken me, and I cry, and thou
hear not, etc? but thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of
Israel. Here is excellent good Carriage, but what is the ground of it? See in
the sixth verse, But I am a Worm, and no Man. As if he should say, I am a
worm, a poor silly creature, and therefore if I cry, and thou hear not, yet
thou art a holy and honorable God. But

Secondly, We are not only poor, but we are polluted creatures. And now, my
Brethren, our pollution (when we come to Jesus Christ) should have a power
upon us to make us carry it, so holily and humbly as we opened. The Leper
under the Law had a liberty to cry out, yet he was to cover his face, and to
cover his lips. My Brethren, you and I are but Lepers when we come to Jesus
Christ; and upon this account it is that we should carry it holily, and
humbly. This had an influence in Jobs good Carriage, in the 40. and 42.
chapters, Behold (says Job) I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I have spoken
once, but I will speak no more. Surely it argues we are not sensible of our
own stench and pollution, if we dare stand upon terms, and mis-behave our
selves toward our holy Physician. If thy poverty will not bind thee to the
good behavior, let thy pollution do it.

Thirdly, Yet add a third string to this cord, that it may keep thee in; We
are not only poor and polluted, but we are very enemies. And (my Brethren) an
enemy, especially a conquered enemy, coming to plead for his life, for mercy,
had need come humbly. When the servants of Benhadad came to the King of Israel,
as enemies, and as conquered enemies, they come with ropes about their necks,
and lie at his feet, and snatch at a word, 1 King. 20.33. Oh sinner! that is
thy condition, thou art an enemy, thou have been in rebellion, and thou art
suing for reconciliation, and should not thou carry it well? Is thy heart so
unsensible of thy former Carriage, as to miscarry it self again? Surely thou
have need, and all the reason in the world, to crouch and bend, to yield and
bow, well to carry thy self (who have been an enemy) with all reverence to the
Lord Jesus; otherwise you do much forget your selves. But I shall not enlarge.
That is the second Reason why souls should carry it holily and humbly to
Christ, Namely, if we consider who we are that come to Christ. But then,

Thirdly and lastly, Consider you the Errand for which you come to Christ at
any time, and you will see in that an Argument to make you carry it well. This
Woman came to Christ upon a great Errand, Ah Lord, My Daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil; And, Oh Lord, I am troubled with him too (might she say) A
great business then, she came about, and so do we when we come to Christ. If
we were to speak with Christ for a trifle, then if Christ spoke roughly, we
might go away, but it is about what most concerns us. For, suppose it be thy
first coming to Jesus Christ, thou art a poor creature under sin, and now thou
art made sensible of it, what do thou go to Christ for? for ease of thy
burden, etc. Suppose thou art coming to Christ after some backsliding, under
the guilt of some spiritual Adultery, and now thou art coming to him that he
should receive thee again, and is not this a serious thing? Nay, suppose thou
go to Christ but for the life of one of your children, or your own life;
these are serious things, and in serious things we should carry it humbly,
when we come to such a one as Jesus Christ is, being such as we are, upon
such a weighty Errand as all our occasions are; I fear thou (that mis-behavest
thy self to Christ) forgettest thy business with him. Is the sentence past, and
art thou condemned already? and art thou come to Christ with the chains about
thy feet, and the halter about thy neck, and now carriest thou thy self ill to
him? Art thou suing for thy pardon, and now proud? art thou before the Lord for
bread, childrens bread at any time, and is thy case such, as death follows upon
a denial of it? and now mindest thou not thy Carriage? Pray souls look about
you (as my phrase is) what come you to Christ for? is it for temporals, or
eternals? come you for your selves, or for yours? are you seeking for things on
Earth, or in Heaven? do you desire your childrens, or your own, or both
deliverance from the Devil? I pray mind your Errand, what thing it is you come
to Christ for; and let it be almost what it will that you are with Christ
about, the consideration of the one, or other, should and may prevail with us,
to carry it exceeding well, though he seem to carry it ill. So much for the
explication of the Point.

Why now then for the Application; Indeed there is but one thing that I do aim
at as the proper and principal intendment of this Point, which is, to direct,
and enable both my own heart, and yours (under God) to carry it thus well to
Jesus Christ, though he may carry it ill to us, But before I speak to that, I
beseech you, if it be your duty to carry it well to Jesus Christ, though he
should carry it ill to us; then do you take heed (as I was concluding the last
time, and would a little hint it again) that you do not carry it ill to Jesus
Christ, when Christ carries it well to you. Therefore all you that are before
the Lord, you hear this, though Jesus Christ should spurn at you, you should
worship him; though Jesus Christ should cast you off with a denial, yet you
should lie at his feet, and honor him. I beseech you take heed, when Christ
smiles upon you, do not spurn at him; when he does good to you, be not you
bad to him. This is a necessary caution, even to those that pretend to God. In
Deuteronomy. 32. What a large Catalogue of good Carriage is there of God toward a
people? When they were in a desert Land, he lead them, and as an Eagle he
bare them on his wings, etc. 10, and 11. verses. He found him in a desert
Land, and in the waste howling wilderness: he lead him about, he instructed
him, he kept him as the Apple of his Eye. As an Eagle stirs up her Nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears
them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God
with him, etc. Here was good Carriage from the Lord, but how did they carry it?
See in verse 15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxed fat, thou
art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then he forsook God, which
made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation, etc. Oh! as Moses
said, in verse 6. Do ye thus require the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?
Jesurun, the Lords people, the Lords heritage, a people that profess God, are
very apt to carry it ill, when the Lord carries it well. And I wish to God this
were not the Carriage of England this day, now we have peace and advantages,
and opportunities. But now the Lord does well, we carry it ill. I beseech you,
beware of it; I shall press it in a few words; Who is there of you all before
the Lord, but I may say to you, as the Lord said to his people by Jeremiah;
Have I been as a barren wilderness, or a dry heath? etc. There is not the most
notorious Rebel that lives out of Hell, but is beholding to Christ for being
preserved. Who of you all that have not had choice dealings by Jesus Christ? I
beseech you do not deal ill with Christ. I know you are ready to say, what, do
we deal ill with Christ? I pray mark it, I will speak but two words.

First, When thou sinnest wilfully after Christ has called thee from sin, and
tendered thee a pardon, thou dealest ill with him. Mind well that place, Heb.
10.26. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth
( i. e. The great truth of the Gospel Grace, in, and by Christ, distinguished,
verse. 28. from Moses his Law) then what follows? why verse. 29. It is accounted
base, and dispiteful dealing with Christ, who shed his blood for sinners. Ah
thou wretch! do thou hear, Christ pitties wretches, and is come to procure
and give in pardon to sinners, and calls, Come sinner, leave thy sin, take my
pardon; cast off thy wickedness, accept my grace; and yet thou turnest thy deaf
ear; thou now declarest a hard heart, and dealest ill with Christ, who is
dealing well with thee. Well then, I say, whoever thou art, that when thou
hear that Christ died for enemies, that he has gifts for Rebels, and that
he is ready to justify the ungodly; and now wilt be a Rebel still, this is
dealing ill with Jesus Christ. This is that which the Apostle calls trampling
under foot the blood of Christ, etc. And so,

Secondly, When you deal ill with any of the eminent things of Christ, you deal
ill with Christ. You know what the Lord will say at the last day, Mat. 25. For
as much as you have done it to any of these little ones, you have done it unto
me. When you scoff at any member of Christ, Jesus Christ says, There is one
scoffs at me. And when you deal unworthily with any of the things of Christ
(as the Ministers of Christ) Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me: and
he that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me, etc. It is not spoke of the Twelve, but of the Seventy:
Those that he had sent out to preach in his Name, though they were not the
Twelve extraordinary ones, I say, but the ordinary Disciples. I pray mind it,
ordinary Ministers are so near Christ, that he accounts despising of them, as
a despite of himself. And so for Christians, the meanest of them all, etc.
Consider them that thou do despise, what are they? they are the Lords
Messengers for thy good, and they are the Lords Members whom he tenders. And
so I say, for any thing of Christ, they that deal ill with them, deal ill with
Christ. I know what is the great Objection against this, and I remember Dr.
Stoughton did well answer it. We do not take these to be the servants of
Christ, the Lords people; his answer is, Beware you do not smite as chismatick,
a holy one, and a Saint be found a bleeding. Well, I beseech you take heed of
this; many that pretend to have much from Christ, they deal exceeding ill with
Christ, it is a sin without excuse. Therefore the Lord does make the 2. of
Jeremiah, to be a conviction to leave them without excuse. Christ may say unto
you all, whom in misery he has supported, in want supplied, in all things
sustained; I say, Jesus Christ may speak thus to you, If so be in the day of
your distress, I had let you lie under the burden of sin; If when you came to
beg mercy, I had put you off with a denial, or long delay, you ought to have
carried it well: but how inexcusable will you be, that while Christ carries it
well to you, you carry it ill to him?

But the most proper. Use is to speak something to direct us all to this good
Carriage. You hear, however Christ carries it to you, yet you ought to carry it
holily, and humbly to Jesus Christ. And it may be there is some poor soul or
other that is now going to Christ; It may be thou art a Months-Convert, and
thou art wrestling long with Christ, and have no answer; or it may be thou art
a backslider, and art returning to Christ, or have been with Christ upon some
family, corporal occasion, hear how you are to carry it.

I will hold out my thoughts distinctly, that I may the better direct: And I
shall press the Use under two heads.

Cave, Viz. 1 Beware, beware of ill carriage Unto Christ.

Cura, Viz. 2 Take care, labor for a good carriage Unto Christ.

Under these two Particulars I would press this good Woman's practice upon my
self, and you; That however Christ seems at any time, in any thing to carry it
to us, although it seem ill, yet let not us carry our selves ill to him, but
rather overcome our evil with good, and study to behave our selves to Jesus
Christ as we ought. I beseech you attend it.

First, Beware of ill Carriage. Satan is at your elbow, he is tempting, he is
busy to make you curse God, and dye: This was Satan's main work to provoke Job
to ill Carriage, and that is his work upon thee now. Satan sees thee groaning
under a sin, that thou have no ease, now Satan is tempting thee to carry it
ill, but beware, do not carry it ill. Take heed of two things as the principal
pieces of good Carriage.

First, Beware of evil words, and wishes.

Secondly, Of unlawful works and endeavors.

First, Beware of evil words, and wishes. My Brethren, we are apt in
affliction to sin with our mouths. But oh Sirs, let me tell you, Mouth-sin is
great sin; Tongue-sin on Earth, is tormenting-sin in Hell; Do not speak ill,
nor wish ill. Do not speak ill. It was an ill speech, yet that good man drops
it in his trouble, Psalm. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence. And it was a very ill speech of the Church, in
Lam. 3.18. I said my hope is perished from the Lord. And a bad wish of Job, Job
6.8, 9. Oh that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the thing
that I long for! even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would
let loose his hand, and cut me off. Beware of speaking unadvisedly with your
lip^. Says the soul, I cannot stand up under the frowns of Christ, and I would
to God I might dye now; God notes what you say, Jer. 45.3. Thou said, woe is
me now! Mark, God noted what Baru^h says. But you will say, may not the soul
speak? may not the bitter heart vent it self? may not I speak of my condition
as it is? I pray mark but these two or three things.

First of all, You may speak, but it is our misery we are apt to speak more
than it is; Many a time we cry out of our misery more than it is. But,

Secondly, Mark this, though we may speak, It it best to hold our peace.
Better is it for the soul to put his mouth in the dust, then there will be
hope, as we opened, Lam. 3.29. But then,

Thirdly, In all your speaking, you must distinguish between humble prayer, and
hasty speaking. You may go before the Lord again, and again, and speak to him,
as the Woman of Canaan; you may tell the Lord your wounds stink and fester,
your bones are broken, etc. but you must not do this unadvisedly, or
passionately.

Quest. How shall the soul know, even in prayer, that he does not speak of his
sad condition badly?

Answ. I answer first, When in all your prayers, and expressions unto God, you
leave your complaint upon your selves. This was Jobs practice, Jeb 10.1. says
He, My soul is weary of my life, I will leave my complaint upon my self, I
will speak in the bitterness of my soul, i. e. I will say, Lord, my wound is
great, but I made it, etc. you may expostulate with God, but still leave your
complaint upon your selves, i. e. lay the fault of all upon your selves; do not
blame Christ. Confess whatever thou feel smart or sore, that thou must only
thank thy self for it. Lay not thy sorrow to thy Saviors charge; whatever you
say, speak not as charging Christ, but condemning self. That is one thing.

And secondly, As you must leave the complaint upon your selves, so you must
not absolutely, and peremptorily condemn your selves. The soul is apt to cry
out, my case is bad, and it will never be better, I conclude I must perish,
there is no hope, etc. Ah! these condemning, concluding, absolute concluding
speeches thus against our selves, proceed from passion, and are of that kind
of words which we must avoid. But it is not enough to watch words, take heed
especially to your works. Therefore

Secondly, As you must beware of sinful words and wishes, so, beware of sinful
works, and endeavors. When the Rod of God is upon thy back, take heed of
putting forth thy hand to evil. Saul's way, was a wicked way; Indeed the Lord
dealt sadly, severely with him; neither to answer him by vision, nor dream; by
Urim, nor Thummim, was very sore and grievous. And my Brethren, to be able to
forbear at such a time any thing that may seem a way to help, I confess it is
very hard. But although it be difficult, yet it is duty. We must beware of
going to Witches, and Wizards for counsel in any case. It was Saul's sin, and I
wish it had died with him; but it remains too great a practice in these times,
Oh take heed of it. Take heed, I say, you do not by any evil practice seek to
ease your selves. Though Christ should not answer thee, no more at present,
than God did Saul; though he do neither speak to thee himself, nor suffer his
servants to speak on thy behalf (as here in this Woman's case) yet beware of
doing any unwarrantable thing to ease thy mind. Be not as Saul at Endor. No,
neither be as Saul in Mount Gilboa, (as the story is, 1 Samuel 30.) At Endor he
consults with a Witch; At Gilboa he took a sword and slew himself. O take heed
of that temptation! viz. Self-murder. I have heard it often as observed
heretofore, and I know, that to this day, it is an evil practiue many take,
they will lay violent hands upon themselves; this is to go back to hell for a
plaster. And surely such a plaster has so much venom in it, that it is
madness to expect Virtue from it. I beseech you therefore beware. This is the
first part of my advice. Learn your duty at least thus far, Not to carry it ill
in word or work, however in any thing the Lord deal with you. But my Point
says more, therefore I must press it. We must carry it well to Christ,
however he may seem to carry it to us. And therefore to come to that in the
next place.

Secondly, Recompense not evil with evil, but rather recompense evil with good.
It is true (as I have often said) Christ cannot carry it really ill; but
however do thou recompense evil with good. Now to that end I pray mind this
Woman of Canaan, and imitate her, write after her Copy, do as she did, let
your Carriage to Christ answer her Pattern in all the particulars which I
opened and instanced in. And to this end give me leave to commend to you, the
exercise of three Graces, in the exercise of which she was, and in them you
should be, (and so shall carry it well to God) Namely, Humility, Prayer,
Resolute Faith.

First, Observe her Humility, and go thy way, and do likewise. However the Lord
carries himself to thee, humble thy self under his hand. Christ could not speak
a word never so bad, but she would he viler. If the Lord would say Dog, she
would ^ay so too; Especially labor to carry it humbly in this one thing, to
accept of any measure, in any manner, of comfort that Christ gives you. Thou
art perplexed, comfort thou would have; Now observe, Christ it may be
offers thee a crumb, and thy proud heart will not accept of comfort, unless
thou may have much. This is just like a little child, the Mother gives it a
small piece of bread, and it cries, and throws it away, if he may not have his
Brothers piece of bread. Ah! Beloved, look to your hearts; Take heed of this
proud piece of childishness. If your hearts were humble, you would accept of,
and thank Christ for a little. As it is with the hungry soul, so it is with
every humble soul; He admires mercy in a morsel, and is willing to stoop under
the Table, to take up a crumb. Put on therefore, and be clothed with
humility, and put it forth, show it in your Carriage to Christ, as this Woman
of Canaan did. It was the humility of her soul, by which she carried it so
well; and this is the first Grace in her Carriage unto Christ, we should
endeavor to conform our selves. I come to the next.

Secondly, Observe in her the Grace of Prayer (I do not say, the Gift of
Prayer) But I observe it as the Grace of Prayer (for here was no great gift) Oh
Sirs! however the Lord does keep up Prayer, your case cannot be so bad, but
pray you may, and pray you must, Do but observe an instance or two in the Book
of the Psalms, of very sad cases, and yet they did not give over Prayer, Psalm.
61. there you have the Psalmist crying after God, in the first verse, But when
would he cry? Why when my heart is overwhelmed, verse. 2. Thou say thy heart
is overwhelmed, and thou can not, it is in vain to pray; Mark the Psalmist
prayed then. Again, Psalm. 88. observe how sad the case of Heman is set forth
there; My soul is full of trouble, my life draws nigh unto the grave, verse.
3. And so on. But what says he in verse. 13. But unto thee have I cried, O
Lord, and in the morning shall my Prayer prevent thee. Though the case was very
sad, yet it was not past praying. Here is the Devils temptation, What, will thou pray, it is in vain? thou have prayed, and Christ does not answer, Nay,
he has returned thee a rough answer; (So indeed the Serpent subtly
suggests, to take us off from Prayer.) But resist the Devil in that temptation;
do thou yet pray, and give not over; yet say, I will pray unto him; say with
Jonah, Yet I will look again toward his holy Temple, Jonah 2.4.

Quest. But if the soul say, But I cannot tell how to pray; I have not a Gift
of Prayer.

Answ. If thou be a Saint, Thou have a Grace of Prayer. And observe this, thou
can pray as much as the Woman of Canaan, Lord, help me, and, Truth Lord,
etc. Here are but three words, Lord help me. And let me in allusion tell you
but three words that you should pray to the Lord, let your case be what it
will.

First, Lord, thou only can help me; all the men in the world cannot help
me.

Secondly, Lord, thou did help many as bad as I.

Thirdly, And Lord, If thou did never help any as bad, then now thou will
have the more glory by helping me.

Object. Possibly the soul will be ready to say, But alas, Jesus Christ puts
me off, I would pray, but he turns away, and will not hear; and I would catch
hold of him, but he runs away.

Repl. You know what Jacob did, ( Genesis 32.26, 27.) He would catch hold of God,
though he would be gone; and you must wrestle with him, and cry after him,
You must not let him go. You see the Disciples tell Christ, that this Woman
cried after them, verse. 23. She was as one that ran after another, who went
away. She cries after us (say they) do thou so; if Christ seem to go, run
after, cry after. Be not put off, renew, and reinforce thy Prayer again and
again. Indeed, in this the Grace of Prayer differs from the Gift; the Grace
lives, and lasts, the Gift dies, and goes out. Well then, stir up thy self to
take hold of God; and keep thy hold, having taken it. Pray, if thou can but a
little, and go again, and pray the same words again and again; Christ himself
did so; Three times he prayed in the same words, Mat. 26.44. Be not ashamed
if thou want variety of expression. A few words prevail with God and Jesus
Christ. Therefore I say, Pray always; however Christ carry it, cast not away
thy Prayers, but continue in it; so this Woman did, and we must do likewise.
But

Thirdly, Be resolute in your Faith. And pray let me mark this by the way,
Though she does not say, Lord, I believe, yet she did believe. The Woman was
acting the Grace of Faith all this while, and she acts it very resolutely,
she speaks as one believing him to be the Messiah, as one whose only hope
and help was in him, and as one that did cleave and adhere to him. Our Lord
Jesus witnesses to the Woman's Faith. verse. 28. It was strong and resolute;
she did believe, and was acted and upheld (as I shall show hereafter) by Faith
in all this address. A Faith she had, and a Faith she expressed really,
though it is not expressed literally, as to the terms; yet it is evident as to
the Truth of it, that she did believe; so do you. Believers are ready to think
that in time of trouble, it is a time to pray, and to hear, but not to believe,
etc. Thou think thou may cry after Christ, and wait upon Christ, I but
thou should believe in him, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the
Lord, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the Name of
the Lord, and stay upon his God. So Job, I will trust in him though he kill
me. That act of Faith I am now pressing, is Trusting; and I pray mind it what
kind of Faith I press in this particular; It is a Trusting Faith. Job did
trust, and he that fears God, must trust in him at all times; yea in the
dark. And truly this word or term Trust, does very fitly set forth the thing I
intend to press you in this particular unto. Now that you may a little
understand it, consider that there are four words in the Scripture, that set
forth the great Mystery of Believing.

There is first, The general word Faith. I believe, Lord, help my unbeleef.

Secondly, There is the particular word of Hope. He hops.

Thirdly, There is a particular word of Knowledge, which is as much as
Assurance. I know whom I have believed. And

Fourthly, There is this word Trusting. And now what is the nature of Trust. A
man that believes, has a pretty deal of light of God, but he that hopes, has
a little more; he has more that knows; but what has he that trusts? I shall
give it you in this similitude: One comes to another, Sir, I know you can help
me, pray help me, pray help me; says he, I cannot do it, or I will not do
it. The other replies, but I beseech you Sir do it; undertake it for me, I
pray promise me. The other returns No, I will undertake nothing, I will
promise you nothing. The man returns again, but yet I will commit it to you, I
pray consider it, I will leave it with your goodness, and though you will not
say you will do it, yet Sir I will trust in you. So, thou go to Christ, and
he will not hear thee, he turns away, and says nothing; after all thy cries,
he seems silent; thou art left without assurance, and without visible hope.
Now say, Lord, I leave my case, my soul with thee. I will yet rely upon thy
grace, and although thou will not give me in a particular promise, why yet
Lord I will trust in thee. Oh trust to his Omnipotent Arm, that he can do it,
and because of his Tender Compassion, and Rich Free Grace, trust in him, that
he will do it; and this is that which Christ takes very well at our hands,
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
TRUSTS in thee, Isa. 26.3. When all fails, Hope and Heart fails, and Christ
seems to speak contrary, Cry out, Yet Lord, I will trust in thee. To draw up my
self to a close of this Use. I beseech you all often remember the Woman of
Canaan, consider her Carriage, and this point which I have been pressing from
her practice; and in your condition strive to have her Carriage, especially in
the exercise of those three things, viz. Humility, Prayer, and Faith. Besides
what in the former Sermon I opened, which I shall not now repeat. For only
this is that I would press, viz. have such a good carriage in all things. You
know what is the particular occasion wherein Christ and you trade, or have to
do upon any account. Be thy case what it will, or Christ's carriage be as he
pleases (cross, or kind, as we speak) still know, you ought to study and
strive to demean your self holily. However the Lord carries it to you, your
duty and wisdom is to carry it well to him.

Quest. I but you will say, This is very hard, how shall I do it?

Answ. I told you indeed it is a hard Copy, but we must endeavor to write it.
And blessed be God, the Copy is written in great letters, so that we may with
the more ease see it, and imitate it.

Quest. But how shall we do it?

Answ. Take but these Three things.

First, If ever you would imitate this Copy, Be sure that you take heed of
those persons, that will shake your hands while you are a writing. Oh Sirs,
when you are to copy out the great Copy of the Woman of Canaan,

1 Away from the Devil.

2 Away from Carnal Reason. And

3 Away from flesh and blood. These will shake your hand. The Devil will put on
Job to curse God, Satan will suggest a thousand things to a soul in the Woman
of Canaans condition. Mark, says he, he does not hear thee, thou do not
belong to him. Mark, he gives thee a terrible answer, he is rather a Judge
than a Father: So, for carnal reason, and flesh and blood (I will put them both
together) they will rise; what, must I be called Dog? must I be put off, as
I must not have a crumb? But if ever you would carry it well, take heed of
those that will hinder you; if you hearken to those, they will but shake thy
hand, and make thee rather blot thy Copy-book (as we say) and only make a few
scrawls (as boys, when some jogg their hand) instead of writing by thy Copy.
Bid the Devil stand further off. If you resist ( James tells you) He will
flee. Shake off carnal reason, mind not what that judges, or says, of
Christ's carriage to thee. Eye thou thy lesson, and regard not any that would
hinder thy learning of it; that is one thing. But then,

Secondly, If ever you would write well by this Copy, I pray often look upon
your Copy. We see that children do mistake, because they do not often look
upon their Copy. It is no shame to learn of a good Woman; it may be you begin
at first to think of the Woman of Canaan, but you do not read through; you
should again and again look over, look through and through this Example; content
not thy self with once reading or hearing; repeat the story again. Remember the
Doctrine a second and a third time. He takes a Copy best, who eyes it most;
and that soul will best imitate this Woman of Canaan, who reflects upon, and
considers her Example often.

Thirdly and Lastly, Strengthen your hands as much as may be. My Beloved, a
cold hand shall I say, or a cold heart, will write but very poorly: if you do
not warm your hearts with some other good considerations, you will not write
well. I will give you one general warming heating word to consider, that you
may write after this Copy, that you may carry your selves thus well. As long as
you have a heart to carry; Nay, but to endeavor to carry it well to Christ;
Christ cannot carry it ill to you. In this sense I tell thee, if thy endeavors
be humbly and heartily to carry it well to Christ; Christ cannot carry it ill
to you. I read once it is said of Christ, viz. John 4.4. That he must needs do
such a thing, he must needs go through Samaria. There was a poor Woman of
Samaria he must bring home. And it is said, in 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe
not, yet he abides faithful, and cannot deny himself. Truly, there is a must
in some things upon Christ; and there is a cannot, which may safely be spoke
of the Lord Jesus. He must be kind, and he cannot deny himself in that.
After our humble holy waiting he must speak; and he cannot conceal his grace
from those that (as this Woman) address themselves to him; And therefore it is
certain (and warm thy fingers, hand and heart (that thou may write the
better) with this consideration) that while you carry it thus (as I opened)
unto him; He cannot continue strange to you, but must, and will appear as you
expect and desire. Remember it, and rejoice in it; I say unto you from my
Master, that albeit the Lord Christ may delay, and demur, yet at last he will
speak to us, and do for us. I need not send you to any man, but only to women,
to assure you of this, who are upon record in Scripture, as presidents for this
purpose. I entreat you to remember, that there are three Women in the New
Testament to whom Christ showed much mercy, though at first he seemed not to
mind them.

The one is in Luke 7.37. One that is called a sinner, she came and sat down
at his feet, and wept, but he did not seem to mind her.

The other is the Woman that had the bloody Issue, in Luke 18. And the

Third is this Woman of Canaan. Here are three Women, whom Christ at first did
not seem to mind, yet he dealt with them very well at last; And, Be ye
comforted in this confidence, He will deal as well with you, as ever he did
with them. Christ is still the same in love and kindness; Oh that we could be
the same with this Woman of Canaan in her carriage! And thus I have done with
that particular, viz. how the Woman did behave her self; hereafter we shall
see how she sped, and what was the happy Conclusion of all.

Faith alone carries the Soul through all Discouragements unto Christ. The Sixth
SERMON.
Matthew 15. verse. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is
thy Faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her Daughter was made whole
from that very hour.


AS the dawning day after some long and dark night; And as the cooling winds in
the midst of some great and scorching heat; so are these words of our Lord to
the Woman of Canaan, very comfortable, and very refreshing. The man that has
lain tossing all night, with what joy does he entertain the dawning of the
day? and the Traveller that is spent with heat, with what eagerness does he
suck in the cool breathings of the wind? Now, such was this speech of Christ to
the Woman of Canaan in this place. They were as a day dawning, and as a cool
refreshing to her soul. By this speech (my Beloved) no doubt, no doubt, but
this poor Woman was now marvelously refreshed, and as much as her soul could
want or wish, she had from the Lord in these words, as we shall see
afterward. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith;
be it unto thee even as thou will. These words have the last particular which
I noted in this story; Namely, the Issue or the Conclusion that Christ made
with this Woman. The beginning was very sad, A poor Woman, at the feet of
Christ, begging much, but seeming not to be heard; but behold the issue is
very good. That Jesus Christ that answered her not a word, answers her now many
words, and many comfortable words; Oh Woman, great is thy Faith: be it unto
thee, even as thou will, etc.

There are two things you may observe in this Answer of Christ here.

First, You have here, Christ's Commendation of her Faith. And,

Secondly, You have Christ's Condescension to her desire.

First, You have Christ's Commendation of her Faith. O Woman, great is thy
Faith. Thou art not only a Believer, but a great Believer; thou art no more a
Woman of Canaan, but a Woman of Israel; no more a Dog, but a Child; Great is
thy Faith.

Secondly, You have the Condescension of Christ to her desires, Now that is
held forth in two things.

First, More Generally.

Secondly, More Particularly.

First, More Generally, Be it unto thee even as thou will. Oh great word! a
word exceeding the Woman's wish; Our Lord (as his manner is) exceeds her
request. The poor Woman would have been glad of a crumb, and by this word
my-thinks Christ ^ids her go to the Table, and cut what she would, take not
only crumbs, but what pieces she pleased.

Secondly. He does particularly grant her particular request about her
Daughter. For her Daughter was made whole from that very hour.

There were three Questions which truly my thoughts did suggest when I
considered these words, and they were (if I may so say) they were in my own
heart to make in the reading of these words. And I shall propose them with the
Answers thereof, being they are Questions not of strife, but of much
edification. The

First Question is this, The Lord commends this Woman for her Faith, Wherein
does her Faith appear?

Secondly, Why does the Lord say to her, Be it unto thee even as thou will? And

Thirdly, Why was the request she made first, granted last?

Quest. 1. The Lord says to her, Woman, great is thy Faith; why, wherein did
the Woman's Faith appear? She prayed (that we read) she cried (that we read)
she worshipped (that we read) but it is not said she believed. She does not
say as he, I believe, Lord help my unbeleef. How then does Christ say, Oh
Woman, great is thy Faith?

Two Answers I shall give.

Answ. 1. The Lord Jesus Christ does know that which we cannot see. That may,
and does appear to Christ, which oftentimes does not appear to us. He needs
not that men should tell him, for he knows all things, etc. John 16.30. The
Woman needed not to tell Christ that she did believe, for Christ himself saw
it. The Lord Jesus Christ does observe that in us, which we do not many times
observe in our selves. In the last day, when the Lord shall judge both the
righteous and the wicked, he will rell the righteous, they did this and that
thing, which they did not know, as that speech intimates, When saw we thee
naked, and clothed thee? Matthew. 25. The Lord can see a few Names in Sardis,
and a little strength even there, where the heart can scarce find any thing;
Therefore mind it by the way, and do you (O poor of the flock!) (that fear
your own Faith) I say, do you hear, and rejoice, Jesus Christ can see Faith in
us, when many times we cannot see it in our selves; that is light to him which
is in the dark to us.

Answ. 2. Mark this Answer, You must distinguish between the real being, and
the extrinsical, or explicit appearance of Faith. Things may be really and
essentially, which are not visibly, and explicitly: And the Scripture takes
notice of some things that are really, though not explicitly. As now in Job,
Job 1.5. Peradventure my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts; That
is, implicitly they may do it. So the Lord takes notice of those things that
are in us ( i. e. real and true, though it do not appear in the formalities
thereof.) That poor Woman, in Luke 7.50. had Faith, though there was no formal
profession of it. Christ has a discerning eye, he can see what is in us, even
as in the root, before the bud, or fruit appear. He can, and does know what is
in us radically, though we do not so visibly, and expressly make it out. Now
such was this Woman's case. Though here is no explicit Confession, or
Profession of Faith, yet she did that which is Faith implicit. And in this
Woman there was real Faith, which did act her in this address to Christ; as you
will see if you consider it; for what is Faith? Faith is the coming of the soul
to Jesus Christ: She comes. Faith is the casting of the soul upon Christ* She
cast her self upon Christ. Faith is a resting on Christ, without a word of
evidence or assurance: The Woman does so. You may by this satisfy your selves
then in the first question. This Woman did believe, though she did not in so
many words express it; she showed it, though she did not speak it. But then
in the second place,

Quest. 2. Why does our Lord say unto her, Be it unto thee even as thou will?

Take a double Answer to this likewise.

Answ. 1. The Lord Jesus saw that this Woman did want more things than one.
Jesus Christ saw all her wants, and all her wishes too, though she did not
express them. That place in Romans 8. is known to all of you, but the 27. verse
is not so often taken notice of. And he that searches the hearts, knows
what is the mind of the spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints,
according to the will of God. The soul sighs, and groans by the Spirit, and
many a time the soul does not know his own sighing; who shall know it? why, He
shall know it that makes intercession; this is particularly spoken of Jesus
Christ. The Spirit helps thee to sigh, and thou can not tell thy own sighs;
Jesus Christ can tell what it means, I say, Jesus Christ knows; for that place
is to be understood particularly of Christ, for it is he that makes
intercession, as it is there expressed. It is a Scripture which may much stay
our hearts; Christ knows what we want, even then when we cannot tell our
selves; only in the general, sigh. Mind it, Oh my Beloved you go to Jesus
Christ with one word, and a many sighs, the Lord will answer all your sighs,
and will say, Be it to you, not only as you speak, but as you groan, and as
you sigh too.

Answ. 2. The Lord Christ loves to show his bounty in rewarding any souls, for
any delay. Isa. 61.7. for your shame you shall have double; And Zechariah 9.12.
Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope, even to day do I declare
that I will render double unto thee. Upon these accounts it was that our Lord
does not answer this Woman with a particular word, take what you come for; but
in a general way, bids her take all things, any thing which she could desire;
take what thou will, as thou will. But to proceed to the last Question. The

Third and last Question is, Why does the Lord give this in the last place? Her
Daughter was made whole. One would have thought this should have been the first
word; Woman go thy way, thy daughter is whole; but first he speaks of her
Faith, and then to her souls desire. Why does Christ so? that is the Question.

Answ. Now the Answer hereunto is easy, and it may be this. Our Lord Jesus is
wise and gracious, and therefore (knowing what we need most, and what is best
to bestow upon us) He does still give that first which is most necessary, and
which is the chiefest. My Beloved, I pray remember it. The Lord loves to give
the best mercies first; her Daughter was possessed with a Devil, but that was
but a corporal infirmity; her own soul was more under the power of the Devil,
and the deliverance of that most needful; therefore he gives the more
necessary thing first. O my Beloved, you have a wise Christ, a good Christ, he
will satisfy particular desires, but he will first do the best things. Indeed
Christ reaches us to beg the best things first. Seek ye first the Kingdom
of Heaven, and therefore first pray, Thy Kingdom come. But we are ignorant,
and apt to mistake; we often ask the best things last. Now Christ will give
the best first, Therefore he begins to speak to the Mothers soul here, before
he mentions her Daughters distemper. But let this suffice for these Questions.
To come to the words, there are many Points observable from this place;
Particular Notes I shall take in by the by, and therefore shall not touch upon
them. Neither shall I press the words too hard, there is no need of it. This
Text, like a brave honeycomb, drops out in three things, like honey without any
pressing.

First, Observe here, What it was that carried the Woman on, and through all
this while, (what bladder kept his Woman from sinking.) It was Faith. O Woman,
great is thy Faith.

Secondly, Observe, What rich bounty is here; here is glorious Grace, rich
Grace; Have what thou will. And then,

Thirdly, Observe, That she has a particular grant of her special request,
her Daughter was made whole. It is the second thing I do principally aim at,
but shall speak of the two other.

And first, Observe from the first, That it is true Faith alone that carries
the soul through all difficulties, and discouragements, in the way to Christ. I
shall not be large in the handling of this Point. I have often spoken of
Faith, and the work of Faith, as it does receive Christ; how that is performed,
etc. therefore I shall confine my self to the Text, and the boundaries of it,
to show that in all the difficulties the soul meets withal in coming to
Christ, Faith bears the soul up under all. And pray mark what I say, I say,
true Faith nor strong Faith, neither do I say a degree of Faith, but a true
Faith. It is true, this Woman had great Faith (and she needed it, for she had
great difficulties) but the Point lies positively thus, Faith, if it be true,
it is that, and that alone, that carries up the soul above all difficulties,
and discouragements in its coming to Christ. I suppose I need not tell you that
there are difficulties, in the way of coming to Christ. This Woman knew there
were difficulties, and discouragements, but what carried her through, did her
Patience carry her through? (she had that) did her reverend esteem of Christ
carry her through? (she had that) did the pinch of her wants carry her through?
No, Christ does not say, Oh Woman! great is thy patience, or great is thy
esteem of me, or great is thy want; But, O Woman, great is thy Faith: It was
the Woman's Faith that carried her through these difficulties. I will demonstrate
this Doctrine by some instances; and therefore I shall mention some of the
difficulties which are in our way to Christ, and show how that it is Faith, and
Faith alone, by which the Lord does use to help us against all these
difficulties. Now therefore I pray mind it, and you may mostly observe in
our-coming to Christ, There are four ways from whence our difficulties, and
discouragements do arise; and you will see, that true Faith alone will carry
the soul through all these.

The difficulties arise thus, from

1 Self.

2 Satan.

3 The World.

4 Christ himself may do that seemingly, which may, and does make it difficult
to come unto him. But now yet see as to each, how Faith carries the soul through
all these.

To begin with the first, which is Self, that comes in to oppose us. And pray
good people look about you, your selves are the greatest hindrances to keep
you from Christ; now what shall carry us up above our selves but Faith? by
Faith Moses denies himself. And says Christ, Whoever will come after me, must
deny himself; how shall he do it? nothing but Faith will do it. I will give
you but an instance of it; Self does hinder coming to Christ two ways.

1 Either by too much diffidence.

2 Or too much confidence. One while it is too high, and will nor stoop to come
to Christ; Another while too low, it cannot be raised up to such a work;
Sometime Self is arrogant, and proud, what, I go to Christ? not I, I can shift
well enough, etc. Other while it is diffident, and fearful, and cries out that
it is not fit, or able, not is it meet for his soul to go, etc. Well, yet for
all this I pray mark, it is Faith makes Self go, notwithstanding all this. For,
as to the Pride of self, Faith brings in so clear a light of the excellency,
and necessity of Christ, that self-confidence is put to silence. And the high
thoughts are brought down by the obedience of Faith, and so carried to the
obedience of Christ. He that believes the testimony which God gives of Christ
in the Gospel, must stoop and bow; and Faith helping the soul in that business,
carries the soul out of proud Self, so as that arrogance shall not hinder the
souls coming and closing with Christ. And for diffidence, and the working of
Self that way, why Faith does evidently carry the soul over that hinderance.
For Faith sees the arm of Christ stretched forth to receive the feeble soul.
Faith tells the weak heart that Christ will come to it, if it cannot go to him.
Faith assures the soul that Christ will enable it to embrace himself. Faith
shows Christ as able and willing to create a hand and heart in us to receive,
and to take hold of himself. When Self cries but childe-like. I am weak, and
same, and cannot go to Christ, then (mark it) Faith says, true, thou have no
legs, but he that bids the man arise, gives him feet; Faith says, thou have
no strength, but he that bids thee believe, will make thee believe. What did
carry Abraham above and against himself? It is said, Romans 4.19. Being not weak
in Faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an
hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb, etc. Faith raises
up the soul, and carries it on to Christ, even notwithstanding the souls
nothingness. Faith incourageth the soul to go, although it be empty; Faith
says, though Christ be a great King, yet a poor soul may come to him without
a present. In a word, Faith levels the mountains, and fills the Vullies; it
carries the soul on its way to Christ, notwithstanding any hinderance from
Self. Self shall not keep off where Faith is, the soul denies Self, and goes to
Christ. But then to proceed,

Secondly, Satan he binders. And remember it, Satan does more oppose your
going to Christ, than he does oppose your leaving of sin. If thou will leave
thy fin, Satan will be content so thou will but trust to Self, and not go to
Christ's Grace. But when once the soul opposes sin, and goes to Christ, then
Satan opposes; now what shall help and carry on the soul, and strengthen the
opposed soul to oppose Satan? In Ephestans 5. says the Apostle, Above all take
the shield of Faith, whereby you shall be able to quench the fiery darts of
the Devil. Let Satan do his worst, Faith will carry on the soul, it will quench
his darts, and tread upon his devices, and sweetly strengthen the heart to
cloze with the Lord Jesus, in despite, and in defiance of Satan, and all his
hindrances. But then,

Thirdly, the world, that opposes too. The world hinders the soul, by saying,
what, will you go to Christ, and leave my pleasures, and leave my riches, and
my honor, etc? Now, what carries up the soul above the world? why the Apostle
tells, 1 John 5.4. And this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
Faith, And then,

Lastly, Christ himself seems to oppose. The Lord does not speak, and that is
sad; and sometimes he does speak, and that is as sad. For (as we formerly
noted) he seems to speak harshly, and Christ may seem to deny, and reject the
soul in its approach to him. Now what shall carry up the soul, when Christ
himself seems to put back? nothing but Faith. It is observed, that it was Faith
carried up Job to go to God; it is therefore very observable that Job does
oftentimes profess his Faith in God. As in Job 13.15. Though he kill me, yet
I will trust in him; it is a known speech. But that expression in Job 19. makes
it more evident what carried him up to God; you have very sad expressions in
that chapter, intimating how God himself seemed to oppose Job. He has
overthrown me, verse 6. And he has stripped me of my glory, verse. 9. Yea, He
has destroyed me, on every side, and has kindled his wrath against me,
verse 10, 11. Now what shall carry Job up? See verse. 24, 25. I know my Redeemer
lives, and oh that this profession of my Faith were written on a Rock for
perpetual remembrance. It is as if he should say, My friends, my
dispuring-friends, do not break my heart with arguments, you oppose, and God
opposes too; but this carries me up, I have a Redeemer, and I know that my
Redeemer lives, etc. Had Job no other grace but Faith? Yes, You have heard of
the Patience of Job, but yet Jobs Patience failed. Had he not Humility? Yes,
He that could lay his mouth in the dust at first, and say, Naked came I into
the world, and naked must I return; Certainly Job had Humility also, but it was
not that which supported him. Had he not Prayer? without doubt Job had a
praying spirit, and did call on God again and again, as he often intimates;
But yet it seems ^^ayer failed, and therefore he is charged by Eliphaz with
neglect of it, in Job 15.4. Thou restrainest Prayer, thou do lessen Prayer,
thou do diminish Prayer; so the word signifies.

I but mark, though Patience failed, and Humility and Prayer failed; yet Faith
carries Job through all; Yet I will believe and trust. I pray observe, whatever
Grace, or Gift, you have nothing will carry you through difficulties and
discouragements in your way to Christ, but only Faith; It was the Woman's Faith
that kept her up all the while. And it is that, and that alone, which carries
every soul through all hindrances (as well as those which I have hinted) unto
Jesus Christ. So you see the demonstration of the Point; to come to the next
thing then.

You will ask me the Reason, Whence is it that Faith should thus be the only
Grace to carry up, and carry out the soul, in the midst of all difficulties, in
going to Christ. I will name very briefly these two heads of Reasons.

The first is, From the appointment of Faith by God.

Secondly, The operation of Faith in us.

These are the two great pillars of this Truth.

First, From the appointment of Faith by God. My Beloved, Faith does therefore
carry us out through all, because it is that Grace that God alone has
appointed. Read the Gospel, or the Prophets, and you will find them speaking
of these two great Truths.

First, That Christ is the only one that is appointed to bring us to
salvation. (There is no name but his, Act. 4.12.)

Secondly, That Faith is the only Grace appointed to bring us to Christ. You
have our Lord shortly in one place speaking of both, in John 6.40. And this is
the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the
last day. There is a great Question among Divines, Why Faith, rather than
Charity, Patience, or Gospel-Obed^ence, should be the great instrument of
Justification? And (my Beloved) this is the absolute Answer to the Question,
Because God has only appointed it. There may be some conjectural Reasons,
why God has appointed Faith, but the chief Reason is, because God has
appointed it. Now Divine Institution being upon Faith, thence it is that Faith
does the work; it is not from any inherent worth in the Grace. (Alas! What is
the worth of a sinners hand, to take a glorious Christ!) But it is only from
Gods pleasure, and appointment, that Faith alone shall be the Grace to carry
the soul to, and help the soul in its receiving of Christ. God has appointed
no other legs to carry us, and because he has appointed these, he will
bless his own apointment to effect the work. The Lords appointment makes all
things operative: Therefore

Secondly, The Reason is from the operation of Faith in us, by virtue of that
appointment. My Beloved, Faith it is a working Grace, and Faith is our great
strength in every working Grace; it conveyeth strength unto all Graces.

There is a threefold Operation of Faith to carry the soul through all
difficulties and discouragements, in its going to Christ, viz. an Inlightening,
an Enlivening, and an Embracing work, in the blessed business of closing with
Christ. I will a little open them all three.

First, Faith has an Inlightening work. An inlightning work, is that which
carries a man through many difficulties and discouragements. In Psalm. 34. you
have a fine expression, where David is speaking of his and others seeking God,
and of their encouragement in that work, says he, in verse. 5. They looked
unto him, and were lightened; and their faces were not ashamed; by Faith the
soul sees the necessity of Christ, the inclinableness of the heart of Christ,
etc. and this carries the soul through all difficulties. Says Faith, look
yonder, there, and there alone, is the rock of safety; And if you be not
there, you must sink; this makes the soul swim amain. And look, says Faith,
there is a safe Landing. Christ (says Faith) stands with outstretched arms of
power and love to embrace thee; and Faith realizeth such a fight, evidenceth it
to the soul, and so inabling the soul to see it, helps the soul to go to Christ.

Secondly, Faith has not only an inlightening work, but an inlivening work.
My Beloved, other graces stir us up, and put us on to go to Christ, but Faith
does only enliven us. Love and humility does marvelously stir up the soul to
go to Jesus Christ, and so do other Graces; I but these do not feed the soul,
nor strengthen; there is a great deal of difference between the Whip and the
Meat you give the horse. A whip, a blow, that stirs it, but does not strengthen
it. A conviction of need, a fear of hell stirs us to go to Christ, but it does
not enable us, or inliven us. My Beloved, Faith is the strengthening Grace. The
Just shall live by Faith, Heb. 10. (there says he) you have need of patience,
that after you have done the will of God, ye might receive the Promise, etc.
Now, The Just shall live by Faith, 36, 37, and 38. verses; Do not cast away
your confidence, what then? You have need of patience, etc. does he stay
there? No, but adds, The Just shall live by Faith. True, you will need
patience, if you go to Christ; but you will live alone by Faith. We need
patience to tarry the Lords leisure; to bear the Lords frowns, to tarry till
he come; but how shall we live in the mean time? Oh, The Just shall live by
Faith. Faith being an enlightening Grace, therefore it is an enlivening Grace;
Faith it finds honey (as Jonathan) and Faith it finds a Promise, and dips in
the finger, and takes a little, and that enlivens and strengthens the soul.
Nay, Faith, though it be full of fears, it is a soul-enlivening-Grace. Take
that instance of the Woman with a bloody Issue, in Luke 8.44. compared with
verse. 46. It is clear, she had a Faith, and she had fears, and she had
virtue. For this Faith full of fears did gather virtue from Jesus Christ: So
thy Faith that is full of fears may gather virtue from Jesus Christ, and
therefore is it that it carries us through all difficulties in our going to
Christ.

Thirdly, Faith it has an embracing work. These all died in Faith, not having
received the Promises; What then, how could they live? but having seen them
afar off, embraced them, Heb. 11.13. My Beloved, Faith it has an embracing
work of the Promise, and because Faith can embrace the Promise, therefore can
it carry the soul through all the difficulties that it meets with in the way to
Christ. What is the Anchor at the end of a Cable (one Ship will carry a
thousand Anchors) but one Anchor will hold the Ship, because it has a
fastening power. Faith is but a little Anchor of it self, I but it has a
fastening power, and so Faith stays the soul. In Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him
in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee;
because you trust in God, therefore are your minds stayed. Oh Sirs, what shall
I say more, Faith, it is a catching hold of that Christ that puts thee off? And
because Faith embraces, and holds him that is sure and strong, it does
therefore ipso facto (as we say) in that very thing carry the soul to Christ
through all difficulties. Well, I pray mind and meditate a little upon these
things, for they are of the life and Mystery of real Christianity. But I will
now speak to some Uses of this Point; Therefore to make some Application, there
are only three Uses.

Use I Let me say, This Doctrine is profitable for reproof. Is Faith such a
Grace? is it Faith that carries the soul through all? Oh then, be reproved all
who profess to believe, and yet are ignorant of what Faith is. Why poor soul,
what shall carry thee through all, but Faith? and art thou ignorant of that? Is
there but one boat to carry us over the Sea? and are we ignorant of that? Ask,
what is your Faith? why, says one, I say my I believe, I say my prayers, etc.
Ask another what is your Faith? he replies, I leave my sins, says he, etc.
this is thy Repentance, but not thy Faith. There are three great parts of
peoples ignorance about Faith.

First, Many are ignorant about the ground of Faith. What is the ground of
Faith? why, the ground of my Faith is this (says one) I am so and so mended of
what I was formerly, and God has a little frightened me, and troubled me for
my sins, and therefore I believe. As if trouble for sin, and moral amendment,
were a ground to build Faith upon; whereas the great, and the precious Promises
are the only and alone ground of Faith.

Secondly, Others are ignorant about the Object of Faith. The Object of my
Faith is the Promise, says one, etc. Now the Promise is not the object of
Faith; it is true, the object of Faith is in the Promise, but the Promise it
self is not the object of Faith; It is Christ in the Promise that is the object
of Faith; the Promises are your spectacles through which you see Christ, it is
he alone that is the object of your Faith, which you are to eye, to look, and
to live upon.

Thirdly, Others are very ignorant about the working of Faith, etc. Many know
not how Faith works, therefore mind it; The work of Faith is only to be our
hands, and our feet, to go to Christ, and to take Christ. It is observable, in
Heb. 11. That Faith was the life of those worthies there mentioned; some did
this, some did that; some went this way, some went that way, but still it was
all through Faith, and they obtained a good report, but all by Faith; for it
was Faith that carried them through all. But alas, how ignorant are some about
the working of Faith? Ask, what do you when you believe, one says, I say my
prayers, another, I read the Bible, etc. Ah souls, you are much to be
reproved, that know not yet what that is, which only carries the soul to
Christ. Let that be for reproof.

Use 2. It serves very much for Consolation to all those who have true Faith.
Bear up thy heart (O Believer!) with that which is in the heart. The soul is
ready to say sometimes in the way to Christ, what have I to carry my heart up?
have thou Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ? beleevest thou the Scriptures?
beleevest thou in God? upon the Son of God? etc. then be of good comfort, thou
have that which will carry thee through. You know the story of Father Jacob, he
must go over Jordan, but he has no company nor help, nothing but his single
staff in his hand, and he walked all his pilgrimage, forward, and backward,
with that staff. O! the staff of Faith, thou who have it, thou may walk
through a wilderness, into the good Land with it. Faith, it is your Jacobs
staff, your Moses Rod, etc.

Object. But says the soul, I fear I have but a little Faith, yea, I fear I
have none at all, etc.

Answ. 1. Thou say thou have but a little Faith; mark, what says our Lord?
If you have Faith but as a grane of Mustard seed, you shall say unto this
Mountain, remove hence, etc. Matthew. 17.20. Though thou have but a little Faith,
it shall not fail, it shall carry you through. It is true Faith does all this,
not thy great Faith.

Object. I but says the soul, I do not see that I have any Faith at all.

Repl. Why Jesus Christ he can see it, when thou can not. The Woman that had
the bloody Issue had great Faith, though possible she saw it not. Have thou
that which that Woman had? have thou said of all the world, they be Physicians
of no value, and do thou, though in much fear, come, be it but behind
Christ, persuaded as she was that Christ can, though thou question whether he
will, heal thee? why comfort thy soul notwithstanding thy fear, Christ will
observe, and own thy Faith, as he did hers.

Use 3. If it be thus, That it is Faith alone that carries the soul thus to
Christ through all Discouragements, this will then be profitable for
Instruction. My Beloved in the Lord, look within you, strengthen Faith. Oh my
Beloved, as the love of many waxes cold, so the Faith of many waxes weak; but
remember, a Christ above you, and a Faith within you, is all that which you
ought to mind. Christ above you will carry you through all things to glory; and
Faith in you will carry you through all to Christ. But I pray look to this, look
to True Faith. A poor fearful believer that has a trembling soul at a dying
hour, what shall relieve it then but Christ? and what shall carry, and keep the
soul to and with Christ, but Faith? when your souls must immediarely go to God
for Judgment, nothing but Faith will, or can carry you with comfort, or with
confidence: against a dying hour prepare a living Christ, and in order to a
clozing with Christ, strengthen, Oh strengthen your Faith.

I shall give you two Directions. If you would have Faith carry you through all,
etc.

First, Leave Faith to it self, Let Faith alone. Faith alone must do it, and
Faith alone can do it. I will tell you how God clears up the thing to me. You
have seen a brave workman, that was to remove such a piece of Timber, and he
by his own skill could remove it, but there be some that stand by, and will
be helping; when as we know that they do but hinder him; and says the
Artist, let me alone, and I can do it my self; and we use to say, let the man
alone, you do but hinder him, he will do it himself: So here, let Faith alone
in its work, you think to help it, but you often hinder it. You have seen, or
heard it may be, of a man, that being to go over a River, and having two
friends with him, one says, it is deep and dangerous, I will go and see if
there be any shallow place; The other faith, it is good to make a bridge, or
boat to go over; Oh but says the man, I can swim, and I must go, and I will
venture, let me alone, I will swim, and never look for bridge or boat. Truly
so it is here, Faith would go to Jesus Christ, but Reason and Sense will not
let Faith alone. Reason comes and says, Be wise, beware what you do; If you
will needs go to Christ (says Reason) I will go make a bridge, or invent a
boat; then comes Sense, and says, I will go look a shallow place where you
may go over, etc. whereas Faith will swim through. And says the believing soul,
I must venture and swim, I cannot be drowned in a way of swiming. Oh Sirs, let
Faith alone, and it will swim to Christ; Sense and Reason do but hinder, not
help Faith; Single simple Faith does its work alone; Therefore I say, Let Faith
alone, do not trouble it with suggestions of Sense or Reason. But then,

A second Direction is, Let Faith have its perfect work. Therefore (as the
Apostle faith about Patience, so) let Faith have its perfect work. Faith goes
at first to half a Promise, but let it alone, it knows where to fetch a whole
Promise. Let Faith alone, it will go to a Promise; for what? for refuge, for
help, for all. Faith will go to, and look upon Abraham (as Isa. 51.2.) and
find encouragement from him: Nay, it can run back to Adam, and help it self
with the thoughts of his experience; let Faith have its course, and it will
carry you to every Promise and Example to encourage you. If it have its perfect
work, it will gather strength from all the Word of God, to help you in your
work of closing with Christ. I beseech you in these Directions strengthen and
labor to encourage Faith. O soul, mind it, storms and trials may come, and
then you will need afresh to run to Christ: Look to your legs, your Faith, it
is that must carry you. If death come, death and doubting will come together;
now remember what must carry you through, nothing but Faith. Trust to no parts,
duties, etc. only trust to the Lord in the way of Faith. I shall conclude with
two things.

First, Woe to thee poor soul (whoever thou art) that want Faith. I do not
say, woe to thee that art a poor man, nor woe to thee if thou be mean in the
world, nor say I, thou art a sick or weak man, and therefore woe, No, No, But
art thou an unbeleever, a soul without Faith? then woe indeed to thee. Ah, woe
be to that man that wants Faith; for without Faith it is not possible to
please God, or to go to Christ; and how sad is the state of that soul that can
do neither? Woe to all unbeleevers.

Secondly, Blessed are you that have Faith; I say not that have so great a
Faith, but Faith, true Faith. I say, Blessed are you that believe, you that do
believe, though but a little, yet your little Faith will do this great work, it
will keep you from drowning, it will carry you to Christ. That little Faith
Peter had (for all his fears) kept him up from sinking. I remember what our
Lord said to Nathaniel; who believed, as I may say a little; Beleevest thou?
thou shall see greater things than these, John 1.50. Do but go on believing,
and thou shall see greater things than yet thou have seen. Two things your
Faith will do.

First, It will be your Legs to carry you to Christ, and that through all
difficulties; so you see it did this Woman. And,

Secondly, It will (if I may say so) Compel (as it were) Christ to entertain
you after all denials. Ah souls, what a glorious entertainment did Christ give
this poor Woman at last. Well, therefore strengthen Faith, and that will help
you to do as this Woman did; and then you shall in the Issue speed, even as
she did. But of that in the next.

Christ will be certainly kind at last. The Seventh SERMON.
Matthew 15. verse. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is
thy Faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will, etc.


YOu have sometimes seen, or at least heard, of a poor beggar, who has long
lain, and loudly cried at the gate of some great person, and yet never liftened
to, never let in; but anon it may be the Master of the house himself has
opened the door, and spoke to the man kindly, and dealt with him very
comfortably; how was the face of this beggar lightened, how was his heart
refreshed! just so, Nay, greater than so was the heart of the Woman of Canaan
cheared, when our Lord answered and spoke unto her the words that I have read.
She had as it were lain long, and cried loud, and begged hard, and no answer,
but now at last the Lord answers, and the Lord answers sweetly, Oh Woman, great
is thy Faith: be it unto thee even us thou will. The last day we came to this
verse; in it I told you we had the last particular of the story of the Woman
of Canaan, which holds forth the blessed conclusion, which our Lord does make
with this poor Woman. After I had hinted and resolved three questions, I told
you there were three particulars, which in an eminent manner are remarkable in
this place.

The First, we did dispatch then, and that was this, The Grace which did carry
on, and carry out this poor Woman in all this address, it was her Faith. And
thence we noted this Doctrine.

Doct. That it is only Faith which can carry the soul through all difficulties
and discouragements in the way to Christ. Only Faith.

Remember it Sirs, some of you have a little knowledge, and others of you have
a great deal of Profession; some of you talk much, and the poorest thinks (it
may be) as well of himself, as he that says most; but remember, whatever you
know, talk, or think, nothing will carry you to Jesus Christ but Faith; you may
have fine words, and good wishes, but alas, wording, and wishing is not coming
to Jesus Christ. Why this Woman had other gifts, and other graces; she had
much humility, and she had much patience, and she had a fine gift of prayer,
etc. yet it is not said, Woman, much is thy patience, or great is thy love,
strong are thy prayers, but oh Woman, great is thy Faith, etc. We did open the
point at large, and pressed it upon you in the Application in diverse
particulars, which I shall not add unto, or repeat. Only I beseech you, my
Beloved, let this abide upon your hearts; streng then Faith. When you come to
dye, you will then see a need of Christ (if you do not now) and if you have not
a living Faith, you cannot have a living Christ, and then is your soul dead
before death. Faith is another kind of thing than the world is aware of; we
hardly know the notion now, but we shall never be able to know the
preciousness of it, as indeed it is precious, but by the experience of it: Now
the greatest experience of Faith is seen in that blessed business of going to
Christ. In that we have this experience of the use, power, and price of Faith,
that whatever we have, and pretend unto, nothing but sincere, single Faith,
will carry us unto Jesus Christ. But I proceed.

The second thing (which indeed is the principal thing) is this. The kindness
of Christ now to this Woman. You see his commendation of her Faith; well now,
mark his condescension to her; how much does Christ condescend to this poor
Woman? he condescends to talk with her; commends her Faith, and complies with
her wishes to heal her Daughter, etc. Oh blessed condescension! The Observation
from the whole will be this,

Doct. That however the Lord Jesus may deal at first, with poor souls that come
to him, in the issue he will deal very kindly.

Or if you will, we shall express the Observation to prevent mistakes thus,

That all those who truly come to Christ, shall in the issue find his carriage
to be very kind, howsoever at first it may seem very strange.

You see the Doctrine lies full in the words; we have opened in the story
already, how strangely Christ did carry it at first to this poor Woman; but how
sweetly does he carry it at last? Sorrow and weeping may be for a night
(says David, Psalm. 30.5.) but joy comes in the morning. Oh my Beloved, it may
thunder and lighten, and be tempestuous in the beginning of the day, and yet
it may prove a fair sun-shiny day after. First coming to Christ may have
clouds, and darkness, but the latter part shall have light and life. This point
is very comfortable, certain, and clear in this instance. It is comfortable in
all its branches; and it is certain in its bottoming (this example being a sure
bottom to build the Doctrine upon.) And you will see it clear also, if you will
but mind the terms in which I express it. Now there are two terms I keep in
the Point, that I would desire you to mind.

The first relates to the persons that are considered in this Point. And the

Second relates to the thing it self.

The first relates to the persons that are considered in this point. And they
are all those that truly come to the Lord Jesus. My Beloved, there are two
sorts of persons who live under the sound of the Gospel, that I cannot think
upon but with a sad heart. The one are those who never so much as pretend to go
to Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding all Christ's tenders of himself,
notwithstanding all their own need of him; upon no account, one or other, do
they so much as pretend to go to Jesus Christ. Some are enemies, and opposire
to very professing of coming to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, There is another sort that pretend to go, but go neither rightly nor
truly; They do not truly come to the Lord Jesus; you have a type of both these,
and their misery, Matthew. 22. in the parable of the Wedding. There were some
that would not go to the Wedding-supper, and there was another he went, but
he went without his Wedding Garment; why now, how did the Lord deal with them?
for the one it is said, in versf. 7. He sent, and miserably destroyed them
with his armies. And for the other, It is said, he found him out, and cast him
out into utter darkness. Therefore mind it, all you that have heard of Jesus
Christ, all you that talk of Jesus Christ, if you do not go at all, or if you
do not go aright, this point does not concern you: I do not say Christ will
deal well with you; alas! you deal ill with him, and he will deal sadly with
you. It is only those that truly go to Jesus Christ, that this point deals
withal. The Woman of Canaan came to him truly, and she came to him rightly
also; she came to him (as appears here in this story) as to the Messiah, the
Son of David; and she comes with great humility (she worships him) with great
resolution (she would not be put off) but above all she came with a good
Faith; and this Woman so coming, though the Lord dealt strangely with her at
first, yet he concludes kindly with her at last.

The second thing I put in the point is, That in the issue, and at last, Christ
will deal kindly with them that rightly come to him. I do not say, at first he
will do it; (No, at first he may seem to be strange) but at last, in the
issue, he will be kind. Christ will not presently, it may be, grant our
request, but in the issue he will. I will open it thus.

There is a Threefold Issue, or end, in which all that come to Christ shall
experience his kindness.

The first is, the Issue of the Act of coming it self.

Secondly, The Issue of our whole life. And,

The third is, The Issue and End of all things.

Now in one of these three Issues, all that come to Christ shall find him deal
kindly with them.

First, In the Issue of the Act of coming it self. I pray mark this, Coming to
Christ is an action made up of many steps; we do not at once come to Jesus
Christ. There is the Agress, Ingress, and Pr^^ress in every going.

The Agress, or Address to it.

The Ingress, The first setting upon it.

And then the Progress, The going on in it.

Possibly when thou do first set up a resolution of going to Christ, he will
not come in and give thee an answer; possibly when thou have set thy foot in
the way, and gone a good way, he will not come and speak kindly to you; but by
that time you are come up to Christ fully, then you shall find Christ will
deal kindly with you. The soul does not at first fully come up to Christ; it is
a great while ere the soul does fully come off from fin, ere the soul does
fully come out of Satan's power, ere he does fully come up to the proposals of
Jesus Christ. Now, do not wonder if Jesus Christ do not deal kindly with you,
till the Issue of the whole Act; but in the Issue of the Act, when it is
completed, then you shall find him deal kindly with you. You are now, it may
be (poor soul) treating with Jesus Christ, and as it is in a treaty of peace
between differing states, there are some preliminary treatments, all is not
presently concluded as soon as it is presented. There are demurs, and debates,
and there are seeming breakings off, and departures; no compleatings, but as it
were for a while complementings: It is seldom seen, that at first all things
are fully concluded upon; But when the Treaty is perfected, then you have the
sound of Trumpets, and the noise of Drums, and all the expressions pressions of
joy that may be. It has been said of old, that coming to Christ it is a
Marriage Act, and so indeed it is. Now there are not complete Acts of kin^ness,
till the whole Marriage be consummate; Therefore, though Christ may carry it
strangely at first, yet in the Issue, when the Marriage is consummate, then you
shall find Christ complying, and showing himself kind.

Secondly, There is (that which we call) the Issue of our life. And my
Beloved, at Death, the Lord Jesus Christ will smile upon many a soul, who have
gone softly in the bitterness of their spirits all their days. Mark the just
man, and behold the perfect man; For the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37.
Though you have clouds, and darkness upon you all your days, and though Jesus
Christ does seem to carry it roughly to you, through the whole course of your
pilgrimage; yet when you are actually going into the good Land, then you shall
see Joshuah going before you. Many that have had fears and terrors all their
life time, yet at the end of their life, when they have been going out of the
world, they have had joy, and comfort. The story of Mris. Drake is known, she
had many terrors, much sadness, no smiles from Christ all her days; till at
last, when she came to dye, a little before her death, Christ dealt so kindly,
that she went out of the world in an extacy, and ravishment of spirit, full of
peace, and full of joy; triumphing in the Lord; so that in the Issue of our
time and life, we shall find Christ kind, however he is at first to us. But
then

Thirdly, Or else in the Issue of all things. When all things shall be wrapped
up, by a final End and Issue put to them, then Christ will show himself kind,
however strange he did seem to carry it to poor souls before. You read of a
day (in Mal. 3.17.) in which the Lord will make up his Jewels, and then you
shall return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, etc. And
Matthew 25. there Christ speaks very sweetly, when the Lord shall say to those
on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you, etc. Then he shall say to this poor man, and woman, thou did mourn
after me all thy days, thou did wait upon me all thy life, and though I
seemed to carry it strange, thou were sincere; Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. I do observe that this carried up
the heart of Job, in Job 19. I know that my Redeemer lives, and he shall
stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and then in my flesh I shall see him,
etc. This Text in Job is worth its weight in Gold upon many accounts. That,
that Jesus Christ that is now at the right hand of the Father, Job many
thousand years ago said, he should know upon the Earth, and though he set him
up as a mark to shoot at then, yet he knew at last he would deal kindly with
him. Well then, I pray put all together; Persons truly coming to Christ, in
the Issue, either of the Act of coming, or of their Lives, or of all things,
shall find this to be a certain Truth, that Christ will deal sweetly with
them, however now he may seem to carry it strangely. And (my Beloved) I shall
not need to bring any other instance to prove it, than this instance in the
Text. Never was any so strangely dealt withal, as the Woman of Canaan, and yet
what a blessed Issue does he make with he^? Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, be
it unto thee even as thou will, etc.

There are only two things that I aim at in the explication of the point. And,

The first is to show you wherein the kind close of the Carriage of Christ in
the Issue shall appear to poor souls, however at first he may carry it
strangely. And

Secondly, The ground of this. We shall begin with the first; And I shall out
of this instance of the Woman of Canaan, show you how kindly Christ will carry
it at last, in the Issue, though he carry it roughly at first. Pray observe
this speech, Jesus answered and said unto her, etc. I remember in the book of
Ruth, when Boaz had espied Ruth, and talked of her to his servants, he spoke
to her himself, in verse. 8. and what says she, in verse 10. She fell upon
her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found
grace in thine eyes, that thou should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a
stranger? It was a marvelous act of kindness, that Boaz should take knowledge
of her to speak to her. Just so me thinks it was here; Christ at first talks
to his servants of this Woman, he did not speak at first to her, but to the
Disciples of her. But now, although before the Lord did not seem to take
knowledge of this Woman, yet I say, now the Lord is so kind, as he turns to
her, and takes notice of her, and he speaks exceeding kind to her. Oh Woman,
great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, etc. Let us open it a
little.

Here are three Parts.

First, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith.

Secondly, Be it unto thee even as thou will.

Thirdly, At the same hour her Daughter was made whole.

First, He answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith. My
Beloved, we must open this by degrees; and it is very much which is here
contained. For,

First of all, He answered and said unto her. O blessed kindness! that Jesus
Christ that before answered her not a word, he now opens his lips, and
vouchsafes to speak to her. David, who knew what an act of kindness this is,
sets it forth, both in the Negative, and in the Affirmative. Negatively,
speaking of his enemies, in Psalm. 18.41. They cried, but there was none to save
them; even unto the Lord, but he ANSWERED THEM NOT. And Affirmatively,
speaking of himself, in Psalm. 118.5. I called upon the Lord in distress; the
Lord answered me, and set me in a large place. Oh my Beloved, it is an act of
kindness that Christ will speak. Let not my Lord be angry, says the soul, do
but speak to me. Oh it is mercy and kindness, when the Lord breaks his
silence, and does but speak to us. Why now Christ you see speaks to the Woman.
And it is said, Jesus answered and said unto her, he answers his Disciples
before, about her, but did not speak to her; now he speaks to her. Remember
you not the expression, in Cant. 8.13? Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the
Companions hearken to thy voice: cause me to hear it. Oh, says the poor soul
sometimes, Blessed Lord, thy Companions hear thy voice; Angels that wait upon
thy Throne, they hear it; and the Saints in the Sanctuary, they hear it; and I
am without knocking, Lord let me hear thy voice. Here is the first step, that
he vouchsafes to speak to her.

Secondly, He says unto her, Woman, etc. how soft is this language? Now he
does not speak to her in a rough manner, but Woman. My Beloved, you know what
is said of Job; Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, who is this
that darkens words of wisdom, without knowledge? Job 38.1, 2. But behold the
Lord he answers in a still voice, he speaks as a man to a woman. By Beloved,
had the Lord spoken louder, it may be it would have broke her; the Lord will
speak to poor souls in a still voice. I remember a prayer of Job, Job 13. about
verse 20. Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide my self from
thee, withdraw thine hand far from me; and let not thy dread make me afraid,
etc. And it is worth our considering, because it will open what we are upon;
he does as it were capitulate with God, and he makes but one Article, Let not
thy dread make me afraid; As if Job should say, Lord, if thou will but take
away thy dread, if thou will not speak in thy Majesty, as a great God, then
speak Lord. That this is the meaning, appears by Elihu his interpretation of
it, in Job 33. about 6, and 7. verses. Behold, I am, according to thy wish, in
Gods stead: I also am formed out of the clay. Behold, my terror shall not make
th^e afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee. Job was afraid to hear
God speaking (as we say) in high language; and therefore desired God to
forbear it. Why you see, Christ does here forbear high words, he now speaks to
this woman in a low, and loving manner, even as a man to a man, or a woman to a
woman; He answered and said unto her, Woman. Without doubt this familiar word,
and way of speaking to this Woman, did much cheer her heart; and she might
hereupon say (as Ruth did to Boaz, when he spoke familiarly to her) says Ruth
in the story, Ruth 2.13. My Lord has comforted me, and has spoke friendly
unto me. It is much mercy that Christ will give us an answer: But it is much
more mercy, that he will give us a soft answer. You know the story of Eliah,
God says, he would speak to him, but he came in a whirlwind before he came
in a soft answer; but Eliah was a strong man, and could bear what we cannot.
If Christ should not speak to a poor heart in a still voice, but in a
whirlwind, alas, it would overpower the soul; Therefore it is that Christ
speaks as a man to his friend, yea, as a Father to a child; so you know he
did use to speak. Daughter, be of good cheer; Son, be of good cheer. And thus
we find it in other places, the Lord speaks friendly, Zach. 1.13, And the
Lord answered the Angel that talked with me, with good words, and comfortable
words. If Jesus Christ do not speak at all, or if he do speak, yet if it be
not comfortable words, we count it strange and harsh; and so it is, and may
be (as we have showed at first) But still know now for all this, whatever he
says at first, yet at last he will speak comfortable words.

Thirdly, Christ condescends yet, and speaks more kindly; for, he owns,
acknowledges, and commends this poor Woman's Faith. Mark it, Oh Woman great is
thy Faith. Why here is our third step. The Lord Jesus eyes and owns her Faith,
and that is a great act of kindness. Poor soul! Thou lie at the feet of
Christ, thou say, I have desire, but no hope; I have fear, but no faith
(thou that art full of fears) yet the Lord will call thee (for all that)
Releever, he will spy out, and acknowledge thy Faith, and call thee a Daughter
of Abraham, as here, Woman, great is thy Faith. It is the kindness of Christ,
he will espy our gold, under much dross; our little coal of fire, under many
embers; Christ will do for us, as for the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.8.
says Christ, Thou have a little strength, and have kept my word; Or as he
said in that same chapter to Sardis, A few Names are among you. O how does
Christ speak to this Woman now at last! Mark it, and see, is not the language
altered? Christ at first spoke to her as a Woman of Canaan, calls her upon that
account (as some call Turks and Infidels) Dog; but now he speaks to her as a
Daughter of Abraham (for so are believers called, in Gal. 3.7.) says the
Apostle, Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same are the
children of Abraham. In this speech, Christ tells her in effect, She is an
Israelite. Once it was (poor soul) a stranger, an enemy, a Canaanite, a
Hittite, such were the words in which Christ at first did as it were speak to
thee. Well, but yet stay a little, and thou shall hear Christ speaking in
kinder language, he will yet call thee Son, Daughter, Saint, Friend, in a
word, no more a Canaanite, but at last Christ will speak to thee as an
Israelite; and say of thee, as of Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite, in whom there
is no guile. I Pray mind it, it is an admirable discovery (this) how kind
Christ will carry it at last. Whatever sin he charges in a spirit of
conviction at first, yet always at last he will acknowledge our Faith, I say,
our faith, and love, and whatever is good in us. I appeal to you (O experienced
souls!) are not you afraid to own your own faith? One while your unbeleeving
fears, another while the humble working of your hearts, will not let you see
your own Grace; I but you have a kind Christ that will take notice of it, and
own it; though thou be a Canaanite in thy first address, and in thine own
account (and Christ may seem therefore to deal harshly with thee) yet still (I
say) in this he will at length be kind, and show it in eyeing and
acknowledging any good, every Grace that is in thee. But I proceed unto the
next thing here in Christ's speech.

The fourth, which is, Great is thy Faith. He does not only own, but honor
her Faith. Oh my Beloved! what an act of kindness is this commendation of
Christ? Praise is a fruit of love, a sign of love; why my beloved. Jesus Christ
will deal so kindly, that he will praise you at last. He does now praise this
poor Woman, whom he seemed to slight before. And though Christ may at first
seem to slight and despise us, yet at last he will not only own, but honor
us. And this is certainly his kindness. How kindly did he deal with the poor
Woman, in Luke 7? he was entertained by a Pharisee, and had large
entertainment, yet how does he turn himself to the Woman, and how kindly did
he deal with her? He commends not the Masters Feast, but the Woman's Faith.
Nay, he seems to reproach the Pharisee that invited him, and to exalt, and
honor the poor sinner that came unto him. Her Love and Faith are very much
praised by Christ there, (verse. 46, 47, 50.) Oh Sirs, that Jesus Christ that
you go unto, truly, however at first he may seem not to own you, much less to
honor you; at last he will both own, and honor you. Look as Jesus Christ
will deal severely with painted Sepulchers, Hypocrites, so he will deal
sweetly with sincere Believers. That is one part of this kind speech, wherein
our Lord deals very kindly, though at first he spoke to her harshly.

The second part is, Be it unto thee even as thou will. We may say of these
words, as one of the Ancients said of some others; They are wonders, and not
words. Oh how does the Lord condescend in kindness now to this poor Woman of
Canaan, when he says, Be it unto thee even as thou will. Once he said, I am
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Once he said, It is not
meet to take the childrens bread, and give it to Dogs, But how well is the
world mended with this poor creature? Now the Lord does not hint, that he was
not sent to her; but he calls her believer. Now he does not tell her, she
should not have childrens bread; but now he bids her take what she would.
Once it may be (poor soul) Jesus Christ said this to thy conscience, Thou art
a Rebel, (deserving no mercy) at another time it may be he said this; Thou
art a filthy person (and not yet prepared for mercy) I but at last Christ will
no more mention guilt or filth, but he will say to thee, Rebel, There is a
pardon; And to thee, polluted sinnet, There is purging and cleansing; yea, he
will say to thee, poor soul, There is Mercy, All Mercy, Any Mercy; what thou
want, what thou will, there it is, etc. As it is in this expression here to
this Woman of Canaan. I will open this too, in two or three steps. Be it unto
thee even as thou will.

First, How fully does the Lord spenk to this Woman? Psalm. 81.10. Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. Woman, take to the full as much as thou will;
As if our Lord Christ should say, Woman, Thou art a poor Woman of Canaan, and
art in want; and I have a rich Treasure; it is unsearchable; go to the Mine,
take what thou will. Woman, I see thou art a poor hungry soul, and I am Manna,
and bread from Heaven, come to me, and take as much as thou will. Woman, thou
have made but one Petition, but I see more in thy heart, take what thou will.
My Beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ he gives like himself, very largely to poor
creatures; He satisfies their souls even to the full. David at last could sing
such a song as this is, Psalm. 103.3. Bless the Lord, Oh my soul, who forgiveth
all thine iniquities: who heals all thy diseases, etc. You that lie hungring
at the gate of Christ, and cry, bread Lord, a Morsel Lord, yea, a C^umb Lord;
Christ will say, There is a whole Loaf, be it to thee as thou will. It was the
speech of a dying Saint, that lived long full of sorrow; I am now as full of
joy as my heart can hold. See Zach. 9.12. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye
prisoners of hope; even to day do I declare that I will render double unto
thee. Good now mind it (poor soul) it may be Jesus Christ may shut thee up in
prison, yet there thou will be a prisoner of hope; I but what shall you have
at last? He will render double unto thee. All the Lords children at last, they
shall have double: So it was with Joseph, he had hard usage at first, cast
into prison, etc. but at last he is out, and Governor of all the Land. At
last Christ will deal with you all, as he dealt with Joseph. The Lord Jesus
will deal with a bountiful hand, full, heaped up, running over. That is the
first thing. But then,

Secondly, Be it unto thee EVEN AS thou will; It relates to the Manner
eminently, as well as to the Matter. As thou will; that is, in such a manner as
thou will. When David came up to Araunah, to have the threshing-floor, and
cattle for a sacrifice, he would have them so, and so; And Araunah said to
him, Do what seems good unto thee, 2 Samuel 24.22. And there is very much in
that; The Lords people have their hearts many times set upon the manner of
their mercy. Deal bountifully with thy servant, as thou usest to do unto those
that love thy Name, (says David) in Psalm. 119.132. The poor soul that lies at
the feet of Christ, would have mercy, and have such mercy as his Lambs have,
that lie in his bosom. Thomas, he would have a sign from the Lord, and he
would have such a sign, John. 20.25. and in verse. 27. Christ condescends to
him; but a little to open this. One while the soul will have Love, I, and it
must be immediate Love. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Cant.
1.2. It was a very elegant, and holy allusion of Bernard, (and therefore I
shall mention it) There is the kiss of the foot of Christ, and of the hand, and
of the mouth of Christ, i. e. There are several sorts of kind expressions; now
the Spouse specifieth what kind of Love-expression she would have (as
sometimes the soul does, and may do) she would have, not the kiss of the feet,
but of the mouth, and Christ gave it her, as she intimates, verse. 4. Mind it
then, One while thy soul will have immediate Love Tokens, and the Lord will
give you as you will. Another while the soul cries out, as David in Psalm. 35.3.
Say thou unto my soul, thou art my salvation, etc. The child will have bread,
and it will have it upon the Mothers lap. Another while the soul is ready to
say, Show me a token for good, that those that hate me may see it, and be
ashamed, Psalm. 86.17, 18. Oh my Beloved, what infinite love is it in Jesus
Christ, that he should condescend so low, as to give us not only what we
will, but as we will! That expression is very full, in Psalm. 145.19. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him. The soul has what he will, and just
as he will have it, his whole desire. And so Jesus Christ will do; and
therefore bear up your hearts, you that come to Christ, he may deal harshly
with you at first, but he will let it be as you will at last.

Thirdly and lastly, Be it unto thee. Christ is very positive, very
peremptory, he speaks as one resolved to do. The Lord Jesus does not say, I
will think of it, or I will take it into consideration, and it may be it shall
be so; but he is positive, Be it unto thee even as thou will.

Two things there are that I eye in this expression, Be it unto thee.

First, It is a Commanding word.

Secondly, It is a Creating word.

First, It is a Commanding word. Be it unto thee.

The Lord does as it were command, and say, Woman, I have commanded that it
shall be so. In Psalm. 42.8. Says the Psalmist there, The Lord will command
his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall be with
me. The poor soul, while it is in the world, it must deal with means, as well
as with grace; and the soul is ready to say, will the means give out? Just as
the poor petitioner that deals with a Lord, but he deals likewise with some of
the Officers, though the Lord grant his request, yet he doubts whether he
shall get it our of the Officers hand; why, says he, I have commanded it.

Remember, and rejoice in this hint, O poor heart! who hopest Christ is free,
but doubtest what means may do. Possibly thou have said this, I have good hope
the Lord will speak kindly to me, but will the Ordinances give it out too?
why, says God, I have commanded it, it shall be so; Be it unto thee.

My Beloved, Jesus Christ at last will say, I command every Ordinance, every
Creature, every word thou read, that it be to thee as thou will. Time was
at first, that Christ carried it so, as nothing did subserve you, or yield unto
you any respect; but when the Lord is reconciled, at last he will command all
to be yours. Time was, when no Man, Means, Creature, Ordinance, had any
commission to smile on you, or speak well to you, and then it was sad; But at
length Christ will give a word, send a Commission to all, and command them,
saying, Be it so and so to such a poor soul, as it will, as it wishes.

Secondly, As there is a Commanding, so there is a Creating Power in the Word;
and that is much. Believer! Believer! though the Lord carry it at first like a
man astonished, he will create mercy at last. As in the Creation of the world,
God said, Let there be light, and there was light. etc. So in Isa. 57.7. says
God, I create the fruit of the lips, peace. The Lord that creates light out of
darkness, peace out of trouble, sweet out of bitter; He will create for thee;
be it light unto such a soul; such a soul wants light, and there is light
created for him; strength, be thou created for him, etc. I remember the
Apostle Peter does exhort Believers, as their last refuge, to eye the creating
power of Christ, and act Faith upon him, not only as a Redeemer, but as a
Creator. In 1 Pet. 4.19. Says he, Commit the keeping of your souls to him,
in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. Soul, if Creating Mercy can help
you, be confident Christ will put it forth at length; there shall be another
fiat, another let there be, this or that, for such a soul, and that with
creating influence in it. And oh! how kindly does Christ carry it now at last,
that he commands all, and will create (rather than fail) comfort for this poor
Woman, Be it unto thee even as thou will. Thus have we in Christ's speech to
this Woman seen (as in a glimpse) what his last dealings will be with those
that come to him; And is not this enough to confirm your hearts, that at last
Christ will be kind, however he is at first? But I proceed to the other
thing here in Christ's Carriage to this Woman.

Thirdly, Her Daughter is made whole the same hour. Poor Creatures, you are
full of unbeleef, and I must say to you, as John said, These things are written
that you might believe. Christ will deal so well with poor souls, that at last
he will give them their desires to the full. And that which may be their
request, in an eminent manner, more particularly, will the Lord Christ give
them that. I pray mark it a little thus. The soul wants many mercies, wishes
all, but it has some particular pinch for the present, etc. Now that shall be
given in to the soul. You have a fine expression to import the condescension of
God to particular mercies, in Psalm. 21.2, 4. Thou have given him his hearts
desire; and have not withheld the request of his lips. He asked life of
thee, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever and ever. Why my
Beloved, you that wait upon the Lord, and truly come to him, know and remember,
however he carries it, as if at first he will grant nothing, yet at last he
will grant every thing; and in particular, that Mercy, that particular special
Mercy, which thy heart is drawn forth to mention before the Lord. Oh, says the
soul, I would have all sin dead, but let this sin dye. Now the soul shall have
his this thing; In this thing the good Lord be merciful to me; why the Lord
will in that thing be kind. Let the soul single out its particular request!
Oh in this matter, in that child, in this cause, etc. And he shall find
Christ at last will come down to that very thing. But I shall speak to this in
the last Sermon by it self, therefore I will not urge it here. Only now put
all together, and tell me if the point be not certain, That Christ at last
will deal very kindly with souls that truly come to him: however at first he
may seem to deal harshly. What could the poor soul wish more than she had? he
spoke kindly; now he does what she will, and as much as she will; now her
Daughter shall be whole in a moment, etc. This is all I shall say for the
demonstration of the point. There are some Objections to be answered, I shall
at this time mention one.

Object. I but will the soul say, This is a particular example; and particular
examples they are not foundations for general conclusions. Here is a Woman of
Canaan, and the Lord deals well with her, what is this to me? For,

Answ. Beloved in the Lord, know this, That every example of Gospel Grace, is
not so particular, but that it is a general pattern. All this was written that
we might believe. And you know what the Apostle says, in that same, Romans 15.
and the beginning; These things are written for our learning, etc. Do not say,
This was a Woman of Canaan, and I am a poor other kind of creature; Know, this
was written for thee. In 1 Timothy 1.16. says Paul there, That in me first Jesus
Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them* which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. If the Woman of Canaan were
alive, she would say, I was a pattern for thee; she would say, Christ dealt
thus with me first, to show how he would deal with other poor creatures
afterward. Let this be an answer. But then the

Second Answer is this, The account upon which she had this grace, it was not
particular, but common. A particular thing, with a particular account, is too
straight to be made a general Rule, but a particular example, upon a general
account, may be made a general Rule; remember that. Now this mercy was given
to her, not upon any personal, particular account, but upon a general account;
what is that account? Woman, great is thy Faith. She has this mercy, not as a
Woman, nor as a Woman of Canaan, nor as so and so speaking, but as a Believer.
Now upon this Reason, Because the Lord dealth thus with her upon the account of
Faith; wherever there is true Faith, the Lord will deal thus. It is the
particular argument of Romans 4. The Apostle proves, that Abraham's Justification
was a general type to others. How does he prove it? because it came to him by
Faith. The strength of the Argument lies thus, Abraham was not justified as
such a man, upon any personal account, but because he was a believer; and
therefore he argues, that all believers should be justified as he was.
Therefore do not say, it was a particular example, it is a pattern, and it is
upon a general account.

There are only two words of Application I shall make at present.

First, I will gather one terrible Consequence from all this consolatory
discourse. And,

Secondly, I shall gather one Rational Caution from the whole.

First, I shall gather a terrible Consequence from all this. When mercy is
preached, and comfort is held out, we have many snatch for it, that have
nothing to do with it. And while I would comfort a Son or Daughter of Abraham,
I would not strengthen the hands of any in sin; Well then, sinners, hear, and
fear; Look about you (as I use to say) for certainly, As Jesus Christ will deal
kindly with those that truly come to him, at last: So he will deal exceeding
terribly with those, who notwithstanding all his good carriage, carry it ill to
him. If Jesus Christ, (Man or Woman) will deal well with that soul, that did
tarry long, because it tarried out to the end, then he will deal ill with thee
(whoever thou art) who notwithstanding all his good carriage to thee, dealest
perversely with him; though he wooes you, and beseeches you now, yet at last
he will deal terribly with you; at last there shall be two in one bed, the
one shall be taken, and the other left. Verily, my Beloved, Look as mercy and
kindness will oblige the heart of Christ to be kind to waiters, and comers
at last; so the justice and wrath of Christ, will, as it were, engage Christ to
be dreadful to Rebels, and impenitent ones at last. Husband! thy Wife came to
Christ, and waited on him long, Christ will in the issue be kind to her; But
thou stand it out still, art a Rebel to this day, Oh tremble to think what
Christ will do at last. He will judge, and condemn, and destroy thee upon whom
he has waited long, and who yet at last would not come in.

The Jews are a sad example of this terrible Consequence that I am upon. The
poor Canaanites that Christ dealt so severely withal (all the Prophecies of
the Messiah were sealed books to them, etc.) at last in the fullness of time
Christ comes, and he speaks mercy to the Gentiles; but how does he deal with
the Jews? the Jews that he had been kind to, because they came not in, he
turns away from them to the Gentiles.

Now therefore I beseech you look about you, Christ has been dealing well with
you many a day, believe it, the Lord will deal harshly with you that stand it
out, and deal ill with him. As he will be merciful at last to the
home-commers, so will he be cruel (and yet just) to you that have, and do
stand it out to the last all your days. Consider this then, you that forget
Christ, lest the Lamb prove a Lion to tear you in pieces, that yet continue in
your sins and impenitence.

A second word; I beseech you let me give you all, one Rational Caution. If
the Lord will deal so well at last, then pray now be so wise, as not
absolutely to conclude against this Truth. Is there a poor Woman of Canaan
before the Lord, that has had many a frown, and many a hard put off; many a
frighting without, and fear within? Beware how you conclude against everlasting
mercy; for Christ may be kind at last. That which I would press, is in
allusion to the 77. Psalm, about the 7. verse. Will the Lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favorable no more? etc. I observe that good man did never
positively say so, but only he questions it; and before he comes to
conclude, in verse. 10. he says, It was his infirmity. Thou say, shall I
cry, and never be heard? shall I beg bread, and not have a crumb? know, that
the Lord that has a deaf ear at first, will have a hearing ear at last.
Therefore it is but a reasonable request, you that are waiting upon the Lord,
it is but a reasonable thing I beg of you; Do not say the Lord will never be
gracious. I shall enlarge it more hereafter. But my thinks a Question is put
now, and I will in a word answer it.

Quest. But what shall I do in the mean time? I think the Lord will be good at
last, but I shall starve in the mean time?

Answ. Pray look once more into the story of Joseph, Joseph carried it very
roughly at first, but he carried it well at last; but what do they do in the
mean time? Why they shall have bread to carry them unto their home. The Lord
Jesus is every way Joseph, before he does reveal himself, and deal kindly with
you, you shall have bread to live upon. Though the Lord seem to carry it
strangely now, he will do as Joseph did, Give you bread to support you in your
journey. Look into the Scripture, there is bread enough for you. Never did the
Lord let any perish, but he gave them sufficient to carry them up; and to
support them even in the way, beside the best, and abundance, which is kept
till last. Therefore lift up thy hanging down hands, and stay thy soul even at
present; Jesus Christ will give in necessary, secret supplies, before he
reveal himself in the open, ample manifestations of his grace. You shall (even
while in the Journey, and the wilderness) have a Viaticum, traveling
necessaries; and at the end, you shall have the full possession and inheritance
of the Milk and Honey in Emanuels Land. This I have proved, and shall next time
give you grounds for it.

Sure Grounds that Christ will be kind at last. The Eighth SERMON.
Matthew 15. verse. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is
thy Faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will, etc.


THat all Persons, Conditions, Affairs, are exposed to alteration and change,
is a truth no less sweet in some respects, than bitter upon others. Indeed, my
Beloved, upon some accounts it is our misery that we are mutable, but withal,
upon other accounts it is our happiness, that things shall not (as we say)
stand always at one stand. This present season, though it be sharp and cold,
an alteration will follow, and a warmer season will come. Our very bodies,
though sometimes weak, yet a change does come, and we are rendered strong. And
as it is thus with us in corporals, so, blessed be God, it is thus with us in
spirituals. Though for a time we may lie under the wrath of man, and the
frowns of God, yet a change will come; for God has said, He will restrain the
wrath of Man, as it is, Psalm. 76.10. and for his own anger he will take it
away, so he promises, Hosea 14.4. Though for a time this Woman of Canaan was
under the frowns of Christ, though he seemed to take no notice of her, yet
behold what a change is here, he that before would not answer her a word, does
now answer her many words, and many comfortable words. He answered and said
unto her, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. We
are now come to the last thing in the story of this Woman of Canaan, and that
is the consideration of that conclusion, that Jesus Christ does here make with
her. And you may remember the Observation we did draw forth the last day, was
this, Viz.

Doct. That all those who truly come to Christ, shall in the issue find his
Carriage to be sweet and gracious, however at the first it may seem rough and
strange.

We did then open the Point, and did go a good way in the confirmation of it.
There were only two things which I said I would speak to in the Amplification
of the Doctrine.

First, To show you wherein Jesus Christ would appear sweet and gracious in the
end, howsoever he may carry it at first to poor souls.

Secondly, Whence this should come to pass.

Now, for the first of these, We told you we need go no further than the
instance of the Text. And we did then endeavor to set out the kindness of
Jesus Christ to the Woman of Canaan. Now here are many words to set it forth.

First generally, He answered and said, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith.

Secondly particularly, Be it unto thee even as thou will. And then,

Thirdly, He does particularly grant her particular request that she had
made. And from that hour her Daughter was made whole. I did then speak to those
distinctly.

Two Objections there lie against this instance, which being cleared up, we
will come to the Reasons of the Point.

Object. 1. The first Objection was this; But this instance of the Woman of
Canaan seems to be so rare, that it does not concern us.

To that we said two things.

Answ. 1. That all Gospel-instances of Grace (I intend not instances of
miracles, and extraordinary favors) are perpetual examples for after ages. And,

Answ. 2. This kindness of Christ to the Woman of Canaan, was not upon any
personal, or particular account, but upon a general account, namely, her Faith.
But there is another Objection to be cleared up, and that is this.

Object. 2. But though this example be not so particular as to shut us out, Yet

Secondly, There are some things in it so extraordinary and special, as that
we cannot look for the same things in our cases. To this I shall say two
things.

Answ. 1. That however, some things indeed here may be extraordinary, (and so
not to be expected) yet as to the MAIN of all things, we may expect the like.
This is certain, that those favors that God has shown in any one age, to any
of his children, though they might have some particular circumstance, wherefore
we may not expect the same, yet in the general, (and by proportion) we may
expect the same. As in the instance of Joshua, The Apostle makes the kindness
of God to Joshua, a general example, in Heb. 13.5. Be content with such things
as ye have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Now
we cannot expect in a particular way, as Joshua did. In like manner, the same
Apostle in the same place, does argue from David, in verse. 6. And though we
cannot expect some rare circumstances, as David did, yet as to the main, we
may say, The Lord is our helper: So though possibly we may not expect some
particular circumstances of the kindness that this Woman of Canaan had; yet as
to the main we may be certain to have the like.

Secondly, However we may not meet with all the particular Acts of kindness
from Christ, that this Woman had; yet, there are usually these three things
wherein we shall certainly find Christ to deal sweetly with us at last,
however he may deal with us at first. Or, There are three Demonstrations,
wherein the Lord will demonstrate himself to be kind to you at last, however
he may carry it at first.

First, At last the soul shall find this, that he will not absolutely, and
peremptorily reject the poor soul. Possibly thou will not find so clear an
entertainment, so comfortable an assurance, as this Woman had; I but this thou
shall find, that Jesus Christ will never absolutely cast thee off; he will
never peremptorily deny thee, or cast thee off. It is very remarkable, he did
not peremptorily send the Woman away; though he did not answer her, yet he
did not bid them send her away. And this thou shall find, that though Christ
may not seem to answer, yet he will not absolutely deny; though he may say,
It is not meet thou should have mercy, yet he will not deny chee mercy.
That speech is an eternal Truth, in John 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will
in no wise cast out. I remember an expression that we have in the Prophecy of
Isaiah, which I think is mistook, and therefore I shall mention it. Isa. 50. at
the beginning, Thus says the Lord, Where is the bill of your Mothers
divorcement, whom I have put away? etc. The meaning I take to be this, That
though God did as it were separate Israel from himself for a while for sin, yet
he did not divorce them; he did never give them such a bill, as upon the
account of which they might conclude I am divorced. And that which I gather
from it, is this, that at last the soul shall not be able to produce a bill of
divorcement from Jesus Christ. No, soul, whoever thou art, take this for a
certain comfort, Christ will not wholly cast thee off, he will not at last bid
thee be gone, though at first he may not presently entertain thee. This is
one thing.

And then secondly, Howsoever Christ may deal with thee at present, for thy
comfort, yet at last he will insure thee of everlasting salvation. Possibly
now he will not give thee bread (so much as thou would have) but yet he
will absolutely save thy soul, and have mercy upon thee to all eternity.
Therefore, this is that Christ says, in John 6.39. This is the will of him
that sent me, That of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up again at the last day. There lies this for certain, At the
last day, Jesus Christ will raise up all those that come to him. Now this is
spoken not of a bare corporal resurrection, but of a resurrection to life. It
is spoken of such a resurrection, as is peculiarly the portion of true
Believers. Christ will at last raise up all Believers to life, and glory,
albeit he may not seem to carry it in this life to the poor soul, as it
desires. So that is a second thing which we may conclude in the general, about
Christ's kindness to us, however in some particulars he may not deal with us as
with others.

A third thing we shall be sure to find at last, is this, That Jesus Christ
will give us something sufficient to support us, though not, it may be, to
satisfy us in all our desires. Howsoever the Lord may seem to put us off for a
while, and make as if he would not give us a Morsel; yet secretly he will
give supports to the soul, as in Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me; and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. Secret,
sufficient soul-strength, shall certainly be given in by Jesus Christ, however
he may carry it at first; at last the soul shall be able to say, All the
while Christ did frown upon me, I had some secret supports given: So that
though the example be rare, and though some things in it be extraordinary,
yet in these three particulars every soul at last, shall find Christ will
carry it kindly, however at first he may carry it strange.

To come now to give an account of the Reasons of the point. There are many
Reasons, which (if need were) we might dilate upon. I shall only name these
four or five.

The first Reason whence it comes to pass that Jesus Christ will deal thus
kindly at last, Is taken from God the Father. My Beloved, that same Will,
Command, and Commission which Jesus Christ has received from the Father, and
which he is careful to observe, is the great reason of this Carriage of Jesus
Christ. I pray mark it a little, Christ coming into the world, he comes not
only as our Savior, but as his Fathers Servant; and this has an influence
upon the heart, and upon the hand of Christ in all his carriage to us. This, i.
e. That he comes as the Fathers Servant, and because God the Father will have
him do thus, and thus, therefore to be certain he will do it. As for
instance, does Jesus Christ come into the world to dye for sinners? what is the
ground of it? because God the Father has given him in Commission so to do: So,
will not Christ break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, as it is
prophesied he will not, Isa. 42? Why this is the Reason, because he is his
Fathers Servant, as it is there, verse. 1. and God has charged him that he
shall not break the bruised Reed, etc. And so in this particular, Jesus Christ
will at last deal kindly with all that truly come unto him, because this is the
will of him that sent him. This is particularly the reason, in John 6.37, 38.
(a Scripture that you may look upon as the foundation of your Faith, but I wish
you did well understand what you did build your Faith upon) All that come to
me, I will in no wise cast off; What is the reason? Mark the 38. verse. For I
came down from Heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent
me. When you act your Faith upon Jesus Christ for his kindness, I pray look to
God the Father likewise, and this will further strengthen your Faith. The poor
soul is ready to say, why should Jesus Christ receive me? why should Jesus
Christ carry it kindly to me? what is there in me? nothing. But there is
another ground, there is the will of him that sent him; there is the Fathers
will. God the Father deals well with us for Christ's sake; and Jesus Christ
deals well with us for the Fathers sake. So that now my Beloved, when the poor
soul goes to Jesus Christ, you may imagine that God the Father says thus, Son,
deal well with that soul, it is my will that thou should not cast him off.
Indeed in this place, Christ does intimate that he does carry himself
according to his Commission. The Commission that was given to Christ, it was
the ground of this whole carriage of Christ. But here is the Commission, Christ
he shall not give childrens bread to Dogs; yet if Dogs will come to him, and
lie at the Fathers door, it is the will of his Father that he should not cast
them off.

Secondly, The innate kindness and tenderness of the heart of Christ, is the
reason of this truth; that he will deal well at last, though he seem to carry
it strange at first. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus has that personal renderness
in himself, that if his Father should never have wished him, nor willed him to
deal thus kindly with poor souls, his own bowels would have put him on to it.
Indeed the bowe's of Christ are so tender, that the tenderest love is set out
by the bowels. When Paul would have the Philippians to know how much he did
love them, and long after them, says he, ( Phil. 1.8.) I long after you in
the bowels of Jesus Christ.

My Beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ he has tender bowels, and because of that
it is that he does deal tenderly with poor souls that come to him. What is the
particular nature and notion of bowels in the Scripture? it is this; For a
person to be moved at last, by the sense of a persons misery, though at first
he may seem to stand off. You have many notable instances of this. That of
Joseph, what was it which made Joseph deal kindly at last, though he did deal
roughly at first? In Genesis 43.30. His bowels yearned within him, and that made
him to speak kindly to his brethren. O my Beloved, The Lord Jesus is full of
bowels; he does pity many times, when he is not spoken to, as in Luke 7.13.
It is said there concerning a Woman, that Christ had compassion on her, he was
troubled, for his bowels did yearn toward her. The Lord Jesus having therefore
such tender bowels, thence it comes to pass, that though at first he may carry
it strangely, yet at last he will carry it kindly. This poor Woman of Canaan,
once the Lord seemed to speak harshly to her, but his bowels did yearn, and
upon that account he dealt well at last.

The third Reason in a word is this, Christ will carry it thus well at last,
because in a sense he is very fearful, and therefore very careful, that none
do perish in a good way, at least through his neglect. My Beloved, Christ is
fearful of the perishing of poor souls, especially in a good way, and most
especially through his neglect. Sinners, look about you, if you will rebel, and
run away from Christ, and wander from him, and perish, Christ cares not; but if
thou have a heart to look toward God, if thou go after Jesus Christ, and
criest to him, he is very fearful lest thou should perish in such a good
way. Isa. 57.16. Says God there, For I will not contend for ever, neither will
I be always wrath: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which
I have made. If Christ should carry it tough always, the spirit of the poor
creature would fail. If so be you will wander in the high ways from Christ,
then the speech of the Prophet may be made good, in Isa. 51.20. Thy Sons have
fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild Bull in a Net;
they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. Yea, but if you
come to him, that cries after you in the streets, (as it is, Prove. 1.) If you
lie not still, but come at his cry, and upon his call, then will he pour forth
his Spirit on you ( as in that place he promises, Prove. 1.23.) If you perish
in your own neglect to come, so it is; but if you come, Christ will not let you
perish at his doors. Oh no; The Lord Jesus will never be a Dives; a poor
Lazarus at Christ's door, shall never perish there; never did any that lay
knocking, and begging for mercy there, go away and perish for the want of it.

Fourthly, The Lord Christ will be thus kind at last, That he may stop the
mouths of all those that are ready to speak hardly of him. My Beloved, if
Christ should always carry it strangely (especially when the sold carries it
humbly) soon you would hear that speech of the man in the Parable; I knew thou
were a hard Master. But God is resolved that never shall there be a witness
brought against him of his hardness. This Woman of Canaan might have been
brought in as a witness against Jesus Christ, if (after all this) he should
have cast her off: but God will be true, and all men liars; He will be kind
at last to confure that report, and reproach, which Satan and unbeleef are
ready to cast on him, truly I may say, Christ will be kind for his own
credir. That none may slander him, he will, and must be sweet at last.

Fifthly and lastly, Christ has a particular design to destroy the work of the
Devil. Now my Beloved, upon this account it is, that he will deal kindly at
last; for if Christ should not at last deal well with those that truly come to
him, the design of the Devil would not be destroyed. I build the foundation of
this reason upon that Scripture, in 1 John 3.8. For this purpose was the Son of
God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. When a poor soul
comes to Christ, and is roughly dealt withal, the Devil has a threefold
design upon that score.

Viz. One design is upon the soul it self, to lead the soul to despair.

Another design is upon other sinners, to discourage them for ever, from
coming to Jesus Christ.

And a third design (which though last in execution, is first in intention) and
that is to cast a disgrace upon Jesus Christ. If this poor Woman should have
been sent away, and not been dealt kindly withal, The Devil would have said,
now despair, now no body go to him, etc. How does Satan say, it is in vain for
you to pray, to believe, Nay, though you worship him, he will not regard it?

Now mark it, the Lord is resolved to destroy the designs of Satan, and that
Satan may never prosper in these designs, Christ will carry it well at last,
however he may carry it ill at first. Does Satan say, it is in vain to wait?
No, it is not in vain to wait, for the Woman of Canaan waited, and was
accepted; does Satan say, go not to Jesus Christ, he will not receive you?
Yes, then say thou, and thou, O soul (every one that is not resolved to hearken
to Satan for his own ruin) we will go, he will receive us at last; does
Satan say, he is a hard Master? say no, he will deal kindly at last. Well, to
come to the Application, indeed the prime, and the proper Use of this point is
but one, and that I shall principally stand upon; but I shall add another,
though briefly.

Use, The prime Use of this Point is but one, Namely, for the comfort and the
refreshing of all those, who, it may be, are in the same condition that the
Woman of Canaan was. Who is there among you, that fears the Lord, and obeys
the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him
trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Isa. 50.10. What soul is
there that has found a want of Christ, and has had a desire after Christ, and
has been a great while waiting upon Christ, and has not had your desires
satisfied; be of good comfort, though the Lord tarry long, he will come at
last. The Lord that seems to carry it rough at first, at last, in the issue
will carry it kindly. Therefore bear up your hearts, it may be your issue is
not yet come, and no marvel if Christ do not speak. Possibly you are but in the
Treaty (as I spoke in the Explication the last day) or it may be you are not
yet fully come, nor do really, and rightly cloze with Jesus Christ. For
certain, if that were, he would be kind unto you according to your hearts
desire. It is a full and everlasting speech of comfort, that, that you have in
Job, Job 8.20, 21. Behold God, will not cast away a perfect man, neither will
he help the evildoers, till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips
with rejoicing. Thou do lie before Jesus Christ, and he seems to reject
thee; I but know, That he will not cast thee away, till he has filled thy
mouth with gladness. No, though at present he may seem to carry it strange,
yet in the issue he will carry it well. Because I would clearly hold forth
this, I shall speak my thoughts by two or three steps.

There are two things I would speak to all you, who, it may be, are in the
condition of the Woman of Canaan.

First, Beware how thou think thy estate too strange, and how thou inquirest
after the cause of it too far.

Secondly, Be confident of this, how strange soever thy case be now, the
conclusion shall be very sweet.

First, Beware how thou think thy state too strange, and how thou inquirest
after the cause of it too far. Was there ever sorrow like to my sorrow? and was
there ever soul like to my soul? says the poor soul, etc. and what is the
matter, that I have knocked, and knocked, till I am weary of knocking? Oh what is
the cause! etc. be not too curious in looking after the cause; possibly there
may be a reason that at first you may not see, but you may see it hereafter.
As Christ said to Peter, What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter, John 13.7. Hereafter thou shall know why the Lord did keep thee from
childrens bread so long, and it may be (by the way) it was to bring down thy
proud stomach; hereafter the Lord will satisfy thee, but at present know, that
no new thing has happened to thee, others have lain as long as you.

Secondly, Be confident of this, how strange soever thy case be, the
conclusion shall be very sweet. My Beloved, the Lord Jesus cannot shut up his
bowels, the Lord Jesus cannot always refrain himself, Isa. 63.15. Where are
the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercy toward us, are they restrained?
That passage in Psalm. 42. is remarkable, though David was very sad, yet says
he, in verse. 8. The Lord will command salvation for me, and yet I shall
praise him. And verily at last, you shall see the goodness of the Lord in the
Land of the Living; he will command and create comfort for you. I but says
the soul, though David might say so, what is that to me? still I say remember
it is to thee. All that take hold of the Covenant of Grace, that God made with
David; God makes with them the sure mercies of David (as it is in that precious
Promise, Isa. 55.3.) But however mark the example we are upon, consider the
Woman of Canaan; and when you consider the whole story of her, you may be
confident at last Christ will deal kindly with you. Mind (above, and besides
what we have said) Three things in this story, to comfort your hearts, that
however Christ may deal harshly at first, yet in the end he will deal kindly.

First, You cannot be further off from Jesus Christ, than the Woman of Canaan
was.

Secondly, You cannot be dealt withal worse, than the Woman of Canaan was.
But.

Thirdly, Though we should grant, you should be further off than the Woman of
Canaan was, and dealt withalt worse than she was, yet there is hope in Israel
for this thing.

First, You cannot be further off than the Woman of Canaan was. My Beloved,
There were no people visibly so far from the Covenant of Grace, and so much out
of the Commission of Christ, as the Canaanites, and the Samaritans, and yet it
is observable, you have two great instances, the one of a Canaanite, and the
other of a Samaritan, that Christ must deal well withal. In John 4. It is said
of Christ, That he must needs go through Samaria; and what was it for, but to
bring home a poor Woman of Samaria? now a Samaritan was far off from Christ,
and such a one as she was very far from Christ; yet the Lord at last must deal
kindly with her. And so this Woman of Canaan, she was far off from Jesus
Christ, she was a Woman of Tire and Sidon, yet she came to the Lord, and the
Lord dealt well with her.

Secondly, Consider this for your comfort; Christ cannot deal worse with you,
than he dealt with the Woman of Canaan. I beseech you in the Lords presence
(you that have been under any darkness, clouds, or trouble) tell me, did ever
the Lord speak to you, as he did to this Woman? when you said, Jesus, thou
Savior of sinners, have mercy upon me, did he ever say, I was not sent, but
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? when in the anguish of your spirits,
you did turn into a corner, and lay in the dust grovling and crying for a crumb
of comfort, did he ever tell you, It was not meet to give you childrens bread?
yet you see Christ said so to this Woman. Indeed I think Christ never dealt
with any (all things considered) so seemingly ill, and rough, as with this
woman: Certainly you cannot be worse dealt with, yet at last you see how well
she speed. But then,

Thirdly, Suppose, suppose that you be further off from Christ than the woman
of Canaan was; and that you have been dealt withal worse, than the woman of
Canaan was; Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Why, what hope?
there is this hope, that the Lord will create a new thing in the world. It is
often used in the Prophets that expression; among others I shall now mind you
only of one. In Isa. 43.18, 19. Says the Lord there unto his people, Remember
ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old. Behold I will do
a new thing, etc. As if the Lord should say, My people, look back to the days
past; do not you remember former things? happily they may say, we remember old
experiences, but ours is a new case; we remember what thou did in the days
of old, but our case is worse than theirs; Behold (says God) A new thing I
will create; and what is that new thing God will create? Why the Beasts of the
field shall honor him, etc. Time was when the Virgin Daughter of Sion did
honor him; time was when Israel followed him through the wilderness; I but now
God will create a new thing, The Beasts of the field shall honor him. My
Beloved, there is very much in this, viz. in the Creating-power, and the
Creating-mercy of the heart of God. Suppose never was any so far off, nor never
any so dealt withal, yet the Lord will create a new thing in the world: So
that I say, it may much comfort the hearts of all those that are in the
condition of the Woman of Canaan, that the Lord will deal well at last, however
he may deal at first.

Object. But now my thinks I hear the poor soul say, But I am not like the
Woman of Canaan; were I as the Woman of Canaan, then I should hope the Lord
would deal well with me, but I am not as she. Why how is that?

Answ. I have not that Grace as she had, I have not her Prayer, her Humility,
I never worshipped the Lord, as the Woman of Canaan did, I never was so broken,
as the Woman of Canaan was. I shall give two Answers.

First, If you be not so humble as the Woman of Canaan, think of it now to be
as humble as she was. But yet I tell you in the

Second place, It was not the Woman of Canaan 's Humility, nor her Patience,
nor her Prayer, not the Worshipping; but the Woman of Canaan 's Faith, upon
which the Lord did all. And I take it to be an undeniable truth, that that
Grace unto which all kindness is showed, is the Grace of Faith. True, Humility
is good, and so is Humiliation; and the Lord give us our measure; but yet I
say, the great Promise is not to Humility, nor to Humiliation, but to Faith.
Woman, great is thy Faith.

Object. I but then secondly, says the soul, But I have not the Woman of
Canaan 's Faith; If I had her Faith, I should think the Lord would deal well
with me. It is said, the Woman of Canaan had a great Faith, but the Lord knows
I have but a little.

Answ. I have answered already this, and showed, That it was not to the measure
of the Grace, but to the Grace it self that Christ did this. Therefore I say,
as often as you read the story of the Woman of Canaan, comfort your hearts with
these words; do as the Prophet Habakkuk, chap. 2. verse. 1. I will stand upon my
Watchtower, and observe what God will say, for the vision will speak at last.
So say I to the Sons and Daughters of the Woman of Candan; Go upon your
Watchtower, and observe, the vision will speak at last. I shall hint to you
that speech, in Isa. 54.6. The Lord has called me as a Woman forsaken, and
grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, says thy God.
The Lord has called thee (truly it was his anger, and wrath that was upon her,
and yet he had called her as a Woman refused.) Poor heart, thou art as a woman
grieved in spirit, yet the Lord is kind.

Object. I but you will say, That is a Promise made to those who once were in
the heart of Christ, who once were married to the Lord, and afterward seem to
be separated.

Answ. 1. That is true; and therefore by the way, if there be any of you that
once were married to the Lord, and by your sins are separated, be of good
comfort, the Lord does ca^l thee.

But secondly, Though the sixth verse speak to one that was once a Wife; yet
the first verse speaks to one that was never a Wife. Sing O barren, thou that
did not bear, for more are the children of the desolate, than the children of
the married Wife. So that mark it, put it either way, thou that once wast
married to Christ, and thou that wast never married, there is a song of praise
for you. Whosoever you are that come to Jesus Christ, whether it be your first
coming, in the day of conversion from an unregenerate estate, or second coming,
in the day of your return from a backsliding estate, I say, which soever it is,
if you come, Christ will be kind unto you. I will conclude. And two words I
shall speak.

First, Know, It is absolutely impossible that it should be otherwise, but
that Christ should deal well with you at last. You know the Apostles
expression, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible
for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, etc. When you have the Lords
Word, and the Lords Oath; when you have the Lords Promises, and many
Experiences; It is impossible now that God should fail; here are immutable
things. You have the Experience of this Woman of Canaan, and you have the
Experience of many thousands, besides, the Promises, and Oath of God, and
Christ: so that I say, it is impossible that it should change, and be
otherwise. It cannot be but that Christ should deal well at last with those
that come unto him. I say again (and Oh remember it) it cannot possibly be
otherwise.

Secondly, It is very probable your comfort may be nearer than you are aware
of. Possibly thou will say, It was never worse, never further off. Be it so,
upon this account thou were never nearer to comfort. My Beloved, it is a
certain Truth, When we are ready to give up hope, and ready to perish, that is
the time of our refreshing and reviving. Possibly now thou do think thou art
at the worst, the Lord may be ready to deal kindly with thee. When did the Lord
reveal this kindness to the Woman of Canaan? when? after he had spoken worst
of all. He had said, It was not meet to give childrens bread to Dogs, and
presently after this word, he says, Be it unto thee even as thou will. It
may be the Lord tells thee, It is not meet to give thee bread; now be of good
comfort; now he calls thee Dog, and is ready to beat thee off; a thousand to
one if he do not give you childrens bread. Indeed this I observe as a
particular thing in the story of Joseph; when was it that Joseph brake out in
his kindness to his brethren? See in Genesis 45.1. Then Joseph could not refrain
himself, etc. When? truly when Judah had told him such a sad story, in chap.
44. verse. 18. As if Judah should say, My Lord, great man, what shall I do if
thou do not let Be^amin go? etc. Then Joseph's heart melted. Happily thou art
brought to this question, Lord, what shall I do? Lord, I have waited, prayed,
cried, and Oh Lord, what shall I do? why bear up thy heart, now thou art near
sinking, the Lord may reveal himself to thee, as he did to the Woman of
Canaan. Well, that is the first, and the proper Use, To comfort those that are
in the Woman of Canaans condition. I shall add but one word of Exhortation.

If it be thus, that the Lord Christ will deal thus kindly at last, however
he carry it at first, Then let the same mind be in you, that was in the Lord
Jesus. This you know is a great Rule, That we should be followers of Christ.
Wherein shall we be followers of Christ?

First, Carry it thus one to another.

Secondly, Carry it thus to Jesus Christ.

First, Carry it thus one to another. If so be through frailty, you have
carried it too roughly one to another hitherto, carry it kindly now. Be not of
a rough spirit irreconcilably; It is time for Believers to lay aside their
bitterness, which has been their sin, and shame, many years. Oh that whatever
unbrotherly, ungospel-like carriage has been amongst Saints (and too much has
been) may now at last end. Let us in this imitate Christ, to carry it well at
last, for a long time we have carried it harsh and ill. And in particular
cases between one Relation and another, one friend and another, be as Christ,
sweet and kind in the cloze, what ere you are, or have been at first.

Secondly, And especially, Carry it so to Jesus Christ. There is never a one of
you but have carried it very strangely to Christ at first; the Lord help you to
carry it well at last. Have not you carried it to Christ, as Christ carried it
to the Woman of Canaan? The Woman of Canaan called, but he would not answer;
Christ comes to you, and calls you, but you will not answer; Christ calls you,
you will not hear; Young man (says Christ) turn to me; it is not meet for me
to do so (has the young man answered) I will not cast my youth and strength on
a doting, disgraced way, as many do; so have your hearts said too often. And so
for old, and rich, and great ones, how often have they put off Christ with no
answer, or at best with a delatory one? I may say to you all, that many a time,
after many a call, and in many a case, you have dealt unkindly with Christ.
Well, but however, though you have carried it ill to Christ heretofore, yet
pray carry it well at last. I shall allude to a speech, in Matthew. 21.28. Christ
speaks of two Sons of a certain man, and he came and said to the first, Go
work to day in my Vineyard, he answered and said, I will not: but afterward
he repented, and went, etc. The Lord Christ shows in that parable how some,
yea many deal with him. He calls, and commands the poor soul; he says to the
sinner, Go to work, leave off sin, but the soul returns answer, No, I will not:
Oh this is naughty carriage; yet now if we recall our selves, and say as he
said at last, I go, (But afterward he repented and went) This will be doing
good at last; and however our former carriage has been, Christ will accept and
count this well, and say, Here is good carriage; So then O soul take this word
to thy self; And if thou have dealt unkindly with Christ, and notwithstanding
great wooings, great means, abundance of favors bestowed upon you, yet thou
would not repent: Oh yet afterward repent and do it And this is to draw out
holiness, at well as comfort, out of the story of the woman of Canaan. And
truly that is my desire, that we should thus improve this example, not only
to Faith and Comfort, but also to Holiness and Obedience; and that in this
particular, of being like-minded unto Christ, not only to others, but
especially to Christ himself, to deal well with him now at last, for as much as
we have dealt ill with him many a day.

Comings to Christ prevails for Corporals as well as Spirituals. The Ninth
SERMON.
Matthew 15. the last clause of verse. 28. And her Daughter was made whole from
that very hour.


WE are come to the last part of the story of the woman of Canaan; the
principal matter we have already dispatched; and I shall at this time briefly
give you an account of these words, and so end the Discourse. Without looking
back therefore to any thing we have formerly delivered; we shall presently
speak to these words that I have now read. These words do particularly relate
to the Daughter of the Woman of Canaan; and they do hold forth the kindness of
Christ unto a child, as a return of the Prayer, and Faith of a Parent for a
child. And there is one Note, that in the very entrance into the discourse we
shall take up in the general. And that is this,

Doct. That the Prayer and the Faith of believing Parents, are very prevalent
with the Lord Jesus on the behalf of children.

My Beloved, little do we know what our prayers may procure at the hand of
Christ, for ours. Thou have oftentimes laid thy precepts upon thy child, and
that would do him no good; thou have oftentimes (in a sense) made thy prayers
to thy child, and that would do him no good; Little do thou know what the
prayers that thou do put up to God may yet effect. Verily, my Beloved, It is
our folly and sin that we are not more in prayer for our posterity, than we
are. Many a soul-mercy, and body-mercy may be procured at the hands of Christ
upon the Parents prayers for the poor children. It is famously recorded of
Austin, that he was the Son of Prayers, and Tears. Oftentimes I say for the
soul, and body, does the Parents prayers prevail for the child. To come to the
words in particular, there is no difficulty in the Letter, and therefore we
shall not stand upon the Exposition. There are only three Notes we shall take
up. The two first more particular; the last more general; and therefore that I
shall spend the time in.

First of all, in particular, Here are two Notes that do relate to the personal
honor and glory of the Lord Jesus Christ; and upon that account, I shall
mention them in two Observations.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ has power over all diseases, over all distempers.

Her Daughter was sick, yea vexed with a Devil; she prays to Christ, and her
Daughter was made whole. You know what he said in the Gospel, Mat: 8.8. Lord,
if thou will but speak the word, my servant shall be whole, etc. Any disease
is at the command of Christ, to go, and to come, as he pleases: So much may
we gather from the Centurions language, Luke 7.8, 9. That expression, in Mat.
4.23, 24. is full, where it is said, He went about healing all diseases, etc.
Indeed it is a fine question, Whether in these days Christ do cure
immediately, as he did in the times of the Gospel? That he can so cure is
made no question; but whether he do, is a question; yet this I will say, that
sometimes I make no doubt, but the Lord Jesus does immediately heal diseases.
And it were no stretching the Truth to tell you, that more than one, or two, or
scores of instances may be given of persons, that have been given over for
lost by man, by no means used, nothing done to recover, many who have been yet
immediately cured by Jesus Christ. However, it is a certain truth, that all
diseases can be cured by Jesus Christ. And the second Note is this (and I pray
mind it.)

Doct. 2. Jesus Christ is not tied to any time to do his work.

The same hour her Daughter was made whole.

My Beloved, the Lord Jesus he can cure by one word, in one moment. That is a
famous story, in John 4.49. You have one there that comes unto Christ, and
says he, Sir, Come down ere my child dye. He was afraid that Christ could
not come away soon enough. Mark, says Christ, Go thy way, thy Son lives, and
it is said, he enquired of them the hour when he began to amend; and he knew
that it was at the same hour, in which Jesus said unto him, thy Son lives. The
Lord Jesus is not tied to any time for any work. There are two sad words, which
we may truly speak of the best men, and means, which yet can never be said of
Jesus Christ. The first word is this, That time is past. And the second word is
this, That time is too short. But now you can never say any of these words to
Christ.

First, Of the best men, and the best means we may say, time is past. We
often do say, and cry out, Oh! If this Physician had come at such a time, the
child had been well; and if such means had been taken, the thing had been
done; I but now time is past; But mark it, though you can say thus of men, yet
you can never say the time is past to Jesus Christ. You have a very glorious
instance of this, in the speech of Martha to our Lord Jesus Christ, in John
11.21, 22. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou had been here, my
Brother had not died; but I know, that even NOW, whatsoever thou will ask of
God, God will give it thee. She does not say, If thou had come, my Brother
had lived, but now it is too late; but says she, now I know, that even now,
whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee. My Beloved, when death
is written upon any person, and it is too late for men to help, it is not too
late for Jesus Christ; time is never past to the Lord Jesus. But then

Secondly, As time is never past, so time is never too short for Jesus Christ.
You may say of such men, if they had but time, they might do something; and of
such means, if there were time, it might do something. I but you can never say,
it is too little, or too short a space, or time, for Jesus Christ. In the same
hour. Jesus Christ can do a great deal of work in a little time. Christ who is
the mighty God, can do a great work in a day. That is a blessed word, in Rev.
18.8. and it bears upon this Notion that I now hint. It is said of Babylon,
That all her plagues shall come upon her in one day, etc. In one day, why the
intirest of Pride, and Honor, Idolatry, and Persecution, that so many ages
were winding up to a height; can this be destroyed in so little time? shall
this be done in one day? Yes, For strong in the Lord God who judges her. A
great God, is never confined to any time. Oh my Beloved! bear up your hearts in
the Lord Jesus Christ; time can no way prescribe him, he can do what he will,
and when he will. But there is one general point that I shall take up from the
place, and end this discourse. And the general Point is this.

Doct. That faithful coming unto Jesus Christ, does sometimes prevail even in
Corporal Cases.

This woman of Canaan came to Christ, and she came in Faith; Here is a
faithful commer to the Lord Jesus, and she prevails for her own soul, I and
she prevails for her Daughters body; she prevails eminently for her own
spiritual concernments, I and she prevails also for her Daughters corporal
concernments. That Faith prevails always in spiritual concernments, that we
have often opened (and my Beloved, it is a mercy, that if it do not always
prevail for our body, yet that it does for our souls) But God has provided,
and does so order it, that sometimes it shall prevail for body and soul too.

Indeed going to Christ is good for every thing, and they who truly go to the
Lord Jesus, shall one day have cause to sing the song of David, Bless the Lord,
Oh my soul, who forgiveth all thy sins, and heals all thy diseases. You that
go to Jesus Christ, you shall have cause to say, Blessed be God, I have
soul-mercy, and bodily-mercy too. If you look through the whole story of the
Life of Christ, you shall see this truth. The whole history of the Gospel gives
us instances; that faithful coming to Christ, did sometimes prevail with him
for corporal-mercies, as well as for spiritual mercies. A double instance I
shall give.

First, An Instance of prevailing for our selves.

Secondly, An Instance of prevailing for others.

First, An Instance of prevailing for our selves; says the Leper, in Matthew.
8.2. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. And that of the blind man
(Barthomeus) in Luke 18.41. says Christ, What will thou that I shall do unto
thee? and he said, Lord, That I may receive my sight, and his sight was
restored to him. Many a time the Lord Christ was prevailed withal for corporal
mercies.

But secondly, As many did prevail for themselves, so they did often prevail
for others. As in Matthew. 15.30. It is there said, Great multitudes came to him,
having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others;
and cast them down at Jesus feet, and he healed them, etc. The Lord did many
corporal kindnesses for others. The like to this you have, in Matthew. 9.1, 2.
They brought to him one sick of the Palsy, and Jesus seeing their Faith,
healed him. But now, here is one Objection against this.

Object. But you will say, This was true of the times wherein Christ lived;
Christ, when he was upon Earth, healed Simon Peter's wifes Mother of a feavour;
and such a ones Daughter, and such a ones Son; but now he is in Heaven, such
things are not to beee expected; so some do think.

Answ. For Answer, First, If we speak of his miraculous way of healing, then
it may be said, that miraculous way of healing diseases was a mercy more
eminently put forth in those days, of Christ's being in the flesh. But if you
speak of the thing it self, healing diseases, curing of bodies, I doubt not but
we may expect the same mercy from Jesus Christ now, that they did then. And
the Reason is, Because there is the same ground for Christ to show corporal
kindnesses now, which was then. Where the ground of a thing is perpetual,
moral, and eternally the same in all ages, the same things may be done upon
the same ground, But, etc. I find in the Gospel a double ground, why Christ
did heal corporal diseases.

The first ground was his pity and sympathy.

And secondly, To fulfill Prophecy and Promise; Upon these two grounds did
Christ heal, either upon the grounds of pity and compassion, as a man, or else
upon the ground of Prophecy or Promise.

For the first ground you have it, in Matthew. 14.14. It is said, Jesus went
forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them,
and he healed their sick. Compassion did move Christ, and therefore he healed
them. Now observe, Jesus Christ now in Heaven, has the same compassions that
he had here on Earth; and that is founded upon his keeping, or retaining of
his humane nature still: If Christ had not now in Heaven our humane nature, he
would not have had this compassion; for you shall find, that the compassion
that was in Christ, it was not built upon his Godhead, but upon his humane
Nature. And therefore in Heb. 2.16, 17. It is said, Christ took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham; Why so? that he
might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest, etc. He did therefore take
Man's Nature, that he might have compassion. Now this, Jesus retains for ever,
and he has the same compassions now he is in Heaven, that he had when he
was upon the Earth.

The second ground is that which I find, in Isa. 53.4. compared with Matthew.
8.17. I pray mind it (for it is good to know what is the ground of Faith.) In
Isa. 53. Says the Prophet there, Surely he has born our griefs, and carried
our sorrows, etc. This was prophesied of Jesus Christ, that he should not
only have compassion on our spiritual infirmities, our sins, but our corporal;
and this was the ground why he did heal diseases in the time of his flesh,
Matthew. 8.17. It is said, He healed all that were sick, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet, saying, Himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Here was the ground why Christ did heal
then, because it was prophesied, he should bear our sicknesses. Now this
Prophecy is an eternal truth. And if in the time of his flesh he did show
corporal kindnesses, that that Prophecy might be fulfilled; he will now do
the same, that the same Prophecy might be fulfilled. Even in these days we
may expect, that our Lord Jesus Christ, upon our faithful coming to him, should
show corporal kindness to us, and ours, as well as spiritual. One Scripture I
shall add for the Truth of it, and that is in James 5.14. Is any man sick among
you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him,
etc. and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, etc. Here observe, that
faithful prayer shall prevail for the saving of the sick: Now a little to clear
up this, you must know, first, that this is to be understood of corporal
sicknesses; and therefore the very two terms that are here used, for saving,
and sick, are usually applied to corporal diseases. I but it is said, this was
by virtue of the anointing of the Elders. To this I answer, this expression
has been abused; But however that this salvation does not depend upon the
anointing, will appear, if you observe the phrase, And the Prayer of Faith
shall save the sick. He does not say, the Anointing shall do it, but the
Prayer of Faith; and further, observe, this is a general Scripture concerning
all ages, built upon perpetual grounds, and to hold now, as well as then; That
coming to Christ in Faith, will prevail with him for corporal kindnesses, both
for our selves, and others. We shall add no more for the proof, but give you
the Reasons.

There are five Reasons whence it comes to pass, that sometimes our Lord Jesus
Christ is prevailed withal by those that faithfully come to him, incorporal
cases for themselves, and others.

Reas. 1. That the Lord Jesus may show that he has power in this particular.
My Beloved, Jesus Christ will sometimes speak, and do such a word, and such a
work, for this reason, that it may be known what he could do in that case. In
Matthew. 9. and the beginning, Why did he say to the sick of the Passie, Be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee? but that they might know the Son of Man
has power on the the Earth to forgive sins. Believers, Believers, you shall
know what your Savior can do, you shall know what a Christ you have, and what
he can do in every thing. You think he can do for your souls, you do not
question it; he will make you know, he can do for your bodies too. That he
may show his power, he will sometimes show corporal kindnesses.

Secondly, That he may show himself to be the same in all ages. My Beloved,
poor hearts are too too ready to sing that doleful Psalm, Is the Lords mercy
clean gone? is his loving kindness come to an end? etc. Poor hearts are too too
ready to say, the Lord did such a mercy at such a time, but did he not then
resolve to do so no more? at such a time the Lord healed such a one, but did
he not end the work then? No, the Lord Christ is from everlasting to
everlasting? through all generations, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 103.14, and 17.
verses. For he knows our frame; he remembers that we are but dust; but
the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear
him: and his Righteousness unto childrens children. That you may know that it
is not only a peculiar mercy to those times, therefore, through all generations
he will heal, as he did then, that it may appear he is the same in all ages.
That Text is to be understood of corporals.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus will sometimes show corporal kindnesses to our selves,
and others, that hereby he may engage us. Oh my Beloved, Jesus Christ does
love to engage poor souls to himself; he loves to lay his fair yoke upon your
backs; he loves to lay the cords of men (of humane love) upon their hearts, to
bind them to himself. Now corporal kindnesses do much engage. The truth is, it
is our folly, and Christ's kindness in a mystery, that a corporal kindness works
more sometimes than a spiritual, and Christ therefore goes that way to work
upon us. We find in dealing with children (and the Lord knows silly children
we are the best of us) that we do oftentimes more win by an Apple, than a
better thing. Oh we have a good Christ that condescends to our childishness,
he will have corporal kindnesses, because he sees they will prevail with us
sometimes, when others will not. How stately is that Psalm, Psalm. 116. Oh says
David there, I will love the Lord, etc. What did engage David? I was in misery,
the sorrows of death took hold of me, and the Lord delivered me, etc. Oh, for
the Lord Jesus to show a kindness to our poor carcasses, does engage much. At
such a time I had a child sick, a relation sick, I prayed to the Lord, and the
Lord heard me; I will love the Lord as long as I live.

Fourthly, The Lord does it, that he may encourage Faith. Sirs, glorious
things (as Doctor Sibbs applied that Scripture) are spoken of thee, O thou
Grace of Faith! Now this is a great encouragement, when Faith shall prevail
with Christ for body and soul too for inward and outward mercies, how is Faith
encouraged? Pray will you turn to John 4.53. The kindness of Christ to the
Noble man's child, whom the Lord did cure upon his Fathers request, mark how it
did work upon that great man, He enquired concerning the time, and he knew
that it was at the time that Christ said, his Son lives, What follows? then,
Himself believed, and his whole house. Why, did not the man believe, before
Christ had cured his child? Yes, in verse. 50. it is said, He believed, but
the Master that believed before, believes more, I, and the whole Family
believed too. Verily Sirs, Faith is marvelously encouraged by corporal
kindnesses. What did encourage David against Goliath, but this? Thy servant slew
both the Lion, and the Bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one
of them. Oh, when the Lord shall hear us for our poor carcasses, this will
encourage Faith. Many a person has been wrought upon to come to Christ, by the
kindnesses that he has showed to others. There is a story of a poor Christian
Maid (in the Ecclesiastical histories) whose Prayer and Faith cured a great
Man's child in a heathenish place. The Governor of the place had a child
sick, and every one was to give somewhat to help it, but nothing would do; at
last a poor captive Christian was asked what she could do; she said, I can
pray to my God, and he can heal; she did so, and the child was healed; and
it is said, it was the occasion to work upon many, to inquire after, and to
embrace Jesus Christ, and the Christian Religion. And let me appeal unto you,
have you not known, at least have you not heard of some poor wretched
creatures, that have been much wrought upon when they have observed that God
has heard the prayers of such a Minister, of such a poor Christian, when they
were sick, and this has drawn them on in the way of Faith and Holiness?

Fifthly and lastly, Jesus Christ will sometimes show corporal kindnesses, that
so he may make good all the Promises. In 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is said to have
the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. Why now you
know what is said, in 2 Cor. 1.20. That in him all the Promises are Yea, and
Amen. All Promises are made to Believers, but the fulfilling of all, does
depend upon Jesus Christ. Now my Beloved, That the Lord may fulfill temporal
Promises, he will upon the faithful coming of his servants, sometimes give
them temporal mercies. We shall now come to the Use. There are but two Uses
that I would make of this Point.

First of all, therefore, Let this serve for a word of Conviction. And,

Secondly, For a word of Instruction.

First, It serves for a word of Conviction. To convince the folly, and the
mistake of many poor creatures, who think, and say, that going to Jesus Christ
may be good for the soul, but they cannot tell what it is for the body.
Repentance, Faith, real Conversion to the Lord Jesus, may save our souls, but
they cannot see what it will do for their bodies. This kind of Dutch-divinity
is every where, to mind Mammon, and body, best, and most; and to think
Religion is not for any profit or purpose in those particulars. But see here
this folly, and know, that Religion is good for all things. Length of days are
in Christ's right hand; and in his left, riches and honor. Oh souls, learn to
see, going to Jesus Christ is good, not only for our souls, but for our
bodies. You shall go to the Lord Jesus Christ, and have the mercies of Heaven,
and the mercies of Earth too. Can the Son of Jesse give you Olive yards, and
Vine-yards, etc.? Was the speech of Saul, 1 Samuel 22.7. So say the men of the
world, Do you think to get any thing by being godly? Yes, if the Lord please,
you may get for body, as well as for soul, by going to Jesus Christ. The world
is mightily mistaken, that think godliness is good for nothing but salvation;
it is good for this present world too. But then,

Secondly, Let it serve for an Use of Instruction, To teach us all whither to
go in all cases, whether spiritual or corporal; why, to go to the Lord Jesus.
Whatever thy case be, away to Christ; going to Christ is good for soul, and
for body. What is your condition? Say some, I am a poor man, and I have a
little estate, and a great charge, I hope believing in Jesus Christ will save
my soul, but what shall become of my Family? go to Jesus Christ, he can give
corporal, as well as spiritual mercies. Says another, I am sick, etc. little
do we know what may be expected from Christ even in corporal cases. You have
a fine speech, in Proverbs 3.16. Length of days are in her right hand: and in
her left hand, riches and honor. She is a tree of Life, and she is health to
the Navel, and the Flesh, chap. 4.22. This is spoke of Wisdom, what Wisdom?
why it is spoken of Essential Wisdom, Jesus Christ; why, what of Christ? it is
said, Length of days are in his right hand; Eternity of Life is a
right-hand-mercy for Jesus Christ to give; I but how shall I live here? why, In
his left hand are riches and honor. You go to Jesus Christ; and say, Lord, I
have a dead soul, dead in trespasses and sins, Lord, Length of days are with
thee; But thy body is sick, why go to Christ, he can cure bodies too; and is
this only for your selves? No, but for others too; you may go to the Lord
Jesus, not only for a morsel of bread for thy poor soul, but for some cure for
thy child.

Object. But may I go to the Lord Jesus? will the Lord Christ accept me, who
come to him upon a carnal account?

Answ. For answer. That Jesus that has the mercy of God, to pity souls, has
the pity of a man to pity bodies; and humane compassions will prevail with
him for bodily pity.

Object. I but will the soul say, Is there then any hope that I may prevail
with the Lord for my sick child?

Answ. My Beloved, I told you in the beginning, That the Prayers and Faith of
the Parent will much prevail with Christ, for the good of the child. In Genesis
17. Abraham goes to the Lord, and he prays for Ishmael, Oh that Ishmael might
live in thy sight. That is, that he might be the child of the Promise; He
was a Son of the Flesh, but not an Heir of the Promise; but yet mark what
follows, though Ishmael should not be the child of the Promise, yet the Lord
does there assure Abraham of this, that Ishmael shall be blessed. Isaac is the
child of the promised seed, yet Ishmael shall be blessed too. Many a time
does the Lord hear the prayers of his servants, even for an Ishmael, i. e. for
a child, yea a carnal child; and this is certain, even bad children have many
corporal mercies for their Parents sakes; and we may expect it.

Object. But we have known many a Parent that have gone in Faith to Jesus
Christ for a poor child, that never have prevailed. How then can you build us
up in this Truth, when we see the contrary?

Answ. I answer, If thou go to the Lord, and prayest for a child, and do
not prevail, God deals no worse with thee than he dealt with thy betters.
David, who was a man after Gods own heart, went to God for a child, and he
prayed hard, but yet the Lord did not hear him. You have the story in 2 Samuel
12.16. David besought God for the child, and fasted. etc. And if it be so
with you, yet are you as well in this respect, as David was; But more fully to
answer the Objection. I pray mark it, that in that place, there are two things
might satisfy David, and so any in the like case.

First, It was not good for David that the child should live. I make that
appear thus; what was the child that David did desire might live? you know the
story, it was the base-begotten child, which he got upon Bathsheba. Certainly
it was not good for David that the child should live; had the child lived, it
would have been his Fathers shame, etc. When thou go to God to beg the life
of thy child, if thy child do not live, what is the reason? he may live to
be thy shame. Some have begged of God the life of a child, what ever came of
it; God has given it as a curse, and the childs life has been a monument of
their shame, and a perpetual heartbreaking to the Parents all their days. (As
a good Woman once sadly said) So that is one thing, it may be for good to the
Parent, that God should not hear prayers for a childs life, and then that may
satisfy us, if he do not. But then,

Secondly, Though the Lord did not hear David for the life of the child; I
persuade me, He did hear David for the soul of the child. I shall give you
this account of it. Says David, in v. 23. I shall go to him, but he shall not
return to me. Whither is that? not so much, I shall go to him in my body to
the grave, but in my soul to God. And my Beloved, that this is intended, does
appear upon this consideration; nothing but this could have so quieted the
heart of David, that the child was happy. Indeed some think that the phrase, I
shall go to him, is no more, but I shall be dead, as he is; and they say,
David did acquiesce in this, that the will of God was fulfilled; and therefore
David comforts himself in this, I shall go to him. But if this had not been to
Heaven, it could have been no great comfort. Alas! what comfort is this bare
thought to a mourning Parent? my child is dead, and I shall dye too. David
might have had that comfort in Absolons death; but here was his comfort, I
shall go to him, i. e. to glory; the bare grave is not comfort, nor was it to
David, but the glory beyond the grave is. And this is that comfort which does
stay the heart, I shall go to him. Though God did not hear him for his childs
life, yet I think for his childs soul. So that is another thing to satisfy
any Christian in this case. I say, when Christ does not hear prayers to restore
a child to life, and health; yet, in this case, in particular, go to the Lord
Jesus, you may go, and you may prevail for corporal kindnesses for them, and if
not for their bodies, who can tell but you may for their souls? Then, I beseech
you all in the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4.6. compared with verse 19. Be
careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God. My God shall supply all
your need, according to his riches, in glory, by Christ Jesus. Whatever your
condition be, be not over careful, go to the Lord Jesus, and he will supply
all thy wants, he will give a pardon to thy soul, and a plaster to thy body,
and to thy childs body too; you may go to Jesus Christ for what you will, in a
way of believing, and to be sure you shall always prevail in spirituals, and
sometimes in corporals. But there are two questions that we must answer.

First, But in what cases may it be lawful to put Prayer and Faith a working
in going to Christ for corporal kindnesses?

Secondly, When may we hope that we may prevail with Christ for corporal
kindnesses?

First, In what cases may we go to the Lord Jesus, and set Prayer and Faith on
work for corporal kindnesses? It is a Case of Conscience, which is not
oftentimes touched upon.

Three things I shall tell you to regulate you, and then in any case you may go
to Christ, and act Faith for corporal mercies.

First, When the thing is lawful that you ask. There are many things that are
not lawful for us to ask. Like Neroes Mother, ask, and say, I will have my Son
King, though I dye for it. You may not beg of the Lord, that your child may
be thus great, or thus honorable; but you may beg of the Lord, life, and
health, creature accommodations, so far as necessary, these things you may
beg, and go to Christ for.

Secondly, You must look that your spirits be not inordinately set upon the
things. When ever thou find thy heart inordinately set upon any thing, then
do not pray for it. And then,

Thirdly, When you can appeal to Jesus Christ, that the end, for which you beg
a corporal kindness, it is for his glory, then you may beg it. As David there,
in Psa. 119.17. Deal bountifully with thy servant; that I may live and keep thy
Word. You may go and say, Lord Jesus, Let my child live: for what end? that
he may be a great man, a rich man? etc. No, the Lord will abhor it; But that
my child may live to serve the Lord; if that be your end, you may pray for
it. And then,

Quest. 2. But you will say, When shall I know, or may I guess, that I shall
prevail with Christ? What are the signs of the time, and season when I may hope
I shall prevail with Christ for mercy, etc?

Answ. I answer, When the frame of your spirit, is as the frame of the spirit
of the Woman of Canaan. I pray mark it a little, what the frame of the spirit
of this Woman was; Take it in some particulars. I will name only two, viz.

First, She had this frame of spirit; That though she mentioned her childs
case, yet she seems to mind her own soul most: And,

Secondly, She had this as the frame of her spirit, To believe for both. Now
to urge it in a few words to you.

The first frame of her spirit was, That though she did beg this mercy for
her child, yet the frame of her spirit was principally set upon her soul. This
poor Woman did desire her Daughters life; but however Lord, bread for my poor
soul. Oh Sirs, when you can go to God, and say, Lord, I would have such a
corpotal mercy, but however Lord, soul-mercy; when you can desire a sick child
may be made well, but especially an evil heart mended; when your soul is set
mostly upon your soul, and its concernments, then are you in a good frame.

Secondly, This Woman was raised up to measure of Faith. Indeed some great and
considerate Divines do think, that that Text of James 5. (where it is said, The
prayer of Faith shall save the sick) is to be understood in reference to a
particular Faith. And my Beloved, howsoever, yet let me tell you, it is not
always necessary we should have a particular persuasion, yet when the Lord
does intend to answer in a corporal kindness, he does secretly, either out of
the word, or by providence, hint some word that may bring the soul to a
believing frame. Something is presented to us, which raises up a Faith in us;
so that when we are in such a frame of heart, as to mind spiritual things
most, and yet to believe, that in a temporal thing God will gratify us, then
may we expect that we shall not be ashamed of our Faith, and that we shall
have the particular corporal mercy granted to us. But to end, This is that I
would press upon the whole; As ever you would have mercy for body and soul, go
to Jesus Christ. But now there is some general word, that I would draw from the
whole story. We have now dispatched this whole discourse of the Woman of
Canaan. What is there that is upon my spirit to beg of the Lord for you, and
for my own soul, but this? That this story may be always a good story to us.

First of all, therefore, I say, Look about you, that the story of the Woman of
Canaan may not be a sad story to any. Is there any such as may have cause to
fear that, you will say? Yes; man or woman, whoever thou art, who do not
faithfully go to Jesus Christ, the story of the Woman of Canaan shall condemn
you; you have no excuse to keep you off from going to Jesus Christ, but this
Woman will condemn you. Three Excuses some make.

First, Alas, I am a poor man, or a poor woman, that have heard but a little
of Christ, and am but a stranger to Christ: so was the Woman of Canaan. I but
says another,

Secondly, I have something else to look after; a great family, or a sick
child, etc. The Woman of Canaan had a sick child, but did that keep her from
Christ? No, that brought her to Christ. If that speech had been spoke with
gravity, that one said upon that in the Parable, Luke 14.15. He might have
brought his Wife with him, it had been right enough; you should bring relations
with you to Christ; do your endeavor to bring children; let not children keep
back you.

But thirdly, Alas, I cannot tell where to find Christ. It is a marvelous
hard thing now adays to find a Jesus Christ. Mark what the Woman of Canaan
did; The Evangelist Mark (who records this story, Mark 7.24.) says, that
Christ entered into a house, and would have no man know it, but he could not
be hid; for a Woman of Canaan found him out, etc. It was one of the tempting
(but the gracious tempting) hours of Jesus Christ. But he could not be hid,
for a Woman of Canaan found him out. The Lord does look thou should find a
Jesus Christ, and never leave looking, till you do find him. The Woman of
Canaan will condemn such as these. Let not the story of the Woman of Canaan be
ever a sad story to you. But,

Secondly, Let the story of this Woman be a sweet story always to your
spirit. Let it be a story, as a storehouse, unto which you may go and fetch
some comfort in your wants. Who of you have been waiting upon Christ many a
day, and have not what you beg? go to the Woman of Canaan, and eat out of her
basket.

There are three things in the story, that will speak comfort to you.

First, That many sins, and great unworthiness, shall never finally keep the
soul from Christ. Oh Sirs, you go to the Lord Jesus, and you knock, but your
sins bolt the door; you cry, but your corruptions cry louder; the woman of
Canaan will tell you, I was as bad as you, and the Lord heard me.

Secondly, This story has this in it for your comfort, That Prayers cast back,
may have a blessed return afterward. The Lord Jesus may now seem to be dumb,
so that he may make thee speak the more. Christ you see as in this woman's case
was silent (as to granting her request a long time) yet you see at last he
answers, and that largely and lovingly. Go to this story for that comfort; were
the woman of Canaan alive, she would tell you this experience: A soul may have
a Prayer returned in mercy, that at first was seemingly cast off.

Thirdly, The woman of Canaan will tell you this, That a mercy may come at
last, of which the soul has no assurance. What assurance had the woman of
Canaan? none, why the woman of Canaan will tell you; I had comfort in the end,
though I had no assurance; souls are much cast down for want of particular
assurance; They pray, and hope, but are not assured; why what assurance had
this woman? Nay, had she not the quite contrary? had not she a seeming
rejection at first, and no assurance at all? But behold, she has the mercy,
before any previous assurance; And so may you have; though no assurance now,
yet possibly you may have the mercy desired very speedily. However learn and
remember th^^. You may IN TIME have a mercy, of which you have as yet no
assurance. Thus meditate on this story, and look into it, as I said, as into a
storehouse of comfort in many cases. To end all, Beloved, (as the Apostle
James said, You have heard of the Patience of Job, and what end the Lord made
with him) so say I, you have heard of the Practice of the woman of Canaan, and
what end the Lord made with her. Let not this story be forgot, as an old story
is, but remember it many a day, yea all your days. For certainly there is much
sweetness and refreshing which you may gather from this record of the Woman of
Canaan.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books are printed for, and sold by Henry Mortlock, at
the Sign of the Phoenix in Pauls-Church-yard, near the Little North-door.
Folios
A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, wherein the Text
is learnedly and fruitfully opened, with a Logical Analysis, spiritual, and
holy Observations, Confuration of Arminianism and Popery. By Mr. Paul Bain.

A Commentary on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, and the Major Prophets.
By John Trap; M. A.

Quartos.
An Exposition of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. By William Green-hill.

The dividing of the Hoof, or seeming Contradictions throughout sacred
Scriptures, distinguished, resolved, and applied. By William Streat, M. A.

Some Sermons preached upon several occasions. By Peter Sterry.

Large Octavos.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in five Books: In the first, A general
Description of their Nature, Kinds, Excellency, Right Use, Properties, and the
Persons to whom they belong: In the four last, A Declaration of the Covenant it
self, the bundle and body of all the Promises, and the special Promises
likewise which concern a man's self, or others, both temporal, spiritual, and
eternal. By Edw. Leigh, M. A. of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

The Hypocrites Ladder, or Looking-glass, or a Discourse of the dangerous and
destructive nature of Hypocrisy, the reigning and provoking sin of this Age;
wherein is showed how far the Hypocrite, or formal Professor may go toward
Heaven, yet utterly perish, by three Ladders of sixty steps of his Ascending.
By John Sheffield, Minister of the Word at Swithins, London.

An Improvement of the Sea, upon the nine Nautical Verses, in the 107 Psalm,
wherein among other things you have a very full and delightful Description of
all those many various and multitudinous Objects, which they behold in their
Travels (through the Lords Creation) both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land, viz. All
sorts and kinds of Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, whether wild, or tame; All sorts of
Trees and Fruit; All sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries. By Daniel
Pell, Preacher of the Word.

Small Octavos.
Several Treatises useful for Christian Practice, viz.

Warning to Backsliders, The way to true Happiness, Mercies Memorials, A Sermon
preached on the fifth of November. Milk and Honey, first and second Part, Orthodox
Paradoxes, The New Commandment, Divine Similitudes, or Mysteries and
Revelations. By Ralph Venning.

The exceeding Riches of Grace advanced by the Spirit of Grace in an Empty
Nothing-Creature, viz. Mris. Sarah Wight. Published by H. Jessey, A Servant of
Jesus Christ.

A Latin and English Grammar. By Charles Hool, M. A.

Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts of Physic and
Surgery, for the Cure of all Diseases incident to man's body: Hereunto is
annexed the Physical Mathematics of Hermes Trismegistus. Published by Ralph
Williams, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery.

Twelves.
Spiritual Experiences of sundry Believers, with the Recommendation of the
sound, savoury, and spiritual worth of them, to the sober, and spiritual
Reader. By Vavasor Powell, Minister of the Gospel.

The Saints Desire, or Divine Consolations, being a Cordial for a Fainting
Soul, containing Observations, Experiences, and Counsels; The Saints daily
Duty, the Life of Faith, and how a Soul may live in the sweet enjoyment of the
Love of God, etc. By Samuel Richardson.

FINIS.

