Altum Silentium: OR, SILENCE THE Duty of Saints, UNDER Every sad providence AN
Occasional SERMON Preached after the Death of a Daughter, by her Father: viz.

By John Durant Preacher of the Gospel in Christ's-Church Canterbury.

What shall I say? He has both spoken to me, and Himself has done it?

Isa. 38.15. London, Printed by J. Streater, and are to be sold in
Popes-head-Ally, near Cornhill. 1659.

TO The Reader.
Christian Friend,
THe Book of Job (says Augustine) is the afflicted man's Scripture: And I may
say, this little Book is the afflicted man's duty; A little pearl may be of
great of price, and such is this little Treatise that now is put into thy hand.

The waves did but lift Noah's Ark nearer to heaven, and the higher the water
rose the nearer the Ark was lifted up to heaven: sometimes such an operation,
afflictions have upon Noah's, upon Preachers of Righteousness; And if they have
not had the same operation upon the Author of the ensuing discourse, I am much
mistaken. Afflictions to some, are like the prick at the Nightingals breast,
that awakes her and puts her upon her sweet and delightful noats; And whether
they have not had such an operation upon the worthy Author, I will leave the
Reader to judge. The more, precious Odours, and the purest Spices, are beaten
and bruised, the sweeter Scent and Savor they send abroad: Had not God bruised
to death one of the choicest and sweetest flowers in the Author's Garden, he
had not sent abroad this sweet and savoury Sermon.

We try Metal by knocking; if it sound well then we like it well. That Is a
tried Christian, a thorough-Christian indeed, that gives a pleasant sound when
under the knocking-hand of God: If thou layest thine Ear, thy Heart, close to
the following Tract thou will hear such a sound as will be sweeter to thee then
the honey or the Honeycomb.

That Christian is worth a world, who under the sorest and sharpest
afflictions, is like the stone in Thracia, that neither burns in the fire,
nor sinketh in the water. Whose silence and patience is invincible and
impregnable. None are such an honor to God, such a glory to the Gospel, such a
shame to Satan, and such a wonder to the World as these; who can lay their
hands upon their mouths, when God's Rod lays heavy upon their backs. That this
is every Christians duty and glory, is fully and sweetly evinced in the
following Discourse.

Happy are we when Gods Corrections are our Instructions, His lashes our
lessons, Isa. 26.9. Psalm. 94.12. Prove. 3.12, 13. Chap. 6.23.
His scourges our Schoolmasters, His chastisements our Advertisements. And to
note this, the Hebrews and Greeks both, express Chastening and Teaching by one
and the same word. ((...)) because the latter is the true end of the former,
according to that in the proverb, Smart makes wit, and, Vexation gives
understanding. That this happiness the Reader may attain to, is the thing
endeavored by the Author.

Reader, thou have much wrapped up in a little, it is more to be admired than to
have Homer's Iliads comprised in a Nut-shell; It Is a mourning Sermon, and
Mourning should be plain. The Reverend Author knew right well, that 'twas
better to present Truth in her Native plainness, then to hang her ears with
counterfeit Pearls. He knew that the King of Nineveh was a King as well in his
sackcloth, as in his Royal Robes: The Author is known to be a Master workman,
and one that could easily shoot his arrows over his hearers heads; See his
precious works in Print, and then Judge.
but he had rather shoot them into his hearers hearts: He dares not affect
sublime notions, obscure expressions, which are but mysterious Nothings. He
dares not do as many, who make plain truths difficult, and easy truths hard,
and so darken counsel by words without knowledge, Job 38.2. If thou will but
taste and try, thou will find this little Treatise to be a heavenly Hony-hive to
thy Soul.

If thou shall say, Oh! it is sweet, it is seasonable, it is suitable to my
condition, and to God's dispensations abroad in the world; but, why have we no
more of this sweet Wine, no more of this Water of life, no more of these
Clusters of Canaan? I must tell thee, that the honored Author buried his dear
and hopeful daughter on the Friday, and preached this Sermon the Sabbath day
following; and therefore thou have more cause to bless the Lord, and admire
the Lord for his goodness, assistance, and presence with the Author, that has
enabled him to bring forth a truth of so great weight and concernment to us,
even then, when he was under such sore and sharp rebukes of God. It Is not every
ones happiness to have such a presence of God with them, when the Rod of God
is heavy upon them.

Reader, the point insisted on, is a point of special use to Christians;
especially to such as are under the afflicting hand of God, whether in
spirituals or in temporals: And if storms should fall upon us from abroad, or
at home, it will be found (in the use of it) more worth then Gold. I have read
of the stone Garaman^ides, that has drops of Gold in it; many a golden drop
will thou find in the f^llowing Lines. As Moses laid up the Manna in the golden
Pot, and as Alexander kept Homer's Iliads in a Cabinet embroidered with Gold,
so do thou ^ay up this Sermon in the golden Cabinet of thy heart. If troubles
at present are not upon thee, yet thou must remember that thou art born to
them, Job 5.7. John 16. ult. 14. Acts 21.22.
as the sparks fly upwards. God had but one Son without sin, he has no Son
without sorrow; he had but one without corruption, he had none without
correction; he scourges every Son whom he receives, he can quickly turn thy
Summer day into a Winter night, and then this Sermon may be to thee a suitable
and an invaluable mercy. I shall only take leave to hint a few things to the
Author my Reverend Brother, and to my dear Sister his virtuous yoakfellow, who
are above all others concerned in this sharp and smart dispensation, and so
conclude.

First, That well grounded hope, confidence and assurance, that you and others
had of the buddings and blossomings of grace in her, in her tender age, and of
her being now at rest in the bosom of the Father, should not only quiet and
silence you, Heb. 11.4.
but also joy and rejoice you. Why may you not think that you hear her, though
dead, yet speaking thus unto you?

When God has stamped his Image upon a mite,
It Is meet that God should have his right:
After a few years past, a wearied breath
I have exchanged for a happy death.
Short was my Life, the longer is my rest:
God takes them soonest whom he loves best.
She that is born to day, and dies to morrow,
Loses some hours of joy, but Years of sorrow.
Other diseases often come to grieve us,
Death strikes but once, and that stroke relieves us.
Therefore (my parents dear) take heed of weeping Cross,
And mind my happiness, more then your own great Loss.
This is all I Will say, to make the reckoning eaven,
Your dearest mercy, is not too good for heaven.
Hasten to me, where now I am possessed,
With joys eternal, in Christ my only rest.
Secondly, The designs of God in all the sharp afflictions, He exercises his
Children with, are glorious, As (1.) the purging away of their sins, Isa. 1.25.
(2.) The making of them more partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. (3.) The
trial of their graces, Job. 23.10. (4.) The communication of more of Himself,
and of his love to their souls, Hosea 1.14. (5.) The multiplying of their
spiritual experiences, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. (6.) The crucifying of their hearts to
the world, Now finis dat amabilitatem and facilitatem mediis.
and the world to their hearts, Gal. 6.14. (7.) To draw them to look and six
their souls upon the great concernment of another world, John 14.1, 2, 3. (8.)
That heaven may be the more sweet and precious to them at last, 2 Cor. 4.16,
17, 18. Romans 8.17, 18. How sweet is a calm after a storm, and summer days
after long winter nights! (9.) To make them more and more conformable to Christ
their Head, Romans 8.17. (10.) That sinners may at the last be found dumb and
speechless, 1 Per. 4.17, 18. Now, Is there not enough in these glorious ends
and designs of God to make his people sit mute under the sharpest trials?
Surely there is. Why then, don't they sit silent before the Lord?


Thirdly, All the mercies you enjoy, were first the Lora's before they were
yours; and always the Lora's more then they were yours, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. All
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. The sweet of mercy is
yours, but the Sovereign right to dispose of your mercies is the Lora's.
Quicquid es, debes creanti; quicquid pores, debes redimenti; Bern. Whatsoever
thou art, thou owe to him that made thee, and whatsoever thou have, thou
owe to him that redeemed thee. Say, as Hierom advises a friend of his (in
the like cause), Thou have taken away whom thou have given me: I grieve not
that thou have taken them, but praise the Lord that was pleased to give them.
You think it but just and reasonable that men should deal with their own as
they please: And is it not much more just and reasonable that God should do
with his own as he pleases?

Fourthly, That God that has taken one, might have taken all; there are several
left, though one be taken. Job, you know, was a nonesuch in his generation,
and yet the sentence of death was past upon all his Children at a clap: and
under this sad clap, Job does not blaspheme, but bless; He does not murmur,
but worship's: He accuses not God, but cleares God of injustice, under the
saddest and severest strokes of justice, Job 1. Geographers write that the City
of Syracuse in Sicily is so curiously s^ituated, that the Sun is never out of
sight. The Sun of mercy is never out of your sight: though one mercy be gone,
yet you have several that remain, and this should make you mute.

Themistocles invited many Philosophers to supper; the owner sends for one half
of those necessaries that he was using: Can you endure this disgrace, said the
Philosophers. Yes (said he) very well, for he might have sent justly for them
all: the application is easy, Oh! let not nature do more then grace.

Fifthly and Eastly, Under sharp afflictions, we ought, carefully to look that
natural affections don't hinder the exercise of gracious dispositions: though
we may weep, 1 These. 4.13.
yet we may not weep out either the eye of faith, or the eye of hope: though
you may water your flowers, yet you may not drown your flowers. They that
wep't, yea that wep't much, Acts 21.13, 14.
yet said, The will of the Lord be done. Jacob doted too much upon his Joseph,
and his affections were too strong for his Judgment, when upon the sight of the
bloody coat, he refused to be comforted, Genesis 37.33, 34, 35.
and said, I will go down into the grave unto my son, mourning. And David was
too fond of his Absalom, when like a puny-baby, he wept and said, O my son
Absalom! my son, 2 Samuel 18.33, 2.
my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom my son, my son. The
Egyptians mourned for Jacob 70 days, but Joseph (though he had more cause)
mourned but 7 days; because he had more grace, and better hopes of Jacob's
eternal welfare, then the Infidels had. In the midst of all your tears, keep up
the exercise of grace, and then you shall not mourn, that you have mourned.

That your own is no sooner in your hand, is only from the remisness and
delatoriness of him into whose hands you had ordered the Copy.

To conclude; That you and I, and all others (into whose hands this Sermon may
fall) may live up, and live out, the following discourse, under all the changes
that has or shall pass upon us, is the earnest desire and hearty prayer of him
who is your entire friend and servant in our dearest Lord,

Tho. Brooks.

THE Silent Soul, UNDER Sorest Trials.
The tenth Chapter of the book of Leviticus, the last clause of the third
verse. And Aaron held his peace.
THese word's they are a hint to us of the holy Carriage of Aaron, under the
hand of God. The Lord had laid upon him an affliction very sad; but the Lord
gave him a carriage very sweet and suitable to it: I think I may say, God spoke
to Aaron bitterly, but He made no reply at all: Nay, the Text says, Aaron held
his peace. I shall shall make no other preface: Three things you may consider
in the verse.

1. The person, which was Aaron, the Lord's Minister. But remember this, by the
way, that Aaron must be looked upon not as a Minister, but as a Saint, so that
what he did, we must all do. 2. The action, which was this, He held his peace.
3. The occasion, which is contained in the former part of the verse, And, which
you may translate, Then. And truly the occasion is that which gives most light
to the action. Aaron had lost two Children at one blow, and God told him, He
would be sanctified, He would be glorified; Aaron, upon this message, and upon
this occasion, lays his mouth in the dust, and held his peace. So that there
is this plain Point arises from the words.
Doct. That under the saddest afflictions that can befall us, we must hold our
peace; or thus, It Is the duty of the Lord's people, whatever He does to them,
to be silent* Aaron held his peace: Afflictions are of two sorts, spiritual and
temporal: Temporal likewise are of two sorts public and private, Now this was
no spiritual affliction, but rather temporal. And it had in it something of a
public nature, but as to Aaron more of a private. And truly as to a private
temporal affliction this of Aarons was very heavy. You all know that, As
Children are sometimes great Comforts: So, often times sad afflictions. The sin
of our Children's life's, and the suddenness of our Children's deaths make sore
afflictions. Aaron might at present reflect upon both, and that reflection (no
doubt) was his affliction: But although he was troubled, yet he carried it
wisely and well; He covers his sadness with silence. His practice is our
Pattern, upon it I build my Point: And 'pray now mind it, Let the dealings of
Gods providence be never so sad, we must be silent, we must hold our peace.
What Aaron did now, David did afterward in Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, because thou did it. This therefore I would stand upon (and oh,
that God would strengthen me to speak it to you!) That it is our great duty
under the saddest providence, to hold our peace. I shall only speak one word
of caution to prevent a mistake about the Point, and so go on. And the Caution
is but this. I am not now speaking of all our duties that are incumbent upon
us, in the day of adversity, in the hour of afflictions; no (my Brethren),
there are many duties besides this: when the Lord affl^ct's, there are many
duties to be done. Indeed here are two duties, that I find are to be done in
this Chapter, in our afflictions, and, in a desire and endeavor to do these
duties, by the light and strength of the Lord in this Scripture, am I this day
present (which otherwise I had not been) to Preach unto you. For I find, it was
Aarons duty in his affliction to do his work, and to be submissively silent
before the Lord. These are the duties I meet with here, as I said in this
Chapter, the one in the Text, the other in the 12. ver. where it is said; and
Moses spoke unto Aaron, and to Eleazar, and unto Ithamar his sons that were
left, Take the meat offering that remains of the offering of the Lord made by
fire, and eat it without leaven besides the Altar, for it is most holy. The
meaning of it, is, They are dead, but go thou about thy work, do not keep off
from the Lord's service, do not let God lose that which thou owe to him. This
is a great duty indeed, for us to go about the work of God in our place,
whether Minister or Magistrate, or other. It Is our fault and folly; under our
affliction we are apt, Child-like, to lie down and cry. Joshua lay upon his
face, when he ought to have been up, and doing his business, Josh. 7.10. O
Sirs! whatever God lays upon us, let not us lay aside our duty. Let us strive
to do while we suffer: Cast not off any duty that God requries, and which our
place calls for, even under the greatest affliction. This is one maine piece of
Satan's policy, by affliction to make us cast off duty: But certainly we must
not say as it is, Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands
in innocence, for all the day long I have been plagued, and chastned or (as it
is in the Hebrew), my chastisement was every morning, Psalm. 73.13; 14. No, we
must not entertain such thoughts. But whatever affliction the Lord brings,
morning or evening; we must do our work all the day long. That, besides others,
is a great part of our duty in the day of adversity. But I shall speak to this
in the Text. Two things I would do: First, 1. Show you wherein this duty lies,
what it is to be silent, and to hold our peace under sad providence: And, 2.
Why this is so great a duty? For the first, what is this silence? what is this
holding our peace? We have, mentioned in the Scripture, a two fold silence: the
Phrase is used in a bad sense, and in a good sense, there is a sinful, and
there is an obediential silence. There is a sinful silence, and a sinful
holding the peace, which is not our duty but sin, and so is not required of us;
and this is fourfold, 1. A sottish silence, 2. A sullen silence, 3. A Stoical
silence, 4. A self-soul secret afflicting silence.
But you, and I, must take heed of these: and therefore I will show you the
rock that you might not come near it.


1. There is a sottish silence. Some hold their peace, because like fools they
know nothing, observe nothing, can do nothing; This does not become the Lord's
people, they should be sensible, not sottish. Jeremiah complains of such a
sottishuesse in the 4. Chap. 22. verse. For my people are foolish, they have not
known me; they are sottish Children, and they have no understanding, etc. What
was this sottish silence? will you look back to the 19. verse. and that will
open it, where says Jeremiah, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very
heart, my heart makes a noise within me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou
have heard, O my soul! the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War. Jeremiah
observed God, he saw a Storm, understood a Judgment, he was not sottish, his
bowels melted for it, but my people are sottish, etc. As if he should fay,
Though I am sensible, they are sottish. There is a sottish silence beware of
that. If the Lord smite, be not as a Sott that sees nothing; who therefore does
not speak, because indeed he cannot: we must hold our peace not as dumb-men,
but as duty-men. He is not wise nor dutiful that cannot speak, and is therefore
silent; But he is both, that can, but yet refraines. Sottish silence is a sin,
not a duty. But then there is,

2. A sullen silence. A silence that, as we say of some, they are dumb, because
they are dogged; they do not speak, because they are sullen and will not speak:
That should not be our frame, a sullen silence when we refrain from good
word's, that was David's fault in the 2 verse of the 39. Psalm. When he said, I
held my peace, even from good. We may say, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken; and say, Lord what is my duty, etc? But to say, as Jeremiah once
said in the 20. Chap. 8, 9: I Will speak no more in his name, because the people
took on, at what he said, that was a piece of his failing. And truly its a
great fault under our affliction not to speak at all; we may and must speak to
God and Man: To God in duty; to man both to ask advice, and to open our case
for counsel and comfort. He that holds his peace as sullen and dogged, sins,
and this silence is to be avoided. I press it not upon you. Nay, I advise you
against it: But,

3. There is a Stoical Silence. Scholars know, what was the opinion of the
Stoick's. They were silent; shall I say out of a high humor, it was an humor,
an earthly humor; they must mind nothing. I do not think it a good speech of
that Heathen, who when he heard of the death of his Child, said* I begat him
mortal. No my Brethren, God has given us affections, that we might make use of
them, for he has made nothing in vain, we may mourn* we may weep, we may be
sensible of the hand of God. There are a company of poor Creatures amongst us
(you call them Quakers) that are much infected with Stoicism; most of there
principles, and much of their practice is but a reviving of what some
Philophers counted their glory long ago. But truly, it is the shame of
Christians to turn Stoics, I may say Stocks: To mind nothing, be affected
with, or for nothing, is a shame, and not a glory. I therefore reckon that, as
a sinful silence. The Stoics silence, is the Saints shame; Aarons was, and
ours must be of a higher, a holier nature. But to pass on.

4. There is a secret soul-afflicting silence. There are deep souls that run
like deep water's, they make no noise, they are very silent. I am apt to think
it was Hezekiah's failing, when he said, He has done it, I shall go softly all
my years in the bitterness of my soul, Isa. 38.15. It was well, he eyed God;
but, to say, he would go softly, that is, he would bleed within, and not open
the wound, was his failing. I know that speech: Ille dolet vere, qui sine test
dolet, Secret silent sorrow is truest, but not best: It is sorrow with a
witness (as we say), because without a witness. To mourn in a corner
silently, to weep, and not to word it: To let Grief swallow up Language; and
not to speak but to be drowned, and silent in a depth of grief, this is an evil
silence. The Lord keep you and me from it: I do mention it (as the other three)
to be a voided, not to be practiced. Aaron was not, we must not, in any of
these senses be silent: for this silence is an evil; and therefore noted, that
it may be avoided. Well, this is the first silence, and this sinful holding our
peace, is not our duty under any hand of God. But Secondly,

2. There is an obediential silence, a silence that is founded in wisdom, and
managed with reverence, and this silence is our duty. It is said of Saul when
the Children of Belial flouted him, he held his peace, in the 1 Samuel 10. ult.
that was a silence of wisdom. And in the 13. Job. 5. says Job to his friends,
O that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom. My
Brethren, such a holding our peace as is our wisdom, that is our duty indeed
under every providence, a wisdom-silence, a reverential silence. Job speaks of
this in 29. Chap. 9, 10. where says he, The Princes refrained talking, and
laid their hands on their mouth; the Nobles held their peace, and their tongue
cleaved to the roof of their mouth; that is, out of reverence. And what says
the Prophet in the 2. Zech. ult. Be silent O all flesh before the Lord. Says
God to Moses, I Will be sanctified, I Will be glorified: And, Aaron held his peace;
but wherein does that lie? I Will open that but in three words. An obedientiall
silence, or holding our peace, does eminently lie in 3 particulars.

1. It is a Soul-quieting silence. I think, so that phrase is to be understood
in the 2 Kings 2.3. where it is said, The sons of the Prophets which were at
Bethel came forth to Elisha, and said to him, Know thou that the Lord will
take away thy Master from thy head to day, and he said, yea, I know it, hold
your peace. As if they should say in our Language, Do you know that the Prophet
will die to day? Do you know your Wife, your Child, your Husband, will die to
day? Hold your peace says the Prophet, as if he should say, Be not distracted.
O my Brethren, We are ready to take on, like frantic people, but here is our
duty to hold our peace. You know the story of Ammon and Tamar in 2 Samuel 13.20.
where, says Absalom to Tamar, Has Ammon thy brother been with thee? but hold
now thy peace my Sister; he is thy Brother, regard not this thing. It is in the
Hebrew, do not fix thy heart: the meaning is, Sister it is a sad thing, but
hold thy peace; do not distract thy Soul, do not set thine heart upon this
thing. Such a silence as to quiet our Spirits, not to torment our souls, that
is our duty. This silence is the Soul's quiet, in it the heart rests, not
tormenting its self with tumultuous thoughts, nor foaming forth tempestuous
words: certainly Christians should in quietness possess their Souls with
patience. A patient Soul-quieting silence, is both commanded and commended: So
to be silent, as not to stir to our distraction, but in our silence to quiet
our Spirits, is our duty, and therefore I mention it. Aaron was thus silent,
his childrens death was not his distraction. But this is not all; For I add, 2.
There is a sincere submitting Silence. Silence (you know) is consent, and to
hold one's peace is a great phrase in Scripture, to consent to what is done;
you have it twice in one Chapter, in Numb. 30.4, 12. And surely my Brethren,
this is our duty, such a holding our peace, such a Silence which gives our
consent to what God does, is an obedientiall one. Unto me (says Job 29.21.)
men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my Counsel; Job was accounted a
wise man, and what he did, they did, viz. held their peace, and gave their
consent: and that is our duty, God is a wise God, when he strikes or speaks we
must hold our peace, at least our silence should be so submissive, as not to
wrangle. You have a phrase in Tit. 2 9. It is spoken to Servants, that they
should be obedient, not answering again. You account it a fault if your
Servants grumble; O what a great fault is it in us, when a God smites, for us
to grumble. Without doubt silence in this sense is a great part of our duty in
affliction: Thereby we show we consent to what the Lord dorh. Will God take? By
silence, give consent: Does God by providence say I Will have that Child, that
Creature, that Relation? Oh! let us by silence declare our assent and consent
to what the Lord does, Our silent suffering is an yielding to the Lord's doing,
and it is our duty so to do. But lastly, 3. There is a studying silence. A great
Scholar was wont to say, when he would study such a thing, I must be silent.
In our studies, we don't use to talk; a man cannot study and talk: therefore
one of the first Lessons Pythagoras gave to his Scholars, was Silence.
Affliction is a School: when the Lord brings an Affliction upon us, and puts us
into that School, we must be silent as Scholars, if ever we intend to learn.
And thus I think the speech of Elihu to Job is to be understood Cap. 33. ult.
Hearken unto me, and hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom. You know
what the Scripture says elsewhere, in Psalm. 94. verse. 12. Blessed is the man
whom thou Lord chastens; and teach him out of thy Law. Would you learn? How
will you learn unless you be silent: we must be silent to study to understand
the Lord's mind. Thus you see what the duty is; wherein especially this
obediential silence lies: In the day of affliction we must be silent. But how?
Not as Sotts, or sullen Stoics, not as those that are silent, mourning in the
Grave. No, but consider: Truly, in the day of adversity we must consider, (as
it is Eccles. 7.14.) And amongst many things we must consider How to hold our
peace; how to be silent, so as not to distract our Souls; nor to grumble
against God; nor to hinder our learning in the affliction: So to be silent as
to compose our spirits, and consent to the Lord's dealings, and so as to study
to hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, to learn our lesson in the school
of affliction: This is our duty, and thus did Aaron here. I have now opened the
point and our practice, What it must be. Let me now enforce and establish it by
Arguments, Why this must be. To come to it:
2. Why must this be? I shall give you the reasons of the Point very briefly:
My beloved, though the Lord might deal with you and me, upon term's of supreme
Majesty, and bid us do a thing without a reason; yet God bath laid no
command's, but there is the highest Reason for them. I Will offer you three head's
of reason, why this is our duty, let the providence be never so sharp. If we do
but soberly consider a little with our selves, even under the saddest
providence,

Either 1. God, or 2. Our selves, or 3. Saran;
we may from each of these particulars see, and be satisfied in the ground of
this duty of silence. I shall be short in opening; but do you consider it by
your selves, more at large.

1. Consider God. Says David in Psalm. 29.9. I held my peace, because 'twas
Thou did it. He has done it, what shall I say? was Hezekiah's saying.
Affliction does not arise out of the dust. Whatever befalls thee, let the Tool
be what it will, it'; God that strikes. Truly, my brethren, this is a large
head of reason; God does it. Why, He may do whatsoever he will, both in heaven
and earth. God does it; He is wise and just, and holy, and honorable. God does
it, pointing at the supreme diety, silences all: Let all flesh be silent,
before the Lord. But I'^e carry the reason only upon one foot, and that is
this, You cannot testify your subjection to a God, if you be not silent at
what he does. You chastise your children, you will not have them prate and take
on while you are chastising. Whenever God afflicts, he does but chastise, and
will thou reverence an earthly Father, and not reverence the Father of Spirits?
Observe, how the Apostle carries on this argument, Heb. 12.9. Says he, we have
had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence shall
we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? A fine
child, a sweeet child, reverences a Parent; it speak's quietly under every
dealing. Do you deal thus with men, and will not you deal so with God? My
brethren, I said even now, that this is a reverential silence, and we cannot
show our subjection unto God, if under every providence we be not silent.
Verily, our silence is our reverence: To take on and fret, to groan and
grumble, to be as a wild bull in the net (as the Scripture phrase is) to roar
and to bellow; It is to dishonor God. If we will acknowledge Him to be (as he
is) a God, we must be still, as it is, Psalm. 48. last. In the day of adversity
they do not consider, but forget God who are not silent. Nay, men forget
themselves, who under affliction (in the sense opened) do not hold their peace.
For,

2. Will you consider yuur selves, and you will see there is reason you should
be silent. My brethren, Self-knowledge in most points has abundance in it to
carry us through all lessons; if ye do not hold your peace, you will hurt your
selv's. To be silent is good for Self, and self-love is a good motive. You will
say, What good is it for me to be silent, it is an case to take on? I answer,
that which is easy, is not always best.

1. For first, If you be not silent, you will never exercise any grace: If a
man's hand shake, he will not write well; when the man talk's, he cannot study
well: So, except we be silent, we cannot show any grace, no grace of faith, no
grace of patience, no grace of humility. All these graces are exercised, and
appear eminently in an obediential silence. He that believes, speaks not much:
He that is patient holds his peace: And the humble soul in every affliction
lies in the dust, submissively silent. You forget your selves (Oh Saints!) as
to the exercise of these graces, if, with Aaron, you do not hold your peace.
Besides consider,

2. If you speak, you will sin, and will you afflict your selves by speaking.
Now, my brethren, mark it; Under affliction we are apt to speak more sinfully,
and God observes it. You have a great evidence of a good man, who in the way of
his affliction spoke sinfully, and the Lord took notice of it, in Jer. 45.3.
Thou did say, woe is me now; for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I
fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest; here is the passionate speech of a
man under affliction. I remember a very fine observation of Dr. Stoughton long
ago from this very passage: says he, It is very facile, very easy, but not
free to offend in word's. Thou did say, (says the Lord to Baruch). We are
apt to say, and forget what we say in sorrow: But says God, Thou did say
thus or thus. The Lord minds our sinful sad words. It is good therefore to hold
our peace; mark that: Thou did say, etc. Oh soul! the Lord observes all our
words, in a day of affliction; and because we are apt to forget our selves, to
speak sin in a passion, certainly, if we consider our selves, we shall hold our
peace. Mind what David says, I said, I Will take heed to my ways, that I sin
not with my tongue, Psalm. 39.1. If you consider your selves you will be silent:
for if you speak much in the multitude of speech, there will be sin; and that
is to be avoided, especially under suffering. But,

3. You will but increase your trouble, at least you will not decrease it that
way. Sorrow has bin compared to a great flood, and if you draw up the hatch it
will run. Unless we hold our peace, submit, we shall but increase our
sorrows; at least there is but little hope to decrease it. In Lam. 3.27, 28,
29. you have a great speech, and a good speech: Says he. It is good for a man
to bear the Yoke in his youth. If God will put it on, do you bear it, Why so?
he puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. My brethren,
there is hope, the parent will give over when the child is silent; and there is
hope a God will forbear, if we hold our peace. But thirdly,

3. You have reason to be silent, if you consider Satan. Satan your adversary
goes always about; Nay, I had almost said, he is never more busy, then when we
are under some sad dispensation; busy to watch you, that he might accuse you;
busy to watch you, that he may tempt you; busy to watch you, that he may
disgrace Religion for your sake. If you overrun the bound's, he will accuse you
of immoderate sorrow. And if Aaron shall misbehave himself in sadness, Satan
will misimprove that misbehaviour to disgrace his place and profession. Did but
Christians consider, how Satan watches their words in a day of affliction,
they would be wary what they say; and for Satan's sake they would be silent. But
I shall not enlarge this, nor add any thing more by way of reason. We shall
make some Use of this Point. to press upon mine own heart and yours, under
all providence, this example to hold our peace: Truly my brethren, silence is
still a great gift. The Rabbis have a proverb, that If speech be silver,
silence is gold. And this I Will tell you from a better Author than the Rabbis,
If in all conditions you look not to your tongue, you have no Religion, Jam.
1.26. Well therefore I would press it upon you, whatever the Lord has done,
or whatever the Lord shall do publik or private, Be silent before the Lord,
hold your peace, I would press that which I have to say under a few
particulars.

1. First I would answer a few Objections, that the soul may make against this.
2. Give you a few special Cautions. And, 3. I would give in a few Directions.
For the first, Do not think, thou have occasion to speak. Whatever you object,
there is enough to silence you. Aaron might have spoke more, than, through
mercy, I hope any of us: His son's were cut off both at once. Shall I answer a
few objections in mine own heart, it may be they may be in yours? Why?
1. Object. But the Lord has afflicted me so grievously, that I cannot hold my
peace. For, says the soul, He has taken away the best thing I have, and
that is a great thing: I had a posie in my hand, a nose-gay of flower's, and the
Lord came and snatched away the best of my flower's, and shall I not speak? I
answer, Who should have the best, if not God? Would you say to any friend that
should come into your Garden, Here are flowers, take any of these, but do not
take the best? O my brethren, though God lay never so sharp an affliction upon
you, and take away the very best; yet remember this, that the best God may have
the best. The best child among all, the best thing which is in your keeping, if
God take it away. Do not grutch God the best, for whom nothing is good enough.
If the Lord take the Jewel out of the Ring, remember, God is most precious: And
best is for best. Hold thy peace.

2. Object. I but, says he, the affliction comes into my soul, and can I be
silent under a soul-affliction? Alas, the dagger that smote the Creature, is
now come into my soul. Mark ye, Is it not said, The Irons went into the soul of
Joseph? I answer, God smites thy soul now, that he may not smite thee in hell
hereafter. O therefore be silent! God does chastise thy soul now, that he may
not condemn thy soul hereafter. And, have not thou then reason to hold thy
peace? But,

3. Object. Alas, I must speak, I must cry out of my own fear; I have not done
my duty, and God punishes me for failing therein. Had I done my duty, in such a
case, for such a child, such a relation, I could be silent. But I have sinned,
etc. I answer, If thou have neglected one duty, will thou neglect another? Thou
have failed in thy carriage to that relation, and this condition, and there God
smites thee: Because thou have sinned once, will thou sin again?

4. Object. But woe is me, I must speak, I have reason to speak, I cannot hold
my peace. Why? In my affliction God is gone, God is clouded, God is departed,
and shall I not speak then? Answ. O beloved of the Lord! what said Mr. Burrows
to this, If God be gone a little, will thou drive him farther? If God be
departed a little, will thou make him depart more? Does murmuring, does
repining, does a passionate taking on, bring God nearer to you? You will never
help your selves under the fear of God's departing, by your taking on; you had
better hold your peace; God will be in the still voice. You may see by this,
whatever you can object, there may be abundantly said to silence your
Objections. Therefore I say, In all afflictions hold your peace. Secondly, I
would press it on in a way of Caution. And I beseech you take heed what you
say in the day of affliction; let the affliction be what it will, take heed
what you say. May not I say any thing, says the soul? I did not say so: You
may speak, but not sinfully; you may say as Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, Blessed be the name of the Lord, Job. 1.22. you may say, God
gave me such a Creature, such a Relation, he has lent him me many a year, and
now he has taken him away; I bless God, he lent him me so long. Such speeches
you may use; they are not spoke against. But it is such a Speaking as is
inobedientiall, which I caution against. I said, it was a fault to refrain
from good speech; it was sullen silence. Therefore I deny not all speech: Only,
whatever you say, take heed of sinful speech. And besides others at present,
what ever words you use, My brethren, there are but four things I would caution
you against. First,

1. Whatever you say, be sure you do not charge God foolishly, whatever thou
speak do not write Folly upon the hand of God. It is said in Job 1.22. In
all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. We charge God foolishly,
when we say, If God had done so, I could have born it: Me thinks, if God had
taken away that, I could have born it. This is to charge God foolishly, as if
God did not know what he had to do. If God had lent it me a little longer, I
should have been well enough, this is to charge God foolishly. I have heard one
say, Any loss but such a one! Another, Had I been afflicted in any thing but
this! A third, In case my trial had been so, I should not have misliked it:
Many such speeches there are, but I pray beware of them. Does not the wise God
do all? And is not infinite wisdom found in every divine action? Providence in
all things is understanding; Oh, avoid these speeches, which charge the most
Wise with foolishness. 2. Be sure thou do not say, God could not afflict me
worse. O we are apt to cry out, The Lord could never have afflicted me worse, O
beware how you speak so; What says David, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power
of thine anger? You do not know my Brethren how a God can strike: Some have
said, God could never have afflicted me worse: but, in a very few years, he
has given them such an affliction, which has been far worse. Beware how you
provoke God to strike sorer, whilst thou say, God could not afflict thee
worse. Thou provokest the Lord, to silence and confute thy speech by sending a
sharper affliction: and thou may feel to thy sorrow the folly of thy speech.
If God smite a second time, thou will find he can afflict thee worse than he
has done. But 3. Beware how you say, There is no affliction like to this. We
are apt to be prating, and, as the ordinary phrase is, Never any bodies
affliction is as mine, beware of such a speech: Will you remember this? It
argues a proud heart for us to say, No body can be worse than us; Is no bodies
Jewel so rich as thine, no bodies loss so great as thine? Thou overvaluest thy
self, and undervaluest others, and thereby provok's God. He that says, No body
could lose such a child, such a yoke fellow, etc. does he not proclaim his
pride, in thinking himself a Nonesuch? and in preferring his things before and
beyond all others. Take heed therefore of such speeches. Thou know thine own
losses, not another. Never aggravate thy grief by pride, in over-valuing your
own, and under-rating another loss. It Is a sinful speech, No sorrow like
mine; you were better hold your peace. But then, 4 Beware how thou say, You
cannot bear it. Beloved, God loves not, that we should return a Cannot. If thou
say, Thou can not, God will try thee. I cannot hold my peace: God will
give thee two blows, to make thee hold thy peace. Do not say, I cannot, Non
posse praetenditur, non velle in causa est. It may be, you can but you will
not, and God is purposed to compel you. Certainly, God is resolved to make the
whole World to bow; and if thy proud heart say, It cannot, God will say, I Will
make thee; and better submit to a little blow, then to make God to make us
submit by a greater. But,
3 ly. I would give you a few directions, and I shall conclude: The great
Question now is, How shall I do this? Aaron held his peace, but alas! I am not
Aaron: David held his peace, but I am not David. Let me say but this word, You
little know what you say, when you speak so. I would not speak to make you
proud, but this I say, Gospel dispensations carry little Saints as high as
David: Is it not said, A little one shall be as David? Suppose we are lesser
Creatures, we have higher Hills to stand upon. But know, There are some things
which David did not as a strong Saint, but as a Saint: It is a mistake to think
David is not to be imitated because he was great. I told you, Aaron here, is
not to be considered as a Minister, but as a Saint. There are some duties
common to all. And this amongst the rest. You know, It is said that David was a
man of Prayer: I am no David: therefore shall not I pray? Yes. But, How shall I
be able to come up to do as Aaron did, and as David did, To hold my peace? I Will
give you but three heads of direction.

1. I pray, Before an afflicting providence com's, take heed that you do not
make it to yourselv's and others more afflicting than it would be: My beloved,
before the sad providence com's, you may do that which may make it worse when
it comes. As it is with sick men, in a Fever or Ague, men do that before the
Fit comes, which makes it worse when it comes. They eat and drink, do t^is and
that, which, when the Fever comes, or Ague comes, make's the Fit more tedious,
and worse then it would be otherwise. So it is here: Before an affliction, we
may do that which may make it more bitter, then else it would be. We do that
often, which makes the afflictions of God the greater. I have two heads in
this, if you mark it, 1. That it may not be the worse for others, 2. Nor for
our selves.
Do that under an affliction which, in regard of thy self, may not make it
worse then it would be. I Will open it in an instance thus, Thou art it may be a
Relation, a Husband, or a Wife, a Child, etc. When ever God takes thee away, it
will be a sad business to thy Relation which is left behind; Now live so, as
when you die, you may not increase the affliction of thy Yoak-fellow, or of thy
Parent. I will put it to Husbands and to Children. Husbands, So carry it, that
when ever God snatches you hence, your wives may know, you are in the Lord's
bosom. O ye little ones before the Lord, Live so, that if the Lord make your
death an affliction to your Parent's, it may not be so great as otherwise it
would be; when the Parent can hope through grace, my Child lived so, that it is
now with my God. It is not in the Father's bosom, but in Abraham's bosom:
this lessens the affliction. You that are little ones, Live so, that if thy
death be thy Parent's affliction, thy life may make it less. And well I know,
that nothing more silenceth a parent, or a yoke-fellow's spirit, under the loss
of Child or Husband; I say, nothing more silenceth, and quieteth the heart,
then some good hopes that the Husband or Child is in heaven. So then as to
others labor that way, to make the affliction less. And secondly, for your
selves. Whatever affliction God may lay upon you, beware that before hand, you
do not make it worse. A passionate spirit, a proud heart makes an affliction
very sad when it comes. A passionate man, one given to passion, a little thing
disturbs him. A proud man before it comes, he cannot stoop to it when it comes.
Live so, as whatever affliction shall befall you, it may be less then
otherwise it would be. 2. Lay up something before hand, that may silence you in
the day of affliction: There are many things which will silence a soul, in the
Language that I am speaking of silence. There are sweet thoughts which beger
silence. I have not time nor strength to open so many as I should do. Lay up
but two thoughts. 1. Lay up this thought, that whatever God does, he will give
you a good reason for it. You are in affliction, if need be: He does not
willingly afflict the Children of men. I pray, mind these two Scriptures,
Lament. 3.33. and 1 Pet. 1.6. It may possibly be, we see not the need; but
there is a need for every affliction: and that is the reason why God sends it. I
pray remember it: though you nor I do not see the reason of an affliction, yet
God will give a reason. The wise God he can, and the loving God he will give
you and I a reason for every affliction, that we shall say, It was good for us
that we were afflicted. Another thought, is this; 2. That whatever the Lord
does in his providence, he will never break a promise; I mean a spiritual
promise, that in any thing he has made to thee. And of all promises, I shall
instance in that great promise, the Covenant, in Psalm. 89.32, 33. where says
God, If they break my Statutes, then will I visit their transgressions with a
Rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness will I
not utterly take from them: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, my Covenant
will I not break, etc. If I take away that which was their beloved, I Will never
take away my own Love. I Will snatch away what you love most, but I Will never take
away my own love. Though the Sun set in the firmament, yet the Sun of
Righteousness shall never ser. A third head is this.
3. If you would hold your peace, Pray; And if you cannot tell what to pray,
turn to David, and learn of him, in Psalm. 141.3. Set a watch (O Lord) before my
mouth: keep the door of my lips. My Brethren, bad speeches are like rebellious
Enemies, they will break out of doors, what shall keep them in? A good Watch. O
but, says the Soul, I am not strong enough to keep a watch: Why then pray,
Lord keep a watch for me. O my beloved, if the Lord would but help you to be
more in prayer, speaking to him, you would be more in holding your peace. I
have now hinted, what is our duty, and offered to help you in it. Aaron did,
and we all must, hold our peace. I would say no more, But me thinks I hear some
body ready to say, But what is this Sermon to us, Whoever have lost, says one,
I have lost nothing, I have all my Children, all my Cattle, and I am
flourishing and green. O Friends, I beseech you (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks
in another case) hear for the time to come; you cannot tell what a day may
bring forth: You cannot tell what a day may bring forth in private; nay, what
God may do in public we cannot tell. Does God begin with Beasts, and may not
he end with men? Does God take away our Cattle, and may not he take away our
Children? You know what Zephaniah says in chap. 1. v. 7. Hold thy peace at the
presence of the Lord, for the day of the Lord is at hand. My Beloved, there may
be a day of the Lord at hand, a day of blackness, a day of darkness, and a day
of gloominesse; God may smite us in the winter, and in the Summer House, God
may smite us in public relations, and in private relations. I would rather
help your faith, then create fears. Therefore I will not tell my private
thoughts (which possibly may be my melancholy) upon public accounts. Yet this
I Will say, God has put us to silence by strange providence: and if he put us
to silence by sad, dismal, suffering, providence, it is no marvel, for we have
provoked the Lord unto it. It is therefore a word of advice before a storm
come, before afflictions do overtake you, learn your duty. It is good to know,
we must hold our peace at the Lord's presence; and if ever the Lord comes to
your house, as he did to Aaron's, in any sad, sore, sharp, providence: here is
your duty, do as Aaron did, He held his peace.
FINIS.
In Parentalia charissimae Sororis.
SArcophagus tenerae juvenilia continet ossa,
Durantis que piae semper memoranda Mariae.
Quamvis descensa est et ad interiora sepulchri,
Nil aliud resonat, quin ad suprema resurgat
Coeli coelorum: cecidit jam argentea stella;
At coelis oritur stellae melioris origo.
Plandite Coelicolae adventum nunc hospitis hujus
Et gratum numero Sanctorum reddite vestro.
Sic deflet Johannes Durant, frater.

