THE Fullness and Freeness OF GODS GRACE IN JESUS CHRIST, DECLARED In two
general Points: First, That Personal Election is no ground of the Saints
perseverance in the Grace of God by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, In what sense the Scriptures speak the Saints Perseverance in that
Grace.

The Third Part.

By FRANCIS DUKE.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Will. Milward, without Westminster Hall Gate, and
Miles Michael within the Gate, 1656.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IN my first Treatise are four grounds or principles in the first four
Chapters: The first is our natural perfection in Adam by Creation: The second
is Gods Covenant with us in Adam, the only and alone Covenant of works made
with man: these two states were distinct each from other, before the Fall. The
third is the Fall of the whole World, by Adams one offense once committed. The
fourth is the restoration of the fallen World by Jesus Christ the second Adam:
And my second Treatise handles this one general point, that is, In it is proved
what is Gods final end, for which he made all things in Heaven and in Earth,
and that he made choice principally of seven means to accomplish that end.
This third Treatise principally treats of three things: First, That Personal
Election is no ground of the Saints perseverance in the Grace of God by Jesus
Christ. The second proves in what sense the Scriptures speak, the Saints
Perseverance in that Grace. The third is a disproving of the false Doctrine of
the Familists, and the Quakers; in particular against Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn.

The Contents of several principal things contained in this Treatise.
FIrst, Against personal Election, these Scriptures following are opened, Romans
1.9, 13. In this Paul repeats a Record, recorded by Malachy; and the thing
recorded is expounded by God himself, that is, what his purpose was in that
business. Page 1. 2. 3.

The second Text, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed. p. 4, 5, 6.

A third Text is the 17. of John, opened from p. 6. to p. 18.

Fourthly, These several Texts are opened. Jer. 31.3.31, 32, 33. Jer. 32.39,
40. Romans 11.15, 27. Heb. 8.8, 9, 10. Heb. 10.16, 17. p. 19. 20. 21.

Also it is opened in what sense the word Elect originally did arise in its use
and application in the Old and New Testaments. p. 22. 23, 24.

Also the Text is opened, Eccles, 12.7. The words are these, Then shall the
dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God that
gave it: This against the Familists, from p. 24. to 32.

Also against them, see p. 33. to 36. All these fall under the first head, as
against personal Election.

These following fall under the second Head.

First, It is opened, how a man that is no Saint, may become a Saint, and so to
be in a capacity to the said perseverance. p. 41. to 46.

The first ground of the Saints perseverance is the power of Gods Spirit, and
the exercise of their Faith and other Graces.

The second ground is the immortal Seed of Gods Word, sown in their minds by
the hand of Gods Spirit.

Also here is opened a threefold distinction, as to the will of man, from p.42.
to 54.

A third ground of the Saints perseverance so as they shall never totally nor
finally fall, is Christ's more full and constant manifestation of himself by his
Spirit to the mind of believers, which so exercise their graces, as before is
said, by which he holds the will of a believer to himself, actually or
virtually at the least, from p. 55. to 60.

To believers is peculiar a twofold righteousness, and to no men else, wherein
is briefly opened, how Abraham and Rahab were justified by works, or working
out their own salvation, from p.60. to 68.

How the nature of true love does arise in the Saints mind. Also a definition
of Love, and its natural properties, declared from p.68. to 74.

Also the patience of the Saints, as to its perfect work, is opened from p.75.
to 80.

Also that God greatly afflicts some holy men, not for trial, nor for
chastizement, nor for sin primarily, but for some eminent respects, from p. 80.
to 92.

Chap. 13. In which is answered, Lieut. Col. John Lilburn his six particulars,
as to the Doctrine of the Quakers.

CHAP. I. In this Treatise is handled two general Points:
FIrst, That personal Election is no ground of the Saints perseverance in the
grace of God by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, In what sense the sacred Scriptures speaks the perseverance of the
Saints in that grace.

But I will first briefly touch upon two things, by way of Introduction.

And first, By Saints is meant no more but this, Romans 5.17, 18. Ephesians. 1.1.
John 1.12.
Man that has inherent righteousness, or holiness, and so does by a right
belief receive abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, which came
upon all men to justification of life. These are Saints in deed and truth, and
none other are the Sons of God; for as many as received him, to them he gave
prerogative to be the Sons of God; Even to as many as believe in his name.

Secondly, The personal Elections which are erroneous, are three; first, the
Superlapsarian way.

Secondly, The Lapsarian way.

Thirdly, An Election of some men's persons upon Gods foresight of their
perseverance in faith and works.

The first is no more but this, That God elected some men's persons infallibly
to eternal life, without respect to Adam's sin or their own, only upon his
Sovereign right over his Creature; And in Reprobation, Not man's undeserving is
the cause of Reprobation, but the will of God to reprobate.

Secondly, the Lapsarian way is no more but this, That God considered all
mankind as fallen in Adam, and elected some men's persons out of that Fall
infallibly unto eternal life, and left all the rest of mankind in that misery
unrecoverably unto Eternity, without any means as effectual unto them.

Thirdly, Personal Election in this sense is no more but as is said, That God
upon his foresight of their perseverance in faith and works unto the end,
infallibly elected them unto Eternal life. So much for Introduction.

And as concerning the first general point, to carry it on clearly, I will
follow this Method, to open the scope of those Texts which is supposed do
primarily prove the said Elections; and the first text that I will pitch upon
has relation to Genesis 25.22, Genesis 25.22, 23. Mal. 1.1, 2, 3. Ezekiel. 16.3. Romans
9.9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.
23. and Mal. 1.1, 1, 2, 3. And the Text that is grounded upon these two Texts
is Romans 9.13. The words are these; For the children being not yet born, neither
having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election
might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls. It was said unto her (that
is, Rebecca) The elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated; Therefore when Rebecca had conceived (as God had
promised) the children struggling together in her womb, thereupon she said, If
it it be so, Why am I thus? wherefore she went to enquire of Jehovah; whereupon
concerning Esau and Jacob God declares his purpose, That he considered those
two children in her womb, not as two persons individually, but as two roots
universally, in National respects; For says God unto Rebecca, Two Nations are
in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and
the one people shall be stronger than the other people, the elder shall serve
the younger.

Now the ground why God elected one Nation in the younger child Jacob, and
rejected the other in the loins of the elder child Esau, was to figure, that
the children of the flesh, as such, should not be counted as children unto God,
but the children of the Promise, as leading to faith in Christ, and born again,
not of the will of the Flesh, but of the Spirit, shall be counted the Children
of God, as faithful Abraham.

A second ground why God elected that Nation in Jacob's loins, was, to be his
only visible Church in all the world, to uphold his Name till Shilo came in
the flesh, namely Christ.

A third ground why God did so at that time, was this, Because when he declared
this purpose to Rebecca, his name in Christ to destroy the works of the Devil,
Genesis 11.8. and 10.32. and 12.1, 2, 3, 4. Josh. 24.2 and 23.15 Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5,
6.
was as it were extinguished out of the world And the ground why it was so
extinct, was this, For at that time all Nations and all the Families of the
Earth were Apostates from the said posture by which they might receive eternal
life: I say all Families except one, and that was the family of Sem, and that
also began to Apostate to Idols, as appears in Terah Abraham's Father,
therefore God commanded him to depart from his Fathers house, and then promised
him (having no child) this Nation to issue from his loins and Isaac's and
Jacob's, and all comprehended in these words, So shall thy Seed be.

Again, God did not only then at that time elect the Jews unborn to be the
visible Church of Christ, but also at the same time predestined the Gentiles
into the same posture, Gal. 3.8.
by which also they might receive eternal life by promise to Abraham; whence
says the Apostle, And what that postture is, is at larg declared in my second
Treatise.
The Scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through faith,
preached the Gospel before unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations of
the Earth be blessed. So that the scope and drift of all these Texts is so far
from maintaining the aforesaid Elections, that it is against them all, for the
Text only speaks of a National not a Personal Election; and of a National
Rejection, not a Personal.

A second Text which is supposed to speak for Personal Elections, as a ground
of the Saints perseverance, are these words, As many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed: But as before, so now, to find the true meaning of this
Text, Acts. 13.98.
is to keep close to that which it aims at. Verse. 42. The Apostle having
preached Christ to the Jews in their Synagogue, thereupon some Gentiles then
present, besought the Apostles that these words might be preached to them the
next Sabbath; whereupon the next Sabbath day, Verse. 44. came almost the whole
City together to hear the word of God. And then some of the said Elect of God,
namely the Jews, seeing the multitude they were filled with envy, and spoke
against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and Blaspheming,
Verse. 45. whereupon the Apostle spoke to the blaspheming Jews, and said, It was
necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken to you; but seeing
you put it away from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, (that
is, of that posture wherein you might have received eternal life) Lo, we turn
to the Gentiles, Verse. 47. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have
set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation to
the ends of the Earth. Verse. 48. When the Gentiles heard this, that is, those
words of the prophecy concerning themselves to be admitted into the posture by
which they might receive eternal life, then they were glad, and glorified the
Word of the Lord; that is, in belief of the said prophecy, for they had been
1800 years excluded from the said posture, because the Oracles of God were
before confined only unto the Nation of the Jews, not at all to come amongst
the Gentiles until Christ came; yet did not all that multitude believe, for
some were in the case of final. Impenitency, through their precedent obstinacy;
as also were some of the Jews, and therefore God denied them the spirit of
faith to believe, verse. 41. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I
work a work in your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a
man declare it unto you. Therefore Verse. 51. the Apostles shook off the dust
of their feet to witness against those unbeleeving Jews that were his visible
members, and so his sheep; but being denied the gift of faith, therefore not
his sheep, John 10.26.
John 10. 26. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto
you. So as the meaning of these words, (As many as were ordained to eternal
life) is no more but this, That God predestined or ordained by promise to
Abraham that the Gentiles should be called into that posture by which they
might receive eternal life; From this ground it was that the Scriptures did
foresee, that God would justify the Heathen through faith, and upon this
ground the Apostle does apply to believing Gentiles, That Gods calling of them
is according to his purpose, to be made like unto Christ, and the first born
among many Brethren, Romans 8.28, 29, 30.
and to be justified and glorified, was now fulfilled; So that the scope of
these Texts makes nothing for Personal Elections, but sets forth the rejoicing
of the Gentiles, in the demonstration of Gods ordaining them to the said
posture by promise to Abraham, and conveyed to them under this prophecy.

CHAP. II. In which the 17th. Chapter of JOHN is opened.
THis Chapter is supposed to prove these Personal Elections as the ground of
the Saints perseverance: Some of the words are these, which our Lord spoke to
his Father of himself; Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him, etc.

These words naturally divide themselves into four branches:

First, The power given him by his Father.

Secondly, The extent of that power, over all flesh.

Thirdly, The End wherefore, That he should give Eternal life.

Fourthly, The Restraint or Bounds to which this Eternal life is limited, Not
to all, but to some.

To the first: Deuteronomy. 6.4.
This power was not given to him by his Father, as he is the one Jehovah, for
so it was his own, and therefore could not be given him; What is meant by that
seventh means is at large declared in my second Treatise. Matt. 28.18.
Nor may it be said to be given him as he is the second Elohim in the one
Jehovah, simply considered, for so he is not Christ: But most properly it was
given him of his Father, the first Elohim in the one Jehovah, as he was
personally God-man, the seed of the Woman, the second Adam and seventh means to
carry on his Fathers final end; for which very end his Father gave him all
power both in heaven and in earth.

Secondly, the Extent of that power is over all flesh, which reaches all
humane Nature, none excepted; for by this power all mankind shall be either
saved or damned, according to the tenor of the Gospel, as is at large proved in
my second Treatise, Chap. 12. Not by any power from the Covenant of the first
Adam, nor by that supposed Law of Works delivered by God to Moses; But all
flesh, ever since the Fall, stands under the universal grace of God in Jesus
Christ before faith; or else in the special grace of God through Jesus Christ
after faith, as is proved at large in my two former Treatises.

Thirdly, the End wherefore this power was given him is, That he should be the
only dispenser of his Fathers gift of Eternal life; wherefore he only reaches
this gift of Eternal life in the sacred Oracles of the Old and New Testament,
by the hand of his Spirit in the Ministry, by the Apostles and others; for so
only this Eternal life comes expressly to be known to man, that by belief he
may receive the gift thereof, as in his very next words to his Father is
employed, Verse. 3. This is life Eternal, that they may know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; For man is only capable of his
deepest misery, or his highest felicity, by his knowable powers; that is, as he
is a reasonable creature.

Fourthly, the restraint or limitation to which this eternal life is bound,
that is, not unto all, but unto some, to as many as thou have given him, and no
more, for that is employed; Now there are several sorts of men, which the
Father has given to Christ, and in several respects in order to his final end,
but they may be all reduced to three heads:

First, his Father gave him twelve men of all flesh, and no more, primarily to
be his dispensers under himself of this gift of eternal life.

Secondly, the Father gave him all right believers to be the mystical members
of his body, and no more of all flesh, except all dying in infancy or the like,
for all such are his mystical members, as is proved in my first Treatise, Page
36, 37.

Thirdly, some part of all flesh as have Apostatized so far from this posture,
as to become dead in sins and trespasses, are given to Christ that he may
give them eternal life, and some of them are not, nor ever shall; and those
that are given him, are given him some at one time, and some at another.

And first concerning the twelve, they were not created by him as he was
Christ, and therefore were given him of his Father, as is proved by his own
words, Verse. 8. I have given them the words which thou gave me. Verse. 11.
Holy Father, keep through thine own name those that thou have given me. Verse.
12. While I was with them in the World, I kept them in thy name, those that
thou gave me. Verse. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe in me, through their word: Therefore it is clear, That
these twelve Apostles were given him of his Father of all flesh, and no more,
To be primarily under him, the dispensers of his word to destroy the works of
the Devil, out of the minds of men.

But I will propound four Queries, for the further clearing of this 17th
Chapter of John, in which will fall the other two heads formerly mentioned.

First Quere, How can those men which rightly believe, be one, even as Christ
and his Father is one? I in them, they in me, That they may be made perfect in
one, verse. 23.

Answ. That which made God, and all humane nature two, (I mean not in Essence;
for so they were never one, nor could, not never shall be;) But that which made
God and man two, was man's error, or sin, And so in the fall, the Apostate
Angels and man were totally one in wills and operations; And on the contrary,
God and man were perfect in one, before the fall; because then, in relation to
Gods will, man's will was created perfect, because he was created perfect in
holiness and righteousness, and during that estate, were perfect in one; But
seeing they were disjoined, and made two by the fall, now Christ by his word
and spirit, does make the will of God and man perfect in one, in the perfection
of parts in this life; but the perfection of degrees is reserved for the life
to come; and then the Fathers will, Christ's will, and the will of the Saints
shall be perfect in one, that is, the Fathers final end to his own glory.

This was Christ's glory he had with the Father, before the World was, Verse. 5.
That God before the World was, did elect and ordain (as it were) that drop of
humane Seed, to be in time assumed, and so to be personally God-man, that he
might make God and man perfect in one; 1 Pet. 1.20. Genesis 3.15.
or else, That the Apostate Angels, and all ungodly men, should be made one in
misery to all eternity. And thus Gods final end herein, is fully perfected upon
all flesh, as to that Text, It shall bruise thy head.

The second Quere is verse. 16. What means our Lord by these words; They are
not of the World, even as I am not of the World?

Answ. As he was not of the World of men, which set down their content and
happiness in this Worlds good; but he used it, as if he used it not. So the
Apostles, and all right Belleevers, were of the same mind in some degree; and
therefore he said, They are not of the World, as I am not of the World.

Secondly, The Apostles and right Believers are not of the World, as Christ was
not of the World, because they do receive, and obey the world of Christ, which
the World does not; Christ perfectly, they imperfectly, but truly, Verse. 14. I
gave them thy word, and the World hated them, because they are not of the
World, as I am not of the World. And concerning the Apostles, he says, Verse.
8. I gave them thy words which thou gave me, and they have received them, and
have known assuredly, that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me.

Again, The Apostles were not of the World, as he was not of the World, because
he engaged himself in life and Doctrine, in opposition to the Apostate World,
both men and Angels. And so in some degree did the Apostles and all Believers,
and so they were not of the World, as he was not of the World; from this ground
it is, that he said to his Father, I pray not for the World, that is for them,
as to their course of life and conversation, but for them which thou have given
me out of the World, that is, Apostles and Believers, that thou would keep
them from the evil.

The third Quere; What means our Lord by these words; for their sakes,
sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified through thy truth?

Answ. He means, that the Apostles should be sanctified by his word of truth,
because by it he did sanctify himself to his work, as it respected his Fathers
final end. Therefore cursed be for ever that Doctrine of the sneaking Quakers,
and our Familistical ranting Popelings, by whom the Apostate Angels endeavor to
adulterate the most pure Oracles of God, the old and new Testaments.

Secondly, Although he thus prays, that it might sanctify them in their work,
as it had done him, yet we must note this by the way, he was not unholy before;
for if we consider him as the second in the one Jehovah, so he was infinite in
holiness, or personally God-man; for so he was perfectly holy, because that
humane seed which was elect out of the fallen Mass, to be assumed in the
course of nature, in the womb of the Virgin was totally separated from the
least tincture of the nature of Devils, (sin I mean) because the Virgin was
over-shadowed by the Holy Ghost, therefore that holy thing was called the Son
of the most high, Luke 1.35
that is, above all created natures, in a superlative degree.

Quest. If you ask me, how could he be sanctified by the word of truth, who was
so sanctified in his divine and humane nature?

Heb. 5.8.
for as he did grow in stature and wisdom, so he learned obedience by the
things he suffered, that is, Luke 2.40, 52.
he did grow in degrees of heavenly wisdom, in the sacred Oracles of God, that
is the old Testament, and also in the words which himself received from his
Father, and gave them to his Apostles in the 8. v. of Jo: 17. which now to us
is the new Testament, and as he did grow from Childhood to a youth, or young
man, to a perfect man, he still kept close to his Fathers words, from whence he
was able to dispute with the Doctors at 12. years age, and to dispute with the
Devils, alleging, It is written, and custom makes another nature in good, Luke
4.4.8.
as well as in evil; for we see by his sufferings, he learned obedi-ence, that
is better and better.

Object. If it be objected,

I answer,

Again, he being not created, as was the first Adam, a perfect man at once; but
being born of Woman, came to it by degrees, as is formerly proved, yet in every
degree, he did (as himself says) always those things that pleased his Father,
Jo. 8.29.
therefore he sinned not. Again, Our Lord did not thus sanctify himself only
to accomplish his Fathers final end himself, but also for his Apostles sake;
for says he, for their sakes sanctify I my self, that is, to give them
example, how to go on ministerially, in that which himself has done
fundamentally; whence in the 18th verse, he says, As thou have sent me into
the World, even so I have sent them into the World; that is, to a World of
Heathens, and to a world of proud formal professors, the Jews, his Elect
Spouse; for he came to his own, and his own received him not. To this end he
gave his Commandment to the Apostles, to go forth to the World, Jo. 1.11.
saying, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, that is, Mat.
19.28
by my spirit; for that is employed.

Again, He sanctified himself for all believers, that he that sanctifies, and
they that are sanctified, may be one, not only in sufferings, but in holiness
insome degree in this life, and to be perfect in one in the next, Heb. 2.11
as is proved; for he did know, as satan's lies believed by our first Parents,
and we in them, was und is the universal ground of all unholiness and
ungodliness; so on the contrary, he did know that his Fathers truth believed
and obeyed, is the universal ground of all true holiness and godliness, and
therefore prayed, sanctified them with the truth, thy word is truth; that is,
the only and alone truth, so to do by the spirit of truth, which goes along
with that word, which the world that lives in weakness knows not.

Therefore O you friends of the Bridegroom, keep close to the pure truth of
the Oracles of God, for the grounds of your Doctrines, expositions and
applications, and be content with the simplicity thereof, and look not too much
upon this, or that man's expositions, as to put too much stresse upon any man's
wit or learning; for their mistakes are numerous. But above all, keep to the
four grounds manifested in the Oracles of God; for in themselves they are
infallible:

for in holiness and righteousness created he him.

Adam, and these two States were distinct, and each did stand alone, before
man's fall.



Adam.

The which four grounds in some measure are opened in the four first Chapters
of my first Treatise: upon which grounds that first Book, my second Book, and
this third Book are built, by him who makes use of the foolish things of the
World, 1 Cor. 1.27.
to condemn the wise; and when you see a Be work beyond his wit, then know
there is a greater efficient than it.

Again, The Father gave not only twelve men of all flesh to be Christ's
Apostles, nor only all right believers of all flesh, to be his mystical members
here; but if they continue to the end, to be triumphant in Heaven to eternity;
But also he gave him some part of all flesh, which by Apostacy are become dead
in sins and trespasses to that posture, in which once they might have received
life: yet some of these men are given to him at one time, and yet given him at
another; and some of them are denied him for ever; and these various respects
are the grounds of our Saviors words in these cond verse, That he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him.

Thus God denied the Gentiles to Christ, about 1800. years, being dead in sins
and in trespasses, excepting some few as is proved in the 7th Chapter of my
first Treatise, and denied them the residence of his Oracles, the said time for
their Apostasy at Babel, until Christ was come in the flesh.

Again, When Christ came in the flesh, Jo. 12.
God gave him many of those Gentiles, dead in sins, to hear the voice of the
Son of God, and live in that posture in which they might receive eternal life:
yet some are denied him to this day, and remain Heathens, and shall, till the
fullness of the Gentiles come in; in the interim, many perish, because denied to
Christ.

Again, When God called us Gentiles to come to receive life in the said
posture, or to be either, as is proved; for before there was no way but death
to most men, yet at that time he denied the Jews to Christ, for crucifying the
Lord of glory, and his blood is upon them; for to this day they remained dead
in sins and trespasses; for in Holland, where the Gospel is preached, it is no
Gospel to them, because God (as yet) denies them the spirit of faith, as he
has done these 1600. years, except it may be to some few.

Again, Thus were some of those denied the gift of Faith, while our Lord lived
amongst them, wherefore he said unto them, Ye are not my sheep; that is,
although my Sheep as from Abraham's flesh, Jo. 1.16.25, 26.
yet not my Sheep, as in Abraham's spirit of faith.

And although the whole body of that Church Elect, still stands cut off for
their unbeleef, yet there will come a time, when they shall be given to Christ.
The Apostle says, Romans 11. If the casting away of them be the reconciliation
of the World, Romans 11.8.12, 15, 16, 20, 25.
what shall the receiving be, but life from death?

Now I come to the fourth Quere. How is it, that Romans 5.18. The Text affirms,
as by the offense of one Judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to justification
of life? And yet this 17th of John restrains that gift of life but to some.

I answer, That justification was universal to all mankind, and to all alike,
and the extent of the imputation of that righteousness was to the whole
Creation, from whence it was put into a posture of travail from that bondage of
corruption, which it fell into by Adam, to be partakers of the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God, and it travelleth until now, as says the Text.

Again, I answer, That the gift of eternal life in the 17th of John, is
particular, and peculiar to him that receives that gift of righteousness by
Faith, in two respects, which that universal justification was not.

As first, He that receives this imputed gift of righteousness, God pardons
that man's sins, although numerous against the mercy of God in Jesus Christ,
which that universal justification did not; for it only pardoned the gift and
punishment of Adams one offense, once committed, to him and all his posterity,
but it pardoned no more.

Secondly, That man which by belief receives that imputed gift of
righteousness, is possessed of eternal life, in this World; for the Text says,
he that believes has eternal life, which that universal justification did not
give: it only gave right to eternal life, but no more.

And the truth is, the Apostle in the fifth of the Romans, points out this
particular justification, and that universal justification.

The particular justification in these words; for if by one man's offense death
reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life, by one, Jesus Christ: But mark the
Text; It refers this particular Justification only to Believers, that receive
that gift of righteousness, Verse. 17. and in the 18. Verse, the Apostle lays
down that universal Justification in these words: Therefore as by the offense
of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to Justification of life.

Obj. It will be objected, Father, I will that those which thou have given me
be with me, even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me, for thou love me before the foundations of the world, Verse. 24.
Therefore those that are given by the Father to Christ, cannot but be
infallibly brought to behold that his glory to Eternity; For it is impossible
but that Christ's prayer must be granted, because he always did that which was
pleasing in his Fathers sight.

Answ. True it is, prayer shall be granted, but in what sense he prayed; for it
cannot be in the sense alleged, because it is proved in this Chapter, that the
Father gave him 12. men of all flesh, and yet one of them which his Father gave
him, shall not behold that glory, because our Lord affirms, it had been good
for him, he had never been born; and in this Chapter, he says, one of them is
lost, and became the son of perdition.

Again, right believers of all flesh are given by the Father to Christ, to be
his mystical members and himself to be head to that body, from which ground he
made this prayer in behalf of them, that they might behold that his glory; but
we must mark the reason and ground of his prayer, why his Father should grant
it, In these words, Thou love me before the foundations of the world. And of
his members he says; Thou have loved them as thou have loved me. V. 23. Now it
is already proved in what sense our Lord himself was loved of his father before
the world was, namely to be the seventh means, or second Adam infailibly to
accomplish his Fathers final end; Therefore it necessarily follows, That all
his members are loved with the same love as they adhere to Christ in respect of
his Fathers final end to his glory and not otherwise; This is expressed by our
Lord himself, John 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me, for where I
am, there shall also my servant be; If any man serve me, him will my Father
love, otherwise not, for that is employed, because our Lord puts it upon if and
if, If any man serve me etc. For if our Lord himself be loved unto the said
respect of his Fathers glory, as to be completed in his final end by him;
Consequently this his prayer is according to that level and not otherwise, as
plainly appears in the comparing the 26th Verse. of the 12. of John, with this
24th Verse. in the 17th of John; But what Gods final end is, here, I pass it
over, because it is proved in the first and 12th Chapter, of my second Treatise.

So much for the opening of the 17th Chapter of John; which proves, that the
Saints perseverance has no dependence upon the supposed personal Elections,
which neither this Chapter nor any other does own.

CHAP. III. In which are opened several other Texts, to the purpose aforesaid.
BEhold the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 31.3.31, 22, 33
That I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house
of Judah, Not according to the Covenant I made with their Fathers, etc. But
this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After
those days, says the Lord; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, etc. By that word, in those days is meant, as is expressed
in the 17. Verse: There is hope in the latter end, says Jehovah, that thy
Children shall come to their own border, that is, their own Land, and return
into that posture, wherein they may receive eternal life, as is employed in
these words, I will write my Law in their hearts, further implying, that
formerly they were dead in sins and trespasses. To the same purpose he says, I
will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the
good of them and their Children after them. Jer. 32.39, 40.
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, and I will not turn away
from them, to do them good. In the next words, he shows wherein principally
their good consists, I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never
depart from me: only note this by the way, That this fearing of God for ever,
and a Covenant that shall last for ever, and that they shall never depart from
him, is in no sense spoken in reference to personal election, as the ground of
the Saints perseverance in the grace of God, by Jesus Christ; for all this
story points only at the Jews, Gods elect visible Church, and these words as
to them imply two things;

First, That God had formerly turned away from them, from doing of them good
many years, yet he continued them to be, and so to be distinguished in all
Ages, and Generations, as that they are known by the name of Jews, as Abraham's
offspring, to this day.

Secondly, These words further point out, That although they are now no visible
Church of Christ, yet after their conversion into the said posture, they shall
never totally depart from being Christ's visible Church, unto the Worlds end, as
they have been many hundred years, and are at this day; and that is meant, when
God says, I will make an ever lasting Covenant with thee, as to the same
effect in the 3. Verse, And in that he says, Romans 11.15.27. Heb. 8.8, 9, 10.
Heb. 10.16, 17.
I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever: And
to this point the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.15, 27. and to the same purpose, Heb.
8.8, 9, 10. and Heb. 10.16, 17. So that it is clear, these Texts speak nothing
to the maintenance of personal Election, as I said before. Only I marvail,
that so many godly learned men, should be so bold to infer from the Apostles
words, Romans 9.13.
Esau have I hated: That Esau was personally reprobated to eternity; for the
Apostle does only repeat a Record, as it is written by Malachy, and Malachy
follows God, declaring his purpose to Rebecca, concerning those Children, That
they were the Roots of two Nations, and he purposed the one Nation should be
his visible Church, and the other (being the elder Brother) should not, that no
flesh as flesh should glory in his sight; and in this sense he says, Esau have
I hated, as is formerly proved in this, and both my other Treatises.

Again, For further clearing of the truth, against those threefold erroneous
Elections, I will prove the original use of the word Elect, and in what sense
that word is applied in the old and new Testament; For instance, many hundreds
of years after Esau and Jacob were dead, came the burden of the word of
Jehovah by Malachy, I have loved you, says Jehovah; yet ye say, wherein have
thou loved us? was not Esau Jacobs Brother, says Jehovah? yet I loved Jacob,
and hated Esau, and laid his Mountains, and his Heritage waste; And to Jacobs
Nation, Verse. 5. he says, your eyes shall see, and you shall say, Jehovah will
be magnified from the border of Israel. And to Isreal's Nation Jsaiah applies
the word Elect, which, as to them, Isa. 44.1, 2.
was the original use of this word: Yet hear now, O Jacob my Servant, and
Israel whom I have Elect; Thus says Jehovah, that made thee, and formed thee
from the womb, he will help thee; fear not, O Jacob my Servant, and thou
righteous whom I have Elect. But thou Israel art my Servant, Isa. 41.8, 9.
Jacob, whom I have Elect, the seed of Abraham my friend. And in the 9th Verse,
Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the Earth, and called thee from the
chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my Servant, I have elected
thee, and not cast thee away. From this ground our Savior (speaking of the
destruction of this visible Church Elect after his death, he concludes those
days of vengeance shall be shortened: except those days should be shortened,
there should be no flesh saved. Mat, 24.2. and from 15. to 22.
But for the Elects sake, those days shall be shortened; implying no flesh,
otherwise of Abraham his friend, whould be reserved for a future call, to the
said posture in which they might receive the gift of eternal life. Dan. 11.15.
1 King. 3.8.
So the Prophet says, thy Servant is in the midst of thine Elect people, whom
thou have elected: likewise, O seed of Jacob his Servant, ye Children of Jacob
his Elect ones: 1 Chronicles. 16.13.
so that in the old Testament, we see the original of this word Elect, and the
application of it, has not the least sense to any personal Elections; but to a
visible Church, or to its individual members under the same capacity.

Secondly, It is applied to the same sense, and none other in the new
Testament. To the visible Church of Colos. the Apostle says, Put on therefore
as the Elect of God, Col. 3.12. 1 These. 1.4.7.
bowels of mercy, etc. likewise to the visible Church he says, knowing
Brethren beloved, your election of God, for our Gospel came not unto you in
word only, but also in power. Verse. 7. So that you were an example to all that
believe in Macedonia and Accaia, that is, that believe according to the
judgment of charity; for of such only the visible Churches under the Gospel
were constituted, being admitted by Baptism. So Peter applies the word Elect,
to the visible members of Christ, scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Asia, 1
Pet. 1.1, 2.
and Bithinia, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the spirit, unto obedience, etc.

So Paul styles the Gospel, whose most proper residence is in the visible
Churches of Christ, and their believing there in the faith of Gods Elect, Paul,
Tit. 1.1.
a Servant of God, and a Servant of Jesus Christ, according to the Faith of
Gods Elect, and acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness: likewise
says Paul, I endure all things for the Elects sake, 2 Timothy 2.2.10.
that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal
glory.

Sometimes this word Elect is applied to particular members of the visible
Church, 2 John 1.13.
the elder unto the Elect Lady and her Children, 1 John 1.13.
whom I love in the truth, the Children of thine Elect Sister great thee, Amen.

Sometimes this word Elect is applied to the universal visible Church of
Christ; but most particularly, to all right believers therein; And shall not
God avenge his own Elect, Luke 18.7.
which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you,
he will avenge them speedily; and so he did avenge diverse times the visible
Church of the Jews upon their Adversaries, as he now does on the behalf of the
Church of the Gentiles, against their enemies. And sometimes this word Elect is
applied more close, as to the invisible members of Christ, which are those that
purely worship him in spirit and in truth; And the Psalmist says, Thou
choosest to thy self the godly man; Psalm. 4.
for these are such as are known to God only, and not to men infallibly: Hence
says the Apostle, the foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows those
that are his infallibly (for that's employed.) 2 Timothy 2.19.
To this point our Savior speaks, Then shall he send his Angels, and gather
together his Elect from the four winds, Mark 13.27. Mat. 24.31.
from the utmost part of Heaven; And he shall send his Angels with the great
sound of Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds,
from one end of Heaven to the other. So that the scope of the new Testament
concerning Election, runs according to the scope of the old; but neither speaks
for the foresaid threefold erroneous elections.

CHAP. IV. Answering some familistical Objections against the premises.
FOr they deny all Elections and rejections of mankind, as well those that are
true, as those that are false, both from several Texts which I have answered in
my second Treatise, Eccles. 12.7.
and from Eccles. 12.7. the words are, Then shall the dust return to the Earth,
as it was, and the spirit shall return to God that gave it; that is (say they)
the body being returned to his dust, the spirit returns to God, to be
essentially his nature; and therefore there shall be no individuals of men, to
be saved or damned to eternity; for all shall be God.

This Objection takes for granted, that to be a truth, Psalm. 147.5. The Text
affirms, Psalm. 147.5.
God is infinite, and the Heathen man could say, He is all Center, and no
circumference, and an infinite admits of no diminition, nor addition; for then
it cease to be infinite.

Secondly, I answer; according to the being of a thing such is its operation:
therefore if the spirit which is in man be infinite, let it produce suitable
operations, and we will believe it, as did our Lord that was personally God-man:
yet the divine nature did not animate a humane body, as does the soul and
spirit of man (as these men dream;) and he did produce suitable actions, for he
laid down his humane body in death, and took it up again: he walked on the
waters with the soals of his feet, and in an instant turned water into wine,
and gave the man sight that was born blind. And if they be God, why do they not
cause the Sun to go back so many degrees as pleases them, and command the Seas
and the winds to obey them; for Christ by his heavenly Doctrine, confirmed by
numerous miracles, was mightily declared to be the Son of God: Romans 1.4. 2 Timothy
3.12, 13.
but you are declared to be as you are (as says the Apostle) that is, evil
men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

Again I answer, It Is true, The spirit returns to God who gave it; but it is
one thing, that it returns to God, another thing, that it returns to be God,
which is impossible, as is proved.

But you will demand of me, in what sense, according to the Text, does the
spirit of man return to God that gave it?

I answer negatively and affirmatively:

Negatively thus; The Spirit is no nearer in its nature, to the nature of God,
when it is out of the body, than when it is in the body; for both body and
spirit do live, and move, and have their being in his essence, for the Text
says, Act. 17.28.
In him we live, and move, and have our being.

Again I answer, As that being, which all created natures have, is bottomed in
the being and essence of God, on which it depends, so as it cannot move the
breadth of a hair, further or nearer, by its own local motion, nor by death,
neither by annihilating it self: for even wicked men are so bottomed upon his
being, that they may be, to be tormented to eternity, although they seek death,
or annihilation, so says the Text. They shall seek death, Rev. 6.
and shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall fly from
them: and the ground why he will thus continue men and Angels to eternity, is
for his final ends sake, for which he made all, that they might be Vessels of
honor, or dishonor, according to their works.

Secondly, Affirmatively I answer, the spirit of man returns nearer to God, in
its own apprehension of him when it is out, then when it was in the body, both
of good and bad men: for while it is in the body, there are several mediums
that do interpose its apprehensions of God: but when it has left the body,
these mediums do vanish, and therefore it has then a more immediate
apprehension of God.

But you will ask me, what are these mediums?

I answer, they are primarily three:

The first is, its body of sense, in which it is involved, and the spirit while
it lives in it, receives all objects by its five senses, as does a Bruit.

The second medium, is the frame of this inferior World, it being also but an
object of sense; but being out of the body, this also vanishes, as to the
reasonable soul, for then the spirit of man sees by its own light, a light
suitable to its own nature: but what it is we know not; for although the light
and darkness of this World is light and darkness to our sense, yet to God they
are neither; for darkness and light are both alike to thee, says the Psalmist:
Psalm. 139.11, 12.
so is it to the spirits of all good and bad men and Angels, being the next
created nature to the uncreate nature of God.

How,

I answer, by his own light. If you ask me what that light is, I answer, it is
his Essence. And if you ask me what his Essence is, I answer, none, but himself
can tell; no created nature, either of men or Angels.

The Text says, God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, who only has
immortality, and dwells in that light which no man can approach unto, 1 John
1.5. 1 Timothy 6.16.
whom no man has seen, nor can see, To whom be honor and power everlastingly,
Amen.

But it will be objected, the Text says, 1 John 3.2.
we shall know him as he is: As it is in the Text, it is true, that is, when
Christ who is God-man shall appear, we shall see him as he is, and every man
that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure; and thus we
shall know him as he is, that is, as he shall be pleased to manifest himself
according to our measure or capacity; the which manifestations are three, the
Scripture speaks of no more.



It is this inferior World, That his tender mercies are over all his works.
Psalm. 147.6.
From this ground arises his kindness to the just and unjust, Mat. 5.45. Acts
17.27.
that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find
him, though he be not far from every one of us, and this is the first
manifestation.



1 Cor. 13.12.
and thorough a glass in comparison of the third.

What Is the third manifestation?

It is the Heaven of Heavens, Jehovah, wherein our comprehensions would be
confounded or swallowed up; for it is only proper to his infinite Essence, to
be without circumference. Hence we may observe, the silly and shallow
seducements of these worms, I mean, the Familistical crew, who dreamingly think
that they are he.

But you will ask this Question,

That in regard the Text affirms, That in him, we live, move, and have our
being, it is unquestionably true in it self, he being infinite, and the word
him points out he, as not we; and the word we, points out we as not he; and it
is one thing that it is so, and another thing for men and Angels, piercingly to
know the manner how it is; for although the Angels know it much more than we
can, that are in an Elementary body of sense and sin, yet there is such a
disproportion betwixt a finite and an infinite, that they can never reach the
manner how. That secret efflux by which the Divine nature continues the being
of Creatures in himself, that they can never reach, it being so immediate, and
they know not how themselves live and move; for they cannot know beyond their
created measure received from their maker. But as for us, we must believe it,
because the Text says it, and there rest: and as for the manner how, it is
only known to God himself; for the truth is, we know little or nothing; we know
not the manner how a pile of grass grows, or how one hair of our head, nor
the manner how our stature is increased; for it is one thing to know we are
increased, and another thing to know the manner how: in which we can do no more
than the Mother knows how the bones of her Infant grows in her womb, or
whether it be male or female, till it be born. And the Text says, Lo, these
are parts of his ways, but how little a part is heard of him; Job 26.14.
Eccles. 11.5.
as thou know not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow
in the womb of her which is with Child: even so thou know not the works of
God which makes all.

Again, The spirit of man returns to God who gave it, that is, for an enjoyment
of his presence and love, which is better than life: thus the Apostate Angels
went out from God, Psalm. 63.3.
for they left their own habitation and were puffed up, they did aspire to be
God himself, as did we in our first Parents, to be as Gods: and thus do the
Familistical Quakers, and fall into the condemnation of the Devil, but the
spirit of man may return to God that gave it. Jud. v. 6. 1 Timothy 3.6.
As the spirit of right believers do, and enjoy his love, which is better than
life: but this is not the returning to God meant in the Text.

In your second Treatise,

This conclusion thus drawn from the premises, Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures. And this error is the first ground upon which this Objection is
built: But our Lord stayed not there, but said, neither do ye know the power of
God, Mat. 22.29. Act. 23.8.
that is, not knowing or believing his infiniteness, and the Text affirms he is
infinite: therefore your ignorance of this is a second ground of your
objection: And you measure him by your reason, or your reasoning, which is as
if you would empty the Ocean into an Egg-she: therefore you cannto but err.
And for further explanation, how Gods potency and virtue which was essentially
in himself, and spirited out of himself by Creation, yet is not now himself, I
refer the Reader to my second Treatise, page 104, 105, 106.

But secondly I answer, that all Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, principally
men and Angels are but a remote shadow of his being, and not his being which is
the fountain of life; for they are all but mere dependents upon his Essence, as
Job affirms of the Earth. It hangs by nothing, that is, no created thing but
dependent upon him, as an accident to a substance: as for example, witheness
upon a wall depends on the wall, yet the wall was a wall before, and will be
when that whiteness shall be washed off: so God was before all things were
created in its dependence upon him.

And he will be the same, though he should please to wash away the whole
Creation by an annihilation; but for his final ends sake, he will never do
this, as is proved: And thou O man, who thus disputest to be he, art but a
remote shadow of him, and can thou imagine the shadow of thy body to be thee,
or to comprehend what thou art? much less art thou he, or ever wilt be, nor
able to comprehend him. But do thou dispute, and believe thine own disputings,
2 Chronicles. 20.20.
And I will believe the Lord and his Prophets, so shall I surely prosper but he
that will not so believe shall be damned. Mark 16.16.
And in that word he points at thee, if thou repent not; for the wanton
despising, and such disputing out thy precious time against Gods long patience,
which (as by a hand of mercy) would lead thee to return unto himself, to be
happy for ever; for at the end of our lives, when the dust returns to the Earth
as it was, the spirit shall return to God that gave it, and can do no other;
for then it will be stripped of all those mediums which did interpose its naked
approach to God in its apprehension, and shall see it self returned to the
alone disposing of God; and this is the meaning of the Text, and the spirit
shall return to God that gave it;that is, to be sent to its place of weal or
woe, Luke 12.^7.
according to his works, as is figuratively laid down between Dives and
Lazrus.So much for answer to the blasphemous abuse of this Text.

CHAP. V. In which is further amplified, the Errors of the Familists and four
Quere's answered, as to the point of Election.
ANd in the first place, take notice from what ground these men deny the sacred
Oracles of God, and prayer to him as our heavenly Father, and all Ordinances as
tending to man's salvation, that is, from the same ground that the Angels fell,
which is, that they abode not in the truth of God, and from the same ground
that we in our first Parents fell, believing not his word of truth. So this
sort of men forsake the truth and believe a lie, that is a fancy, which they
name a light within them, and the divine nature and Christ, they call their
light by the name of Christ. But what says our Lord to these men? Joh. 8.44.
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do; and
concludes, he is a liar, and the Father of lies.

But you will say, your own grounds imply,

Though it be true, that he is so near us,

That is, this World being but an object of sense, and the body of man being
but a sensitive thing, and the spirit of it self involed in a body of sin, and
of errors and mistakes,

Therefore although he be so near, we have great cause to pray unto him, to
manifest himself unto our spirits, as did he, that said, Lord I believe, help
my unbeleef.

Again I answer, The nature of sin in our mind, carries in it enmity to God,
and therefore our mind being conscious to our sin, in our apprehensions keeps
at a distance from him: therefore (as near as he is unto us) we had need to
pray unto him, to show himself to us; for it is one thing that he is so near,
and another thing to believe that he is so near; as for example, If a man be as
near to one that is blind, as possible may be, if he neither feel him nor hear
him, he is to him as if he were 1000. miles off; and this is our case, by
reason of these three mediums before specified: therefore we have need to pray
to God to draw near to us, not in his Essence, for nearer he cannot be, but in
the manifestation of his mercy and goodness he may.

Again, Our Lord taught us to pray to our Father, as in Heaven, because it is
the ultimate manifestation of his transcendent glory, that Men and Angels can
be capable of, and a place created purposely for that end, in which we shall
center in him to all eternity: therefore we begin our Lords Prayer with Our
Father which art in Heaven, and conclude it with Thine is the Kingdom, power
and glory.

Again, Because it is Jehovah that makes a barren Wilderness fruitful, and a
fruitful Land barren, therefore he (being so near us) we may the rather pray,
Give us this day our daily bread, that is, a competent maintenance for us and
ours, during this life, which is our day.

Again, Because the Apostate Angels do multiply and advance their Kingdom of
darkness, by men's believing lies, and lying vanities, so forsaking their own
mercies, and principally this Familistical Crew, seemingly Angels of light to
deceive: therefore in regard God is so near unto us, I say we may the rather
pray, Let thy Kingdom come, and will be done, by removing those numerous errors
and blasphemies, which darken his glorious Oracles, not in themselves, but as
to men.

Again, In regard the heart of man at the best, is as a Fountain of error, he
being so near unto us, we may the rather pray him to purify our hearts, that
we may by a simplified belief see where we are, even in himself.

Again, In regard Jehovah is so near unto us, from this ground it is, the
Apostle exhorts all that are truly godly, saying, Let your moderation be known
to all men. The Lord is at hand, be careful for nothing, but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto
God.

Therefore the Objection is frivolus, that we need not pray, because God is so
near us.

From this ground, that Jehovah is so near, did arise that singular moderation
in Moses, as to this sensitives Worlds glory; Heb. 11.24.27.
for he refused to be called the Son of the Kings Daughter, esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the Treasures of Egypt, and endured, as
seeing him which is invisible; and David when he was in his right mind, beheld
Jehovah, (which is invisible to sense) saying, Psalm. 23.4.
Though I walk through the vale of the shadow of death, yet I will fear none
evil, for thou art with me; And having done with the Familists till I meet with
them again, I return to the clearing of the point of universal Election, by
answering of four Quere's.

Was not Election out of the fallen Mass, Adam and his Wife?

Although the fall was of two individuals,

How can that be?

Very well; Esau, and elected Jacob in the womb, yet neither personally
rejected, nor elected, although they had a personal existence, as appears by
their struggling in the womb: He calls them two Nations, and two manner of
people to be separated from her bowels, so in this male and female God
considered all mankind radically in the Seed: from this ground the Text says,
In Adam all die; yet note this by the way, our first Parents (in this case)
were only the Root materially, but not formally, for the formal cause why all
mankind might transgress in that one offense, was Gods Covenant with Adam, for
life and death eternal, as is proved in my first Treatise, page 22. Therefore
the fall was not personal but universal, consequently so was the Election. In
the Seed of the Woman Christ the Lord as comprehending the whole Mass.

If the whole Mass were elected,

We must consider the Apostate Angels and man, I will put enmity between thee
and the Woman, Genesis 3.1 5
and between thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy head, etc. For he in no
wise took the nature of Angels: but here we see, he did take the Seed of the
Woman to mercy, so that here is a proper rejection, consequently a proper
Election.

From what did that Universal Election,

It freed all mankind from three things,





A second reason is this; for without this Seed of Devils (sin I mean) thus
issuing in humane nature, it is not capable of eternal life in Gods gift,
through Christ's imputed righteousness; for the whole needed not the Physician,
but the sick, and he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance:
therefore all those that fancy themselves to be without sin and righteous, as
do that pack of Familists, or Quakers, or to obtain eternal life by their own
merits, as joined with the righteousness of Christ, or by works of
super-erogation, as do the Romanists, are all quite out of any capacity to be
saved by him; but not out of a capacity to be damned by their own error, if
they repent not.

Adams one offense, never any man perished, as at large is proved in the fourth
Chapter of my first Treatise.



It was after this manner, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
And the Text affirms, that all spiritual blessings which believers have, it is
according as he has chosen us in Christ, before the foundations of the World.

Again, It was after this manner, the foundation of this Election out of the
fallen Mass, was laid in the seed of the woman, personally God-man; for the
Text says, he chose us in him, wherefore he did not assume the person of any
man into personal union, but the nature of every man, which contains the
universal nature of all men; for he assumed it in the womb of the Virgin, as
already is proved, and will yet more fully appear in due place.

Again, This Election was after this manner, God considered not man, without
all respect to works, good or evil, nor upon his foresight of man's faith and
works; but he considered man in the fallen Mass, unholy and under blame, and
not loved; for the Text says, He chose us in him, that we might be holy, and
without blame before him in love. Now this word chose us in its full drift, is
to be understood, in a twofold respect, that is, restrictively and universally:
restrictively thus, He chose us believers among men, which receive his gift of
righteousness into the possession of eternal life in this World, and to the
adoption of Sons; for (as the Text says) God elected to himself a godly man,
so it also says, Psalm. 4.3. Joh. 1.1 2.
He that believes has eternal life. And to as many as believed in his name,
he gave prerogative to be called the Sons of God, that is, by adoption; And
thus the word chose us restrictively considered, is only believers, as were
they to whom this Epistle was written.

Secondly, This word, He chose us, is to be understood universally of humane
nature, as such in opposition to the nature of fallen Angels, and so it
comprehends all in the fallen Mass, as unholy, and under blame, and not loved,
save in the seed of the woman. And thus in after times, when man did
universally apostate into perdition with the Apostate Angels, then, as a
continued act of this universal Election, and as a continued act of the
Apostate Angels rejection, he takes hold on mankind, to stay him from sinking,
but left the Angels still to sink; And hence it is, the Text says, That he in
no ways takes hold of the nature of Angels, but of the Seed of Abraham he
takes hold, that is, in electing a visible Church of humane nature, as such,
in the loins of Jacob in his Mothers womb. This point is further amplified in
my second Treatise, page 24, 25, 26, 27. Now the rule of truth leads me to two
conclusions from the premises.

First, To give a right judgment of the supposed Elections, Nota.
that is, being simply considered in themselves, they are neither more nor
less than three lies, because the truth of God owns none of the three, neither
ought we.

Secondly, To give a right judgment of the godly learned, touching this
controversy, that in them it is an error of love, as to Gods glory, and not
that they love to err, they being at the least friends of the Bridegroom.

But if you say unto me (as it has been said by some) that I may err,

1. True it is,

2. Secondly I answer, If I or any man else keep close to the simplicity of the
sacred Scriptures in their drift or scope (according to mine or his Talent,)
Then Gods spirit will keep me, or any man else to his truth, and so from error,
as he says unto the Church of Philadelphia, Because thou have kept the word of
my patience, Rev. 3.10
I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation. And as before, so I say
again, when you see a Be work beyond its wit, then know, there is a greater
efficient than it.

CHAP. VI. In which is begun the second general point, that is, in what sense
the Scripture speaks, the Saints perseverance in the grace of God by Jesus
Christ.
THis point falls asunder into two general parts, the one remote, and less
proper, serving only for introduction: the second is the very point it self.

The first is no more but this, how a man may attain to, or become a Saint? one
means remote is, the Universal Election before spoken of; for until then it was
as possible for the Devil to become a Saint, as any Son of Adam.

Another remote means, is the taking away of the guilt and punishment of Adams
one offense, from the whole Creation in general, and from man in particular, by
the universal imputation of the righteousness of Christ the second Adam; for
till then, the damned in Hell were as capable to be Saints as any Son of Adam.

A third remote means is, That in regard man totally lost all righteousness and
holiness in that fall, therefore if God had not written his Law in the mind of
man by the spirit of Christ, from whence man by nature does the things
contained in the Law, or Oracles of God, man had been utterly incapable ever to
become a Saint.

A fourth remote means is this, Romans 2.
To become a Saint, man must do as did those heathens, Romans 2. they having not
the Law or Oracles of God resident with them? knew not Christ, the Text
answers, they did by a patient continuance in well doing, seek glory, honor,
Immortality and eternal life, that is, implicitly and virtually, they came
toward Christ whom they knew not, for they could not know him expressly,
having not the Oracles of God.

Then what could those Heathens find, those that seek shall find.

But what did those Heathens find?

Two things which made good the promise of Christ unto them.

The first was Circumcision, Romans 2.26. By nature, that is, by the force of the
Law, written in their nature, and the voice of God in Christ, speaking kindly
to man in the whole frame of nature, from whence they became Saints, Verse. 29.
that is, they were holy; for says the Text, their Circumcision is that of the
heart in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

But does the Text affirm,

Yes, Romans 2.6, 7. from 10. to 15.
and also to the Gentile; for there is no respect of persons with God.

What can men that live within the sound of the Gospel,

They that are under the Gospel may do more than the other, things that they
seek, which are under the Gospel, are much more clearly manifested: therefore
God will much more circumcise their hearts, as he did Lydia's, opening her
understanding to what Paul preached; and as to Paul himself seeking
immortality, and eternal life in a patient well doing; for he says, he lived
unblameable, that is, in the truth of God, though through ignorance he
persecuted that truth under the notion of error; but says he, I did it
ignorantly, and therefore obtained mercy. Thus the young man in the Gospel, by
a patient continuance in well doing, did seek to Christ, saying, Good Master,
what shall I do to obtain eternal life; and he answered to what our Lord said,
All this have I done from my youth: but mark what entertainment our Lord gave
him in two particulars; first, he looked on him, that is, seriously, and loved
him, says the Text. Secondly, He put him upon this, that it was not in the
power of his own seeking, to find what he sought, but in his to give,
therefore he put him upon that which he was never able to do. That was, to sell
all he had, and follow him; so he led him to become a fool in himself, that he
might submit to Christ, to make him wise: from this ground it is, that God
commands man to plow up the fallow grounds of his heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16.30. Jer.
4.3, 4.
and to circumcise his heart, and then promises, that himself will circumcise
it; and thus man becomes a Saint.

How could Christ look upon him,

It is one thing for God to be so pleased with man before faith, of eternal
life, as to all right believers he does, because it lies in the nature of the
thing, that is, of right belief to possess it self of eternal life, in
receiveing Christ's righteousness, as the eye possesses it self of the light,
which a man, before faith can never do, and so these Texts are reconciled.

What if these men so seeking honor and glory, etc. die before faith? shall
these men's case be no better then those that sit down contented in this Worlds
good, and seek no further, nor no better then men openly profane?

The Universal Justification; Adams sin to all men, but also gives every man a
right to eternal life, and no man can loose that right, but by refusing to come
to Christ, which those that so seek, as is described, do not, therefore they
loose not their right.

It may be objected,

If they do die without possession of it by faith, Adams sin; but also all
mankind dying in infancy, notwithstanding original sin, shall be saved, and be
possessed of eternal life, as is proved in my first Treatise, p. 36, 37.

Again, To bind man's eternal life to faith, it is to make an Idol of our
faith; as for example, because my eye which is a dark body, which receives the
light, shall I therefore prefer this dark body before the light; And I will ask
any believer this question, if it were Abraham himself, what gives him right to
eternal life? Is it not pardon of sin, and that gift of eternal life, as
included in the imputation of Christ's righteousness, in which he is the light
of life to man? or is it the dark body of his own faith or belief?

CHAP. VII. In which is opened the manner how the Saints persevere in the Grace
of God, by Jesus Christ, according to the Scriptures.
FIrst, A word or two for introduction, That although there be a difference
between men that seek honor and glory, as is discribed, and betwixt those that
are dead in sins, and in trespasses, before the gift of faith: yet after, there
is no difference, but both are alike possessed of eternal life; for he that
rightly believes has eternal life, whatsoever he was before.

A second thing premised is this, what is meant by the grace of God in Jesus
Christ?

I answer, Two things, the first is Gods merciful acceptance of a believers
person, as a mystical member of the body of his Son, and to be his adopted Son
in him, and so to no men else.

Secondly, By grace is meant his endowing of them by the work of his spirit,
with inherent righteousness, every man according to his measure, as of Faith,
and love, and patience, etc. and these men are called new Creatures, and none
else.

If you ask me, Balaam believed that Oracle truly which the spirit of God
dropped from his lips, but not rightly; First, Because his mind creeped on the
earth, or earthly contentments, like the Serpent which God cursed, for they run
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward. Secondly, Because he leaped over
a sanctified life, Epist. Jude 11.
only desiring to die the death of the righteous: Thus did the proud and
covetous Priests, Pharisees and Scribes, the great professors of those times,
truly believe the Oracles of God, delivered them by Moses, to be the word of
God: but they did not believe rightly for if so, they would have embraced the
Lord of glory, and never imbrewed their hands in his blood: therefore I
distinguish between right believers, and true believers; so now I come to the
point;

The Saints perseverance. And in the first place it is grounded upon that which
may ever be distinguished, but never separated in this business, that is, the
power of Christ's spirit, and the Saints exercise of their graces already
received. And thus they are kept by the power of God; through faith unto
salvation, that is, in perseverance unto salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5.9. Receiving the
end of your Faith, even the salvation of your souls, Wherefore gird up the
loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the end, Verse. 13.7. The trial of
your Faith being much more precious than of Gold, which perishes. Verse. 1.21.
That your Faith and hope may be in God: from this ground it is, the Apostle
gives them this rule, Gird up the loins of your minds for the Grace which is
brought unto you, seeing you have purified your selves in obeying the truth
through the spirit unto unfaigned love of the truth, see that you love one
another with a pure heart fervently: in this work of the Saints perseverance,
the power of Christ's spirit, and the exercise of their graces formerly
received, may ever be distinguished, but never separated, as is formerly said.

Again Peter in his second Epistle, 2 Pet. 1.3.
comes more close to the point of perseverance, even to be established
immoveably according as his divine power has given unto us all things that
pertain to life and Godliness: thereupon he enforces the exhortation; Giving
all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, add to
your knowledge temperance, and to your temperance patience, and to your
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity; and then renders them this reason, why they should so do; for
if these things be in you, and abound, they make you, that you shall neither be
barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Joh. 13.17, 13.
wherefore the rather Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure. Verse. 11. whereupon he draws up a peremptory conclusion, If you
do these things ye shall never fall, that is, neither totally nor finally, from
the grace of God in Jesus Christ. Thus our Lord himself to his eleven Apostles,
excluding Judas, says, If ye know these things, happy are, ye if ye do them, I
speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen; for he chooses to himself a
godly man, his mystical member.

A second ground of the Saints perseverance is this, Psalm. 4.3.
the seed of Gods word, by the hand of his spirit sown in their hearts, being
born again, not of a corruptible seed, but of immortal by the word of God,
which lives and abides for ever, Verse. 23, 25. The word of the Lord endures
for ever. And this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you, and
the ground why the word is immortal to the mind of believers is this, that
although the word as printed or preached by the Tongue of man to man, be no
more but a humane expression, or dead letter, yet the thing therein contained,
is to man the unchangeable mind of Jehovah, and he will make it good upon
them, according to the tenor of the Gospel, for the works which they have done
in the body, whether they be good or evil to eternity. And thus the word of
God is a seed that perishes not, but is immortal in both respects; for it is
in this case (in some sort) as it is with seed in natures production of bodies,
which in one respect; is perishable; for all humane bodies return to the dust;
and in another respect, it is not perishable, for that seed has continued its
kind from the Creation, and so shall to the worlds end, because the seed
carries in it a spirit of life virtually. To this alludes Peter, calling Gods
word an immortal seed; and hence says our Savior, The words that I speak unto
you are spirit and life. Joh. 6.55, 63.
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. And as it is in
the natural seed, so it is in the spiritual seed in some sort: if it be not
sown, or do not fall in a right place, or on a proper subject, it loses its
natural force or life to produce its effect: so is it in this case, as to the
perseverance of the Saints, never totally, nor finally to fall away; for
although by their inherent righteousness (or circumcision of the heart) the
spirit of Christ has made their minds a fit subject to receive that seed,
Gal. 5. 2 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16.
and so to grow: yet if the Saints afterward do quench the spirits force, not
as to it self, but as to them in their perseverance; for in the mind of a
wicked man, the seed of Gods word has its force as to its self; but it has
not its force, as to that man's happiness. Hence it is, that the word is a sweet
favor unto God, in them that perish, in the demonstration of his merciful
justice to eternity, for all are damned by the tenor of the Gospel. And that
the seed of Gods word does thus take various effects, according to the minds
of men in which it falls, is affirmed by our Lord himself, in his exposition of
the parable of the seed; for when he has said, the seed is the word of God,
thereupon he explains its various effects in the minds of good and bad men,
and thereupon, to his Apostles he says, Luke 8. from 4. to 18.
Take heed therefore how you hear.

But if it be objected,

It is a general Rule ordinarily, Take heed how you hear; and this is a general
rule, except in cases extraordinary, such is that in the 10. Verse, Unto you it
is given to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom, etc. And thus our Lord
when he ascended, he gave gifts unto men, some to be Apostles, etc. Not for
their own sake, but for the sake of his Fathers final end to his glory, in
carrying on the aforesaid particular branch against the design of the Apostate
Angels, what this particular branch is, is amplified in my second Treatise; and
therefore it was given to the Apostles, but not to others, to understand the
mysteries of the Kingdom, clearly and infallibly; and it is clear, that this is
meant by the Apostles; for the first verse of the Chapter says, the twelve
were with him, and in the 9th Verse, they put a question, which drew this
answer from him in the 10. Verse, therefore this makes nothing against the
aforesaid ordinary rule.

Here we must remember two things, as to the perseverance of the Saints, to the
foresaid stability, that is, they stand in relation to a twofold contingency,
until they have arived to that stability, not to fall; the first is, the tenor
of the Gospel, the rule of mercy and justice, according to which, if they do
not exercise their graces, they may fall away totally; but if they do, they may
go on from strength to strength in Sion, or be established as is proved; And
this is the first contingency. And the ground why the Lord in this case has
put all mankind and the Saints thus upon contingency is, it suits with his
final end, for which he made both men and Angels, as formerly is proved.

The second Contingency is, the natural liberty of the will, purposely so
created by God, and that also with respect to his final end: so any man, let
him be what he will, or can be (Christ excepted) or any Saint, not yet attained
to that stability, may be a Vessel of honor, or dishonor to eternity.

But to clear this point concerning the will of man, we must always consider
it under three distinctions.

The first is its natural liberty, and that is, it chooses or refuses all
Objects, or things presented to it, as it likes, or dislikes them, and this
remains in good and bad men on Earth, and also in Heaven and in Hell, because
it is the very nature of the reasonable soul.

The second distinction is, the natural property of man's will, which is this,
to look to good, either as it appears good, or as it is indeed the very true
good. And as the eye does naturally follow light, so this natural property of
man's will does follow good, according as it apprehends it to be so. This also
is natural to the very essence of the soul, and neither of these can be lost,
but by annihilation of the reasonable soul, which God will never annihilate,
because it will make void his final end: therefore neither of these were lost
in Adams fall.

The third distinction is, as concerning the freedom of the will to
righteousness, that is, rightly to choose Gods word, and God himself as his
cheifest good, and rightly to refuse whatsoever is contrary to this.

Man in the fall lost all this totally, and whatsoever else did tend to
blessedness; for although God created his nature in righteousness and holiness,
yet holiness and righteousness was not his nature; for if it had been so, it
could not have been lost in the fall; for the being of the Creature depended
not upon the standing or falling of Adam, but upon the Essence of God only.
Now that which did depend upon his standing or falling, was every thing that
any way tended to his happiness, and nothing else: therefore the Lord Jesus
Christ, by all his works, does no way extend to the being, but to the
blessedneses of the Creatures; wherefore if man would have blessedness, he must
look only to Christ, and keep to his rules; for he is the Author of eternal
salvation, to all that obey him, otherwise not, for that is employed.

If it be objected,

It Is true, He that believes, and continues to the end shall be saved, that is
employed, if not, shall be damned. And notwithstanding the wills natural
liberty, or the wills being thus biased by original sin, yet it is far more
possible for all the Saints to be saved, then it is possible for them to be
damned; for the Gospel-tenor pronounces salvation to believers, and they are by
faith possessed of the chiefest good: therefore the wills natural liberty has
more reason to keep to the highest good, which it has possession of, because
it is suitable to the natural property of the will to follow good, as the eye
to follow light: therefore much more this true good of which it is possessed
before any other seeming good. And whereas the will is biased by original sin
to evil, the will in the Saints is much more biased according to the degrees
of their graces, to that which is good by Regeneration, because Regeneration in
the nature of it, contains (virtually at least) the spirit of love, of power,
and a sound mind: therefore it is more possible, that all the Saints shall be
saved, then any of them should fail of salvation, by the three Contingencies
aforesaid.

If it be objected,

If they exercise that degree of their spirit of love, Syon, to that stability
as never to fall, as is formerly proved.

If it be objected,

In this case there is far more danger,

First, Because, then God will pardon their sin; for to the Saints it is, that
the Text says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ, the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins, etc.

Secondly, If they return in time, in that small strength which remains, Christ
by his spirit will assist and comfort them in that return, if their strength be
but as a bruised Reed, or smoking Flax; for to such he says, Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

Thus he did to David and Peter, and so he will to any other; for he is the
same God to the Saints which suffer shipwreck by their own negligence, now, as
then.

But they must thus come and return, which is repentance; for God forces, or
compels the will of no man, for then man's will is no will, no more then he
does make a man to be man, without a reasonable soul, for so he is no man.

Again I answer, If the Saints do give diligence, and shake off negligence,
adding to their faith virtue, as is described, then God will make his word of
an immortal force, by the power of Christ's spirit, and keep them through faith
unto salvation, and establish them as Mount Sion, that shall never be moved:
therefore it is far more possible, that all the Saints may be saved, then to
fail of salvation.

Now the ground of the point is this, To the Saints that so exercise as a
reward of their works, and labor of love through diverse temptations, God will
habitually manifest himself virtually to the will, which will draw the will
habitually, and hold it to himself, virtually at least, and on this particular,
depends their stability: But what this manifestation is, shall be proved in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. In which is proved, what is that manifestation that so draws the
will, to keep to God, virtually at the least.
FIrst, It is written, Luke 24. Luke 24.13.
Our Lord appeared to the eleven Apostles, and the two men that went to Emmaus,
and opened to them the Oracles of God, which spoke of himself. Ver. 44. And the
Text says, Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures, that is, more clearly, the mystery of his sufferings and
Resurrection. Verses 45, 46, 47. This further clearing of the understanding in
the Saints, in order to their perseverance, and to the Apostles, in order to
their Ministry, contains in it two things; The one is right information to the
understanding of the word of God, as here we see Christ to these two men,
informs them of his sufferings and Resurrection. The other is, He illuminates
their minds by his spirit, to a more right understanding of his word; and so
this illumination adds more light to the understanding of the truth of God in
his holy Oracles, and so the will is rightly drawn to God: for as sin and error
shuts up the understanding and will of the Saints, hindering their
perseverance: so this information and illumination carries them on to the said
stability: for the understanding, from the force of this illumination and
information, brings God in Christ to the will, as its cheifest good: wherefore
the will by its natural liberty, cannot but freely choose it; nor by its
natural property cannot but follow it, as the eye follows light. Thus the
will is forcibly drawn according to its own natural liberty and property.

Secondly, Joh. 14.21.
Our Lord speaks to this point, as it is written, John 14.21. He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to
him, that is, virtually and habitually to keep his mind to Christ, Rev. 3.10
Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will also keep
thee in the hour of temptation, etc. likewise 1 These. 5.14. to Verse. 24. The
Apostle having laid down many particulars, concludes upon the Saints observance
of them, Faithful is he who calls you, who also will do it; and the Saints
having inwardly left in part, the force of this drawing of their minds to
Christ, they cry out, Draw us O Lord, and we will follow thee. And this is it
when God says, Hos. 11.4 Cant. 1.1.13.
I draw them with the cords of a man, and bowels of love.

If the will of the Saints cannot refuse God thus manifested,

It is hard to clear this Objection, Angels, much less do the Angels apprehend
the infinite God, but as he is pleased to stoop down to their capacities, in
manifestation of himself; but what that manifestation was, we know not, nor how
the Angels did forsake it, because it is proved, that this is locked up from
us; but whatsoever that manifestation was, it stood for a time contingent, that
they might, or they might not fall; for the Text says, He found not stability
in the Angels.

And the ground why it must thus stand upon a contingency for a time, is this,
That they could not be established in any condition of weal or woe, but
according as they did exercise what they had, either right or wrong, and the
ground of that is this, God made the Angels as well as men, with reference to
his final end, That they might be made Vessels of honor or dishonor to
eternity, according to their works.

But after what manner God proceeded so to make them Vessels of honor or
dishonor, is darkly pointed at, as by a Law suitable to them, and what that
Law was, and that they did transgress that Law, and for the grounds and reasons
why God has elected some Angels to stability in eternal felicity, and rejected
the rest irrevocably to eternal misery, I refer the Reader to the 13th Chapter
of my second Treatise.

From the premises thus proved, observe, why God by the Prophets and the
Apostles, and by our Lord himself, in commending or blaming men for their
actions, principally refers it to the will, as, ye will do this, and ye will
not do this. One reason thereof is this, Man from his own Counsel and voluntary
choice produces all his deliberate actions, therefore they properly proceed
from the liberty of his own will, and this is the first ground why God charges
the will with this or that, You will not do this, or you will not do that.

A second ground why God does approve, or disapprove of men's workings with such
special reference to the will, is not only that the will has the immediate
production of, and inforceth all actions: but also the striving of the spirit
of Christ to assist the wills of the Saints more eminently, then any man in all
the World, to good works: therefore the good, and also the evil actions of all
men, especially the Saints are by Christ imputed to the will; hereof the seven
Churches of Asia are an example.

Whereas you peremptorily affirm, Luke 6.22, 23.
Blessed are ye when men shall persecute you, and when they shall separate you
from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for
the Son of man's sake, rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, behold your reward
is great in Heaven; so that heavenly glory, and the degrees thereof are the
great reward of the Saints sufferings and righteous works.

First, Servants, and admonishes them so to judge of these works, that is, as
to attain the heavenly glory, for that's employed: yet in other respects, he puts
a worth upon their works, Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth
much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples, Joh. 15.8. Mat. 5.16
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, yet in Luke 17. after some discourse,
he gives a right judgment of their best works; for when he had told the
Saints, It is impossible but that offenses will come, but woe unto them by whom
they come. He exhorts them, saying, Take heed to your selves, Verse. 2. And if
thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him,
and so to seventy times seven. Verse. 3, 4. whereupon they said, Lord increase
our Faith, whereupon he opened to them the force of faith, Verse. 5, 6. and then
goes on to give them an example, as to the point of the worth of their works.
Verse. 7, 8, 9. The example is this, Which if you having a Servant ploughing, or
feeding Cattle, will say unto him, by and by, when he is come home from the
field, go and sit down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, make ready,
wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten and
drunken, and afterward thou shall eat and drink? does he thank that Servant,
because he did the things commanded him? I trow not. And to the Saints he says
likewise, ye when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, we are unprofitable Servants, etc. Therefore if the Saints works, either
in doing or suffering, Isa. 64.6. Isa. 6.5.
are unprofitable in any respect, it must be in attaining that great reward of
eternal life, which is only attained by our Lord himself, as formerly is
proved; And the Saints affirm of themselves, selves, That they are all as an
unclean thing, and all their righteousness as filthy rags: Isaiah says, I am a
man unclean, because I am a man of unclean lips. And the Psalmist says, I will
take heed unto my ways, that I sin not, Verse. 1. yet Verse. 5. concludes,
Verily, every man at his best estate, is altogether vanity: therefore this
objection at the best is of no force, because no weight of truth in it.

But secondly, I answer to that Text, which is the ground of the Objection,
because their sufferings is for the Son of man's sake, therefore they are to
leap for joy, in respect of their great reward in Heaven, and much to the same
effect in the 10. Verse. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness
sake.

It is one thing that our Lord comforts the Saints with presenting them with
the heavenly glory, Paul in the like case to comfort the Saints in a suffering
condition. Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, works for us a
far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, that is, works this good
effect in us, to settle our minds the more upon that glory to come, and the
less upon this worlds glory, as the next words imply; while we look not at
things which are seen, but at things which are not seen; for the things which
are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. But to
avoid mistakes in this point of the Saints works, it will be necessary, to lay
down this ground, that the Saints in this World have a twofold righteousness,
which are to be handled in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. In which is handled a twofold righteousness peculiar to the Saints,
and no men else.
THe first righteousness is this, namely, the imputed righteousness of Christ.

The second is their inherent righteousness.

As concerning the first,

I answer;

It is one thing, That all had a right to eternal life,

The second righteousness which is inherent, is their sanctification, or
Circumcision of the heart, and this righteousness is theirs, and theirs only.
The first righteousness is wrought by Christ only and alone, personally
considered, and is received by the Saints, as the Eye receives the light, and
so their own.

The second righteousness is their own, actually wrought in their own person,
and not by Christ's person, only his spirit does assist them rightly to operate
but the operation is their own, as proceeding from their own counsel, and
voluntary choice, and so far forth righteous, as agrees with the word of God,
and no further.

The Apostle commands the Saints to work out their own salvation, Ph^l. 1.12,
13.
therefore their own works attain to eternal life, which is their salvation.

Salvation in the object is one thing,

Salvation in the subject is, when a man by faith or belief, is possessed of
that gift of imputed righteousness, in which is contained pardon of sin, and
eternal life only: therefore all the works of the Saints, is but to be more
and more possessed of that gift of eternal life, by the increase of their
graces, and in Union and Communion with God, and to their Brethren under the
same capacity.

But if it be objected, James affirms, that Abraham and Rahab were justified by
works.

I answer, James enveighing against those that bragged of their faith without
works, as to the fruits of righteousness he concludes their faith to be dead,
and because the said twofold righteousness in the Saints are ever distinct, and
yet never separated: therefore of Abraham and Rahab, and all right believers,
James might safely conclude, they are justified by works, as Abraham in
offering up Isaac, and Rahab by receiving the spies; but to avoid mistakes in
this Doctrine of works, because the Scripture sometimes promiscuously
attributes justification to the Saints works, sometimes to faith, and sometimes
to Christ: therefore we must remember this rule as a ground in this point for
our direction, That these things are spoken according to the rule of
communication of properties, as for example, our Lord attributes that to the
eye, which is not proper to it, saying, The Eye is the light of the body, yet
the Eye has no light in it self, to enlighten the body; but he attributes that
to the eye, which is only proper to the light, because the eye receives the
light into the body: so in this sense it is said, that works saves faith saves,
and Christ saves, attributing that to one thing, which is proper to another, by
reason of that connection in this point of justification, by this rule of
communication of properties: so it is said, that God redeemed the Church with
his blood, yet God bleeds not; but that which is proper to the humane nature,
is attributed to the Divine, by reason of the personal union: so in this point,
by reason of the near connexive relation between Christ and his righteousness,
which is the object, and the wills and understandings of the Saints; together,
with the motions of the whole man to Christ; therefore it is thus promiscuously
attributed each to other; wherefore Cardinal Bellarmine from the force of
divine truth, while he endeavored to prove justification by the Saints own
works, yet concludes, That to cleave to Christ's righteousness, as to
justification, is the safest way, as is affirmed by Divines: And the truth is,
that right aspect of Christ's imputed righteousness, which he labored to make
void in those dark times: It may be, that implicit Aspect might stand him in
as much stead to pardon of his sin and salvation, as but a glimps of the Brazen
Serpent, to the salvation of man's body, which had been bitten with the fiery
Serpent, he rendering this ingenious acknowledgement of the divine truth.

Whereas you affirm, Faith arises as a particular branch of the new Creature,

I answer, It is one thing that Faith is included in the general nature of the
Saints inherent righteousness wrought by the word and spirit of Christ,

That man's belief is the general ground of all his deliberate actions, as to
the avoiding of any danger, and attaining any good hopeful; And this is
bottomed in the nature of the thing, and not in the excellency of faith, above
the nature of other graces; for justifying Faith, simply considered in it self,
as to justification of a sinner, is but a dark body, till it has received
Christ and his righteousness, which is the light of life eternal: As is the eye
a dark body, till it receive the light: And as by the Saints exercising all
their graces, all graces do grow: so faith grows up with the rest: Hence says
James, thou see that Faith was the helper of Abraham's works, and by works
Faith was brought to its end, that is, by offering up Isaac, which figuratively
was Christ to Abraham; for says our Lord, Abraham saw my day and rejoiced.
Thus Christ is the Author of eternal salvation, to all that obey him,
otherwise not; for that is employed, as to those professors in whom Faith dyed,
mentioned by James. Jam. 2.22.


If it be objected, what I affirm in my first Book, Eli, and Miriam, and Aaron
and Moses, whose carcases fell with others in the wilderness, by the wrath of
God, 1 Cor. 1.29, 30.
and in the Church of Corinth, for contempt of the Sacrament, wherefore Christ
smote some with sickness, and some with death.

Moses and all the Saints that dye under a relaps, Solomon and Eli, and those
Corinthians which Christ stroke with death; yet as for Moses, although he dyed
under a Cloud, yet he dyed not as a barren and fruitless Christian; but being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, although he disobeyed Christ eminently
in one particular of unbeleefe, for which Christ slew him, his Carcass falling
in the Wilderness with the rest, yet God rendered him this honor and comfort,
in his passage from this Vale of misery to eternal felicity; for before he
destroyed his body, he led him to the top of a Mountain, to let him see the
figure of his eternal felicity, Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6, 7.
the promised Land of Earthly Canaan, still proving that Christ is the Author
of eternal salvation, to them that obey him, as is formerly proved, those that
obey him most, according to their measure of grace, receive most.

To those Saints he most manifests himself to their secret mind, and they that
obey him least, according to their measure, he manifests himself least to their
secret minds; for only the pure in mind see God: therefore the more purity
of spirit, the more sight of God, and the less, the less; for the sanctified
mind of the Saints, is the only Temple of the Holy Ghost, and not the Saints
persons, as personally elected; for as personally elected, Christ's humane body
and soul was only the Temple of the holy Ghost, as formerly is proved, and
therefore it is said, the Godhead dwelt bodily in that person, or humane body,
but of none else; for the Text says, In him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9.
that is, the fullness of the one Jehovah, for that most properly is the
Godhead: therefore the second in the one Jehovah to carry on his Fathers final
end, was personally elected God-man, and his soul and body receives not the
spirit by measure, as do the Saints; but without measure, as says the Text.

CHAP. X. Briefly touching upon the point of Faith, but at large upon the point
of Love.
FOr having formerly spoken of the works of the Saints, whereof Faith is the
first mover, It were necessary that I should now treat what faith is, but in
regard I have handled it in my first Treatise, here I pass it over; for there
I have proved that in justifying faith there are three degrees, and show the
difference between that Faith and other Faiths, and then I have proved what
justifying Faith in its own nature is definitively, and defined what its
perfection is, and also proved how God does bring the Saints to that
perfection, and also that justifying Faiths perfection and dissolution, are
both in this life, Page 128. to the 140
from page 128. to the 140.

And because Faith works by love, it is requisite to treat upon the nature of
love, and how that love does arise in the minds of believers, and in a word
all love in general in the mind of man, arises from that suitable
agreeableness between the subject and the object; and so in this case of
justifying Faith; for no man can love that which is not suitable, nor agreeable
to his mind. From this ground Jacob could not love Leah so well as Rachel, but
because there was a suitable agreeableness between the subject and the object:
therefore Jonathans love to David was more than the love of women: so much to
show, how love arises in the mind of man; but the question will be,

What is love in its own general nature?

In a word,

What is the first property?

It is to endeavor as near an Union and Communion with the thing loved,
Jonathan and David kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David
exceeded, and that David said concerning Jonathan, I am distressed for thee my
Brother Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26. 1 Samuel 18.1.
very pleasant have thou been to me, thy love to me was wonderful.

Thus it is with love in the Saints, which works by Faith, according to their
measure to God in Christ, endeavoring as near an Union and Communion, as may
be, Cant. 1, 2.
Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. Verse. 13. He shall
lie all night betwixt my breasts: and thus John leaned on Jesus bosom; And thus
David, Joh. 13.23. Psalm. 86.11.
Unite my heart to fear thy name. So Paul defires to be dissolved to be with
Christ, meaning in Heaven, yet names not Heaven: implying, Heaven were no
Heaven to him, Phil. 1.23
if Christ were not there, whom his soul loved. And this love is the sum of the
first Table of the Law; so much for the first property of love.

What is the second property that naturally arises from true love?

It is no more but this, Jonathan to David, he saved his life with the hazard
of his own; and himself being Heir apparent to the Crown, 1 Samuel 18.4.
yet he endeavored to lay aside himself, and to prefer David to the Crown, and
stripped himself of the Robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, Romans
4.20. Jam. 2.21.
and his Garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle. Thus
Abraham's love added to Gods extrinsicall glory; for his Faith was the helper of
his love, to offer up Isaac his only Son; for he was strong in belief and
love giving glory to God.

Thus Moses, when he came to years, out of Faith and love to God, refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26
choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches
than the Treasures of Egypt; and in this he was faithful in his measure of
grace received: but he did not add to the perfection of Gods glory, in the
point of circumcision; for it came to pass by the way, in the Inn that
Jehovah met him, Exodus 4.24.
and sought to kill him: so David when he was in his right mind in faith and
love, according to his measure, did add to the perfection of Gods glory, 2 Samuel 17.45, 46, 47.
in the destruction of Goliath; but being not faithful in his measure of faith
and love, he greatly diminished the glory of God, by his Adultery with
Bathsheba, and the murder of Uriah. 2 Samuel 11.
Thus Mary, to whom much was forgiven, loved much, therefore added to the
perfection of Christ's praise, Luke 7.43.
by odoriferous and costly Ointments, anointing his feet, wiping them with the
hairs of her head. Thus the poor Widow honored God with her substance,
rendering him all her livelihood, Mar. 12.44.
although but two mites.

Again, True love to God in believers, does not only endeavor to add to the
perfection of his praise, according to the first Table of the Law, but also
according to the second; that is, they love the brethren, that is, each loves
other according to their measure received, and not only endeavoring Union and
communion as Saints, but also to add to the perfection and good of each other:
hence, says David, I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, Psalm. 119.63.
and such as keep thy Statutes. And Abraham, out of love to the righteous that
he supposed might be in the Cities of Sodom, humbly prayed of God, to spare
those Cities for their sakes. Thus Paul from love endeavored to preserve Peter
and others from the danger of his dissembling, Gal. 2.11, 12.
therefore openly reproved him to his face. And thus to add to the good of
those that they loved, the Brethren sent to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul, releef to the Saints which dwelt in Judea.

If all love arises from that suitable agreeableness which is between the
subject and the object, Observe.
then hence all you that believe your selves to be Saints, look how far your
secret mind is suitable to Gods word; for so far forth you are suitable to
him, and no further: and on the contrary, hence we may give a right judgment,
what those men's minds are suitable unto, that would extinguish the sacred
Scriptures, that is, to the mind of the Devil, whose children they are.

Secondly observe, Is love in it self a liking and uniting affection? Then you
that are Saints, look to your affections, lest with Lot you love the plains of
Sodom too much; but with Abraham, affect the mighty possessor of Heaven and
Earth much more, and so your minds will lie loose to the wealth and glory of
this World, as it did his; for he left Lot to choose the rich soil of Sodoms
plains, and took to himself what he refused. And so Moses affecting him that
was invisible, his mind lay loose to the Treasures and pleasures of Egypt, he
being faithful in his measure received: but on the contrary, if by adulterous
affections to this present World, you return not speedily, you may fall to
despise the Commandments of the Lord, yea God himself, as did David; for you
must remember, 2 Samuel 9.10, 12.
your sanctified mind is the Temple of God, and while you detain that, he is
near to you, by a liking and uniting affection: therefore increase the degrees
of your graces, as before is laid down, and beware of backsliding by affecting
other things so far, that you destroy the Temple of God; for it is to the
Saints he says by the Apostle, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the spirit of God dwells in you. If any man destroy the Temple of God,
him shall God destroy, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
for the Temple of God is holy, which ye are, Let no man deceive himself, etc.

Again observe, Is it the first property of love to endeavor union with the
thing loved as near as may be? then it will be your wisdom to endeavor as
close an union with God from degree to degree as may be; for there is no union
so close or near unto God in this world, but it may be nearer, for although the
perfection of parts may grow high as in Moses to God, and John to Christ, yet
it is but the perfection of parts, but not of the degrees, but beware you dream
not, that you have attained to the perfection of degrees, as do the Familists,
Quakers and Papists; for when you so think of your selves, that is your very
hour and power of darkness, to fall into temptation and all abominations.

The Apostle affirms, that by his righteous works and sufferings, he filled up
the measure of Christ's in his body, and that is the ground from whence the
Romanists say, that their righteousness and Christ's do attain eternal life.

I answer, Belial; yet nevertheless, I grant by the way of similitude, and by
virtue of that union between the head and the members, there is a conformity
betwixt Christ's righteousness, and the righteousness of the Saints; and
therefore Christ as the head, is sensible of the sufferings of the members,
therefore when Saul persecuted the Saints, Christ called to him, and said,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Again observe, Is it the second property of love, to add to the perfection of
the thing loved? then you that know your selves to be Saints, every one
according to your measure received, add to the perfection on of Gods praise,
by being filled with the fruits of your inherent righteousness, adding to your
faith virtue, as is described; for then, as says the Text, Ye shall not be
barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; for this in
you is it, which does add to the perfection of Gods glory, as says our Lord:
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit; and this will
demonstrate to your secret mind, that you love God; for says our Lord, He that
has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and then
Christ will manifest to your mind, that he loves you, and this will be your
honor; for God says, I will honor them that honor me: And thus he did
honor David, while he was upright in his measure received, by strengthening
him to the destruction of the Lion and the Bear, and Goliath, and so advanced
him to be King; so on the contrary, those Saints that dishonor him, he will
dishonor them, and cause them to be despised, as he did David, for the matter
of Batsheba and Uriah, by delivering up his Son Absalom to his wicked mind, to
attempt the thrusting of David out of the Kingdom, that he might be King in his
Fathers room: as also to commit filthiness with David's Concubine, in the sight
of the Sun and all Israel.

Again observe, you that are Saints, If you love him which did beget, you will
also love them that are begotten, not by the will of the flesh, but by Gods
word of truth; for here you see the property of true love is to add to the
perfection of the thing loved: then look what affection you bear to the godly,
because they are such, whether you compassionate their misery, be they mighty
or mean in the World, if they are lost in fools Paradise, and vain prosperity,
as was David, esteeming his Molehill as a Mountain: If you have opportunity and
ability, add to the perfection of their godliness, and from divine truth,
blast their pride and foolishness, or according to you own intimacy with God,
procure some merciful chastizement upon them, that they may not perish with the
world of ungodly; so in this case God did withdraw his wonted presence from
David's secret mind; and this was his trouble and the occasion of his return to
God; or to your Brethren that are mean in the world, to add to their
perfection according to their necessity, and your ability. Also by your
example, abounding in the fruits, of righteousness, and so lead them into paths
of true, godliness, then this will evidence to your secret mind, that you do
add to the perfection of the thing loved: consequently, that you do love God
and your Brethren, not only in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is treated of Patience, as to its perfect work.
IN brief, Patience in its perfect work is no more but this, a quiet sufferance
in bitter crosses unto the end, liking it, as issuing from the sacred hand of
God; Aaron went something near to the perfection of patience: for when Jehovah
slew his Sons, Levit. 10.2, 3.
Aaron held his peace. So Eli answered, It is Jehovah, let him do what seems
him good; so David, 1 Samuel 3.13, 18. Psalm. 9, 9.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth because thou did it.

But as for Job, in him patience had her perfect work; for he quietly suffered
his bitter and transcendent crosses to the end thereof, as issuing to him from
the hand of God, to the loss of his whole estate, and all his Children, by
fierce winds, by robbers, and fire from Heaven: for then he arose, and rent his
mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, and
said, Jo: 1. from the 3. to the 22.
Naked came I out of my Mother womb, and naked shall I return thither: Jehovah
has given, and Jehovah has taken away, and blessed be the name of Jehovah.
And the Text concludes, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly;
that is, patience had her perfect work, as formerly is described: wherefore the
Scriptures lays this down, as the only pattern of patience, Christ excepted,
that is, under the execution of Satan's first Commission upon him, and also in
the entrance of the second, he did detain his patience for a time; for when
Satan had stroke him with boiles, from the sole of his foot to his crown; he
sat down among the ashes, took him a pot-sheard to scrape himself withal,
whereupon said his wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity? Job
2. v. 3.7, 8, 9, 10.
Curse God and die. But he said, Thou speak as one of the foolish Women
speaks: What, shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? and the Text concludes, In all this Job sinned not with his lips,
that is, though his mind did begin to boil and rise, yet he did restrain it:
implying, here was patience, but not to her perfect work as before.

But when Job came off, suffering under the first Commission, says Jehovah to
Satan, Have thou considered by Servant Job, that there is none like him in the
Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil?
and still he holds fash his integrity, although thou movest me against him,
to destroy him without cause.

The first Commission in these words, Jehovah said unto Satan, Jo. 1.12.
Behold, all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself, put not forth
thine hand.

The second Commission in these words, and Jehovah said unto Satan, Job 2.6.
Hehold, he is in thine hand, but save his life.

If it be demanded, Job, in regard patience had her perfect work in the first?

As every Efficient is delighted the ultimate excellency of his work: 1 Pet.
1.6, 7.
in them that excel therein, and therefore so in Job.

Again, God delights in the trial of the Saints inherent righteousness, because
by their so exercising, he will enlarge their graces: hence it is, the Text
says, That where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, that is, more
liberty from degree to degree, and so he rewards their labor of love: and hence
it is, That the trial of the Saints Faith, is much more precious than gold,
that perishes, though it be tried with fire.

Again, God is delighted to put the Saints upon trial, to the utmost measure of
inherent righteousness, which they have received, to the rebound of his glory,
by a weak humane Creature over the proud and envious Apostate-Angels, as in
Jobs case in the first Commission; He says to Satan, Yet he continues in his
uprightness, although thou movest me, etc.

If God delights thus in the trial of the Saints righteousness, Job upon the
second Commission, he knowing that Job would fall foul therein?

It is true, God did know it, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.
namely, tempt Adam, and that Adam would yield and fall, I say, it appears, he
knew all this before the World was, because he verily ordained Christ to redeem
man out of that fall; And although he knew all this before, yet he put them
all, that is, Men and Angels upon the trial of what they had received, as being
delighted so to do; and therefore his knowing of a thing before, is no ground
of an hindereance to proceed.

Again I answer, This Objection arises from ignorance of what is revealed in
sacred Scripture; for as it says, He works all things after the counsel of
his own will, so the Scriptures evidence he wills some things infallibly, and
some things contingently, Ephesians. 1.11
with a possibility to infallibility, that which he purposed infallibly, he
refused to put upon the contingent faculty of the wills of men or Angels, but
only upon the immutable power of Christ personally God-man, that is, to carry
on his final end, as formerly is proved; and amongst those things which carries
a contingency with a possibility to infallibility is the increase of the Saints
graces, as to stability: therefore the Text puts that stability upon two thngs,
that is, the power of Christ's spirit, and the Saints own Faith: And although
Faith carries in it self an ebbing an flowing, and consequently a contingency:
yet if they exercise their graces under diverse trials, they shall then be kept
by the power of God, through Faith unto salvation, that is, infallibly to the
said stability, otherwise not. If they consult with flesh and blood, and quench
the spirit, as did Job in this second Commission; for as in the first
Commission he did voluntarily choose affliction, rather than iniquity, so in
the second he did choose iniquity rather than affliction. Job 36.2.
But this must be remembered, that God never lays more weight of afflictions
upon the Saints, in point of trial, than that present measure of inherent
righteousuess already received is able to bear, that is, and to work thorough
it to him, if it be improved, or exercised by them, as did Job, under the first
Commission; but when they leave the exercise of their Faith and grace, and
follow the wisdom of the flesh, then in stead of possessing their souls by
patience, they fall into distempers, and distractions, through impatience, as
did Job under the second Commission.

How does this great impatience or distemper appear in Job?

In answer, laid upon him; for because Chap. 3. He not only cursed the day of
his birth, but also the days which God had allotted him to live: And upon
this, Eliphas, Bildad, and Zophar his three friends dispute against him,
implicitly concluding him to be a wicked man, and this raised his impatience
against God himself, saying, He teareth me in wrath who hates me, he gnasheth
upon me with his teeth, mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me, God has
delivered me up to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the
wicked. I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder, he has also taken me by
my neck, and has shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark, and then he
cries out, Job 16.9, 10, 11, 12, 21.
O that one might plead for a man with God! and this his impatience stirred up
the spirit of Elihu against him; for he says, Behold I am according to thy
wish in Gods stead, doubtless thou have spoken in mine ears, and I have heard
the voice of thy words, I am clean without sin, I am innocent, and there is no
iniquity in me, he has found occasion against me, Job 33.6.9, 10, 11, 12.
and counts me for his enemy, he has put my feet in the stocks, and looks
narrowly to all my paths: and Elihu concludes, Behold in this thou have not
done right.

Again Chap. 34. Job had said, I am righteous, God has taken away my
judgment, should I lie in my right, the would of the Arrow is grievous without
my sin. Chap. 34.5, 6, 7. and 37. Verses, whereupon says Elihu, What man is
like Job, that drinks scornfulness like water, he adds rebellion to his
sin, and clappeth his hands among us, and multiplies words against God. And
here note this by the way, that although Job disputed against his other three
friends, yet to this young man his reply was only silence.

Again, This his impatient distemper, moved God to manifest himself against
him, Job 38.1.2, 3.
then Jehovah answered Job out of the Whirlwind, and said, Who is this that
darkeneth Counsels by words without knowledge? gird up thy loins like a man;
for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me: where wast thou when I laid the
Foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou have understanding, etc.

Again, Chap. 39. from the 1. to the 8. Verse, Moreover, Jehovah answered Job
and said, Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that
reproves him, let him answer it. Then Job answered Jehovah, and said, I am
vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once have I
spoken, but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further.

Then answered Jehovah unto Job the second time, out of the Whirlwind, and
said, Gird up thy loins now like a man, I will demand of thee, declare thou
unto me, Will thou disannul my judgment, will thou condemn me, that thou may
be righteous, etc? To which Job answered Jehovah, and said, I know that thou
can do every thing, and that no thought can be withheld from thee? who is he
that hides counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that, which I
understand not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not; hear I beseech
thee, and I will speak, I will demand of thee, answer thou unto me. I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes see thee, Job 44.
from the 1. to the 8. verse.
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, that is, Answer
thou me in much mercy, for now I see I have exceedingly erred, concerning thy
proceedings toward me; for I perceive, if I had been faithful to thee,
according to the measure of my graces, in this second Commissions execution
upon me, then thou would have assisted me in this, as thou did in the
first: therefore shame belongs to me, but praise and glory to thee.

In the first place here appears, Jobs most perfect patience, as to the first
Commission.

Secondly, Hence it also appears by his seven days silence to his three
friends, and theirs to him, they being in a prosperous condition, and he
reflecting upon his own misery, not in faith and love to God, as formerly, but
in consultation with the wisdom of flesh and blood, was the ground of his great
impatience.

Thirdly, Hence it also appears, that his impatience augmented his misery, for
above what God limited Satan, to lay upon him to the torment of his mind, from
his three friends, and from Elihu, who rightly charged him with his impatience,
and Jehovah charged him more deeply, and dreadfully twice out of a Whirlwind.

Fourthly, Hence it also appears, that in his mind he unfainedly returned to
God, from whom he went out by his impatience, and frowardness, by his unfeigned
acknowledgment of his error to God the first time; but yet his mind was not
come close enough, as it was before: but when God had appeared the second time
against him in the Whirlwind, then his mind returned to its former neerness
to God, and then God returned to his former neerness of his manifestation of
his love and favor to Job. First, he gave him this honor, as to make his
three friends that wronged him, to come into Gods favor by Jobs Mediation.
Secondly, Job 42.7.9, 10, 12.
He gave him twice as much of all prosperity, as he had before, and says the
Text, So Jehovah blessed the latter end of Job, more than his beginning.

Hence observe, all you that are Saints of God, in regard that patience in its
perfect work, is a quiet sufferance of bitter crosses, to the end thereof
liking it as proceeding from Gods will. Hence you may give a right judgment of
your selves; I say, your selves, for this concerns none but Saints, as capable
of this blessed qualification, and so far forth as you like your bitter
crosses, in a quiet sufferance thereof, of what nature soever they be, because
sent by God to you: so far forth you may comfortably conclude, you are truly
patient, as Job here in the loss of his whole Estate and Children, he never
mentioned the Sabeans, nor Caldeans, nor the fierce winds, nor fire from
Heaven, but God only was his object, Jehovah has given, and Jehovah has
taken, etc. And this is the only ground of the nature of right patience, as in
Job, so in any else.

Again observe, Whatsoever your afflictions be from men or Devils, the finger
of God, limits it, as well as sends it; for the extent of it, either in weight
or length, as in the first Commission against Job: it was to extend but to his
whole Estate, and all his Children, but not to Jobs person, whatsoever
instruments Satan did employ.

And in his second Commission restrained but to his flesh and his bone, but
Satan in all his power could not take away his life: therefore Oh you Saints of
God, whatsoever you are, in your deepest miseries of want of means, health, or
whatever, if you look for help and comfort, do as Job did, look only to God,
as he that has taken all that ye want from you, and he alone to restore all to
you, for here you see second causes, either for good or evil, they come and go
at Gods Commands.

Again, You that think your selves to be Saints, hence observe also, that here
you may give a right judgment, wherefore God lays bitter afflictions upon
you; for if it be for trial of your grces, then he sends it unto you, when you
flourish in the fruits of righteousness, as here upon Job, the uprightest man
in the earth; but if he sends you bitter crosses for your failings, and being
loose and careless, then it is for chastizement at the least, as here to Job:
for all his afflictions under Satan's second Commission above the touch of his
flesh and bones, God laid it upon him for chastizement, that is, as I said
before, which he suffered from his three friends, and Elihu, and from Gods
twice dreadful apparitions in the Whirlwind; and thus God chastized the Saints
at Corinth, for abuses of the Sacrament, some by sickness, and some he slew. So
Eli, so David in the matter of Uriah, so Miriam, Aaron and Moses, he slew them
in the Wilderness.

Again, Hence observe, That when you are laden with bitter crosses, then as
Elihu counseled Job, humbly seek unto God for releef, by your craving desires,
which indeed are your prayers, not your words. And so far forth as your craving
desires are primarily to bring Gods will to yours, you prayers are naught, as
those whom James reproved; but so far forth as your craving desires primarily
are to bring your will to Gods will, your prayers are good, and shall never
want an answer in due season; for, says John, if we ask any thing according to
his will, he hears us, that is, he will give a seasonable answer, and give
quietness of mind in the interim, to wait upon him.

of Jobs miscarriage under the second Commission, as his consultation with the
wisdom of flesh and blood, but certainly there was some other particular.

I answer,

Another particular was this, he had too high an esteem of his own uprightness,
wrought by the spirit of Christ in him, who also assisted him to perfect
patience under the first Commission: consequently, he did too much undervalue
the glorious imputed righteousness of Christ, in which was comprehended the
pardon of his sin, and eternal life, included in the sacrifices which he daily
offered: therefore O ye Saints of God that are eminent in the fruits of
righteousness, beware you stumble not at this Rock, but endeavor with Paul to
be found in Christ's righteousness, more and more, in a sole dependencie only
on it for pardon of sin and eternal life: And though ye endeavor to grow in the
fruits of inherent righteousness, and at the best as compared to his, esteem
yours but as filthy rags, or as dross and dung, as did Paul.

Formerly you affirm, etc. But now you affirm, none have true patience but
Saints.

According to the being or nature of a thing, such is its workings, the root of
their inherent righteousness, or sanctification which the former has not, but
only a previous disposedness toward it, from a remote principle, from whence
they do by nature the things contained in the Law of Christ: therefore the
objection is without ground.

CHAP. XII. In which is more fully opened, the works of the Saints, as under a
dolorous and troubled mind.
IF it be objected, The Apostle says, He that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him: therefore the Saints are accepted of God for
their own works of righteousness, as to salvation.

Although this point be formerly answered, Romans 5.17.
and in it abundance of grace, and so a particular ground of their acceptance
with God, and no men else.

Again, The Saints inherent work of righteousness in one particular branch,
does act and work in the receiving of Christ's righteousness, namely Faith, and
so Christ's righteousness is brought to be their own, as the eye, by its
operation brings that light to be its own, which was not its own. Hence says
our Lord, this is the work of God that ye believe: so that the one
righteousness, as in it self is an external object of blessedness: the other
righteousness in this particular branch is the blessed act of reception, and
from this union with the subject and object, according to the Text, He that
works righteousness is accepted of him; and that in two respects;

First, That man's person is accepted of God, a member of Christ's mystical body,
whereof he is the head.

Secondly, That man's person is accepted the Son of God by adoption, as says
the Text, To as many as received him he gave this prerogative, to be called the
Sons of God, even to as many as believed in his name.

You affirm formerly, Heman, that holy man, whose days of life from his youth
were in dolor, terror and horror? Says he to God, Thy terrors have cut me off,
etc. where was the increase of his graces, Psalm. 88.16.
either of Faith or love, or the quiet fruits of righteousness, the reward of
his righteous works?

Questionless, the sacred Scriptures, as I remember, does not speak of one man
the like, as to the whole life of any: therefore this is besides our point in
hand, as to Gods ordinary course of the Saints reward, as is proved: yet
nevertheless, in Scriptures we find one extraordinary proceeding of God, in
the affliction of a particular man for a time, as John 9. God denied from the
womb, one man the light of this World, being born blind, whereupon the
Disciples put the question to our Lord, Who did sin, this man or his Parents,
that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his
Parents, that is, not to so transcendent a height, as to draw on this
judgment; for that is employed, but he was so born with respect to Gods glory,
that Christ might prove himself to be he, that was sent of God to give sight,
and light to man, sitting in the shade of death and darkness; and accordingly,
Christ and he met together, and the man born blind, received sight, as never
man the like: So doubtless, as this man, so Heman was in some eminent respect
to the glory of God; for although God thus deeply afflicted him in sorrow and
troubles of mind, yet it is apparent, God secretly preserved him, and his
mind to himself, Verse. 1. He says, Oh Jehovah Elohim of my salvation, I have
cried day and night, etc. For God sometimes brings men to a low ebb of
distraction, some in respect of Estate, some in body, and some in mind; Psalm.
9.3. Ps. 116 3.
but we read not at so great a length as this man, as to a troubled mind. And
then God says to such men, Return again ye Sons of men; The Psalmist says,
The sorrows of death compassed me, the pangs of Hell got-hold*upon me, I found
trouble and sorrow, whereupon Verse. 4. He prayed to God to deliver his soul,
and Verse. 8. His soul was delivered. So without doubt, God granted Hemans
unfeigned prayers, either delivering his soul out of those great troubles of
mind, in the latter end of his days, or else over and above what he could
think or speak, secretly preserved him to his Heavenly Kingdom, whereof his
deep afflictions were but light, in comparison of that glory now revealed.

Now the main ground why God does so deeply sink some holy men in sorrows,
terrors, and troubles of conscience, as Heman is for the redundancy of his
glory, that maugre Satan, I mean the Apostate Angels, by all their power, and
hour of darkness upon this distressed Creature sitting in darkness, and can
see no light: yet God for his glory sake, secretly preserves the mind so to
himself, That when Satan thinks himself surest of his prey, God then will set
the soul at liberty by his word and spirit in this life, and then will, in
effect say to Satan as of Job, What say thou to my Servant Job? etc. or else
by taking him into eternal glory, and so Satan loses his prey for ever.

Does not Heman mean, Thy terrors has cut me off, as did Job, I choose
strangling, rather then to live: then if Heman or Job had strangled themselves,
had not God then lost his glory, in that Satan had got the prey?

I answer, God lost the glory of his grace, but the redundancy thereof to
eternity.

How is this possible to be true?

I answer, You must consider what capacity Heman and Job were in, namely, right
believers: therefore not in an estate of unbeleef, as was Achitophel and Judas,
that hanged themselves; for dying such they are cut off from all pardon of sin,
because the sin of unbeleef in such, cuts off all hope of pardon.

And whereas you say they died in the act of sin, it is true, yet it is as true
in this case, they are not themselves, by reason of their deep trouble and
distemper of mind: therefore if Job had hanged himself, yet it might be said
of him, as Paul in another case, That which I do I allow not, for what I would,
that I do not; but what I hate that do I. If I do that which I would not, I
consent to the Law that it is good. Now then it is no more, I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me. So might Job in this case say, It is not I, Romans 7.15.
but my most deep distemper that dwells in me, which strangled me.

Again, Whereas you sty, that in this case he had departed this world in the
act of sin, I answer, it is true, a sin in a transcendent degree; for if God
forbids to murder another man, much more a man's self: yet says our Lord, Mat.
12.31.
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy
against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven: therefore this being not the sin
against the holy Ghost, in Job a believer, would have been pardoned unto him;
for there is no man in Heaven, nor never shall, but Christ himself, but came
thither by a pardon of his sin.

Again I answer, It is proved that all men, who by a patient well-doing, seek
for honor and glory, immortality and eternal life, having not as yet the gift
of faith, and dying without it, they ascend to the heavenly glory, through the
universal imputation of Christ's righteousness, notwithstanding the universal
imputation of Adams one sin one committed, nor notwithstanding their own sin
against Christ; for they ascend to Heaven in the same right that all mankind
do, dying in infancy, which have the seed of original sin in them: therefore
much more a right believer, as in this case of Job is presupposed; for this
particular act of sin so committed, cannot totally extinguish the internal
habit of inherent righteousness, whereof justifying faith is one branch, which
cannot be extinguished, but by a custom in sin, which in the mind of man
produces another nature: therefore this internal habit did detain in it self a
virtual tendency to Christ, its most proper Object, although but as smoking
flax, or a bruised Reed: therefore in the very act of strangling, Faiths
virtual force will move to Christ its own objects, as Jonas in the deep Seas
from out the Whales belly, the motions of his mind moved to Christ the true
Temple then standing at Jerusalem; so holy men in this disconsolate condition,
in the depth of sorrows and distractions, their memory is renewed in belief to
receive comfort in the satisfactory righteousness of Jesus Christ: as for
example, in London at the Counter in the Poultry, Mr. Mercer being arrested, in
his passion slew the Sergeant, and was hanged in the place. The godly Ministers
and his friends, desired him when he was turned off the ladder, during the time
of his strangling, if he did find any divine consolation from God, to give
them some manifestation thereof, the which he did, by lifting up both his hands
three times to his head, notwithstanding his former deep sorrows, and his
present pain, his body so hanging, yet he had the use of his mind and memory,
to give them the foresaid sign. Doubtless, so it is in this case, concerning
godly men, that when Satan thinks himself surest of his prey, he is furthest
from attaining his desired end: And thus God turns the rebound of his glory to
himself, in the salvation of holy men, from so great a misery. Also I remember
Mr. Fox, in the Acts and Monuments of the Church, of a Martyr, says, His godly
friends desired him when he was in the flames, that if such a sharp dissolution
were sufferable with comfort, to give some sign to them; And notwithstanding
the sharpness of the flame, he being much burnt, and their expectation, as it
were past hope, yet then his comfort was internally so clear, that his mind
remembered the promise to his friends, and gave a sign by lifting up both his
hands three times to his head in those fierce flames, to the great amazement of
the people, and the establishment of the godly: at the which, the people gave a
great shout.

Is it so that the Saints of God by not improving their graces, according to
their measure received, may turn that affliction which God inflicts on them,
for an honorable trial, into a dishonorable sharp chastizement, as did Job
under the execution of Satan's second Commission? Then hence observe, that this
case carries along in it a contingency, as to the Saints of God, and not an
immutable current, which cannot be turned by them another way; for here we see
Job altered its course, wherefore God proceeded against him for his fault, as
is proved: therefore ye Saints of God, keep to the exercise of your graces,
according to your measure or degrees given you by the word and Spirit of truth,
and be sure to operate according to the Scriptures direction; for, as from
thence did arise the truth of your grace: so from thence must arise your growth
in grace and perseverance therein: therefore make not the consultations with
flesh and blood, nor your vain imaginations, your Religion, as do those Saints
which fall away to be Quakers and Familists, not only to the destruction of
themselves, but to the destruction of the Faith of many others, by calling
their fleshly wisdom and vain, imaginations by the name of Christ, and the
divine nature, not meaning those former graces wrought in them by the word and
Spirit of God. But they fancy themselves to be the divine Essence essentially
the one Jehovah: this they name also by a light within them; but do you be sure
to make Christ your Religion, who is personally Godman, and none other, and
depend upon his righteousness imputed, only for Gods gift of eternal life.
Also beware ye destroy not that inherent righteousness which is in you; for
that is the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Wherefore give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, because God (if you so do) by an act of merciful
justice, will establish you, and keep you, that you shall never fall totally
nor finally, to be seemingly deified Angels of light; but indeed and in truth,
Angels of darkness, the Children of the Devil, a cursed crew of Familists, who
scornfully despise the sacred Ministry of Jesus Christ, stilling the holy
Ministers Priests, and the godly which wait at wisdoms gates, to be taught by
Christ, by their Ministry, they style them Priest-ridden fellows, and style
the sacred Oracles of God, to be but a dead letter, and from beneath:
therefore, O you Saints of God, which yet rightly believe, take heed of turning
your graces which God has endued you with, into wantonness, by a filthy greedy
covetousness, and under a proud formality in Religion, to walk after the flesh;
for by the just judgment of God at this time, upon the Churches of Christ for
so doing, from amongst you, and of you, do arise these monstrous, blasphemous
Beasts, the most dangerous Antichrist that ever was within the confines of
Christendom: therefore, I say, take heed, for there may a time come upon you,
that yet stand for quenching the Spirit, and loosing your first love, and for
making shipwreck of that Faith and Conscience that once was good, and for
destroying the Temple of God, which is holy, which Temple ye are, he will
destroy you. And the Text subjoynes these words, speaking to the Saints, Let no
man deceive himself, because then you are in the high way to the impardonable
sin, and then ye shall never believe more the sacred truth of God, though never
so cleared unto you; for then God will deny you the gift of faith, and then
your damnation sleeps not; though you should deny, as do the Familists, No
man shall be damned or saved, Judas shall be in as good a case as Peter; for,
say they, all shall be turned into the divine Essence of the one Jehovah: yet
know this, that the one Jehovah will not deny himself in his word of truth, but
make his final end good, upon all flesh (except as is excepted) that is, the
case of dying in infancy, that is, every man according to his works that he
has done in the body, whether it be good, or whether it be evil; that is, some
to be Vessels of dishonor to eternity, and some to be for honor to eternity.
And Heaven and Earth shall fail, before one jot or tittle of this truth shall
fall short of what God has said; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, as
at large is proved in the 12. Chapter of my second Treatise.

CHAP. XIII. Containing an answer to Lieut. Col. John Lilburn his six
particulars, viz.
FIrst, You deny the Trinity.

Secondly, You deny the Scriptures to be the word of God.

Thirdly, You deny there is any word of God, but that light which is in man.

Fourthly, You affirm in your Book, Page 16. that that light in man, is as the
light is in God himself, in whom is no darkness at all.

Fifthly, You affirm, the Scriptures are true, as a witness-bearer, or declarer
of that light in man, which you call Christ.

Sixthly, You affirm Gods word, the light in man, was long before the
Scriptures.

To the first I answer, and thus I prove the Trinity, Hear O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.4. and I told you the word Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
twice in this Text, was by the care of the Translators of the Bible, ordered
to be printed in Capital letters, purposely to notify unto the people, that
the word Lord in the Original was Jehovah, as I have heard Doctor Gouge unfold
many years ago, whereupon I told you, that you must read the Verse thus, Hear
O Israel, Jehovah our Elohims is one Jehovah, so that here is Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity. Also I told you, Genesis 1.26. the Elohims spoke each to
other, and said, Let us make man, etc. and John in his first Epistle, the 5th
and the 7th says, There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and says he, These three are one: here also is
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, suitable to that of Moses, Jehovah our
Elohims is one Jehovah, as Mr. John Brain most learnedly unfolds against M.
John Biddle's most gross Doctrine of the Trinity; and as he says to him, so
say I to you, Deny this if you can.

As to the second, I will prove the Scriptures to be Gods word, which is that
which declares the mind of God to man, as amongst men our words convey one
man's mind to another. It is written, Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times, 1 John 5.7 Heb. 1.1, 2.
in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last times spoken unto us by his Son.

Again, When the Elohims had spoke each to other, saying, Let us make man, etc.
Here note by the way, that because the Elohims thus spoke each to other, the
Trinity cannot be as some dream, that is, Distinctions and Relations only, but
really Existencies in the Essence of Jehovah; for Distinctions and Relations
are such as cannot speak.

Man being thus made, God conveys his mind to man's mind by his word, and said
unto them, Be fruitful and multiply: likewise he said, Genesis 1.1, 26, 28, 29
Genesis 2.16 Genesis 3.9. Genesis 4.4., 6, 9, 15. Genesis 6.13.
Behold I have given you every Herb, etc. Likewise Genesis 2.16. Jehovah Elohim
commanded the man, saying, etc. Likewise after the fall, Jehovah Elohim called
to Adam, and said unto him, etc. Likewise he conveyed his mind to Cains mind,
three times by his word. Likewise Elohim said to Noah, The end of all flesh is
come before me. So also he conveyed his mind to Noah, and to his Sons with
him, Genesis 9.8. Genesis 13.13, 14. Genesis 12.1.? Numb. 15.30.
saying, etc. And so to Abraham; Are not these words which these Scriptures
speak, Gods own words? by which he conveyed his mind, to the mind of these
men; but I pray you hearken what God speaks to all such as you are. The soul
that does, ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the Land, or a stranger,
the same reproacheth Jehovah; and do not you reproach Jehovah, when you deny
these and other Scriptures to be his word. Yet he further says, That soul
shall be cut off from amidst his people, I but mark the reason and ground,
because he has despised the word of Jehovah, and has broken his Commandment:
Here note that God concludes his word, and his Commandments to be one and the
same thing, and concludes, That soul shall be utterly cut off, his iniquity
shall be upon him, Exo. 9.20.
that is, it shall never be forgiven him, except God in mercy grant repentance:
the truth is, you are worse than the Heathen; for they believed the word spoken
unto them by Moses, to be the word of Jehovah. He that feared the word of
Jehovah, Exo. 2.23.
among the Servants of Pharaoh, made his Servants and his Cattle flee into the
Houses: Likewise he conveyed his mind by his word, to the mind of the
Israelites; for to them he spoke all these words, saying I am Jehovah thy
Elohims, Deuteronomy 4.2.
which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,
thou shall have no other Elohims before me.

Moreover, he says, Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it. Here take notice of this, That this
Scripture God ownes to be his word; therefore admits of no addition, or
diminution; then it is certain, it is the spirit of the Devil in you. I do not
say, does add or diminish, but that which is much worse; for you endeavor
utterly to dissolve the Scriptures.

Again, The Apostle Peter affirms two conclusions of the old Testament:

First, That the then written Scripture in his days, (namely, the old
Testament) was to the Churches of Christ, a more sure word of Prophecy, than
that excellent speech that came from Heaven to Jesus Christ upon the Mount,
because that was a private and peculiar respect to him alone: He renders this
reason why; Knowing this first, says he, that no Prophecy of Scripture is of
any private interpretation, as all your quaking Doctrines are, being bottomed
upon your light within, which neither you nor any man else knows what it is.

Secondly, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18, 19, 20.
Your Doctrines are of a private interpretation, because they are not owned by
the public Oracles of Gods word, neither do you own them to be his word.

The Apostles second conclusion to the Churches (as to the old Testament) is,
you do well that ye take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day-dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts; and in the 21.
Verse, he renders a reason thereof; for (says he) the Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, as your quaking Doctrines do; but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Now the reason why the shining of the old Testament was in a dark place, is
because it was under types and shadows, and Prophecies, as to them that had not
believed the Gospel, though then unveiled, and by the dawning of the day, and
the day star, arising in their hearts, is meant the preaching of the Gospel
without that veil so believing in Christ, more clearly manifested to their
minds by his spirit, that was the day star, which was to arise in their
hearts.

Again, Our Lord Jesus Christ himself proves the Scriptures to be the word of
God: Mark 7.8, 13.
when he had charged them that they had laid aside the Commandments of God, as
do you more directly then ever they did: then in the 13. Verse he affirms, that
Commandment written in the Scriptures to be the word of God. Likewise he
affirms the Gospel preached to be the word of God; Luke 8.11
for, says he, (expounding the parable) the Seed is the word of God, and it
appears also to be the word of God preached, Verse. 18. saying, Take heed how
you hear. And from this ground I told you, that a wiser man than you did affirm
the Scriptures to be the word of God, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Likewise he says unto them, Joh. 10.34, 35.
It is written in your Law, I said ye are Gods; if ye call them Gods, to whom
the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be dissolved. Here our Lord also
affirms the word of God to be the Scripture. And in John 17.8. Our Lord to his
Father concerning his Apostles, says, I have given them thy words which thou
gave me, and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out
from thee, and they have believed that thou did send me. Observe here, that
Gods word which the Father gave to Christ, and Christ to his Apostles, and they
believing those words, preached them to the World, the substance whereof is in
their Gospels and Epistles, and the Scriptures is unto us these words of God,
and the ground of our Faith.

But you endeavor to dissolve this ground, and to lay a foundation of your own
making, a thing that you call a light within, and tell us, that that is Gods
word, and that there is none other but that; and you call this thing the
everlasting word of God, and your Christ and your spiritual King Jesus, and
this lie is the ground of your Faith. But our Lord Jesus Christ in the hour of
his Temptation, kept his mind close to the word of God, in the Scriptures that
were written by Moses, to repel the Tempter and his temptations, saying to the
Devil, It is written, that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word
of God; that is, his mind shall live by believing the Scriptures, as his body
does by bread; as in Verse. 8. Deur. 6.16. Chap. 10.
Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve; and this word was then written. And here
our Lord applies those Scriptures to the Devils, that were spoken to the
Israelites, they being his Creatures as well as man. Thus the word of God in
the Scriptures, was the ground of Christ's Faith, and so are to all that are
his; that is, that are truly godly: therefore because you deny the Scriptures
to be Gods word, and also the sacred Trinity, consequently you deny God
himself; for it is proved, that Jehovah is in the Elohims, and the Elohims in
Jehovah: wherefore I told you, because you deny principles, you ought to be
served, as they serve such in the Schools, that is, they kick them out, and so
ought you to be kicked out of the School of Christ, and the company of all Gods
people; yet nevertheless, I did then grant, that the Scriptures as a humane
expression, as printed in Inck and paper, was not the word of God; for that may
be burnt in the fire, as the King did the Roll; yet that which was expressed to
the King in that Roll, Jer. 26.29, 30.
was the word of God, and God made it good upon him, and so he will make good
his word upon you, and your Companions, though you endeavor to dissolve that
word, as did that King, that all men must ground upon a lie, and nothing else;
for you deny the increate word of God, the second Elohim in Trinity, Joh. 1.1.
Who in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God.

And secondly, You deny the Scriptures to be the word of God, and so you leave
the World no word of God, but the light forsooth that is within you: so much
for your second point.

Thirdly, you affirm, There is no word of God, but that light which is in man.

To this I need give no answer, having proved a twofold word of God; but
because you did affirm your light within to be the word of God, I desired you
to prove it; thereupon you alleged the 1. of John, and the 1. Verse. In the
beginning was the word, etc. To which I answered, That word which was with God,
and was God, was the second Elohim in Jehovah, or in the Trinity, and he did
create all things; and without him was not any thing made that was made; but
what I pray you did that light within you create, what were the things which it
created and made? for the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is personally God-man,
simply so, created nothing, that is, as he is Christ: yet you would have your
light which you call Christ, to be a creator of you know not what. And because
I affirm, that the word that was with God, and was God, being the second person
in Trinity, this stirred up the light within you to deny the Trinity: therefore
I conclude, that the light in you is darkness. Yet nevertheless, I do grant
that the Lord Jesus Christ as personally God-man: the second Adam after the
fall of the World by the first Adam, immediately did, as the faithful and true
witness of God, against the Apostate-Angels lies, Rev. 3.14.
as it were put a new Creation upon the works which God had made, by virtue of
his imputative righteousness interposing the imputative unrighteousness of
Adam, put the whole Creation in a travel until now, from that bondage of
corruption, Romans 8.
to which it fell, to be partakers of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God:
And this first Chapter of John speaks to both, that is, what he did, as he is
the second Elohim in Jehovah; and also to what he did, as he was personally
God-man, Jesus Christ. But what is all this to your Idol light within, which
is your spiritual King Jesus and your Christ; I, and the same light which is in
God himself: I pray you let me ask you this question, is not this to reproach
Ichovah? for you also attribute Creation to your light within: so much to the
third point.

Fourthly, You affirm in your Book page 16. That that light in man is, as the
light is, in God himself, in whom is no darkness at all.

I answer, This word light is a metaphor allluding to the light of this
inferior Elementary World, which light is not suitable to the reasonable soul
of man, nor spirits, as Angels, but to the eye of flesh, as to man and beast,
yet no man certainly knows what it is, but in probability, whether it be a
quality, a substance, or a spirit: therefore for its excellency, the essence or
nature of Jehovah is compared unto it; the words are these, God is light, 1 Timothy 6.16. 1 John 1.5.
in whom is no darkness at all, who only has immortality, dwelling in the
light, which no man can approach unto, which no man has seeen, nor can see, to
whom be honor and power everlasting, Amen.

Yet in your Book page 15. you affirm, that this light which in the Text is the
infinite Essence of God, is the living and quickening, holy, or tender part of
man, the everlasting word of God, by whom all things were made. But herein you
fall just with the Familists, that the Essence of God is the tender part of
man; but as to those your elder Brethren in evil, I have answered this point
formerly, in this very Treatise, Page 19.27. And also in my second Treatise,
from page 104. to 108. Nevertheless, I will say something of this point to you
also. And first I grant, that this increate light, the Essence of Jehovah, our
Elohims is in all men, and in all things; but not in your sense, as to be any
part of the nature of man, or of any thing else; for it is in him, that we and
all things else do live, and move, and have our being; for as nothing is able
to include him, so is it impossible, that he should be excluded by any thing.

But I pray you here take notice, That although the sacred Essence of God be
within and without all men, yet this no way conduces to the happiness of man,
as you ignorantly affirm in several places of your Book, and in page 19. it is
affirmed to be the very principle of all true Religion: I pray you, is it such
a principle to the Devils, and all damned Creatures? for their being, life,
and motion is in him. He that is being it self, is the bottom of the being of
all created nature, and so it is of good and bad men, to continue them to be
happy, or to be tormented to eternity, otherwise they would all fall to nothing
by an annihilation. But God for his final ends sake, will so continue them for
ever: now what that final end is, I refer you to my second Treatise: and thus
for his final ends sake, he upholds the Earth, which hangs by nothing, as says
the Text, that is, by no created thing; and the Text says, He sits upon the
Circle of the Earth; and the truth is, his infinite Essence is not only in and
thorough all created Natures and Worlds; but also his intrinsicall glory
extends far beyond them all, and he is where they are not, nor any created
thing ever were; for in his intrinsical glory, they all add nothing unto him,
who is Jehovah our Elohims, our own Jehovah; and is this that which you call
the tender part of man? and so his happiness, as you childishly affirm, not
knowing what you say.

Again, I answer and grant, It is a great happiness unto a godly mind, to know
and possess this infinite light, which is both within, and without us, as he is
pleased to stoop to our capacities, as appears Joh. 1.1. speaking of the Lord
Jesus Christ, personally Godman, he says, That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the word of life. Here note, that John had heard, and
seen Christ looking upon him, and handled Christ by being in his Company. But
your Idol Christ, your light, your everlasting word, that same tender part of
man, was never visible, but invisible; for you say it is within, so that you,
nor any man else can say what it is, except a whimsey.

But in the second verse John complains himself further, saying, the life was
manifested, we have seen it, and bear witness, ad show unto you that eternal
life which was with the Father, and was manifested to us; and Verse. 3. That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be
full. And Verse. 5. concludes, This then is the message which we have heard of
him, that is, of Christ, and declare unto you, namely, That God is light, in
whom is no darkness at all. Thus it is a great happiness to a godly mind, to
know the infinite God, as he has manifested himself by Jesus Christ; for John
writ these things to the faithful, that their joy might be full.

Again, Take special notice of this, that it is one thing that the infinite
Essence of Jehovah thus possesses man, and all things else, as is foreshewn;
and another thing for man to possess him, as to his happiness; for so man only
possesses God by his rules, which he has made suitable to man's understanding,
and will so to move or work, to enjoy him as a reasonable Creature, and this is
to walk in the light, and his light to be in us, Psalm. 119.106.130
as says the Text. The entrance of thy word gives light, it gives
understanding to the simple, thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my path; and this is employed by John in 1 John 6.7. If we say we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth; and if
we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. 2 John 3.
Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; but I am sure
you know him not, but deny his Commandments to be his word, and refuse to walk
by his rules: you will have his Essence as a tender part of you, and that's your
word, and that's your rule; but what says the next Verse, He that says, he
knows him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him. And in the next Verse, he calls Gods Commandments his word; Whosoever
keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected; and hereby we
know, says St. John, We know that we are in him: therefore because you do not
keep his word, we know that you are not in him; for all your swelling words of
vanity in your 4th page; for when you had spoken of your single sol'd, your
single-hearted Shoemaker. I stand ready (say you) to hear and obey all things
that the lively voice of God (which is your light within) speaking in my soul
shall require of me, as page 5. you quote one John Jackson for a tall Cedar in
the profession of Religion; but you vaunt your self a taller man of your hands,
than any speaks with tongue, Page 19. for, say you, I lay down this as a
positive position, which through the strength of God, viz. your lying light
within, I shall not only be able by letter or witness without me, viz. the
Scripture or declaration of the word of God, or your lying light within,
clearly to maintain against the ablest man whatsoever, that speaks with a
tongue, that can or shall oppose it, etc. yet nevertheless, here is a poor
Idiot, whom Jehovah has taught in his Law, is able to encounter you, and your
Companions, and also your Emissaries, whom you send out to preach your lying
light in the Countries, and style them the Ministers of the everlasting Gospel:
but of this light, namely, the true light, I will give you a definition what
light is, from the Apost: Ephesians. 5.13. whatsoever does make manifest is light:
this he lays down as a definitive rule, what Light is, as to us men: yet note
this, he does not define Light in its nature, but as it is in its effects to
us, so he defines it, whatsoever does make manifest that is Light, God does
manifest himself to us in four things, every of which, to us is Light.

The first is the Fabric of the Creation in all its parts, Romans 1.19, 20.
man himself the chief, the Text says, That which may be known of God is
manifest in them, that is, the Creatures, for God had showed it to them: for
the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead. Hence the Psalmist says, O Jehovah, how wonderful are thy works,
Psalm. 104. v. 24. Psalm. 107. v. 43.
in wisdom have thou made them all, the Earth is full of thy righteousness; who
so is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord: therefore this manifestation was light to these
godly men.

A second manifestation of God to lead men to know the invisible God, is his
Word written in the Scriptures, which as formerly is proved, gives light to
the simple, being a Lamp unto their steps, and a light unto their paths; and
this is the second light.

But thirdly, That which does most of all manifest, and is therefore Light, is
the Spirit of God, being the third Elohim in Jehovah, that is, even the spirit
of truth; Joh. 14.17. Joh. 16.13. Joh. 17.17.
And when the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth:
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth, that is, the Spirit of God
enlightens the mind to love, and obey God in his Word of truth; according to
the desire of David, Open thou my understanding, that I may see the wonders of
thy Law; and in another place, Teach me, and lead me in thy truth. And the
Apostle speaking of right believers, says, Romans 8.26.
The Spirit helps our infirmities; for we knew not what we should pray for as
we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with sighs and
groans, that cannot be expressed, that is, the third Elohim, discovering to us
by the Word of God, some depth of our imperfections to any thing that is right
in Gods sight, from thence arise sighs and groans that cannot be expressed; and
not that the third Elohim himself does sigh and groan, but because his silent
and secret efficiency does frame a sanctified mind to this blessed
disposition, therefore it is attributed to him, and not to us: so it is
attributed to him, to make intercession for us; not that he does actually make
intercession for us, not that he does actually make intercession himself, but
because he teaches us how to pray aright, according to Gods Word; for says
the Text, 2. Cor. 2.10.
God has revealed this to us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all
things, yea the deep things of God: therefore this manifestation is the most
near and clearest light to the mind of man, and therefore Light: for says the
definition, Whatsoever does manifest, that is light.

Fourthly, There is in all men a light within, but not in your sense: for
although in Adams fall we were all totally darkness it self, yet I say there is
a light which enlighteneth every man which comes into the World, which is the
Spirit of God the third Elohim, and he does write the effect of the Law of God
in the hearts of all men, from whence they do by nature the things contained in
the Law, which (as says the Text) show the effect of the Law written in their
hearts, and it was written to this end, that from this Light within, suitable
to that Light without Gods Word, namely, the Scriptures, they might come to
Christ, that he might give them life: or on the contrary, if then by custom in
sin extinguish this light within, this will leave them in their own Consciences
without excuse, as is at large amplified in all my three Treatises: but your
light within you is a lie, and you have extinguished that good light which was
written within you. And you are become dead in sins and trespasses to come to
Christ, for you deny him, and say the light in you is Christ, and you deny the
Scriptures to be Gods word: you also deny the Trinity, and consequently you
deny God himself: and therefore (as our Savior says) If the light that is in
thee be darkness Mat. 6.23
how great is that darkness?

And now I come to the fifth general point, which is you affirm the Scriptures,
are true as a witness-bearer, or declarer of that light in man, which you call
Christ: in answer to which, I deny that the Scriptures are a witness-bearer to
your light within, which is your Idol, styled by the several names aforesaid:
for if it should bear witness to your foolery, it should witness it self to be
no word of God, and also that the Lord Jesus personally God-man, blessed for
ever more, is not the Son of God, and so it should contradict what it self
affirms: Also it should deny what it self affirms, that is, that Jehovah our
Elohims is one Jehovah, as does your light within, which Mystery of Iniquity,
you varnish over with the words of the Scriptures, in an injurious and uncouth
sense, as do our Gipseys and Canting-beggars, who leave their native language,
as do you the native sense of the Scriptures, and only use the terms; and you
had need put glorious titles upon it, and when you have done all, it is nothing
else but a painted Sepulcher, and nothing but stench and rottenness, wherefore
you gild it over with your sufferings and imprisonments, writing your selves
persecuted Saints: truly, if you and your Companions be Saints, you are of the
Pope or the Devils canonizing; for I am sure that God never owned any man to be
holy, that ever denied the holy Scriptures to be his word, or that denied the
second Elohim to assume humane nature, and so became personally God-man, and to
be his seventh means, as is proved in my second Treatise; or that ever denied
the Trinity, which is to deny God himself, Jehovah our Elohim to be one Jehovah.

And if the Lord Jesus Christ commanded Peter, who was a Saint, get thee
behind me Satan, in reference to the temptation, which Peter unawares tempted
him unto, then much more will he judge you to be the Children of the Devil,
whose works ye will do, as did your Father the Devil, when he alleged the
Scriptures to Christ, tempting him to throw himself off from the Temple, that
he might destroy himself: so you bring in the Scriptures a witness-bearer to
the lying light within you, but it is to destroy, and dissolve the Scriptures
from being Gods word, to make that good, that there is no sure word of God, but
that lying light of yours within you: for you deny the second person in
Trinity, to be the increate word mentioned in 1 John 1. and the Scriptures to
be Gods word: also you deny the Trinity, consequently you deny Jehovah our
Elohims to be one Jehovah: consequently you leave no God at all, but your light
within, which you call by the name of God, in diverse places of your Book.

Lastly you affirm, That Gods Word the Light in man, was long before the
Scriptures; but having so largely proved this Word of God within you, to be no
more nor less then a lie, this last point of yours needs no answer at all:
nevertheless, I grant your Word of God to be long before the Scriptures were,
For your Father the Devil was a liar from the beginning: and it was long after
the Devil was first a liar, Joh. 8.44.
that Moses began the Scriptures: and your quotations of Scripture in the
margent of your Book are numerous, and all is but to guild over your Idol,
Light within, and although you give us number, yet you give us no weight of
truth; even as you give us antiquity, but no verity.

And although you undervalue the Antiquity of the Scriptures, yet it declares a
truth unto us, more ancient then you or your Fathers lies, that is, what the
Elohims speak each to other, and said, Let us make man in our Image. Also it
tells what God said to man, having made him, the Elohims said unto him, Be
fruitful and multiply: and the Elohims said, Behold I have given unto you every
Tree bearing seed, Genesis 1.26, 27, 28, 29. Genesis 2.16
etc. Jehovah Elohim commanded the man, saying, Of every Tree of the Garden,
etc. Also the Scriptures tell us of diverse things, long before themselves were
written, That the Word of God after the fall was manifested to Adam and his
Wife: Genesis 3.8, 9.
and also that Jehovah manifested himself to Cain, by his Word three times: and
also that the Word of Jehovah came to Noah, Genesis 4.6.9, 13.
and so to Abraham and others: I would ask you this Question, Can your Light
within tell you any of all this, if the Scriptures had not told it first? and
yet you would fain make us believe that, that Light is the only word of God
and Scripture, and that is the reason you endeavor so much to dissolve our
Scriptures; but in all this, you do but wash the Blackamore, and make a
nightcap for the Moon: for that which our Lord Jesus Christ says, shall stand
firm, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away. And
as he says in the forecited Text, Luke 24.33.
and the Scriptures cannot be dissolved: And for all your Light within, which
you call your God, and unbeleeve the Scriptures, yet God will make his Word
good upon you, and all your Companions, He that believes shall be saved, He
that believes not shall be damned. Mar. 16.16.
And truly, whereas you put this title upon your Book, The Resurrection of John
Lilburn, you should rather have put it thus, The perverting of John Lilburn, in
order to his destruction, if God in mercy prevent it not.

Again, I met with one of your elder Brethren in evil, a Familist, and he
objected unto me against the Scriptures, because to King James, learned
Broughton made it appear, that many places in the Scripture were falsely
translated, not agreeable to the original Copy; therefore the Scriptures to us
was altogether uncertain; thus he said, although he did know, that King (by the
godly learned) mended those defects, and caused the Bible to be new printed,
and it is judged to be the best Translation that is extant; but his end in all
this is the same as is yours, to have us believe that that Light within to be
the only true Scriptures, which you call the tender part of man: but he then
further objected, that the Scriptures are altogether uncertain to us; for who
knows that original Copy that Broughton alleages, were that of the Apostles,
for since their time, they have past through many corrupt hands, generation
after generation.

I answer, So did the old Testament in Moses days, for many hundreds of years
Generation after Generation past thorough corrupt hands; for the Israelites
themselves sometimes fell to Idolatry, sometimes in their Captivity scattered
among the Heathens, yet the Apostles took it for granted, the original Copies
of Moses and the Prophets were so sound, as to be a ground of truth to the
Churches; for to them he says, Whatsoever things were written before time,
were written for our learning, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And
our Lord Jesus Christ, he took it for granted also; for he makes use of the
Scriptures, Luke 4.
that were written by Moses, and so through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures, repelled the Tempter and his temptations.

If ye demand of me what I mean by the internal or intrinsical glory of
Jehovah.198

I mean his unmeasurable, Elohims Father, Word and holy Ghost, and these three
are one, says St. John. And to this internal essential glory, no created
nature can approach, nor comprehend what it is: therefore not the glorified
humane body of the Lord Jesus Christ; now glorified in Heaven, although in
personal Union with the second Elohim; much less the glorified Saints. And
this essential glory in Jehovah, is not more glorious in any place or thing in
one than another; but is as glorious in himself, and to himself, beyond all
Worlds, where no created things are.

If ye object, That Heaven is his Throne, and his highest glory, wherein is the
Lord Jesus Christ, and glorified Saints and Angels.

Answ. All this is true, if it be rightly understood, that all this is but his
external glory, resulting from his Creatures, in relation to his final end; for
which he made all things in order to glorify himself in the Vessels of honor
or dishonor, to eternity, as at large is proved in my second Treatise: but all
this no way adds to his internal divine glory; for infinite as such admits of
no addition nor diminution: therefore your dreams, and your Brethren the
Familists, that the Essence of God is the tender part of man, as say you; the
same light that is in God and his Essence, as say they, that all shall return
into his Essence, and no individuals to be damned, or saved to eternity, both
these from hence appears to be a most blasphemous whimsey.

And for conclusion, take this observation, that you Quakers, and your elder
Brethren in evil the Familists, are not only Atheists, because your Tenants
lead to believe there is no God; for you deny Jehovah our Elohims to be one
Jehovah, but also do deny man's reasonable soul, as animating his body, since
you fancy a thing in man, which you call your God, your Christ, as before is
proved: wherefore from your Tenants, one asked this Question, If you enclose a
living man in a Vessel, that the Air cannot enter, and opening it, find him
dead, then tell me what you can see therein, more than his dead Corpse; what
then is the reasonable soul in man you so much talk of?

To this man I answer, If the reasonable soul be there together with his Corpse,
you cannot see it: therefore you know not whether it be there or no; for your
eyes see not the Wind, nor Air, nor the Angels good or bad, nor God himself,
although he be so near to us, as is proved: and the reason of all this is, that
your eye, or the eye of any man else, cannot see any thing, but that which is
of some Color, for Colors are the proper object of our sight: therefore
because the Wind, the Air, man's Soul, Angels good or bad, and Gods Essence
being all without color, your eye cannot discern them, for they are invisible
to it: will you therefore conclude, there is no Wind, no Air, no reasonable
Soul, no Angels good or bad, nor no God, you may as well infer, you have no
Face; for you never saw it, but by a Glass, or some such help.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. Line 24. read and, p. 14. l. the last, add the word not, p. 16. l.
29. for the word gift, r. gilt, p. 18. l. 15. add the word for, p. 30. l. 13.
leave out the word as, p. 56. l. 13. for left, r. felt, p. 46. l. 2. add the
word man, p. 103. l. 30. for complains, r. explains, p. 108. l. 2. for then, r.
they.


