A SERMON At the Funeral of the truly Virtuous, Honorable, Valiant, in Fame,
never-dying, Sir Simon Harcourt, One of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council in the Realm of Ireland, and Colonel over some of His Majesty's
forces there.

Preached in Christ-Church in Dublin, Mar. 31. 1642.

Before the Lords Justices, and the rest of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, his Majesty's Commanders and Soldiers for that present
service.

By Edward Dunstervill, Batchelour of Divinity.

Opus unius Diei. Now published by Command of the House of PARLIAMENT.

London Printed for Richard Badger. 1642.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Sir SIMON HARCOURT COLONEL in IRELAND.
2 Chronicles. 35.23, 24. And the Archers shot at King Josiah, and the King said to
his servants, have me away for I am sore wounded.

His servants therefore took him out of that Chariot and put him in the second
Chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem and he dyed, and was
buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers, and all Judah, and Jerusalem mourned
for Josiah.


I Have this day upon this most sad occasion two sable subjects to treat on,
one in the Text, the other out of the Text, the first is of slain Josiah, a
godly Prince, the second is of this slain Colonel a ^odly subject: which two
valiant worthies as they agreed in most things in the manner of their life, so
did they also in the manner of their untimely timely death Mutato nomine de
illo fabula.
. For Josiah was shot in the field by an enemy, and so was he: Josiah was
thereby sorely wounded, and God knows so was he; Josiah was then carried of in
a Chariot by his servants, so was he by his servants, and sad Officers; Josiah
dyed of the stroke, and so did he; Josiah had the blessing to be buried in
Jerusalem, and so has he in this City; in a word Josiah was much lamented
both in Jerusalem, and Judah, and so will he be of all Gods servants, and
Loyal Subjects, in the several Kingdoms of his Majesty's Dominion.

Give me leave to speak of the latter Subject first, if it be but to ease my
own present sad thoughts for him.

Omitting to say any thing of his worthy descent, of his goodly education, his
matching into an honorable family, of his high Command, and how famously he
has behaved himself in foreign services.

To begin with him at home.

1. He was one who had an honorable repute in his and our Nation, with the
most honorable there of a prudent faithful and choice Warrior, which may
appear by His Majesty's and the Honorable Parliaments joint Election of him
for this our great service.

2. He was one who from a Child was employed in the Military service of our
faith and not affected as some with glorious wears, yet which is honorable
indeed one that bore in his body Martyr-like, the marks of Christ Jesus,
having been before this his last two several times sore wounded in two
several services at Mastrichte and Kinsconce.

3. And in a word which is the best of his renown, the diamond in his gold, he
was godly, honest, temperate and faithful as well to God and his Conscience,
as to His King and Country.

Durst I presume to enlarge my self further than my limited time, I could tell
you rare things of his devotion, of his frequency in private prayer, of his
godly exercise with his Family, of his diligence in reading the Scripture and
other holy books: Seldom, as I received, from diverse of those best
acquainted with him did he come alone to his Chamber, but immediately, for the
most part he addressed him self to the Bible or some other good book; a sure
argument, that he had his delight in the Law of the Lord, and therefore in a
blessed condition.

In the time of my short acquaintance with him I had in private a bundell of
such sweet holy divine expressions from him, which with out trespassing on my
Conscience, I may say, then filled my soul with ravishment of joy, as it is
now with sorrow, that God should be so gracious unto this distressed land, to
send us in this needful time a leader of his people, one as well virtuous as
valorous, one that was both a Ioshuah and a Josiah, and indeed such a worthy of
whom we in this sinful kingdom were not worthy.

It is worth recording that immediately before his fore stroke he was reproving
a Soldier for swearing, demanding what if God had taken him away with that
oath in his mouth.

After being himself stricken, and deeming his wound to be mortal, he with
great willingness and patient mildness submitted himself to the LORDS will,
and to my knowledge so continued unto the end.

It is true he lay the after night and many hours the next day in a constant
torture of unutterable griefs which could not but trouble each beholder, and
yet in all the time of my being with him, I never heard one impatient passage
from him, but comforting himself that it was in Gods cause he suffered, saying
to me, had it not been his cause, he would never have come over hither on the
service; and in a word, passing by many devout passages, as long as his weary
spirits had any vigor he scarce ever ceased sending forth with great comfort
and confidence most strong cries and prayers; and as one supposing every breath
to be his last, would frequently end his requests with that sweet dying saying
of Saint Steven, Lord into thy hands I give my spirit, and in the end with the
breathing out of our prayers for his salvation he gave up the Ghost; So that
howsoever his sore wounded, dead, and bloud-died body is here with us to be
interred in the dust, yet am I confident that his pure bathed soul is with the
soul of Josiah, with the souls of the blessed Martyrs, and of the just men
made perfect in the presence of Jesus Christ, Heb. 12.23. Isa. 53.5.
who was sore wounded for his transgressions, bruised and slain for his
sins, where he is triumphantly rejoicing like a great Conqueror, where he is
made of a godly subject and valiant Soldier on earth, a most glorious happy
and immortal King in Heaven. For blessed and holy is he who has part in the
first Resurrection, On him the second death shall have no power, but they shall
be Priests of God and of CHRIST and shall Reign with him a thousand years,
Rev. 20.6.

And thus much of the first thing proposed in this Treatise, the subject out of
the Text; to wit the tragicallstory of this slain Christian Colonel.

I proceed to speak of the second thing, of the subject in the Text, which is
a like tragical, to wit, of the fatal death of that godly valiant King Josiah.

And the Archers shot at King Josiah, and the King said, have me away for I am
sore wounded, etc. Least I should trespass my commands, which is to be
brief, I have hence culled out two particulars only to treat of:

The first is of Iosiahs death.

The second is of the peoples lamentation for him.

Certain it is that there was not a King after David over Judah and Israel
like unto Josiah; who so reads the Bible History shall find most glorious
things recorded of him. It is said of Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.33. That he was a man
of War from his youth, but of this Josiah that from his youth he did seek
after the God of David; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and
Jerusalem from the high places, etc. 2 Chronicles. 34 4.5, 6. He did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, and turned not aside to the right hand or to
the left, 2 King. 22.2. In a word such was his zeal against Idolatry and to
the service of the Lord, that he remains on sacred record without parallel;
and yet for all this, you see that Josiah was shot, Josiah was sore wounded and
taken away with a stroke of an enemy in the Field as well as others. Whence we
may observe this conclusion, that The events, occurrencies and strokes of
War, they may betide the good as well as the bad, the best as well as the
worst of the Lords people.

1 Samuel 17. In the great battle betwixt the Philistines, and Israel God by
David's hand with a sling, stone stroke nocent Goliath, and 2 Samuel 7. Thus in a
hot b^ttaile was innocent Vriah smitten also, 1 Samuel 31.3. Disobedient Saul was
shot, and says the Text, sore wounded: and so was godly and obedient Jonathan
in the same field on the same day, again 2 Chronicles. 18.^^ A certain man drew a
Bow at a venture, and smote wicked Ahab between the joints of the arms, so
that he called to his Chariot man, have me away for I am sore wounded. And you
see here that the like occurrence betides this most godly Prince Josiah. So
that as it is said concerning the Duke of Alua's sword, that it knew no
difference betwixt the Protestant or Papist, so may I say of the adventurous
shots and strokes of War, it makes no difference twixt the godly man and the
sinner.

Justly therefore are those to be judged, who will take upon them to judge men
by these events; for certainly there is no rule more uncertain, See Eccles.
9.2. All things come alike to all (viz. all outward things) there is one event
to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good and clean and unto the
unclean, to him that swears, and to him that fears an oath, in Luke 13.1, 2,
3. Our Savior reasons this case with certain who conceived that they were
more righteous than others, because that they escaped the hands of blood
shedding Pilate; Others because they escaped the fall of the Tower of Siloe
which slew eighteen persons, but our Savior tells them Nay, but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish; It is true sometimes God in judgment to
destroy wicked men, sends outward evils, sometimes in the field, sometimes in
their families, sometimes in their beds, sometime in battle as he did Abner,
and Ahab, and Absalom, and Shebah, with many of the rebellious and provoking
among the people of Israel of old, and in Histories as he did Olimpius the
Arrian Heretic Anno 510. and as he did Julian the Apostate, who was slain
with an Arrow having intended upon his return from Persia to have slain all
the Christians, to root out the name of the Galileans: and as he did the wicked
Emperor Dioclesian of whom it is reported, that he was struck with madness,
and as he did that wicked late persecuting Gardener, who was suddenly taken and
destroyed by a strange strong burning Fever. Notwithstanding to conclude, that
all who have suffered these or the like outward evils, are greater sinners then
others, because they suffered such things, is no divinity.

The grounds of the points are two. 1. Ground.


The first is taken from the cruel disposition of the wicked, it is certain
the wicked hate the just and their mercies toward them are cruel as we may
see in Ahab and Amaziah, and Iezabel and Pashur and Saul, and in the Primitive
and later perfecutors, as Domitian, Dioclesian, Valentinian, Le^, Garnet,
Gardener and others Heb. 11.
and that which we now know by woeful experience of this bitter and hasty
Nation, who Caldean like Hab. 1.6.
have not only marched through the breadth of our Land, and possessed the
dwelling places which are theirs, but have most despitefully reproached our
Nation, and most holy profession, branding both with as foul opprobrious
obloquies as could be devised, either against Jews or Mahumetans, neither have
the rested herein, but like so many evening Wolves, have torn in pieces poor
innocent babes, stripped as well Aged as others in the coldest season both men
and women stark naked, and now (we hear) as in the Parsian massacre under
that cruel Duke of Guise, he cut off all, yea as in the Sicilian slaughter of
the French, rip up the bellyes of our Protestant women. Besides the more holy
(from the beginning of the rebellion, when their minds were best difposed) the
more holy any man, any Minister had been, the worse it fared with him, such
have been fure to be stigmatized, to be sore wounded, to be slain or
hanged; So that if in an Army they could discover such a one, a Puritan as they
term such, surely they would give charge as the King of Syria in another case,
neither fight with small or great, but against him.

The second ground is taken from Gods permission. Ground 2.
God is able to guide the instruments of War as he pleases, either with
Jonathan to shoot beyond, or on either side his gifts: 1 Kings. 19. Dan. 6.22.
Dan. 3 25.
as he was able to keep Elijah from the fury of Ahab and his wicked Wife;
Daniel from the fury of the Lions, the three Children from the fury of the
fire, as he did Jehosaphat and David who were frequent in hot services, yet
were kept from the strokes: and yet the Lord in wsdome finds cause sometimes
to permit the righteous to be smitt^n, sore wounded, and fall in the battle
as well as the unrighteous sinner.

Neither yet may we conceive that this is for evil, Causes. 1.
but first sometimes to prevent evil, Isa. 57.1. The righteous perishes, and
no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come, and for this cause it
is plain that God took away this godly Prince in the Text thus suddenly, 2
King. 22 20.

When God has had a purpose to bring a lingering heavy calamity upon a Land,
it has been usual with him to call and cull out to himself such as are his
dearly beloved, as Lot to Zoar, these with himself, Genesis 1^.
safe and free from the discomfort thereof. Even as a careful mother who
seeing her Children in the way, when she beholds a company of wild Horses or
beasts coming, she presently whips up the Child into her arms and t^kes him
home, or as the Hen seeing the ravenous Kite hovering in the air over her,
she clocks and gathers her chickings under her wing, even so when as the Lord
sees a hovering judgment over a Land like a flying fiery Scroule, he gathers
some of his choice servants unto himself, that he may preserve them from the
evil thereof. It was a passage which this worthy Colonel fastened for his own
stay and comfort in the day of his departure in my hearing, that he did
conceive that this might be a cause of this Gods dealing with him, expressing
his fears of some approaching evil to the Church of God: I pray God that
according to his fears it fall not out unto us.

Secondly, God may have a mind in his so doing to bring them the more suddenly
to Heaven, one reports it for a saying of Bradford the most blessed Martyr, if
there being any going on Horse back to Heaven it is by Martyrdom, for this
sends them away in an instant, as fast as a raging fit or the like can haste
them, had the Gunpowder plot taken, had Faux once given fire, how soon had his
then Majesty with thousands more of Gods most holy servants before the glance
of an eye or motion of a thought been in Paradise, and certainly with the
like celerity, are all those of his Saints hasted unto the Lord, who with
Josiah and this sweet holy Worthy are taken away with a stroke of an Arrow, or
any other instruments of War before they can return to their Chambers their
souls are in heaven.

Thirdly, because that God has a mind to honor such his Saints in their death
before men. Dying in the Field we style a dying in the bed of honor.
For indeed next to martyrdom no wounds so honorable, no death so glorious,
nay no health or life so honorable, when as they are wounded in the Lords
battle, when as they dye in Gods cause, have they not in this that surpassing
glory to be made like unto Christ Jesus, Isa. 63.1.2.
who went hence according to the prophecy, with his garments and sacred body
dyed in his own precious warm hearts blood. We read of a sweet Primitive
Martyr, that whereas the persecutors had cut orifices diverse wounds in his
sides, he even smiled saying, now have I so many more mouths, meaning his
wounds, to praise the Lord for whom I suffer these things: Nay it is reported
of an holy Emperesse, who with her hands dressed the wounds of the persecuted
Saints: Of Constantine who kissed the eye of Paphnutus put out by the Arrians,
some Soldiers affect glorious dies in apparel, but give me a Soldier whose
garments have been dyed in blood, for therein is the best of outward glory,
excellent is that brave resolution of Paul, God forbid that I should glory in
any thing, save in the Cross of Christ Jesus, Gala. 6.14. where by Cross is
not meant Constantines or the Papists fond material Cross, one of their dumb
Idols, but the sufferings, the stripes, which he underwent for the profession
of his faith toward the Cross: Jesus, See an example of this, in Acts
5.40.41. of Peter and the other Apostles, who when they were imprisoned and
beaten, they went from the Council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer for Christ's name. Paul's chain was Paul's glory, and Peter's Cross, was
Peter's Crown.

This uncertainty of the occurrences of War does certainly afright multitudes
of way ward spirits among us, who think it death to go into the field to put
their heads out at a Castle, but to such I say, since God has made you men,
quit your selves like men, for shame fear not to be made honorable: besides
consider how Christ was smitten wounded and slain for thy sake, why then will
you fear to suffer the hazard of wound or of life for his sake.

Lastly, this should work every Colonel, Officer and Soldier of an Army to a
holy care to prepare themselves for every event beforehand, and to make their
peace with God on their knees in their Chambers before they go into the field.
Thus did those two renowned Emperors, Constantine and Theodosius; for this end
consider what you have heard, godly Josiah was shot and fell in the field, as
well as unrighteous Ahab, and if this happen to a Josiah, to the green Tree
what cause have the wicked especially to fear, and as they are making ready
the weapons of War, so to make ready their souls and spirits for the Lord
that made them. It is a fond conceit, that every one that dies in the field
shall go to Heaven, then Goliath had gone to Heaven, then Shebah and Absolon,
those two great Rebels had gone to Heaven, then Richard the third that usurping
murderous Tyrant had gone to Heaven, then these impious rebels, some whereof
are already fallen, and the rest whom I doubt not but God will give us for a
prey) according to the tenure of their base romish Bulls should go to Heaven:
surely for those that die in the Lords quarrel, God forbid that I should not
be charitable in my secret thoughts of such, yet let me tell you, that he that
goes to Heaven, he must die in the Lord, as well as for the Lord, Rev. 14.13.
Romans 8.1.

Man says Solomon knows not his own time though he be in his parlour, though
in his bed, though at his table feeding, though in the fields walking, though
in Tavern revelling; how many presidents might I name you in sacred stories,
in humane histories, and some in our experience who have suddenly been taken
away in all places and conditions? So that in all places, in all conditions, in
all actions, at all times, it is a good and meet thing that all persons make
ready, with their loins girt, Luke 12.35.36.
with their lights burning, to be like men who wait for their Lord; Watch ye
therefore, says CHRIST, for ye know not when the Master of thehouse comes,
at even, at midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the morning, Mark. 13.35
36.
least coming suddenly, he find you sleeping, and what I say unto you meaning
his Disciples, I say unto all watch. But especially give me leave to apply my
self to you who are in the service of War, a service honorable, and
honored, yet perilous above all ways of service, because for you our enemies
daily lay ambushments, watch night and day in every opportune place, who are
often whole days and nights, or may be charged with instruments ready
prepared to take away your lives, you I say of all men should speedily make
ready, so that though you be with Josiah sore wounded in body, in the day of
battle, you may have the sweet comforts, the sweet comforts of a good
Conscience in your souls, Eccles. 12.
in a word though killed, you may gloriously live in your spirits with that
God, who made you, and his Son Christ Jesus, who gave his own blood aransome
for you. And this of this first point.

I proceed now from Iosiahs death to the peoples lamentation for him.

And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for I^siah.

This mourning for this godly Saint is further enlarged, in Zach. 12.11. In
that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem as the mourning of
Hadadrimon in the Valley of Megiddon, and the land shall mourn, etc.

The point arising thence is, That when God takes away an eminent Saint, set in
place of extraordinary service, that then is surely great cause of great
lamentation.

When Abner that great General of the field was slain by Ioab, 2 Samuel 3.32.33
it is storied that David cursed Ioab, and he and his people mourned greatly
for Abner, and says the Text, the King lift up his voice and wept at the grave
of Abner, and all the people wept, and the King lamented over Abner, etc. Again
behold what excessive mourning was by him, and his people at the tidings of the
death of Saul and Jonathan, but especially for righteous Jonathan, Then David
took hold of his clothes, and rent them, and likewise all the men that were
with him, they mourned and wept and fasted until even for Saul, 2 Samuel 1.7.12.
2 Samuel 1.24, 15
and Jonathan and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of Israel,
because they were fallen by the sword, after he applies himself to the women
most pathetically, and elegantly: Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul who
clothed you in Scarlet with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon
your apparel. How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle, O
Jonathan thou wast slain in thy high places, I am distressed for thee my
brother Jonathan, etc. Moreover I dare adventure to go further, that to be
insensible of an affliction, that besides a Joseph a Saint, a Land of Gods
people, is a provoking sin as is plain, Amos 6.1, 2, 4, 5. Much more when
the Lord does not only wound but take away a Joseph a Josiah a religious
Statesman, a godly Officer, as he has done from us this day.

1. Because as you have heard it is a presage of some near approaching evil to
the land from whence they are taken.

2. Because this begets courage and gives cause of triumph to the adversaries,
a thing to be lamented, oh how did the Papists joy, and rejoice at the death of
that sweet Josiah Edward the sixth, and of his unparalleld godly Sister Queen
Elizabeth, and without question which pierces my heart to think on the like
rejoicing is now in the hearts of our base and cruel enemits in this Kingdom
upon the unhappie tidings of the fall of this renowned valiant. This was one
maine cause of David's great mournings for the loss of the forenamed Saul and
Ionatham, 2 Samuel 1.19, 20, 21. The beauty of Israel is fallen slain how are
the mighty fallen? Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askalon, Why? Least the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, least the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, and for this cause says oe o^^ our
Tex^ it was that Iosiah's servants after he was wounded took him out of his
own Chariot where he was, and put him into another Chariot, to cover and
conceal his death from the enemy least they should have then trtumphed in the
Camp.

Thirdly, consider that howsoever it is in many respects a blessing to the
Saints thus taken from us, yet is it in it self a grievous judgment to the
people left where they had abode see the Prophets bewaylings of this evil and
how he ranks it with one of Gods sore judgments, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. For behold
the Lord, the Lord of Heasts will take from Jerusalem the stay and staff, the
whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water, the mighty man (mark) the
man of War, the Judge and the Prophet, and the prudent, and the Ancient, and
the Captain of fifty, and the honor able man, and the Councellor; So that
not improperly may the souls of such cry, and apply to the relict land, that
of our blessed Savior; Weep not for me but weep for your selves, for as their
gain is unutterable so in their death, the Kingdoms loss unconceiveable. I
remember what a most solid holy Divine M. Bolton in his Funeral notes on Judge
Nicols.
said of the death of a worthy Judge of England, that the redemption of the
life of such a one in such times as we live in, for the good of such a Country
had been worth a Kings ransom, neither in my opinion do I conceive, that the
life of this deceased Gentleman in such a time and place as this is to be
prized at a lower rate, all the blood in the bodies of a province of Rebels is
not worth the blood that ran in his Veins.

The ground of this conclusion is in that the loss of such men do greatly
weaken the State of a Realm, especially when a Realm is in such a broken
condition, and stands in such need of mighty men, of men of War and prudent
Captains and honorable Counselors, and most of all of godly servitors, as
ours does this day.

It is a great loss to lose an Abner, a Ioab, a valiant Captain, such as were
our old English Warwick, Talbot, and Bedford, who were the terror of the
French, such as Mountjoy, Essex, and Chichester in Ireland, but there is no
loss like the loss of such as these, being godly religious.

As for a swearing deboyst Soldier, Ios. 7.
he may bring a curse upon the Camp, he may lose the day in the field though he
fight courageously; we have an example of this in Achan, it is like he neither
wanted skill nor will, nor courage enough to help the Lords noast, but by the
wickedness he committed in taking the unlawful pillage, the wedge of Gold, and
the Babilonish garments, he so provoked God, that he permitted the men of Ai to
smite Isreal's great Host, them under brave Ioshuah, that before prosperous
General. In Tertullians time the Christian Saints were counted of the wicked
as now with us, hosts publici, the enemies of the Commonwealth, so Ahab
accounted of Elijah the troubler of Israel, but the truth is, it is Ahab and
such as he, wicked men who cause trouble, and all evil that betides a State,
being indeed as so many secret hornets and Caterpillars to a Commonwealth, or
as so many vipers who eat into the bowels of their mother the Church.

As for the godly howsoever deemed by the wicked they are the best friends that
they have in the world, they are the strength of a Land, 2 King. 2.
as it is said of Elijah, they are the Chariots and horsemen of Israel, that
is their very strength of War, who prevail more, though at home precando, then
the Soldiers can pugnando. Take away says famous Jewel the bonds the hoopes
of the vessel and all will fall asunder, so if God take away these who are our
bonds, our hoopes, our Church, our Commonweal cannot hold together, See Isa.
1. Except Lord had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, That is except the
Lord had continued some seed of righteous men, we had been destroyed before
this day. An example of this we have in Genesis 19. Whenas the Lord was about
to destroy Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim, and Zegor, had there been in those
five Cities but 50, 45, 40, 30, 20. Yea ten righteous persons the Lord would
not have destroyed them: for why says the Text, for tens sake; moreover whenas
the Lord was bringing fire on them because there was not ten righteous persons
found there, only Lot his Wife and his two daughters, though a family abased,
and abused by the ungodly Citizens, yet the Lord out of his precious esteem
and care of them, he provides a Zoar a safe place for Lot and them, and
commands them to make have thither, Why? because says the Lord, I cannot do
any thing, mark, I cannot do any thing, until you be come thither, Genesis
20.22.

These things being considered, Josiah or any other godly and Religious
Commander or any righteous person whatsoever is taken away, especially I say
where there is such breaches and perils, whether that the people of that Land,
nay all the people thereof with Judah and Jerusalem have not cause to mourn
and lament greatly.

It was Zedekiahs blessing of honor to be lamented of the people, Ier. 34.5.
And contrary it is a judgment for an eminent person to die, and the people not
to lament, as Jer. 16.4, 5, 6. Wherefore it is an evil done to the party
deceased, but indeed the greatest evil is done unto God and to our selves.

For our particulars, Sir Laurence Carij, and Captain Rorchford.
I pray God it be not a present sin in this our present evil time, we had two
religious valorous brave Officers sore wounded to death of late before this
Honorable Colonel. I might say they were were too slightly lamented,
howsoever consider what you have heard this day among other things that the
neglect thereof is a most grievous sin, as a sign of a most wicked sensual
obdurate heart. My bell: we have other sins as yet reigning and very raging
among us want of humiliation on fast days, excessive drunkenness abundance of
oaths, notwithstanding all the desires that God has brought upon us, God of
heaven withstand that we persist no further therein, but that we may forsake
our wicked ways, and return unto the Lord who though he has stricken us,
then will he surely heal us, and make the light of his countenance again to
break forth upon us in this land of darkness. But passing many other things
which the very short time of my meditation constraines me unto Let me beseech
you right Honorable and the rest of Gods people here present to apply your
hearts to a sable sensiblenesse of this great evil which the Lord has done unto
us, let it never be said that such a religious affable honorable worthy, who
came over and offered himself willingly to help us, and by Gods blessing did,
having by Gods permission in our cause fallen; I say, let it never be said that
such a great man should fall in this our Israel, and the people did not lament,
least the Lord, great Jehovah be angry and in his displeasure take away yet
more of those brave valiants which he raised up for us, to the weakening of our
armies, and the ruin of our hopes. And thus have I ended a few hours
meditation of that which may well be many years Lamentation.

FINIS.

