A LETTER TO A PERSON of QUALITY, Concerning the FINES Received by the CHURCH
AT ITS RESTORATION, WHEREIN, By the instance of One of the Richest CATHEDRALS a
very fair guess may be made at the Receipts and Disbursements of All the Rest.

By a Prebend of the Church of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

CANTERBURY 1668.
SIR,
LAtely when you honored me with a visit in Canterbury, we fell upon a
discourse of Cathedrals; of which your short stay did not allow us to say
enough for our mutual satisfaction. Did I want that Introduction to entertain
you upon that subject, yet I could think of no fitter person, either for
ingenuity or place to deliver my thoughts unto. They are at this present
renewed by a malignant Writer, who has cast a groundless In the Libel
entitled, A Proposition for the safety and peace of King and Kingdom, etc.
page 47.
and undeserved Odium upon Cathedral-men, to work their ruin, and that of the
Cathedral Churches with them. He misrepresents their Persons and their
Emoluments, depressing the Persons, and heightning the Emoluments, both
unmeasurably beyond truth and reality. He Characteriseth the men low in their
condition and in their interests, covetous, and undeservedly rewarded. He finds
fault with the King for not seizing upon the Arrears of their Fines before
their admission. Says that they got vast Emoluments, such as never were and
are never like to be again: That those excessive riches were thrown upon them
undeservedly, and provokes against them the envy of others as deserving better
of the King.

If by the lowness of their condition he understands their shortness in means,
and makes poverty a vice, he ought to remember that they were brought to that
condition by men of his gang, who sequested them for being guilty of Loyalty to
their Sovereign. And that whereas those of the Laity that were in the same
guilt were admitted to compound for their Estates, Clergymen were deprived of
their Livings, and kicked out of their Houses. If their enemies be grieved at
their preferment, let them blame themselves for bringing them to such a low
condition as made them especial objects of the Royal compassion.

If by the lowness of their condition he means that of their extraction: Let
that Gentleman (if he be one) know that most of them are not inferior in blood
to them that would bring them low. By the nobleness of their spirits in the
hardest trials they have expressed that of their Birth and Education. But it is
part of their calling to rejoice in their Lowness, since it is a conformity
with Christ their great Master.

As for lowness of Interests we know well enough that our old Persecutors, who
are now acting under new Vizards, would have us so disinteressed in the State
by our Poverty, that we should look unconcernedly upon public actions and
alterations, as having nothing to lose. But whether poor or rich, we are high
in Interest for the public prosperity, upon the account of Conscience; and
have showed so much by throwing off all other interesses for it.

Our undaunted constancy, great and long Sufferings, and loyal actings, clear
us of the other imputation of being undeservedly rewarded: wherein his
Majesty's wisdom and Equity is more taxed than we. Neither can we be justly
blamed as Covetous for enjoying his Royal bounty, and using the rights of our
places. The most part of the Dignitaries advanced at his Majesty's blessed
return, were persons that had lost their Estates for his glorious Fathers
service: Courageous Holy men, who by their unwearied labors and the authority
of their Piety, had kept the most part of the English subjects in their duty to
God and the King, against the prevalency of the reigning Rebellion. Many of
them had fought with their Pens against the usurping Powers, to the great
danger of their lives; which to save, they lived either in exile abroad, or
shifting from place to place in the three Kingdoms. If after their long tugging
against the Tyranny, they were rewarded by their long desired Sovereign with
some of the Churches goods, those goods were set in their proper place, and
cannot but injuriously be said to be thrown upon such men undeservedly.

BUt they were vast Emoluments and excessive riches, says the Libeller. So are
all Church goods, wheresoever Envy is the Controller, how little soever there
be in the Receivers Books. I can give account of no other Chapter but the
Metropolitical of Canterbury, of which I have the honor to be a Member. This
being the first, and one of the best endowed of the Kingdom; if those first and
so enviously cried up Emoluments of twenty years in one were but reasonable at
Canterbury, they could not be very Vast in other Cathedrals. Our Fines are
divided equally, but that the Dean has double the share of a Prebend. Now I
can give you this true account, Sir, that of the total of that great In-come of
our first Fines (deducting the reparation of the Church and our Present to our
Royal Benefactor) the share of each of the twelve Canons was about eleven
hundred pounds. Such a sum was no excessive reward for long Sufferers, and
constant Actors in the Kings Cause; of which the most part of our Society
consists. I am none of the greatest losers of the Clergy: Yet I may truly say
that this Proportion did hardly amount to the third part of my losses, by
Sequestration and other violences of the War. Such moderate showers falling
upon Lands parched with a long drought, could not drench them to an Exuberancy,
to leave pools above ground. The condition of my Brethren cannot be much
different from mine. We have been long learning with St. Paul how to want, but
have had no occasion as yet to learn how to abound. But the popular rumor that
we have all the money of the Land, has taught us another Doctrine, -- est
inter causas paupertatis opinio divitiarum. Certainly one of the great causes
of poverty is to be esteemed rich; and another, to think our selves obliged to
justify that opinion.

It is hard to say, whether the Libeller shows more injustice or ignorance,
when he wishes that we had entered the present Honors and Revenues, and left
the arrears for public accounts or good works. Were it granted that the
Revenue of the Church without Fines is sufficient for us to keep Hospitality,
and maintain the Quire, the Officers, the Schools, and the Almsmen of the
Foundation, (of which we find it very short.) What had become of ours and all
the Cathedral Churches, if all the Fines had been taken from them before the
admission of the Canons? That of Canterbury (though much defaced by Culmer and
the Fanatic Soldiers, and decayed by a neglect of well nigh twenty years) was
more entire than most Cathedrals in England when we came to it: Yet in the year
1664 we found that the reparations of it stood us in Twelve thousand pounds,
all that expense arising out of Fines. But for the Fines, all the Cathedrals of
the Kingdom by this time had been heaps of Ruins. Without the Fines these
great Fabrics, the greatest of Europe cannot yet be preserved from ruin. And
it is that ruin, and another following upon it of a better Church than the
Material, which such men as the Libeller aim at, when they cry out against
Fines, and would have them converted to other uses. God keep the Church from
such Stewards; and enrich us with a better Patrimony of the Church than this
Temporal, which brings little plenty, and breeds much Envy. It is the prayer,

Sir, Of Your affectionate humble Servant, P. D-M.


