Of the Right of CHURCHES, And of The Magistrates power over them. Wherein is
further made out 1. The nullity and vanity of ecclesiastical power (of
excommunicating, deposing, and making laws) independent from the power of
Magistracy. 2. The absurdity of the distinctions of power and laws into
ecclesiastical and civil, spiritual and temporal. 3. That these distinctions
have introduced the mystery of iniquity into the world, and always disunited
the minds and affections of Christians and brethren. 4. That those reformers
who have stood for a jurisdiction distinct from that of the magistrate, have
unawares strenghthened the mystery of iniquity.


By LEWIS du MOULIN Professor of History in the University of Oxford.

Hieronym. in cap. 9. Ierem. Nec Parentum, nec Majorum error sequendus est, sed
authoritas Scripturarum, and Dei docentis Imperium.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. and are to be sold by Sa: Thomson at the white Horse
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To the high COURT Of the PARLIAMENT Of England, Scotland and Ireland.
Right Honorable,
I Offer unto your Honors the first and greatest task (though the meanest
work) that has been yet undertaken; which is, to make the right and power of
private Churches consistent and sociable with the Magistrates power over them,
and so to sever by Divine right the sacred function of Ministry from that of
Magistracy, as to make both their jurisdictions but one, and derive it from the
sovereign power of the State, and this from the Lord Jesus Christ, who has
given unto the Magistrate sovereign power and authority for a sovereign end;
even to set up and promote the interest of his Kingdom. It is one of the most
dangerous heresies that ever the wicked one did sow among his tares, that the
Magistrate, though Christian and godly, does not intend ex natura rei, and in
regard of his particular vocation, the glory of Jesus Christ, as Mediator and
King of his Church, and that the end of Magistracy is not godliness and
honesty, but peace and quietness. For these be the words of Mr. Gillespie in
his Aarons Rod page 187. and 188. much like those page 253. where he says,
that in a well-constituted Church, the Magistrate ought not to receive
complaints exhibited against a sentence of an Ecclesiastical Court by the
party censured: which language I humbly conceive to be rank Popery; for this
heresy (if I may call it so, because it is the main engine to subvert the
doctrine) has been, and is still, the greatest dividing principle that the
world has ever had: it disunites men's minds and affections; it divides, most
absurdly, jurisdictions into spiritual and temporal, laws into
ecclesiastical and civil; it builds up a magistracy within the dominions of
magistrates, independent from them. These erroneous tenets I maintain in this
Book to have set up Popery, and to be the grand mystery of iniquity; and not
their broaching of a hundred heresies, which were but consequences and products
of that great mystery, and which are very compatible and consistent with the
main drift and design of that mystery; even to set up a jurisdiction and a
government on earth distinct from that of the Magistrate: whereas the
reformation from Popery, which England of all nations has been most blessed
with, is altogether inconsistent with the retaining of that springhead of the
mystery of Iniquity, by which powers and jurisdictions are divided, and you the
Magistrates are removed and discharged from your principal duty of magistracy;
which is not so much to procure out ward and temporal peace, as eternal
happiness, and to make Acts of Parliament, Statutes, Laws, Courts, Armies,
Navies, Taxes, Excise, Custom, punishment of evil doers, subservient to that
end. Which duty I humbly conceive to be so much the more incumbent on you, by
how much greater the power is that God has put into your hands. This being an
undeniable truth, that, where God has given more power, authority and
opportunity to do good, there also he has laid more obligation and duty. For I
dare confidently affirm, that all the godly martyrs and ministers that ever
were in England, put together, were they so many Bradfords, Latimers,
Greenhams, had not so much obligation laid upon them to promote the interest of
Jesus Christ, in setting up his ordinances, as one single woman, Queen
Elizabeth, had upon her. So then, right Honorable, I have two main tasks upon
my hands. One, to root out that dividing principle and remain of Popery amongst
us, and to prove that there is no other ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but that
which the spirit of God in the word, by the preaching of the Gospel, has over
the consciences of men; when it convinces and persuades them, and brings
every thought and affection captive unto the obedience of the cross of Christ.
The other task is, to make your power and duty of magistracy in matters of
religion sociable with the right liberty, yea independency of churches. For
the magistrates are to set up pure ordinances, Ministry, Schools of learning;
to call Synods, and invite all men to join with them in promoting the interest
of Jesus Christ: but they are not to constrain any man's freedom, liberty, and
choice, drawing him to Church perforce, and urging him to embrace rather this
Ordinance then that. For as they cannot command grace, so they cannot punish
any man for want of grace, or for an error in judgment: yet they may punish
for an error in practice, if it be a breach of the law of the land: they ought
also to restrain men from spreading blasphemies and heresies, laying that tie
upon them which the Theodosian Code, l. omnis de haeret. imposes, ut sibi
tantum nocitura sentiant, aliis obfutura non pandant, to keep those hurtful
tenets to themselves, not to vent them abroad to the infecting of others. All
these notions and positions I am confident I can make out so plain, that they
shall be obvious to any ordinary understanding; straining neither Scripture nor
reason; nor casting the mist of grammatical and scholasticall learning, to
keep men off from seeing their way, and discerning the truth; nor loading the
margent with quotations, which draw the mind beside the context. May it please
you to pardon this bold address, and uncouth dress and language of a stranger,
(and yet no longer a stranger, being by your bounty naturalized, and made an
Englishman) who in affection and zeal to promote the religion, peace, and
wealth of these three Nations, under the protection of his Highness, and to
that end to bestow his labor and studies, yea his life, will not show himself
inferior to any Native. I shall dye with much comfort, if in my lifetime I
can see some fruit of my labors; as I doubt not but I shall; conjecturing it
by the effects that my other labors in this kind have already wrought upon
men's minds beyond seas, possessed before with prejudices, both against this
subject, and the godly party of this Nation. If your Honors apprehend this to
be a truth, I humbly conceive that Gods work, which is also your work, in
settling religion, is half done to your hands. For all jurisdiction now
streaming from one jurisdiction, even from that of the Sovereign Magistrate;
that religion cannot choose but be well settled, which retaining soundness in
doctrine, and holiness in life, is harbored under such a church government,
as has no clashing with that of the Magistrate. Such, as I humbly conceive,
may be established by setting up Overseers and Bishops over Ministers and
Churches; with whom if the right of private Churches can but stand, and be kept
inviolable, (as no doubt but it may) no government can be imagined more
preserving conformity in doctrine and discipline, and besides banishing all
jurisdiction which steps between magistracy and the inward jurisdiction of the
spirit of God in the word, over men's minds and hearts; and thereby making all
the church-judicatory power more naturally flowing from, and depending upon the
Magistrate, and easing him, by this compendious way of inspection, by a few
good men's eyes, who may have a particular oversight of the affairs of the
Church. And thus by such a tempered government, the four parties, namely the
Episcopal, the Erastian, the brethren of the Presbytery, and of the
Congregationall way, will have a ground for reconciliation, and obtain, with
some condescension, what every one of them desires. The Lord make you his
instruments to make up all breaches among brethren, and to bring to pass what
hitherto has been rather desired then effected; (...) settling the reformed
Protestant religion in the purest way of reformation, and commending your
model and labors therein to other Churches abroad: that as the English Nation
for purity of doctrine, power of godliness, hospitality and bowels of mercy
toward strangers, and the persecuted members of Christ, has hitherto gone
beyond all the world; so you may be instruments to preserve those blessed
privileges, by further promoting the interest of Jesus Christ; particularly by
clearing and removing the mistakes and misunderstandings from many of our
brethren beyond the seas, who by the suggestions and false informations of some
enemies to the people of God in this Island, or of friends to Popery,
superstition and formality, are as ready to misapprehend the ways of God
amongst us, as these are to slander them, and to join with them in giving
credit, that with the English hierarchy and liturgy, all religion and fear of
God is banished out of this Nation; where there is neither Episcopal nor
Presbyteriall ordination; no uniformity of discipline, yea no discipline at
all; no catechizing enjoined or performed; no Creed, no Decalogue, no Lords
prayer rehearsed in Churches; nor any Scripture publicly read to the people;
nor the Sacrament of the Eucharist constantly administered: thus clothing what
truth there may be in all these, with the cloak of rash and uncharitable
construction, as others do cloth it with the cloak of malice and lying. I doubt
not but that by your piety and wisdom, as you will stop the mouth of slander,
so you will give no occasion to the Reformed and Godly, to conceive amiss of
your godly proceedings.

A TABLE Of the CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the nature of power and authority. That there are but two ways to
bring men to yield obedience; either by a coactive power, or by persuading them
by advice and counsel. That there is no medium betwixt command and counsel:
which shows that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is a name without a thing, not
being exercised by either of them. The division of power, and of the
subordination and coordination of powers. Many errors and mistakes are
discovered about subordination and coordination of powers. That the power
called Ecclesiastical does signify nothing; and such as it is, is subordinate
to that of the Magistrate. Fol. 1 Chap. II. Of the nature and division of right
divine and humane. In vain do they call things of divine positive right, which
are acted by a natural right: such are many church acts. Things that are of
divine right may be said to be of humane right, and on the contrary, those
things that are of humane right may be said to be of divine right: which is an
argument that, by right, power cannot be divided betwixt clergy and laity. 25
Chap. III. The nature, matter, form, and author of law. The canons and
sentences of Church-judicatories have no force of law, except they receive it
from the sanction of the magistrate. The defects in the division of laws into
Divine and humane; into moral, ceremonial and politic; and into
Ecclesiastical and civil. 34 Chap. IV. Of the nature of judgment what
judgment every private man has, what the magistrate, and what ministers,
synods and church-judicatories. They have no definitive judgment, as Mr.
Rutherfurd asserts; but the magistrate has the greatest share in definitive
judgments; which is proved by some passages of Mr. Rutherfurd, and of Pareus
and Rivetus. Who is the judge of controversies? 44 Chap. V. An examination of
the 30. chapter of the confession of faith made by the Rever. Assembly of
Divines. That in their Assembly they assumed no jurisdiction, nor had any
deleg^d to them from the magistrate, and therefore were not to attribute it to
their brethren. That the ecclesiastical jurisdiction is the same with the
magistrates jurisdiction. Mr. Gillespies reasons examined. 53 Chap. VI. Whether
Jesus Christ has appointed a jurisdiction called ecclesiastical, as King and
head of his Church. Of the nature of the Kingdom of God. In what sense the
magistrate is head of the Church. 65 Chap. VII. The strength of Mr. Gillespies
reasons, to disprove that the magistrate is not chief governor of the church
under Christ, examined. 76 Chap. VIII. Mr. Gillespies manifest contradictions
in stating the magistrates power in matters of Religion. 83 Chap. IX. The
concessions of Mr. Gillespie, which come to nothing by the multitude of his
evasions and distinctions. The vanity and nullity of his and other men's
divisions and distinctions of power. Martyr, Musculus, Gualterus alleged
against the naming of a power ecclesiastical, when it is in truth the
magistrates power. The positions of Maccovius, about the power of the
magistrate in sacred things, not hitherto answered by any. 91 Chap. X. Whether
the Lord Jesus Christ has appointed, as the Rever. Assembly says, officers in
government distinct from the magistrate. The strength of the place 2 Chronicles. 19.
by them alleged, examined: That the elders in that place are not
church officers. An answer to Mr. Gillespies arguments, endeavoring to prove
that Iosaphat appointed two courts, one ecclesiastical, another civil. 108
Chap. XI. A case propounded by Mr. Caesar Calandrin, which he conceives to
assert a double jurisdiction, examined. Of the two courts; one of magistracy or
external, the other of conscience or internal. That ecclesiastical
jurisdiction must belong to one of them, or to none. 119 Chap. XII. Of the
nature of calling to the ministry. Ministers are not called by men, but by
God, by a succession not of ordination, but providence. The plea for succession
is Romanish. Ministers are no successors in their ministry to the Judicial
Priests, but to the Prophets. 133 Chap. XIII. The nature of the ministers
power, and of that of binding and loosing: the power of the keys. Amyraldus
and Mr. Lightfoots judicious exposition of the power of binding and loosing.
The power of governing and ruling is not the ecclesiastical contended for. Mr.
Gillespies arguments answered. 142 Chap. XIV. That the power of the keys and
of binding and loosing are not committed to all church officers, but to the
ministers of the Gospel only. 155 Chap. XV. That God has not given to the
church officers of the Gospel a certain platform of government, and that it is
arbitrary and of humane institution, and therefore not to be administered by a
power distinct from the humane. 161 Chap. XVI. The 31. chapter of the
confession made by the Rever. Assembly examined. The use of synods. Two things
are humbly represented: first, that for a reunion of jurisdictions over all
persons and in all causes, a convocation made up of ministers only be
re-established during the sitting of Parliament: the second is, that ministers
may be put into the same capacity as all other ranks of freeborn people, to
sit and vote in Parliaments. Of the power of synods, and that of the magistrate
in calling of them. The synod of the Apostles was extraordinary, not exemplary.
The exception of the brethren of Scotland against the 2. article of the 31.
chapter of the confession examined. The uses and abuses of synods: that they
are not the way to compose differences in matters of religion, if their canons
are beyond counsels and advices. 166 Chap. XVII. That the Jewish
Church Officers had not a jurisdiction distinct from that of the magistrate.
Mr. Gillespies distinction, that they were not materially but formally
distinct, examined. The argument of Amyraldus, that though they had a distinct
jurisdiction, yet the example of the church of the Jews is no pattern to the
Christian church, discussed, and proved to be of no validity. 192 Chap. XVIII.
The cause of mistakes in stating the nature of the church, and calling that the
true church which is not. Three acceptions of the word Church in holy writ. The
meaning of the word Church Matthew. 18. v. 17. 206 Chap. XIX. That a particular
assembly of Christians meeting in one place about the worship of God, is the
only true visible church mentioned in Scripture. That that church considered as
an assembly of Christians, brings forth other kinds of acts then it does
considered as a society of men: by which the nature and extent of the power of
a private church is made clear and evident. 213 Chap. XX. That the power
attributed to private churches by the reverend dissenting brethren does very
well accord with the power of magistracy in matters of religion, as it is held
by Erastus, Bullingerus, Musculus, Grotius, Mr. Seldom, and Mr. Coleman. This
same is proved by reason, and by the testimony of Mr. Buroughs, writing the
sense of all his brethren, as also by the practice of the churches in
New England. 222 Chap. XXI. That a church made up of many particular churches
under one presbytery invested with a judicial power over them, is not of the
institution of Christ. 234 Chap. XXII. That the greatest opposers of the
dissenting brethren, namely Salmasius, Amyraldus, and others, have laid down
the same grounds for the right and power of particular churches, and so
confuted rather their own fancies, then invalidated the tenets of the brethren.
The question whether Rome be a true church briefly resolved. That Amesius, and
John Mestrezat late minister of Paris, in their writings, have held the power
of private churches to be independent from any church-judicatory. 242 Chap.
XXIII. The consistency of the right and power of private churches with the
magistrates power in ordering public worship, proved by the example of the
Jews: that they had through all the land particular convocations, synagogues
or churches, called also colleges or schools, where the Prophets and sons of
the Prophets taught, especially on the sabbath day: that they were independent
from any church-judicatory. How synagogues were altered from their first
institution, and that being converted into Christian churches, they retained
the same right, power and way of government. 251 Chap. XXIV. That the Christian
churches under heathens were governed by a confederate discipline, or a power
of magistracy, as the synagogues were, appointing men, which Ambrose calls
elders, to decide such matters as otherwise were to come under the magistrates
cognizance. This practice is grounded upon 1 Cor. 6. v. 1, 2, etc. and
confirmed by Origin, Justin Martyr, Ambrose and Mr. Lightfoot. That the power
of these elders continued still under Christian Emperors, with some
alteration, they erecting in lieu of them Episcopal courts. That all
church power was the Emperors power. That the very heathen magistrates knew no
other but that all power was annexed to them. 267 Chap. XXV. That
ecclesiastical jurisdiction as it is held by the Romish church, better agrees
with reason and the letter of the Scripture then that of the presbyterian
brethren. That some Romanists have ascribed more power to the magistrate in
sacred things then the presbyterian brethren. 287 Chap. XXVI. The description
of excommunication in terms received by most of our opposites, though otherwise
variously defined by them. That for four thousand years no such excommunication
was in use, either among the heathens or the Jews. An answer to some
objections. That the legal uncleanness was no type of the moral. That the
Priests judging of the leprosy is no plea for excommunication, nor for
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 298 Chap. XXVII. That neither in the time of Ezra
such an excommunication began. That the casting out of the synagogue did not
answer that excommunication. That there is no ground for it nor practice of it
in the new Testament. 307 Chap. XXVIII. That the whole context Matthew. 18. v.
15, 16, 17, and 18. makes nothing for excommunication; neither Judas
non-admission (if granted) to the Eucharist, nor the delivering of the
incestuous person to Satan, nor yet the self-examination required 1 Cor. 11.
316 Chap. XXIX. That excommunication is contrary to common sense and reason.
326 Chap. XXX. That excommunication was mainly subservient to the working of
the mystery of iniquity. That the corrupting of the doctrine of the Eucharist
made way for excommunication. 337 Chap. XXXI. The History of excommunication
from the first reformation from Popery: how it was received in Geneva, but not
settled without disputes and clashings betwixt the consistory and the
magistrate. 342 Chap. XXXII. A continuation of the History of excommunication
in France, the Low Countries, Scotland, the Palatinate. How it came to pass,
that amongst reformed states the Scottish ecclesiastical jurisdiction ascended
to such a height. What plea the reformed churches in France have for
excommunication. That it is more justifiable among them then in churches under
an orthodox magistrate. 353 Chap. XXXIII. The judgment of some Divines yet
living both of the argument in hand, and of the writings of the Author. Of some
men's strong prejudices against, and harsh censures of him. 369
The PREFACE.
I Intend here by way of Preface to give a brief account how I came to write of
this subject. Having a little before the beginning of the long Parliament in
the year 1639. written a piece in Latin against the corrupted party of the
English Hierarchy, who made as near approaches as they could toward Popery,
and being a little while after engaged in that quarrel, it so fell out, that
this corrupt party being soon foiled by the great torrent of opposition they
met withal, their opposers themselves, (who were very numerous) did soon
divide into parts and factions, dissenting from one another, particularly about
church way and discipline, which afforded me new matter to study on: which I
did, being indifferently affected toward the four kinds of opinions held in
the reverend assembly of Divines, viz. of Episcopacy moderated, Presbytery,
Independency, and Erastianisme, and for many years together not giving my
approbation more to one of them then to the rest, before such time as I should
be well resolved in the controversy. I pittyed for a long time the preposterous
endeavors of each party, tending to make the rent wider, while they sought
rather the victory then the truth: brother became eager against brother,
branding each other with schism and heresy; their principles so far dividing
them asunder, that partners in the same martyrdom, and who had lost their ears
together, were soon together by the ears; and Mr. Edwards (by name) in showing
rather his spleen then his zeal, and Dr. Bastwick, who styled himself the
Captain of the presbyterian army, did but power oil upon the fire of
dissension, in stead of quenching it: as likewise did our brethren the Scots,
when they wound up their string of ecclesiastical jurisdiction to such an
height, that it was ready to break, and ranked the Erastians in the list of
abominable heretics; pointing therein particularly at poor and mild Mr.
Coleman, walking almost alone in a melancholy posture, and who would not give
railing for railing, but mildly entreated all the brethren that dissented from
him, specially the presbyterians, to give a satisfactory answer to the queries
of the Parliament, touching a jurisdiction and government of the church
distinct from that of the magistrate, and to show in Scripture a place parallel
to Matthew. 18. v. 17. where by the word Church is meant either the ministers, or
a presbyterian consistory; besides, to find out in Scripture the name and thing
of excommunication, or that it is as well, though not as much, a soul-saving
ordinance, as preaching of the word and the administration of the Sacraments,
as the reverend presbyterian ministers would fain have persuaded him in their
reasons against the dissenting brethren p. 63. At length, being well satisfied
that truth seldom lies on the multitudes side, as I did much pity Mr.
Coleman, so did I fall to study him, and thought it but reasonable, ere I
should join with the general clamor against him, to hear what he could say
for himself. And indeed his still voice did more work upon me, then all the
thundering voices of his opposites. So then being convinced by him, about eight
years since I put forth in print a tract in English, the drift whereof was only
to assert the power of the magistrate in matters of religion: which subject,
being but an answer to a letter, I handled cursorily and superficially. And
while I was upon that work, I was much in charity, as I express in some
passages of that tract, with the churches of the congregationall-way, no less
cried out upon then Mr. Coleman, both here and beyond seas, specially in
France; where, namely at Charenton near Paris, a national synod condemned them
by an authentic act: yet then I had no such thought as to conceive or imagine,
that the power and right of private churches or congregations, could agree well
with the power of the magistrate in matters of religion. But soon after the
publishing of this English tract, my uncle Dr. Andrew Rivet, whose memory is
very precious to me and to all the Churches of God, sent me a Latin manuscript
made by a Divine in France, wherein he endeavored the confuting of my English
book, and besides did much tax me for favoring the congregationall way so
much spoken-against amongst the reformed churches in France, and expressly
condemned by a national synod of theirs. About the same time came Amyraldus
forth in print, as full of bitterness and invectives against them as Mr.
Edwards in his Gangrena. Both which books (I mean Amyraldus, and that which Dr.
Rivet sent me) were the cause, occasion and subject of writing my Paraenesis in
Latin. In writing of which I was insensibly carried to conceive and propound
ways of accommodation betwixt the brethren of the congregationall way, and the
assertors of that measure of power in sacred things allotted to the magistrate
by Musculus, Bullinger, Gualterus and Erastus; nothing doubting, but that by
these propositions of reconciliation and accommodation I have given, with a
very little yielding on both sides, the true way and notion of settling in such
a nation as this, where the sovereign magistrate is orthodox, might be made
out, and the Christian reformed religion and worship established with more
peace, truth and holiness of life, then they were ever hitherto since the
times of the Apostles. These notions suting more to the purpose and interest of
the English climat and nation, ought to have been then rather put in English
then Latin, but that I mistrusted my own abilities to appear in public in any
other tongue then Latin or French, and that I had a great mind first to
disabuse other nations, particularly my own countrymen, who were possessed
with strange prejudices against the godly party of this nation, as well
presbyterians as others, by the false suggestions and informations of
Amyraldus; so far, that some have expressed to me by letters, how much they
bewailed the lamentable condition of England, where all religion and fear of
God was well-near quite extinct, where there was no church discipline, no
excommunication, no synods, no ordination, no lay elders, no Lords prayer or
ten commandments rehearsed, and no Sacrament of the Lords supper administered.
Now this present tract coming after the other, and being otherwise digested and
framed, and those controversies that concern England being chiefly handled
therein, and all brought within a narrower compass; I do not despair but that
my present design will be excused, though I come short of giving satisfaction
to all parties. I honor equally the persons, learning and piety of those that
I assent to, and dissent from, no less respecting the memory of Mr. Gillespie,
(an eminent man for wit, piety, learning and soundness of faith; but very
erroneous in what he stiffely maintains in his Aarons Rod) then that of Mr.
Coleman, or of any of Gods Ministers now with the Lord: neither do I ^sse
honor the churches of Scotland then those of France. I would fain make all
churches and brethren friends without prejudice to the truth: which I conceive
I can retain inviolable, by that temperament I have followed, which gives unto
the magistrate his due, and to private churches their right; which denies not
the presbyterians a discipline, but only groundeth it upon a firmer and
steadier foundation then they have hitherto done themselves. The Lord reveal
these truths, which are very much subservient to saving truths, to all sorts of
people, that so the minds of the people of God may be more settled and united
to retain the foundation that is in Christ Jesus, not by constraint and by an
external coercive jurisdiction, but with a ready mind; and that others, who
are otherwise led captive by their errors and ignorance in doctrine, but much
more swayed by this mystery of iniquity or ecclesiastical jurisdiction, may
now, by the discovery of this truth, get freedom, and by it the knowledge of
saving truths, hid from them because of their bondage. Thus the truth of that
saying of the Lord Jesus will be more manifest, If ye know the truth, ye shall
be free indeed. Did but those of the Romish communion understand that all
Papal, Episcopal, Presbyteriall and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which is
not subordinate to the power of magistracy, is repugnant to Scripture and
reason, they would soon, by the knowledge of this one truth, recover their
liberty, and with it the opportunity of having saving truths taught them, lying
no longer in shackles for fear of men, which, though imaginary ones, have kept
them in as much captivity as if they had been really of iron. For the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and excommunication the product of it, put forth
and exercised over magistrates and people by inconsiderable men for coercive
power, have hitherto been like to a child leading about an Elephant with a
thread, who if he knew his own strength, would lead the strongest man that is
with a single hair. In short, all ecclesiastical jurisdiction, without a power
of magistracy, is like the feathers of an arrow, which can never hit nor have a
direct motion, but with the wood to which it is adjoined: The feathers alone
may be made to fly at one, but never to hurt, or make any impression. I will
conclude this Preface with the words of Antonius de Dominis lib. 5. de rep.
cap. 2. who says that all ecclesiastical jurisdiction is ineffectuall without
a power of magistracy; Nihil sine potestate laica obtinebimus; neminem
ecclesiastica potestate possumus extrudere, abripere, expellere. If this,
(which is the substance and the whole drift of my book) can be made out to me
not to be Scripture and reason, I will not obstinatly maintain either this, or
any other error, but acknowledge it both to God and man, as I ought
continually all those of my life; which as I hope God will forgive me, so, till
I be otherwise taught, I crave no pardon either of God or man, for holding
this, which to some is an error, but to me (and I hope in Gods good time it
shall be so to others) as clear a truth, as that two and two are four.

ERRATA.
Page 121. l. 16. read, to whom I give thanks. Page 242. l. 11. dele common.
Page 215. l. 2. read, Cornelius Nepos says. Page 292. l. 27. read, next to the
magistrates who have. Page 311. l. 14. for was read is. Page 355. l. 2. read,
supra quam.
Of the Right of CHVRCHES, And of The Magistrates power over them.
CHAPTER I.
OF the nature of power and authority. That there are but two ways to bring
men to yield obedience; either by a coactive power, or by persuading them by
advice and counsel. That there is no medium betwixt command and counsel:
which shows that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is a name without a thing, not
being exercised by either of them. The division of power, and of the
subordination and coordination of powers. Many errors and mistakes are
discovered about subordination and coordination of powers. That the power
called Ecclesiastical does signify nothing; and such as it is, is subordinate
to that of the Magistrate.

THe nature of power, right, command, obedience, function, law, judgment, are
so twisted together and linked, that it is not possible to treat of one alone:
for as the perfection of power is command, so power is exercised with laws by
those that have right to it and a function in the state: obedience is a
yielding to power, command, laws, counsels and advices.

The word Potestas, power, denotes three things; Person, Right and Office.
Often it is taken for the person or persons that are the sovereign Magistrate:
it is also opposite to jus or right; thus Tacitus, in the third Book of his
annals, says that right is weakened when power comes in. In a large sense it is
defined, A faculty to bring any thing to pass, either by right or by wrong: or
thus; A faculty in the agent to move it self toward the patient either
necessarily, or at the will of the agent: necessarily in a natural body, but
arbitrarily in an intelligence either Divine, or Angelical and humane.

Authority as it has relation to man, is a faculty in the agent, to move it
self at the will of the patient: for power is exercised over men against their
will; but authority is over those that willingly yield, and are persuaded and
convinced: yet sometimes power and authority are promiscuously used. But
philosophers, humanists, and statists usually ascribe authority to men, and
writings, that put no coercion or force to men's actions: thus they attribute
great authority to the placita and responsa of wise and prudent men, whose
judgments, dictates and definitions who ever gives no credit (...), is taxed
of foolishness not of rebellion or disobedience: and so to men, commendable
for their age, wisdom, prudence and experience; as the Heathens did to their
Plato, Socrates, Aristoteles, Zeno, Princes of Schools, who captivated the
minds, not the bodies, of their hearers. It Is in that sense Cicero, in his
first Book of Offices, in the very beginning, speaks of the great authority
that Cratippus and Athens had, though neither of them had power either of
legislation or of jurisdiction: and in his Epistles, he often mentions those
that were in great favor and authority with Caesar and Pompey, although they
had no power of jurisdiction over them. Albeit Grammarians should put no
difference betwixt power and authority; yet nature, custom, and the practice
of all nations, yea the holy Scripture distinguishes power of jurisdiction and
command, which imposes penalties upon the transgressors, from that authority
which enforces not the outward man, but only works upon the soul, persuades
and begets belief, respect and reverence. Power of jurisdiction is always
attended with command, and followed with obedience, either active or passive,
to the command of the power: but authority, being for the most part attended
with some of these, old age, gravity, wisdom, prudence, experience, strength
of reason, eloquence, by its exhortations, dehortations, counsels, produces
in those that are wrought upon and persuaded, the effect of obedience, not with
constraint, but freely and voluntarily; not for fear of punishment to be
inflicted by men in case of non-obedience, but either (may be) for fear of
offending God, or because strength of reason makes one yield to a truth; or
one yields to authority to avo^d an evil, or purchase some good. Briefly, the
holy Scripture, reason, man's wisdom and reach, nature and custom, yea all
tongues of men, can utter or imagine but two ways by which a man is drawn to
yield obedience, or put upon that duty to obey and yield: either because the
command of a power puts a force or penalty on the outward man; or because the
authority of counsel, advice and exhortation has so convinced the inward man,
and persuaded him, that it must needs move the outward to yield an obey.
Plautus in Bacchides act. 4. sc. 7. could say, ego neque te jubeo, neque veto,
neque suadeo; I neither bid thee, nor forbid thee, nor yet persuade thee.

Sure the holy Scripture makes use but of these two ways to draw obedience
from a man, 2. Thessal. 3. v. 12. We command, and exhort you. Curtius lib. 5.
speaking of the soldiers of Darius, who were rather drawn by command then that
they approved his counsel, says, Regis imperium magis quam consilium
sequebantur: and Livy in his 29. book, nec imperium illud meum, sed consilium;
this is not my command, but advice. So in all states, councels and assemblies,
civil or religious, men bring their designs to an end, either by advising and
counselling, or making laws and constitutions in order to their commands.
Cicero, in his Oration for Rabirius, says, that the sovereign counsel is
seated in the Senate, but the sovereign command in the Consuls: and Tacitus,
speaking of the Germane and Gallick Kings, says that they were endowed with a
persuasive power, but not with a commanding power: so Curtius lib. 6. of the
Kings of Macedon in capital matters, the power of the Kings was little worth,
except they could by their authority persuade. The like may we say of the power
of Synods or church assemblies, without a power of magistracy, that their
canons and decrees, except men be convinced and persuaded to yield and assent,
are of small validity.

The most learned Divines did never put a medium between command, and counsel
or advice. Thus Rivet upon the decalogue: there is some subjection of the
Magistrate to the Ecclesiastical college, but such as is not a power of
jurisdiction as under a command but of direction and counsel. And in the same
place; We say that the Magistrate does not depend on any: so that we do not
exclude counsel, but comm^nd; for it is one thing to make use of couns^ll,
another to submit himself to command.

So for matter of law (as we shall see somewhere else) and which is a product
of power, if it does not put a penalty upon the transgressors of it, it is a
mere counsel and advice. So says Campanella real. Philosoph. cap. 4. apoph.
12. Lex nulla potest esse sine poena, ubi non exprimitur, est arbitraria;
alioqui consilium erit, non lex. My reverend Father, in an Epistle to Subrandus
Lub^rt^s, and in his book of the temporal monarch^e of the Pope chapter 8. says,
take away the co^ctive power in judges, then their judgments are but
counsels, since the execution depends on the will of man.

Under counsel ^ank entreaty, warning, exhortation, dehortation: counsel
persuades, command compels, and is an act of jurisdiction (...) defined by
the Lawyers, potestas jus dicendi etiam in nolentem, a power which gives law
to the unwilling: whereas the other, if it be jurisdiction (and so may I call
it, though it be but a product of the inward jurisdiction) it is over those
that from unwilling are made willing; such is the jurisdiction of the power of
the keys by the preaching of the Gospel. As I know no medium betwixt these;
so I do not conceive that a jurisdiction presbyteriall, classical, synodicall,
or even congregationall, can ever have any workings that run in a middle
channel, and are neither acts of magistracy, nor of counsel and advice: but a
consistory or synod must needs exercise either one of these two jurisd^ctions
singly, or both jointly. For example, a synod of Dordrecht dispensing both
jurisdictions, the one from Christ, the other from the magistrate, may by the
one convince some remonstrant ministers of the truth of the five points
handled; but by the other jurisdiction they will remove the obstinate
remonstrants from their flock. Thus a synod of Arians, if authorized by the
magistrate, may compel the orthodox Bishops to relinquish their sees, but
never persuade them to change their opinions.

But the Ecclesiastical history affords us a notable example, proving the
nullity of Ecclesiastical and Presbyteriall power, which is neither advice,
counsel, nor the inward jurisdiction by which the inward man is persuaded and
convinced, nor a power of magistracy compelling the outward man to obedience.
Paulus Samosatenus, being by a Synod of Antioch excommunicated, and deposed
from his see, and one Domnus voted to be in his place; Paulus slighting the
synods judgment, and the synod being not invested with any power to execute
their sentence against Paulus Samosatenus had recourse to their Emperor
Aurelianus a heathen, who not only judged in the behalf of the synod of
Antioch, but actually outed Paulus, and put Domnus in his place. This history
we have in the seventh book of Eusebius chapter 39. I ask here, what was the
sentence of the synod against Paulus Samosatenus, but advice and counsel, and
a declaration of their mind, that Paulus deserved to be excommunicated, and put
out of his place, and Domnus to take his place? and indeed that sentence of
excommunication and deposition signified just nothing, until power of
execution went along with it.

All this is sufficient to evince that all jurisdiction Papal, Episcopal and
Presbyteriall, is a name without a thing, if it be not coercive; else that it
is merely a counsel and admonition, by which if a man be not persuaded to
obey, the transgressour cannot incur any penalty, and thereby be deprived of
life, liberty and goods: so that all censure, as excommunication, which is not
a product of magistracy and a coercive jurisdiction, falls to the ground, and
is like the bulls of the Pope, which hurt none but those that are afraid of
them. For the act of excommunication must be a product of a commanding
jurisdiction, or of counsel and advice; we having clearly seen that there is
no medium betwixt these two. If it be an effect of coercive jurisdiction, then
it must be a product of magistracy delegated by the sovereign power without, or
exercised within the assembly of those that do excommunicate. Either way
excommunication finds no footing, since it is not a mere advice, nor, as they
will have it, a mere product of coercive power; which the very Papists, at
least those that newly came from amongst them, namely Antonius de Dominis,
conceived to be necessarily joined with all Ecclesiastical sentences; else
that they were mere declarations of the mind. These be his words lib. 5. de
rep. ca. 1. Nos potius Episcopi and Min stri declaramus esse excludendum, quam
actu corporali excludimus; we Bishops and Ministers do rather declare that one
is deserving to be excluded, then we exclude him bodily; one being an act of
command, the other of advice. Thus in the 2. chapter he says, that no church
can excommunicate without magistracy: Nihil sine potestate laica obtinebimus;
neminem Ecclesiastica potestate possumus extrudere, abripere, expellere.

These two jurisdictions, the one of advice and counsel, the other of
magistracy, neither of them being like the presbyteriall jurisdiction
challenged, may be instanced in all kinds of societies, families, meetings,
religious or civil; whereas our presbyterian brethren cannot so much as
produce one single act exercised in a consistory or synod which is not an
effect of magistracy, or of counsel and advice, and is not either compelling
the outward man, or persuading the inward. Thus a father of a family, to bring
his son to walk in the ways of God, must go about it either by persuasion, or
by compulsion, hale him perforce to church, hoping that God may there work upon
his heart. Thus a private church, by the jurisdiction of the keys and power of
persuasion, may win a brother; but by the other jurisdiction will expel him,
and put him out of the congregation.

One thing very considerable, and which overthrows all jurisdiction which
steps between the jurisd^ct^on of magistracy and that of the word, which in
foro externo, in the court of man, is counsel and adv ce but in f^ro interno,
in the count of conscience, is command, strict injunction with threatening; that
thing considerable, I say, is, that it is of the nature of the division of
power exercised in all societies, as of most of the things delivered either in
nature, philosophy, or Scripture, that naturally it brancheth into two; by
which dichotomy most tru^hs a^e discovered. Thus natural philosophy divide^h
^ance into first and second; the whole world into heaven and earth; sensitive
creatures into man and beast, rational and irra^nall: thus the Scripture
divides Angels into good and bad; men into elect and reprobates; the Testament
into new and old; the people of God into Jews and gentiles; the whole man into
flesh and spirit, new man and old; things enjoyed into spiritual and
temporal; Gods Kingdom into earthly and heavenly. And thus, to come to our
purpose, there be two powers, one internal, the other external; two swords,
the sword of the word or spirit in the ministry, and the sword of magistracy;
two courts, one outward, called forum externum, governing the outward man, and
imposing laws on him; the other forum internum, governing the conscience,
persuading and convincing it. So for judgment and obedience; judgment is
either a commanding, or counselling, advising, and may be called judgment of
approbation: obedience is either to commands or counsels. He were here a
cunning Oed^pus, who could find room for Ecclesiastical court, judgment and
law, or find a medium at least of participation betwixt those two
jurisdictions, the one coercive or of magistracy, the other persuasive and
exercised by persuasion; such is that which is exercised in the word, to which
(as St. Peter speaks) man yields not by constraint, but willingly and with
a ready mind.

Even all actions where art, man's wisdom, industry, nature, and Gods
blessing and grace do concur, do evidently show the necessity of this
dichotomy, and the nullity of what is imagined to be interposed betwixt the
power of magistracy and the power of ministry, betwixt the power of compulsion
and the power of persuasion. For example, the acts of magistracy are like the
acts of a plough-man, who has a command over his ground to plough it, dung it,
then harrow it, and scatter his seed: but the acts of ministry, or rather the
acts of God in the ministry, by working upon the heart, convincing, and making
the man to follow willingly Gods call, are like the other acts, which are not
so much in the power of the plough-man; as in Gods sending the rain upon his
ploughed and sown land, blessing or frustrating all his past labors.

This being the nature of power, next is to be considered how it is divided,
and how powers are subordinate or coordinate. I could never conceive that power
can be branched but into two, viz. external and internal. The internal power
is either divine, or of art: the divine power is either natural, or of the
word; which is either ordinary, or extraordinary. Ordinary is upon these that
are either convinced, or hardened: the extraordinary is either of prophecy, or
of miracles: that of prophecy is either under the old, or the new Testament.

The external power is either private, or public. Private power is that
freedom in every private man or society to act things and in things, wherein
the public is little or nothing concerned, and no way disturbed: which power
does much belong to private churches, as we shall see in another place.

The public external power is either sovereign, or subordinate and delegated.
The sovereign is either of legislation, or of jurisdiction. The subordinate is
a power delegated by the sovereign to cities, provinces, families, societies of
whatsoever kind, as churches, schools, colleges, halls, universities,
corporations: so that there is no external power commanding obedience under
some penalty, making laws, and compelling the outward man, wherewith masters,
husbands, fathers, halls, corporations, societies, churches are invested, but
is derived from the sovereign external power, which we call power of
magistracy. Here is no more room for ecclesiastical power then for maritall,
paternall, despoticall, as neither for medicall if you will, and so for
pharmaceuticall, military, rural, and the like; all which are a like
subordinate to the sovereign external power, called the power of magistracy:
for I do conceive that church power or jurisdiction are as improperly called
ecclesiastical, as if the jurisdiction wherewith a college of physicians
might be invested were called medicall or physical; since a minister, a
physician, a merchant, as such, are not invested with jurisdiction: which
cannot be said of a justice of peace, of a constable, or of a sergeant, who as
such are invested with a power and jurisdiction: and sure the power of a
sergeant might less improperly be called sergeantall, then that of a
churchman, ecclesiastical.

The coordinate powers, when neither of them is subordinate to the other, are
the power of the word in the ministry, and the power of magistracy: the one
being Gods spirits jurisdiction over the hearts and aff^ct^ons of men; the
other the magistrates jurisdiction compelling men to an outward act of
obedience: which powers I have showed that nothing could step between, as
medium either of participation or of negation; although our presbyterian
brethren tell us, that the ecclesiastical is also coordinate, if not to the
power of the word, at least to the power of the magistrate: a power (they say)
which is distinct both from the power of the word, and from the power of the
magistrate. But this having already been disproved by reason, I will allege
but one of their own, namely Triglandius de potestate ecclesiastica against
Vedelius, as good as confessing he cannot tell what to make of that
ecclesiastical power, and where it must be placed: for in the description he
makes of the power of the magistrate about sacred things, and that of the power
of the word, which yet he calls ecclesiastical, he leaves no room for a
presbyterian ecclesiastical power of excommunicating, deposing, and making
laws authoritatively, as they speak. Though, I say, he calls that power
ecclesiastical, yet it has but merely the name of it; for he gives such a
description to it, as I could give no other to the power of the word. These be
his words, in the prefa^ to the reader: The ecclesiastical power is the
spiritual power seated in the administration of the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, striking at the soul, and intrinsecally affecting the consciences of
men; which God makes use of as an inst^ument and a mean for their conversion
and salvation; and for that cause is so much nobler then the civil, as the
soul is nobler then the body, and eternal felicity and salvation is more
excellent then temporal prosperity. But this power none of the divines
attribute to the magistrate. There is nothing in this description that
belongs to the ecclesiastical presbyterian power, such as Mr. Gillespie
would give us: for excommunication does not strike at the soul, but at the
body; and the opposition he makes of the things he likens it to, do show he
speaks of such a power as is called the power of the resurrection, Philip. 3.
v. 10. and the power of God, Romans 1. v. 16. and by which we are the sons of
God, Ioh. 1. v. 12. which properties cannot belong to the power of
excommunication, and of making laws in a synod, which being carried by the
major part of votes, though it were but of one, oblige all men to obedience.
Yet my ^everend and Mr. Caesar Calandrin conceives, that Triglandius by the
keys understood both keys, of the word, and of discipline. To that I say, 1.
that Triglandius description of ecclesiastical power reaches only to the
soul, and not to the ordering the outward man by discipline: 2. that a key is
an admission to the Kingdom of grace, and not to a visible assembly: 3. a key
is an instrument to get in those that are without, if they please to come in
willingly; not to force them in, or to keep them from entering; nor to cast out
those that are within by excommunication, except they desire to go out of
themselves. They use to expel men with staves and ^udgels, but not with a key,
except it be taken by the wrong end, and to a wrong use. What Triglandius
says, that this power none of the divines attribute to the magistrate, is true
of the power of the word in converting from darkness to light; which indeed
none of the divines ascribe to the magistrate. But if he had spoken of a power
of presbyterian ecclesiastical judicatories, it had not been true what he
says, that none of the divines attribute it to the magistrate; for it is the
opinion of Bullingerus, Musculus, Gualterus, great and famous divines, who take
off from the ministers all such presbyteriall power, and give it to the true
owner, even to the Christian magistrates.

Now let us see how far he extends the power of the magistrate in sacred
things; by which it is plain he affords no room for presbyterian power to
interpose between the power whereof we have just now seen the description, and
the power of the magistrate. These be his words chapter 16. p. 317. It belongs to
the civil power to deliberate what religion he will have to be exercised among
his subjects: if he does remove the true religion, he abuses indeed his power,
yet for all that his power must not be denied. I would fain know by what power
the magistrate does these things: Is it an ecclesiastical, or civil? If civil,
then some acts of the ecclesiastical power are subordinate to the civil: if
ecclesiastical, I ask whether it is coordinate to that of the ministers power,
or subordinate to the civil power. If subordinate, it is all I say. If
coordinate, then it is ten times more absurd to fain two equal powers and
judicatories over the same persons, and in the same cause and matter, as we
shall see in another place.

To clear all mistakes about subordination of powers:

1. When we say that ecclesiastical power is subordinate to the power of the
magistrate, we do not understand a subordination of functions; for neither the
functions of physicians, merchants, professors of arts, no more then that of
ministers, are subordinate to magistracy; but that whatever jurisdiction
ministers, physicians, merchants, or professors of arts have, is subordinate
to the magistrate. And indeed this has been one great cause to deny a
subordination of ecclesiastical to civil; because persons, and functions, and
the affairs about these functions, having always been separated, this error
has soon crept in, that jurisdiction and rule must be also separated: but if
jurisdictions have need to be separated and distinct, because functions are so;
there would be as many jurisdictions in a state, as there be professors of
arts and sciences. And since functions that have no affinity with magistracy
make no distinction of jurisdiction; much less the sacred function and
magistracy, that are so near a kin, have need to have several jurisdictions.
And indeed the affinity is great; both tending to the promoting of the
sovereign good, and for many 1000. years the same person having been invested
with them both.

2. It is a great mistake of some, who, because a jurisdiction is from God, and
subordinate to him, deny it to be subordinate to the magistrate. For is not the
maritall or paternall power-subordinate to God, and yet to the magistrate? and
is not despoticall power subordinate to God, Colos. 4. and yet to the
magistrate?

3. Neither do we say, that all those whose jurisdiction is subordinate to the
magistrate, ought to exercise their power by authority from the magistrate
only: for they must do it as servants, 1. ^n all just and lawful things; 2.
not with an eye-submission, (as St. Paul says of servants) as men-pleasers,
but as subject to Christ, and from a principle of conscience, though there were
no magistrates at all.

4. This consideration will remove many mistakes, that it may well stand that a
power, a command, a law, a precept may be both from God and from the
magistrate: thus the decalogue is as well a law of the magistrate, as of God.
Yea I maintain, that a command or law of God has no force of law in the court
of man, or in any presbytery, synod or assembly whatsoever, binding to active
or passive obedience, except it has the stamp of magistracy, and be published
anew by the sovereign magistrate; and that no man can be punished legally for
robbing and stealing, yea not for killing, much less can he be excommunicated,
except there be a law of man against robbers and murderers, and that some
magistracy impowereth churches or synods to pass a sentence of excommunication.

5. This also has been a great mistake, which made many deny a subordination
of ecclesiastical to civil, because those that embrace the true religion, and
live under those that hate them or persecute them, endeavor as to have a
communion independent from the magistrate, so also a jurisdiction.

6. Another error in making the church jurisdiction not subordinate, but
wholly independent from the magistrate, is, this assertion easily descending
into the minds of those that affect rule and jurisdiction, viz. that the end of
magistracy is outward peace and quietness only, and purchasing all means to
the attaining of the preservation of temporal life, wealth and prosperity;
having nothing to do with promoting the eternal good and happiness of the
soul. But this error is not only refuted by the very heathens, but also by the
most learned orthodox Divines, both English and others. Pareus on the 13. to
the Romans dubio 5. says the end of the magistrate is not only the civil good,
but also the spiritual good of the subjects, that religion may flourish in the
church according to the word of God: and so Junius Meditat. on the 122. Psalm
tom. 1. col. 721. says, that the magistrate is to procure by divine and humane
right the good of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ. But Antonius de Dominis
lib. 5. de republica ecclesiastica cap. 5.. 1. is very prolix and nervous to
prove, that he that is invested from God with a power to purchase natural
felicity, is also invested with a power to promote the spiritual.

7. It is also a great error, to make a coordination of powers seated in the
same persons. For, if it could be imagined that one part of the people were the
Church, and the other part the Commonwealth, they might be also imagined
independent one from another: thus a society of merchants, and a college of
scholars, may be well imagined to be corporations so independent one from the
other, that none of the society of merchants are part of the college, and none
of the college are part of the society. But granting that the same persons are
members of the society of merchants and of the college of scholars, the
command, law, discipline of those two corporations, as long as they admit the
same members, must have either a perpetual conflict and clashing, or the
command of one corporation must be subordinate to the command of the other; or
else if they be both coordinate, they must also be both equally subordinate to
a power set over them both. This is the case between the Church and the
Commonwealth. Granting that the same persons are members of the Commonwealth,
and of the Church, it is not possible to make these two jurisdictions
coordinate, and yet subsist together in peace, love and amity: and without one
disturbs the other, they must jointly agree to have one power over them; or the
law, injunction and commands of one, must be subordinate to the laws of the
other.

8. The grandest inconvenience in this coordination of powers and jurisdictions
is, that the same persons being members of societies under both these powers,
and submitting to the commands of both, shall be in continual perplexity which
to obey, if both do not command one thing. There is such a communion in men's
actions, causes, relations, functions, callings, commands, duties,
jurisdictions, freedoms, liberties, among those that live under one sovereign
power, and within the precincts of one jurisdiction, that it is impossible that
any outward action can be performed in whatever relation a man be considered,
as husband, master, father, pastor, lawyer, physician, merchant, at home or in
church, in a synod, or in a city, or hall, except they all are modified, ruled
and directed by one supreme jurisdiction; otherwise the saying of Tacitus would
prove true, ubi plures imperant, nemo obsequitur, where there be many
coordinate powers, there is none found to obey. When a magistrate does command
a subject to attend him in the wars, this command does exempt him from the
commands and injunctions that may be made to him as he is a son, member of a
consistory, or of a synod, or of some other corporation: therefore, when the
King of Scotland in the year 1582. commanded the magistrate of Edinburgh to
entertain and feast a French Ambassador on a set day, and the presbytery of
Edinburgh, to cross this command, had enjoined a fast upon the same day, since
both commands could not be obeyed at once by the magistrate of Edinburgh,
either the magistrates commands must be subordinate to those of the presbytery,
or the commands of the presbytery must be subordinate to those of the
magistrate; or else the different commands of both must be subordinate to a
third power, above both presbytery and magistrate.

I have brought in my Paraenesis a cloud of witnesses, Martyr, Musculus,
Gualterus, Iunius, Pareus, Cassander, Hooker, Antonius de Dominis, proving the
necessity, that the power called ecclesiastical should be subordinate to that
of the magistrate. I will only allege Musculus, in whom we shall see the sense
of all the rest; loc. com. de magistratibus. The way and nature of government
cannot bear that in the same people there be two authentic powers, two diverse
legislations and dominations, except it be by subordination; as there is no
place for two heads upon one body. Learned Dr. Hammond, who is neither for
Geneva presbytery, nor of Erastus opinion, nor yet of Musculus, Bullingerus and
Gualterus, who made little account of excommunication; yet he holds, that
ecclesiastical power is subject to the civil magistrate, who in all causes
over all persons is acknowledged supreme under Christ. These be his words, in
his tract of the power of the keys, p. 87. though by them he overthrows all
power in ministers and Bishops of excommunicating independently from the
magistrate, which yet he strives to assert against Erastus. Mr. Rutherford and
Mr. Gillespie think, that if it were granted that the magistrate is Christ's
viceregent, it would subvert wholly the grounds upon which ecclesiastical
presbyterian power is built. I question whether this concession of Dr. Hammond
that the magistrate is the governor of the Church under Christ, would not
equally unsettle his episcopal excommunication.

I should in this chapter, as I intended at first, show the vanity and nullity
of the multitude of divisions and subdivisions of ecclesiastical power, which,
like wooden legs to a lame man, must be more in number, and worse for
substance, and unfitter to walk upon, then good legs of flesh and bones to
another: for whereas this must have but two, the other must have as good as
four, and yet very bad ones. According to our principles, these two only things
well considered and retained, namely, the power of the word in the ministry,
and the external power of magistracy, will clear and decide the whole
controversy, and assert the right of churches, and the power of magistracy in
them and over them: whereas all the limbs of the ecclesiastical power, which
are more in number then the pillars of Salisbury church, are not capable to
prop up the ecclesiastical jurisdiction independent from that of the
magistrate. But it would be now too long and tedious a task, having handled
that subject very largely in the second chapter of my Paraenesis, and hoping to
speak further of the same when I meet with M. Gillespie, who being a great
schoolman, has devised a number of cases and boxes to lodge his
ecclesiastical power in.

CHAPTER II.
Of the nature and division of right divine and humane. In vain do they call
things of divine positive right, which are acted by a natural right: such are
many church acts. Things that are of divine right may be said to be of humane
right, and on the contrary, those things that are of humane right may be said
to be of divine right: which is an argument that, by right, power cannot be
divided betwixt clergy and laity.

RIght, in Latin jus, differs from law, as rule from justice: for law is the
rule it self, but right is the justice of the rule. Sometimes it signifies
that virtue called in Greek (...) equity, which abates of the rigor of the
law. But right in general that comprehends all rights, is that which is due
to every one by either equity, that is by the law of nature and of nations, or
by an instituted law. Sometimes right is so styled, by those that will call it
so, because they have the better sword: thus Ariovistus answered Caesar, that
right of war was, that the victor should give law to the vanquished. By
natural right we understand that which is consonant to right reason.

Commonly right is divided into private and public. Private right is the same
with personal right; which is had either independently from masters, parents,
husbands; those that have it are called sui juris: or dependently upon masters
and parents. The public right is either natural, as when St. Paul says that
the Gentiles do naturally the things of the law; or instituted, and is called
positive right, having a positive rule, which is given either by God or by men.
God gives it 1. to certain persons, as to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, etc.
2. to a certain people, as to Israel: 3. to all men, either for a time, as the
law of not eating blood; or for ever, as the Sacraments, and the preaching of
the Gospel.

It is not possible to give an exact division of right. Many things that are of
natural right are also of divine and instituted right; so, many divine
precepts, as is the decalogue, are of humane institution: but custom has
prevailed, that these precepts should be of positive right, that have no
footstep in nature, as is the observation of a seventh day, the forbidding of
eating the tree of death and life. We say things to be of natural right, in
which we are rather born then brought up, and which are naturally imprinted in
us; as is the law defined by Tullius 1. leg. law is a sovereign way imbred in
nature, commanding things to be done, and forbidding things contrary. By that
law we know many things instituted and delivered in Scripture: as that
obedience is due by children to parents, by servants to masters, by wives to
husbands; that theft, murder is to be avoided; and, to come nearer to our
purpose, that there is one God; that he must be worshipped; that he cannot be
worshipped except it be in meetings and assemblies in one place; that in those
assemblies all must be done in order; that the whole assembly, if it be
numerous, must be governed by some choice men chosen out of the whole body, and
deputed from them; likewise the law of nature and of nations teaches us, that
what is agreed on by the major part of those deputies, must stand for a law;
that that law must be obeyed under penalties: albeit if we be ruled by the
positive law of God, we are not so much to follow the number of suffrages and
votes in carrying of a law, as the soundness and goodness of the law. This
also is a law of nature, practiced even by all nations, that sovereign command
about sacred things, yea the chief sacerdotall function, belongs to the
sovereign power; of which law a part has been abrogated by the revealed law of
the Scripture, which did so sever the sacerdotall function from the regal,
that the regal still kept the sovereign jurisdiction about sacred things. This
is also a law of nature and nations, that every assembly and convention of men
should have power to choose, admit, and exclude members of their own society,
and to perform all acts conducing to their subsistence.

Those rights of nature God by a superior dictate or command in the Scripture
has not abrogated; for grace does not take away, but perfects nature. So that
no member of a society is to recede from its natural right, liberty, and
privilege, except by a positive law of God or man he is restrained and
commanded otherwise.

Those rights of the natural law being well understood, it will easily be
stated, by what right or power, natural, civil, political, (I had almost said
ecclesiastical) despoticall, paternall, maritall, not only every society,
family, but also each member acts: for the greatest mistake about
ecclesiastical power is, that many acts of ministers and people are said to be
of ecclesiastical, ministerial, divine, positive right, which indeed are acts
grounded upon the law of nature and nations, and are derived from a liberty and
common prudence, that every rational and free man makes use of in ordering
all kinds of societies, fraternities, corporations, whereof he is a member,
without needing to fly to a power taking its right and name as if it were of
another classis, nature and kind, and independent from any other. For as a man
being at once master of a great family, fellow of a college of physicians, a
citizen, and member both of the Commonwealth, and of the Parli^ment, besides of
a church, is not said to act by so many kinds of rights and powers, as his
stations are in the Commonwealth, as if in his college he acted by a medicall
or academicall power, in city or hall by a civicall power, in a church by an
ecclesiastical or church power; all being supposed to be alike coordinate, and
not being subordinate to the supreme power: so natural power, right, liberty,
and prudence in ordering all kinds of affairs, societies, and families, are no
otherwise distinct in kind or species, then a yard that measured cloth differs
from that which measured searge: as a yard is alike appliable to silk and
thread, and the same hammer will knock in an iron nail and a wooden pin; so the
same power and prudence governs the church and a college.

It is also observable, that a man being at once a member of a family, hall,
city, Parliament, church, does not act always according to the quality of his
relation, function, and place, public or private; not acting as a physician,
father, or husband, but as a judge; and not as a churchmember, but as a free
member of a society. Thus a member of a college of physicians joyneth in
consultation with his brethren in a case of physic, as a physician; but in
making laws, regulating the practice of physic, and the apothecaries
entrenching upon the physicians, he does not act as a physician, but as a
judge, and as a person invested with judicial power from the state. The same
physician in a Parliament, upon the matter and question of physic and of
physicians to be regulated, may speak pertinently of his art as a physician,
but does not vote and give his consent to the making of a law about physic as
a physician, but as a judge of the land. Likewise, to be sure by what right
pastors and people act in the church, the acts and actions of a pastor or
churchmember are to be considered either as acts of pastors and of
church members, or as they are acts of rulers and members of a society. The act
of a pastor as pastor, is to discharge all ministerial function commanded in
the revealed word, and not declared by any dictate of nature. In those acts I
see no right of jurisdiction, but over the inward man, when by the power of the
word the sinner is brought to the obedience of the cross of Christ. The acts
of church members, as such, are either in relation to the pastor, or of one
member to another. In relation to the pastor, the acts are to submit to the
minister ruling them, and dispensing unto them the word. They may have that
liberty to try his doctrine, and to do as they of Beroea, who searched the
Scriptures, to know whether it was so as St. Paul preached unto them: this is
also an act of every faithful member of the church, not to assent to any
doctrine, because it has been assented unto by the major part of suffrages:
but in things that concern order and discipline, to yield to the constitutions
agreed on by the major part of the assembly; so that by them the bond of
charity and the truth of the doctrine be not violated and perverted. The acts
of church members relating one to another are, to bear one another burdens,
to forgive and edify one another, to prefer another before himself.

The acts of pastors and church members as they are endowed with a power common
to all other societies, are 1. to do all things orderly; 2. to make a
discipline suitable to time and place, since there is not in the Scripture a
positive precept concerning the same; 3. to oblige every member to the laws of
the discipline voted by the major part of the members; 4. to admit and expel
the members which by the major part are thought fit so to be. Many other acts
are performed by the same members not as church members: as to appeal to a
superior tribunal, as magistracy or synod, in case of wrong sustained; for
they do not oppose a just defense to wrong by any other right, then a member of
any society should do. Thus an assembly of Christians meeting in a church way,
being persecuted or assaulted in their temple by rude and wicked men, does not
oppose a just defense by weapons or otherwise as church members, but as men
invested with natural power against an unjust violence.

In short, ministers and people have many act^ngs within the sphere of
Christian duties, which are not proper to them as Christians and members of
churches; being like in that to a physician, who does not build as a physician,
or to a counselor of State carrying a letter to a friend, who acts then the
part of a letter-bearer: thus a father has a power over his son by a natural
paternall right; but he does instruct him in a Gospel way by a paternall
Christian right and duty, grounded upon a positive precept of the Scripture:
thus Queen Mary of England established a religion by a natural right, power
and duty annexed to all sovereignty to order sacred things with a sovereign
authority; but Queen Elizabeth did overthrow the false worship, and did set up
Protestant religion, not only by the same right that Queen Mary had, but also
by a positive right, as principal churchmember, as Ezechiah, Josiah, etc.
appointed by God to be heads, and nursing fathers and mothers of the churches.

The same things, laws and constitutions that are of divine right, are also of
humane right: and likewise the things that are of humane right, in a good sense
may be said to be of divine right. Things are said to be of divine or humane
right, either because the matter of right is concerning Gods worship or humane
policy, or because God or man is the author of them. Thus the laws of the
Jews, regulating their Commonwealth, are said both to be of divine and humane
right: divine, because God is the author of them; humane, because they order
all affairs about mine and thine, right and wrong, and betwixt man and man.

Likewise many things have been instituted with great wisdom by magistrates
and councils, which may well be said to be both of divine and humane right:
Divine, because they further the purity of worship and power of godliness;
humane, because they were instituted by men, and may suffer alteration and
reformation.

So things that are every way of divine right, both for the matter and
institution, as the eating of the passover, and the observation of the
Sabbath, may be said to be of humane right, because commanded and enjoined by
humane authority. The very calling of synods, which they say is of divine
institution, both for their institution, which is Apostolic, and for the
matter that is handled in them, none but a papist did yet deny to be the
Emperors and magistrates right. Thus fasting, prayer, public humiliation,
though duties to be performed by divine right and precept, are also of humane
right, as commanded and ordered by the magistrate in a public way. Thus it was
the good Kings of Iuda's right, and none can blame them for it, to command
fasting and prayers.

Lastly, things that are every way of humane right, and made by man, and have
for their object the regulating of humane affairs, as are the laws concerning
conduit-pipes, buildings, forests, chases, etc. may conveniently be said to be
of divine right, because by divine right they oblige the conscience.

Hence we may gather, how impossible it is to share betwixt laity and clergy by
Divine and humane right, power of legislation and jurisdiction, about things,
causes and persons; as that pastors and ministers should be over things that
are of divine right, and magistrates over those things that are of humane
right, without clashing of powers, causes and persons; there being such a
complication of right, causes and persons, that they cannot be so much as
imagined a sunder: besides that the preaching of the Gospel and magistracy do
comprehend all actions of man, and parts of life, wherein men ought to live
godly, justly and soberly.

CHAPTER III.
The nature, matter, form, and author of law. The canons and sentences of
Church-judicatories have no force of law, except they receive it from the
sanction of the magistrate. The defects in the division of laws into Divine
and humane; into moral, ceremonial and politic; and into Ecclesiastical and
civil.

INtending chiefly to prove the vanity and nullity of a power called
ecclesiastical distinct from that of the magistrate, since also no power of
legislation nor of jurisdiction can be exercised without a power to make a law,
and to command obedience to the law; it will be requisite to know the nature of
law; that so making good, that Church Officers are not invested with any power
to make laws, or to command obedience to them, all their jurisdiction may be
brought to just nothing.

Law sometimes is taken for a dictate of nature, or right reason, and consent
of nations: thus they say of Aesop, that though he was free by nature, yet the
law of man enslaved him: generally it is defined, the rule of actions and
duties. This ensuing definition I conceive to be one of the most perfect; Law
is a rule of life and of moral actions, made and published by a legislatour
armed with a judicial power, commanding things to be done, and forbidding
things that are not to be done, under recompenses and penalties.

To understand the nature of law, we must consider the matter of law, which is,
whatever can be commanded, whether God or man be the author of it; so that no
causes or things can be exempted from being the matter of the law of God, or of
man: it is enough that it may be commanded. The very doctrine and matter of
faith may be matter of the law; for the Hebrew thorah signifies both law and
doctrine: so that there is no doubt but that not only the decalogue, but also
all the doctrine of the Gospel is matter of the law. For were there any thing
that should not be the matter of the law of man, we had need to have a visible
infallible judge on earth, besides the sovereign magistrate, who should
determine which thing must be the matter of the law, which not. The very
doctrine of the Trinity is made the matter of the Code of Justinian; and
Theodosius commanded that all his subjects should embrace the religion that
Peter the Apostle, Damasus of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria professed.

2. Next we must consider the form of the law, which gives force of law, and
without which law would be no law, and no obedience were due to it in the court
of man. That form is the stamp or sanction of the sovereign power, obliging men
to obey upon penalties. Law, says Campanella, without penalty is no law but
counsel. That form is expressed in short in the Digests; Legis virtus, etc.
the virtue of the law is to command, to forbid, to permit, to punish. The
sovereign power gives the form of law to any matter that is the subject of a
man's duty or obedience either to God or man: yea it gives form to the laws
of God, which though they oblige the conscience, whether published or no by the
magistrate; yet they are of no force in the court of man, to oblige for fear of
punishment, and, as the Apostle speaks, for wrath, except they are commanded
by the magistrate. So that it is properly man that gives name and force to a
law; and a man may well say with St. Austin, ep. 66. that Jesus Christ
commands by the magistrate; hoc jubent Imperatores quod jubet and Christus,
quia cum bonum jubent, per illos non jubet nisi Christus.

3. We must consider the author of the law, either as he that has given his
counsel, and (it may be) furnished the matter and contrivance of the law, as
Tribonianus to Justinian; or he that has given sanction and force of law to
the matter brought to him, such was only Justinian, and not Tribonianus.
Sometimes the same person contrives the law and gives sanction to it; such was
Solon and Lycurgus. God, who is the author of his laws, is not the enforcer of
them among the Mahumetans, nor any where else, without a Moses; but with those
people whom he does incline to obedience by a law of the spirit.

4. To the nature of the law it is required, that the legislator be armed with
a sword to punish the transgressors of the law; therefore equity, truth and
justice are no conditions required to the validity of a law, for it receives
force from the will of him who is able to make his will good, were it never so
bad.

5. It is required that the legistator should command his own laws, not
another, commanding in his own name, and not in the name of another; and
therefore those that are invested with judicial sovereign power, are to give
account of their actions only to God.

By what I have said, it is easily conceived what force of law have the
judgments, sentences, canons, decrees of ecclesiastical judicatories, except
they receive form and sanction from the magistrate; without which they are but
counsels, admonitions, and advices.

1. Touching the matter, they may afford it, as Tribonianus to Justinian: in
that sense they may be the authors of a law: but they cannot give form and
sanction to it, obliging men under penalties in case of disobedience, since
they are not invested with coactive power, without which law is no law; except
they have that power in subordination to the magistrate; for two coordinate
powers cannot give sanction to the same law, except it could be imagined, that
the will of one should never cross the will of the other, which is not
conceivable.

2. Ministers and church-judicatories are not to command any laws, much less
their own laws, but only deliver the commands of a superior, either God or
the magistrate. The pastor may say with Moses Exodus 18. v. 15. I do make the
people know the statutes of God and his laws; but he cannot lay any penalty
upon the breaker of the law, except, as Moses, he be invested with magistracy.
But were the minister not only to deliver the commands of God, but also lay a
command; this he could not do but in the name of God: and therefore the
magistrate has this privilege, that although he be a minister of God as well
as the minister of the Gospel, yet he may command in his own name the law of
God, which the minister of the Gospel may not. It is the opinion of the
gravest Divines, that ministers have no power of legislation* which being
granted, it is not possible they should have a power of jurisdiction: for it
was never heard that he that has no power of (or capacity to) legislation, can
have any to jurisdiction; for every member of Parliament is supposed to be
capable of exercising jurisdiction, but were he disinabled to have a power of
legislation, by that he should loose all capacity to bear any office of
jurisdiction. Camero is very express in his tract de Ecclesia p. 369. where
having showed that there be two things which are the matter of law, 1. faith
and good manners, 2. things that pertain to order and discipline; he adds, in
neither kind the church has power to make laws: having said a little before
that what proceeds from the church ought rather to be called admonitions and
exhortations, then laws. Musculus is no less express in his common places p.
6^1. We do confidently assert, that all that power by which authentic laws
are made binding the subjects to obey, whether they be called civil or eccle
siasticall, do not belong to the church, that is, to the multitude of the
faithful and subjects; nor to the churchminister; but properly to the sole
magistrate, to whom is given a mere command (merum imperium) over the subjects.

3. This shows the invalidity of all canons, decrees and sentences of
church-judicatories; which except they be known to be equitable, true and just,
are not to be obeyed: since the validity of an ecclesiastical law is not like
that of the magistrates, which be it never so unjust, has the force of a law:
but sure none of our presbyterian brethren will maintain, that all judgments
and sentences of church-judicatories are infallible; and therefore it belongs
to every man censured by such a judicatorie, to be well informed of the
justice, truth and equity of the censure, before he obeys it, yea before it
has the force or name of a censure. For it fares with the sentences of
ministers, as with the counsels of physicians, which must convince the party of
the necessity of vielding to this or that remedy: their commands must have
always some reason annexed, why they must be obeyed: but the law of the
magistrate needs none, and permits none to interpret it, but obey it according
to the letter.

Laws are variously divided: into Divine and humane; ecclesiastical and
civil; moral, ceremonial and politic. Some call those divine, which are made
by God; and those humane, which are made by men: others call them divine laws,
which rule the conscience; and those humane laws, which govern the outward man.
But none of these divisions are without their defects: for humane laws govern
and oblige the conscience, as the Apostle tells us To. 13. and albeit all
humane laws are not divine, yet all divine laws are so far humane, as the
magistrate gives a sanction to them, and imposes an obligation in the court
of man to obey them.

Likewise the division of laws into moral, policick and ceremonial, has its
defects: for I conceive that the moral law is the ground and basis of the
ceremonial and politic, and a rule by which God is to be worshipped, State,
cities, families, fathers, husbands, children, servants must be governed. So
that the ceremonial law is but the moral law applied to the use of divine
worship; and the politic or civil law is but the moral law applyable to the
practice and conversation of life at home and abroad.

The holy Scripture puts no such distinction. 1. God was alike the author of
them all.

2. God only and Moses his deputy on earth did give a sanction and stamp of
obligation to them all.

3. The matter indeed was diverse; and so are the military laws distinct from
the matrimonial and testamentary, and yet are they all comprehended under the
civil law, because the civil magistrate gives force of law to them alike: upon
that account why may not the moral and ceremonial law be called civil?

4. Because when the Scripture speaks of the perfection of the law of God, of
those that walk in the laws of God, that the law of Moses was read every
Sabbath, that many days passed without law; the whole body of the laws given
by Moses is understood, without any such partition.

5. Because the same persons judged every causes and matter punishable by the
law, there being, as Mr. Gillespie faineth, no such thing as a judicatory
ecclesiastical for ecclesiastical causes and a civil bench where the judges
decided civil or politic causes; for so we should need a third bench of judges
meddling with moral matters and causes. Yet Mr. Gillespie, p. 14. grants that
the Jews had no other civil law but Gods own law; and besides that the Levites
judged not only in the business of the Lord, but also in the business of the
King, 1 Chronicles. 2. v. 30. and 32.

And so falls down the division of laws into ecclesiastical and civil; for

1. They differ not in kind, otherwise then a man from an animal; this being
the genus, the other the species.

2. All laws devised by men, whatever subject and matter they are about, are
civil, politic, and laws of that power that gives them force and vigor of
laws: such are all the constitutions about discipline of the church, which in
vain they call ecclesiastical.

3. If a law were to be called ecclesiastical, because it handles laws for
the government of the church, we should need as many kinds of laws as there be
societies in the world, and we should have one peculiar classis for laws to
govern schools and Universities, another to govern societies of merchants, a
third for societies of drapers. I do not deny but that a law may be as properly
called ecclesiastical, as a law is called nauticall, military, testamentary,
matrimonial, either because they are about matters of churches, armies, wills,
husbands, wives; or because they were invented for the benefit of churches,
soldiers, married people, and the like: but in vain do they think to call a
law ecclesiastical because not only it is of church matters, but also because
it must be made by ecclesiastical men, and receive form and sanction from
them, and because all causes and matters which they call ecclesiastical must
be judged by ecclesiastical men. For

1. As ecclesiastical power (if there be any such thing) must be subordinate
to the civil, as we have proved before; so ecclesiastical laws to the civil
laws.

2. Ministers having no power of legislation nor of jurisdiction; therefore
laws to govern Christians in churches need not to take their name from church,
minister or ministry, but from the magistrate, who is the maker, latour and
giver of them, and binds men to a submission to them under penalty.

Musculus, in the above-quoted place, disproveth at large this division of
laws into civil and ecclesiastical, and tells us, how far laws are to be
called ecclesiastical, though they be in truth the magistrates laws; only
because they are made by him for the good of the church: for as properly, says
he, laws may be called scholasticall and Academicall, because they were made
for the good and benefit of schools or Universities; and so far, and no
further, can it be allowed that laws should be ecclesiastical.

CHAPTER IV.
Of the nature of judgment: what judgment every private man has, what the
magistrate, and what ministers, synods and church-judicatories. They have no
definitive judgment, as Mr. Rutherfurd asserts; but the magistrate has the
greatest share in de finitive judgments: which is proved by some passages of
Mr. Rutherfurd, and of Pareus and Rivetus. Who is the judge of controversies?

NOt to run over all the acceptions of judgment, which I have handled in my
Paraenesis, I will mention but one, that serves to decide the whole
controversy, which lies in a narrow room, whether the magistrate, or pastors
assembled in a presbytery and synod, or even private men be judges of
controversies about faith and discipline.

Judgment is an act, by which every man endowed with reason, or pretending to
have any, upon debating within himself, and weighing things to be done or to be
believed, at length resolves peremptorily what either he will do himself, or
will have others to do, about things he conceives to be true, just and
useful. For to the nature of judgment it is not required, that the thing that
a man will do himself, or will have others to do, be true, just and good; it
being enough that he apprehends them to be so.

I make two judgments; one private, the other public. The private I call
judgment of discretion, by which every one having weighed and debated within
himself the truth, equity, goodness or ^sefulnesse of counsels, advices,
commands, doctrine and persons, at length choseth and pitcheth rather upon this
then that: this judgment may be called judgment of knowledge and apprehension.

The public judgment is the delivery of ones private judgment so far as
concerns others, by which a man utters what he conceives fitting for
others to do or believe.

This judgment in ministers, presbyteries, synods, wise men, counselors,
physicians and others not invested with any jurisdiction, and who have more
authority then power, is called advice, counsel, declaration, when they
deliver their sense, meaning and opinion upon any debated subject, concluding
something which they conceive others are to embrace, believe or practice.

In magistrates and men invested with jurisdiction, both this public judgment
and the private have the same operation; as in ministers, synods, counselors
and the like: but over and above it causes them to command what they conceived
fitting to be received and practiced.

By the public judgment Pastors do what St. Austin says, Epist. 48. to
Vincentius; pastoris est persuadere ad veritatem persuadendo; pastors are to
bring to truth by persuasion: sed magistratus est cogendo; but magistrates are
to bring to it by constraint and by commanding.

From these public judgments every private man is to appeal to his private
judgment of discretion; not yielding and giving his assent to the
declarations, canons, sentences of ministers, any further then by his judgment
of discretion he conceives them to be true, just and useful; not obeying
actively the commands of the magistrate, in case he conceives them, by the
same judgment of discretion, to be against faith and good manners.

The staring thus and dividing of judgment decideth, as I conceive, all the
questions and doubts arising about this subject, and answers all Mr.
R^therfurds and Gillespies definitions and objections concerning judgment.

They make a fourfold judgment; apprehensive, discretive, definitive, and
infallible, which belongs only to Jesus Christ. The definitive, they say, is
proper to ministers and church-judicatories. But they forget the main
judgment, which gives life and force to all the rest, and is the magistrates,
when he brings to execution things well debated by the judgment of
declaration, and approved of by the judgment of discretion.

In that division of theirs they also commit two great errors. 1. That they
make of one judgment two; for to the judgment of discretion they add a
judgment of apprehension, which differs only in degrees from the other; and
were these judgments distinct, yet they go always together, and are always
in the same person, and do belong to the private judgment. 2. They ascribe a
definitive judgment to pastors and church-judicatories, which they themselves
had need to explain what they mean by: for, 1. must every private man stand to
it, and not appeal from it to his judgment of discretion? 2. if they do not
stand to it, what inconvenience, harm or danger, or worse consequence can
befall him, then any one that despises good counsel or advice, which put no
obligation, except they be reduced into laws and commands by the magistrate?
3. must the magistrate adhere to that definitive judgment, and command them
without debating within himself whether those definitions be agreeable with his
own public or private judgment? which indeed is to make of him an
executioner. If he must not stand to the definitions of pastors and synods, but
rather they must stand to what he conceives most fitting; then it is evident
that that judgment of pastors, called by them definitive, is of no validity,
and has need to take another name, since neither magistrate nor private men
are obliged to stand to it, except they be convinced that it is reasonable, and
that its definitions are true, just and useful.

The evidence of this truth about judgment is so clear, that Mr. Rutherfurd
and Gillespie are unwares carried sometimes to deliver the substance of what we
said before. I will allege but two passages out of Mr. Rutherfurds book, of
the divine right of church government; for there he overthrows his definitive
judgment of pastors or church-judicatories, and sets above it not only the
judgment of the magistrate, but also that of every private man: for sure, that
definitive judgment that may be reversed and rejected without any redress by
the ministers, cannot be of any weight or validity.

The first passage is chapter 25. quest. 21. p. 668. The magistrate is not more
tied to the judgment of a synod or church, then any private man is tied to his
practice. The tie in discipline, and in all synodicall acts and determinations,
is here as it is in preaching the word: the tie is secondary, conditional,
with limitation, so far forth as it agrees with the word; not absolutely
obliging, not Papal qua, nor because commanded, or because determined by the
church; and such as magistrates and all Christians may reject, when contrary to
or not warranted by the word of God. If such words had fallen from Grotius or Mr.
Coleman, they would have been branded for rank Erastianisme. If all the
presbyterians will but put their names with probatum est to them, all
controversy will be ended, and the power in the hands of church officers will
be no longer distinct from that of the magistrate, and all presbyterian
jurisdiction of excommunicating, deposing, and making laws authoritatively,
will be taken away. So that, if we give credit to Mr. Rutherfurd, all acts,
sentences and excommunications pronounced by synods and presbyteries, are no
further valide, then as they are conceived by the magistrates and private men
agreeable with the word.

The other passage of Mr. Rutherfurd does no less pull down the definitive
judgment of ministers, and by it all presbyterian jurisdiction; p. 577. As the
church is to approve and command the just sentence of the civil judge in
punishing ill doers; but only conditionally, so far as it is just: so is the
magistrate obliged to follow, ratify, and with his civil sanction confirm the
sound constitutions of the church, but conditionally; not absolutely and
blindly, but only so far as they agree with the word of God.

Studying brevity, I am loath to load the reader with authorities out of most
eminent divines, Zanchius, Martyr, Iunius, Pareus, Camero, Rivetus, and others;
all jointly proving, 1. that all the judgments and sentences of synods,
church-judicatories, presbyteries, are mere counsels, advices, and no laws
obliging to obedience or to assent, except they receive the ultimate sanction
from the magistrate; 2. that the magistrate ought not to take the ministers or
synods judgment barely because it comes from them, but follow his own
judgment. I will allege but one or two out of Pareus, and one out of Rivetus,

That of Pareus is on the 13. Romans All faithful, even private men, ought to
judge of faith and of religion; not only with an apprehensive judgment, that
by it they may understand the true religion; but also with a judgment of
discretion, that they may distinguish the true from the false, hold to one and
reject the other: much more ought the Christian magistrate to judge of the
religion, not only apprehensively and discretively, but also definitively. Here
we have a definitive judgment proper to magistrates as well as to ministers
and church-judicatories. In the same place; A Prince ought to defend the true
religion, suppress the false, banish blasphemies and heresies: he ought then
to know of all these singly, and by his office judge of them: for if he were
only to draw the sword at the beck of the priests, without knowledge and
judgment, and without making any question whether the judgments of the
pastors are right or no; what would he be but a sergeant and an executioner, as
the Jews made of Pilate, saving to him, If he had not been a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him to thee?

Rivet on the decalogue has these words: We join those two together: that the
magistrate should not only act by others prejudice, but also by his own
judgment; not that he should trust so much to his, but also let ministers of
the Gospel have their parts; not relying on his fancy, but being counseled by
the pastors of churches, calling synods, and there hearing godly and learned
men discoursing out of the word of God, of controversies of religion, and of
articles of faith; then what he has himself approved of to be the truth, let
him embrace it and spread it. There he makes no more of synods, then a Prince
of his state-counsellors, or a sick man of his physicians, whose judgments
they take for counsels and advices, and not for definitive sentences. And so
speaks Maresius Coll. Theol. loc. 16. these. 77. Ministers of churches do not
so much represent judges in a senate, as prudent doctors and learned, gathered
to give counsel; and their result is like the advice of physicians about the
health of the body.

By what I have said of judgment, and alleged out of Mr. Rutherfurd, that
question so much debated betwixt the Romanists and the Protestants, who is the
judge of controversies in matters of faith, is easily decided: for doubtless
the ministers of the Gospel have by their education, function and ministerial
duty, that public judgment to declare either in churches or synods, what by
the judgment of discretion they conceive to be the mind and the ordinance of
Christ; but this judgment inforceth and obliges no man to assent to it,
except they also by their private judgment of discretion apprehend it to be
such. So ought neither magistrates, nor the power of magistracy seated in
churches, to command or enjoin it as a law to be obeyed, or a doctrine to be
believed, except apprehended by the judgment of discretion to be the mind or
an ordinance of Christ. Ministers in divinity, physicians in physic, each
professor of art in his art, not only because they are more versed in that
thing they profess, but also ex officio, have a judgment that carries and
gives more authority; but it being fallible, and therefore subject to the
revisall of others, whether magistrates or subjects, and not attended with
command obliging to obedience, either active or passive, it is only authentic
to them that are persuaded and convinced to yield to it.

CHAPTER V.
An examination of the 30. chapter of the confession of faith made by the
Rever. Assembly of Divines. That in their Assembly they assumed no
jurisdiction, nor had any delegated to them from the magistrate, and therefore
were not to attribute it to their brethren. That the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is the same with the magistrates jurisdiction. Mr. Gillespies
reasons examined.

THe reverend Assembly of Divines, in the 30. and 31. chapters of their
Confession of Faith, are strong assertors of a double jurisdiction. Before I
come to examine what they say, and their proofs alleged in the margent, I
would be well understood, that I do not quarrel against the spiritual
jurisdiction over the inward man in the ministry; when a minister does command
from Christ, and the people yields obedience, being once enlightened and
convinced: all is done on both parts willingly, and not by constraint: the
weapons of that jurisdiction are not carnal, and yet very mighty; not by
putting away by excommunication, but by pulling down the strong holds of sin,
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor.
10. v. 4. and 5. The Lord Jesus Christ, (say they, sect. 1.) as King and head
of his Church, has therein appointed a government in the hands of
Church Officers distinct from the civil magistrate.

It may be the Rev. Assembly do only intend to adjudge jurisdiction to other
church assemblies and synods, and none to themselves, for these reasons.

1. They were bound by their charter by which they were called, not to exercise
any jurisdiction and authority ecclesiastical whatsoever, or any other power,
(for these be the words of the ordinance;) and besides, are en joined, not to
assume any authority, but to advise and give counsel upon such things as shall
be propounded to them, and to deliver their opinions and advices.

2. And the same they did by their practice; for they assumed no jurisdiction,
but having perfected the Confession of Faith, the Catechism, and platform of
government, they presented them to the Parliament under the name of humble
advice: for they were not to determine any thing authoritatively, albeit they
pretend no less was due unto them, as they speak in the 31. chapter sect. 3.
that ministers in synods may determine authoritatively matters of religion.

3. But both the power which was delegated to the Assembly, and the exercise of
that power during their sitting at Westminster, being a lively representation
of the extent of power which all councels and synods under an orthodox
magistrate ever enjoyed or ought to have, I wonder much they would ascribe
judicial authority to ministers in synods, which they themselves had not,
never looked for, were not to have, and which they never saw practiced before
in any assemblies convocated by the magistrate.

4. Had the Lord Jesus Christ instituted a jurisdiction distinct and
independent from the magistrate, they were to disclaim that ordinance which
delegated a power which was none of their own, but was derived immediately from
Christ, not by the intervention and the channel of the magistrate, unto
themselves as ministers of Christ: and if any ordinance before their sitting
was to be expected, it was not to be directed to the ministers, but to the
people, who were to be enjoined to suffer the ministers to exercise that
jurisdiction which they authoritatively challenge from Jesus Christ.

5. Had the jurisdiction of the Assembly been acknowledged, the magistrate, as
our brethren the Scots speak, should have submitted to all resolutions of the
Assembly, being no longer humble advices, but canons, decrees and laws made
authoritatively, by the Governors of churches under Jesus Christ.

But what sense can be given to these words, when they say, there is a
government distinct from the magistrate? Is it such a distinction as is betwixt
subordinates, or betwixt coordinates? If the magistrates power and the
presbyterian power are coordinates, each must needs be independent one from the
other; which how inconsistent it is under one magistrate, we have discussed in
another place. If these powers be subordinate, it must be one of these three
ways: 1. in coercive power; 2. in judgment or judicial determinations, that
are to pass for laws, obliging all sorts of people to obedience either active
or passive: 3. in the affinity of power in nature and definition, which
necessarily imports subordination betwixt them. 1. For matter of coercive
power, the ecclesiastical having none, they must be beholden to another power,
which indeed makes it to be power; all external power and jurisdiction being
but childrens play, ens rationis, a bubble, a name without a thing, without a
power of coercion. 2. For judgment; if ecclesiastical men cannot execute
their power without the magistrate, the question will be whether he shall
execute their injunctions as a judge and interpreter, or as a sergeant and
executioner, not interpreting the commands of the court, but fulfilling them
with a blind obedience and judgment: for there is no medium betwixt these two.
If as a judge, then he ought to judge of the judgments of ministers, ere he
does command them to be observed; and so in a manner all determinations of
ministers will be but counsels and advices, seeing before they have force of
law and of rule, they must receive the ultimate judgment and approbation from
the magistrate. 3. Subordination of powers implies affinity of definition and
nature betwixt the subordinates: as Surgerie being subordinate to Medicine,
proves the affinity betwixt Medicine and Surgery. Yea, if subordinate
jurisdictions stand in pari gradu, and in equal distance from the power they
are subordinate unto, it argues an identity of jurisdictions among them: as if
the jurisdiction of a college of physicians and of a corporation of merchants
be both subordinate to one magistrate, it is manifest that the jurisdiction of
that college and of that corporation are but one, as springing from one head
of jurisdiction; thus if the jurisdictions of a church and of a corporation are
of equal distance in subordination from one springhead of jurisdiction, no
doubt the jurisdiction of that church and of that corporation are but one
jurisdiction.

Now that the nature of the jurisdiction of pastors, churches and synods, is
the same with that of magistracy, and needs not to be coordinate with it, it
is evident by many proofs.

1. There is the same use of judgment, prudence and discretion: as by the same
yard one may measure cloth, silk and thread; so may the same wise political
head, and the same prudence and discretion govern a state, a church, and a
family. Dionysius the tyrant used to say, he did employ the same art in
governing his school at Corinth, and his Kingdom of Sicily.

2. There is the same nature of law in both jurisdictions: for the nature of
the law consists not in its being just, equal and honest; but in its being
published by him or them that are invested with magistracy. The better men,
(that is, not the wiser and the most rational, but the richer and the most
potent) give law to the rest. The philosophers permit us to weigh and interpret
their laws; but the magistrate enjoyneth blind obedience to his. Seneca says
that the magistrates law does not dispute, but commands: and Tullie in his
th^d book de natura Deorum says, I am to receive from thee, O philosopher,
satisfaction from reason; but I am to yield to the laws that our ancestors
have delivered us, though they give no reason. In like manner all presbyterian
synods, namely the general assembly of Scotland, do not give so much leave to
inferior ecclesiastical judicatories or private persons, to examine their
decrees by a judgment of discretion, as those of Beroea took to themselves
when they examined St. Paul's doctrine, and searched the Scripture, to know
whether it was so as he preached: for their ecclesiastical constitutions have
force of law, only because they have the sanction of an ecclesiastical
assembly, and are not to be disputed by any inferior judicatory; whereas the
nature of an ecclesiastical law should be quite different from the civil, viz.
that it should not be the product of a jurisdiction compelling or requiring to
assent or obey, except the inward man be persuaded and convinced. It may be our
presbyterian brethren will say that, for example, excommunication has no
further validity of sentence, then as it is just, and done deservedly: which
indeed proves the nullity of all excommunications; for all being done in the
name of Christ, all must needs be just and valid, and every one excommunicating
in the name of Christ should excommunicate infallibly, and his excommunication
should be an effect of an unerring judgment; which till it be known to be
infallible, a man may justly question the validity of his excommunication.

3. In this also there is a great affinity and agreement betwixt the
jurisdiction they call ecclesiastical, and the civil (and therefore no need to
make two of one;) that ecclesiastical presbyterian jurisdiction is bounded by
the same limits as is the civil jurisdiction, which is against the nature of
all other jurisdictions different from the magistrates power, though
subordinate to it, as is the maritall and paternall powers; none doubting but a
father in England has a power over his son in France, and that a wife is
subject to her husband however distant from him. Now it is granted by all, that
the jurisdiction of churches combined, and that of synods never went beyond the
magistrates jurisdiction; that the churches of Persia, Aethiopia and India were
not tied to observe the deciees of the first council of Nice, nor the reformed
churches of France those of the synod of Dordrecht, neither the church of
Barwick to submit to the orders of the general assembly of Scotland: and yet
some do not stick to maintain, that a man excommunicated in Scotland, is also
bound by the same sentence in France or Holland, because, if we may believe
them, it is reasonable that the sphere of activity within which excommunication
acts should as much spread down wards as upwards; and that since a man bound
by excommunication at Edinburgh is also tied in heaven, good reason he should
be bound and fast in any part of the earth.

4. This also which all churches, classes and synods assume, makes their
jurisdiction wholly concurring in nature and property with the jurisdiction of
the magistrate; which is, that as in all civil and political assemblies, the
major and the stronger part in votes, not in reasons, does carry it; so decrees
and canons, because the major part have voted them to be such, are therefore
receivable by inferior ecclesiastical judicatories, as they call them:
whereas, since they pretend that ecclesiastical jurisdiction is of a quite
different nature from that of the magistrate, it were most convenient that it
should not be like it in this main particular, but that private men or churches
should adhere to truth, not to multitude; not numbering the votes, but weighing
the reasons.

And indeed this was well considered by the Parliament, in their ordinance for
calling of the assembly: for though they took upon themselves that power of
legislation and jurisdiction, whose votes are not weighed, but numbered, and
which cannot be otherwise exercised in this world; yet they very prudently
conceived, that such a jurisdiction could not be assumed by churchmen, as such,
in matters of religion: for they never intended, that whatsoever should be
transacted or defined by the major part of the ministers of the Assembly,
should be received for a canon and an ecclesiastical law, that should stand in
force; since they expressly enjoin, in the rules which they prescribed to the
assembly, 1. that their decisions and definitions should be presented to the
Parliament, not under the name of law made to them, but of humble advice; 2.
that no regard should be had to the number of the persons dissenting or
assenting, but that each party should subscribe their names to their opinion.

5. Another argument to prove that the ecclesiastical and the magistrates
power are not coordinate, but that the ecclesiastical is subordinate to that
of the magistrate, and that they both are of the same nature, is, that both of
them, magistrate and ministers, challenge not only the duty of messengers from
God, in delivering to the people the laws of God; but also as judges exercise
power about making new laws, which do oblige to obedience for conscience sake:
for the assemblies and presbyteries of Scotland do not only press obedience to
the laws expressly set down in Scripture, but also to their canons, decrees
and constitutions.

6. Another argument to prove the identity of the powers ecclesiastical and
civil is, that both are conversant about laws and constitutions that are made
by men: such are most of the canons and constitutions of synods and
ecclesiastical assemblies, which are no more express Scripture then the
Instinian Code: and therefore it is altogether needless to constitute two
coordinate humane legislative powers.

7. But suppose that all the decrees, canons, constitutions of presbyteries and
church assemblies were word of God, and divine precepts, this very thing, that
they are divine constitutions, and that one jurisdiction or other must be
conceived enjoining by a sanction, and commanding obedience to them, argues
that ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction are but one: For what can the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction do more, then to give a sanction to the laws of
God? which thing the magistrate is to do. If he must give a sanction to the
decalogue, why not to all other precepts which are equally of divine
institution?

8. It is absurd to put under the Gospel a difference betwixt the jurisdiction
or law of Christ, and the law of God the universal Monarch, as Mr. Gillespie
speaks p. 261. for there is no precept of the decalogue, there is nothing
good, holy, honest and of good report, but is the law of Jesus Christ: and
therefore since the magistrate cannot be (...), a minister of God, as St. Paul
calls him, but he must be a minister of Jesus Christ, and that he cannot be
keeper of the decalogue and of the law of God under Moses administration, but
he must be also the keeper of the law of Christ; what need to constitute two
coordinate judicial powers, each of them being pari gradu subordinate to Jesus
Christ?

Lastly, if the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is not of this world, and that this
Kingdom, as our brethren tell us, is the presbyterian government, then this
Kingdom must have a jurisdiction and laws quite different from the Kingdom and
jurisdiction of this world; which yet does not prove true by the parallels we
have made of both jurisdictions.

Mr. Gillespie, a member of that Assembly, page 85. endeavors to show what a
wide difference there is betwixt these two jurisdictions, in their nature,
causes, objects, adjuncts: but I might upon the same grounds maintain the like
wide difference betwixt martial, navall, testamentall, paternall, maritall and
civil power; all differing, and yet subordinate to that of the magistrate. I
might also attribute to each society its peculiar power; placing in a college
of physicians a medicall power, subordinate to God the God of bodies, health
and outward safety, as the civil is subordinate to the God of the Universe, and
the ecclesiastical to Christ. For if the God of nations has instituted the
civil power, and the God of saints the ecclesiastical, as Mr. Gillespie
speaks; what hinders but that the God of nature has instituted the medicall
power? And if moral good be the object of the civil power, and spiritual good
of the spiritual power; why may not bodily health be the object of the
medicall power?

CHAPTER VI.
Whether Jesus Christ has appointed a jurisdiction called ecclesiastical, as
King and head of his Church. Of the nature of the Kingdom of God. In what sense
the magistrate is head of the Church.

WE proceed to examine what the Rever. Assembly say, that Jesus Christ has
instituted this ecclesiastical ^sdiction as King and head of his Church. Mr.
Gillespie, one of their body, and therefore the best interpreter of their
meaning, says in his 2. book chap. 5. that Jesus Christ has two Kingdoms: 1.
a general, as he is the eternal Son of God, the head of all principalities
and powers, reigning over all creatures; 2. a particular Kingdom, as he is
mediator, reigning over the church only: by which church he understands a
visible church of saints, combined in such a body as is the church of Scotland,
enjoying the ordinances and the discipline of Christ. And of this Kingdom he
understands Matthew. 16. v. 28. There be some standing here, which shall not
taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom. So does
Beza against Erastus, who, with Mr. Gillespie, out of those words of Christ, my
Kingdom is not of this world, concludes two things: 1. that the
ecclesiastical government is distinct from the civil or that of the
magistrate; 2. that that Kingdom is an aggregation of many churches under one
presbytery.

In the 6. chap. of the same book he is very prolix to prove, that Jesus
Christ, as mediator and head of the Church, has not appointed the magistrate
to be his viceregent in the government of the church in the second acception.

I confess that the holy Scripture mentions two Kingdoms; but that both
these be visible ones, I deny flatly: particularly, that Jesus Christ is called
King and head of the church, in reference to the visible congregations of
Christians, or that by the body of Christ is meant the visible assembly of
those that make outward profession of the Christian religion.

Let us then consider in this Kingdom of Jesus Christ as mediator, the nature
of the King and head, of his scepter, sword, power, weapons, keys, fulness;
that so we may see if all these qualifications, yea if any one of these are
proper to any visible church particular and national.

Both Rivet and Reynolds, in their comments upon the 110. Psalm, make this
Kingdom wholly spiritual, not of this world, much less seen in this world,
though known to be in this world. It is that Kingdom which is many times
mentioned in the Gospel; but never once taken for a visible government of men
professing outwardly the name of Christ, but for the Kingdom of grace, and that
government which Christ has over those whom he rules by his spirit of
adoption. The keys of this Kingdom are the door of utterance in the ministry,
whereby men have entrance: these keys keep out from coming in those that are
without doors, but never put out any that are once in; and therefore most
absurd it is to ground the power of excommunication upon the power of the
keys, committed by Jesus Christ to the Apostles: if the Kingdom of which
Christ speaks is the Kingdom of heaven or of grace, will they say that an
excommunicated person is put o^ of the Kingdom of grace? The scepter and sword
of this Kingdom is the word of God. The weapons are not carnal; nor are they
used to the putting a man out by excommunication: but to the pulling down the
strong holds of sin; not by tying a man with church censures, but bringing into
captivity his imaginations to the obedience of Christ. This truth broke through
the darkness of popery, and was acknowledged by those that were oppressed by
the Popes tyranny: so in the year 1080. the advocate of the Emperor confut.
9. says, that the preaching of Gregory the 7. was new, since the church had no
other sword then that of the spirit, which was the word of God. This language
was acknowledged by the canonists to be in the mouths of the Popes adversaries,
who yet kept within the communion of Rome, never dreaming of a Wicleff or a
Luther; as can. inter. 33. quest. 3. Ecclesia non habet gladium nisi
spiritualem, qui non occidit, sed vivisificat.

The law of this Kingdom is not the discipline or censure of the church, but
the law both of the Gospel and of faith, called also the law of the spirit.
For by the power of that Kingdom, described by the holy Ghost in the new
Testament, and mentioned in 50. places, is not in any of them understood the
ecclesiastical power, or any such thing as the power of ministers,
presbyteries, synods, to make decrees, canons, to determine authoritatively, to
suspend, excommunicate and absolve: but always is meant that power that
translateth from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God; by
which we are made sons of God, Ioh. 1. v. 12. by which we are enlightened, Act.
26. v. 18. and raised unto newness of life.

The fulness of that Kingdom is, the saving gifts and graces given to the
members. The head of this Kingdom is Jesus Christ, our King, Priest and
Prophet, ruling by his spirit his subjects which are his members, offering,
satisfying and interceding only for them, teaching none savingly but them.

There is no governor or viceregent of this church, but the spirit of God
working in the heart by the word preached or read, and guiding into all truth.
Though God has no visible governors of this Kingdom, yet he has externally
many subservient instruments and ministers for the advancing of that Kingdom;
as magistrates by their jurisdiction, pastors by their function, all godly
people by their general calling and duty, their persecutions, afflictions,
maladies; and particularly the ministers of the Gospel are main agents in Gods
hands for the building up of that Kingdom. What they know they do, is the least
part of their ministry; they themselves being ignorant, what and how they work
by it in men's hearts. Gods chief minister is Christ in the word: the power is
the efficacious working of the word: the keys are the openings of the heart to
the word, or rather the openings of the word to the heart, and the receiving of
the person into the heavenly fellowship.

This power is not placed in the ministers, but the word; which though it is
delivered by them not only in a way of beseeching and exhorting, but also of
commanding, yet that jurisdiction is only effectual on those that of unwilling
are rendered willing: so that it is rather the jurisdiction of the word, then of
the minister: for the ministers operation in the ministry is like to that of
the artists in their chymicall operations, where they are rather spectators
then actors, admovendo agentia passivis; for nature and fire are the main
agents. They are like an husbandman in a vintage, who makes not the wine, but
orders it, pouring it from one vessel to another.

This being the nature of the Kingdom and church of God, of which Christ is the
head and King; it remains to enquire, who is the viceregent of God, in
governing the visible congregations of Christians meeting about the worship of
God.

Properly the magistrate is not head of the church, more then of other
societies: for as the callings of a physician, merchant, smith, seaman, so of a
Christian, as Christian and churchmember, are not subordinate to magistracy;
but only under the notion of, and as they are members of families, societies,
corporations and commonwealths: in all which magistracy is virtually and
eminently resident; in regard that no society of men can be imagined to be
governed either without a power delegate from the magistrate, or without
assuming magistracy within it self.

In that sense the magistrate may be said, for these three or four reasons, to
be head of a visible national church. 1. Because the matter, manner and extent
of the power exercised by that church, being wholly the same with that of the
magistrate, it is needless to make of one power two; and therefore the
magistrate being the supreme governor in the managing of that power exercised
alike in all kinds of societies within his dominion, he may very properly be
the supreme governor as well of churches, as of all other societies.

2. The magistrate may be said to be head of the visible church, because there
is no man, of what place, function, calling, dignity so ever he be, that in an
external visible way can so much promote the interest of Jesus Christ, and the
building up of his Kingdom, as the supreme magistrate; not so much considered
as Christian, but as magistrate, and by virtue of his magistracy. None does
doubt but that one single woman, namely Queen Elizabeth, being a magistrate,
did contribute more for establishing and spreading the Gospel of Christ in
England, then all the godly ministers put together in the days of Queen Mary.

Let but one single magistrate countenance religion, this will avail more then
thousands of Greenhams or Bradfords under a magistrate of a contrary religion.
Sure, where God has given more ability and power to do good, he also has
placed there more right and duty to promote that good. I think there was more
stresse of duty laid upon Queen Elizabeth to advance Christ's Kingdom in
England, then on 100. Bradfords, Latimers and Ridleys in Queen Mary's days.

A 3. ground may be added, why the sovereign magistrate may be called the head
of the church, (and which is much pressed by Reynolds, Martyr, Musculus,
Bullingerus, Gualterus, Zanchius, Pareus,) is, because all the decisions of
ministers about matters of faith or discipline, are but mere counsels, advices
and directions; not binding externally, that is actively or passively, any
church, society or corporation, except they receive a sanction from the
magistrate: and besides that these sanctions are not to be made by him caeco
judicio, with a blind judgment, standing to their determination, without
examination, and doing as much as those of Beroea, who ere they believed St.
Paul, searched the Scriptures, to know whether it was so as he preached. As no
obedience is to be rendered by any person, society or corporation, without they
duly weigh in their judgment of discretion whether the command be just or no:
so a command is not to be made by the person whose duty and part it is to
command, until he first understands and apprehends by his judgment of
discretion the thing to be a good and a fitting rule of obedience. So that
since presbyteries and ^ynods cannot enforce obligation of obedience to their
declarations and decisions, without the injunction and command of the
magistrate; since also he is not to enjoin or command any thing repugnant to
his own judgment; it does consequently follow, that good reason it is, that he
who last is to judge and command any thing, propounded and debated in whatever
assembly of men, should be styled the sovereign judge, head, ruler, and
governor of those things that are solely in his own power.

Fourthly, he may be said to be head of the church, because of three main
duties which are annexed to his office of magistracy, which comprehend what is
requisite for life, godliness and happiness. The 1. is provisio mediorum
conducentium ad finem optimum, provision of the means conducing to the best
end: 2. remotio impedientium, the removing of hindrances: 3. actualis directio
in illum finem, an actual direction and ordering things to that end.

These 3. conditions Javellus a Romish Bishop lays down to assert the
sovereign power of the magistrate, in judging, providing, ordering, and
removing, in order to obtaining the best end, which he says is the main
felicity of man.

Lastly, he may be well called head of the church, that receives appeals from
all church-judicatories, and disannuls or ratifies their judgments and
sentences. But Mr. Rutherfurd denies those acts to be appeals, being not in
eadem serie, from a lower ecclesiastical court to a superior ecclesiastical
court; and says, that from an ecclesiastical court to a civil, as to the
magistrate, there is no appeal, but a removal by a declinator, a complaint, a
refuge. But we having proved that synods, presbyteries, etc. have no
jurisdiction but what they have from the magistrate; therefore all appeals from
a church-judicatorie to the magistrate, are but from an inseriour court of the
magistrate to a superior of the same magistrate. Rivet on the decalogue had
not learned such squibs of distinctions betwixt appeals and refuges, complaints
and declinators; for by any means he would have men to appeal to the magistrate
from church-sentences: Ministers as ministers are the subjects of the sovereign
magistrate, and why may it not be lawful for subjects to appeal from the
judgments of subjects to the supreme magistrate? and why may it not be lawful
to the supreme magistrate to review the judgments of his subjects, to ratify
them, if they be good, and abolish them, if they be bad? For call those
removals what you will, so that the thing be still the same: for he that from
an unjust sentence of a church-judicatorie has his recourse to the magistrate,
both declines the sentence of that court, appeals to a higher court, and makes
his complaint to him that can redress him, help him, and disannull the first
sentence. I confess, if a man be condemned in England, he may have his refuge
to some neighbor Prince: but this Prince can but protect him from the
execution of the sentence against him; but cannot disannull the sentence
against him, nor restore him in statu quo prius. Such are the examples of
Chrysostomus, Flavianus and Athanasius, which are to no purpose: for they
repaired to the Bishop of Rome, desiring indeed to be judged by him; but they
did not look upon him as their superior that could relieve them, and quash the
sentence against them; they repaired to him only as to a mediator and
intercessour.

Authorities should now make good what I have proved to be consonant to reason,
such as might be brought out of the best reformers, as Martyr, Reynolds,
Pareus, Chamier; who make no other supreme visible governor of the church then
the sovereign magistrate: but I will not trouble the reader with many
quotations. Yet to show that this is no new doctrine, I might produce some
famous Romish authors, who thought no less in the darkest times of ignorance:
for so Claude Fauchet has left written, a famous Historian and a Papist, in
his book of the liberties of the Gallicane church; who out of Gregory of
Tours, and the practice of his time, proves that the Kings of France were
reputed heads of the church: a title which many 100. years after was much found
fault with in the Kings of England, by the Romanists, yea by some reformers. He
concludes his discourse thus: which shows, that the Bishops of that time did
hold, the King, assisted by his counsel of State, to be under God head on
earth of the church in his Kingdom, and not the Pope; whom if they had looked
on as the head, they would have sent unto him the conclusion of the council of
Orleans, and not to King Clovis. So speaks the author of the Review of the
council of Trent, lib. 6. cap. 5. The ecclesiastics in France do not hold
their ecclesiastic jurisdiction from the Pope, but from the King; though the
Jesuits teach otherwise.

CHAPTER VII.
The strength of Mr. Gillespies reasons, to disprove that the magistrate is not
chief governor of the church under Christ, examined.

ALl that I have said does sufficiently overthrow what Mr. Gillespie alleges
for a double jurisdiction, and against the magistrates being the chief
governor of the church under Christ. To make good that, in a hundred places he
does much under value the magistrates power in sacred things: namely p. 187.
that the magistrate, though Christian and godly, does not exnatura rei, and in
regard of his particular vocation, intend the glory of Jesus Christ, as
mediator and King of the church. In the next page; The glory of Jesus Christ,
as mediator and King of the church, is not the end of magistracy. And in the
same page he says, that the end of magistracy is not godliness and honesty,
but peace and quietness. Page 235. he says, the magistrate is not to rule in
the name of Christ. Page 250. he says, the magistrate of England is not a
member of the church as a magistrate, but as a Christian. In the 294. page; the
civil magistrate is Gods viceregent, not Christ's: and ibid. If the magistrate
be supreme head and governor of the church under Christ, then the ministers of
the church are the magistrates ministers as well as Christ's, and must act in
the magistrates name, and as subordinate to him; and the magistrate shall be
Christ's minister, and act in Christ's name.

By all this he declares his opinion, more then he proves it. But to elude
whatever strength this carries, I further add, that God makes use of two main
instruments to promote and advance the Kingdom of Christ as mediator.

1. The first is the sacred function, wholly set a part by God to preach the
glad tidings of God reconciled to the world: which function was first laid on
Christ, and then on the Apostles and the ministers of the Gospel, who are
ambassadors and messengers of and from Christ. In this function there is no
jurisdiction annexed, but what the spirit in the word has upon men's hearts for
their conviction and conversion. In the exercise of this function there is no
law made by him that bears it, but the law of the spirit; no censure inflicted,
but on such as either willingly and not by constraint undergo it, and chose
whether they will or no; or when it pleases God in judgment to afflict the
despisers of Gods ministers and ordinances. This function, I grant, is not
exercised in the magistrates name, but Christ's, nor is it subordinate to him.

2. The second thing servient (if I may so speak) and subservient to the
promoting of the Kingdom of Christ, is the magistrate and magistracy; in as
much as (which I said before) it cannot be that ministers and people assemble,
synods be called, an outward government settled, laws published, good men
rewarded, bad men punished, heresies and heretics rejected, ministers
maintained, union preserved, except ministers, people, synods be invested with
a power of magistrate and magistracy.

These two, as I suppose, being undeniably true, all Mr. Gillespies assertions
abovementioned will be found built upon the sand. The magistrate having not
the sacred function on him, is no minister nor ambassador of and from Christ,
neither does the inward operative jurisdiction annexed to the sacred function
arise from magistracy ex natura rei. In that regard the minister preaching the
Gospel, and exercising his pastoral function, is not the magistrates
minister, but Christ's. But as magistracy is the second necessary instrument
which God employeth to promote the Kingdom of his Son in the world; and for as
much as it cannot be so much as imagined, that magistracy is inherent in all
pastors and assemblies of churches and synods; no doubt but the ministers in
that consideration may be called the magistrates ministers, as both in the same
respect are Christ's ministers. If Christ's Kingdom cannot be nor ever was
promoted without magistracy actually present and acting, then the magistrate is
a main minister of Christ in those acts.

Reverend and learned Mr. Lightfoot, in his Harmony of the New Testament, upon
the 1 Cor. 5. clearly evinceth, that church officers cannot be so much as
conceived to govern the churches without magistracy either assumed or
delegated: for having told us, that every synagogue of the Jews had magistracy
within their own body, judging betwixt party and party in matters of money,
Health, damage, yea inflicting corporal punishments; he adds, all things
well considered, it may not be so monstrons as it seems to some, to say, it
might very well be so in those times of Christian congregations: for since, as
it might be showed, Christ and his Apostles, in platforming the model of
Christian churches in those times, did keep very close to the platform of
synagogues; and since the Romans in those times made no difference betwixt
Jews Iudaizing, and Jews that were turned Christians, for as yet there was no
persecution raised against Christianity; why might not Christian congregations
have and exercise their double function of ministry and magistracy in them, as
well as the Jewish synagogues? and if that much controverted place, 1 Timothy 5.
17. should be interpreted according to such a rule, it were neither irrational
nor improbable. Here by the way one may see, that in synagogues there were
several functions, but one Imperium and jurisdiction, which was that of
magistracy; 2. that the churches of Christians were modelled according to
Jewish synagogues; 3. that every church had both ministry and magistracy.

By this likewise down goes what he says, that the magistrate, though
Christian and godly, does not in regard of his particular vocation intend the
glory of Jesus Christ, as mediator and King of the church. The main end as
well as duty of magistracy is, the care of religion, and so of Christian
religion: his aim is, and ought to be, not so much peace and quietness, as
godliness and honesty. Must a magistrate hide his power, which is his talent,
in a napkin? were not Adam, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by their paternall,
magistraticall power tied to promote Gods true worship?

It is very strange doctrine, when he says p. 189. that the end of an
ecclesiastical sentence, as delivering to Satan, is, that men may learn not to
blaspheme; but the end of the magistrate in punishing blasphemers, is only that
justice may be done according to law, and that peace and good order may be
maintained. A rank papist could hardly speak more crudely. Ought not this to be
the end of the magistrate in punishing transgressors, if it be not by death,
that they may change their lives, and be better then they were? Were not
reformation of life the end for which a blasphemer is punished, but only peace
and quietness, the magistrate might as well let him go unpunished, if he can
but obtain his end, which, as Mr. Gillespie says, is peace and quietness;
which has been often obtained when no blasphemers were punished. It is
observed, that in Augustus time there was for 12. years through all the Roman
Empire peace and quietness, though the life of all his subjects were a
perpetual blasphemy against God.

But, I pray, how can Christ's church be ruled by magistracy, except it be in
the name of Christ, promote the interest of Jesus Christ, and aim at the glory
of Jesus Christ? When he says, that the magi^rate of England is not a member
of the church as a magistrate, but as a Christian, and that he governs not as a
Christian, but as a magistrate; I confess I understand not, why I may not say
as well, that a pastor is not a member of a church as pastor, but as a
Christian: for there be in the church as well Balaams and false teachers, as
persecuting magistrates. Why may I not say, that a father is not to teach the
fear of the Lord to his son as a father, but as a Christian? for the magistrate
is not to rule and order affairs of the church as a Christian, but as a
magistrate: otherwise a Christian, without the office of magistracy, might do
the like. How can the duty about the exercise of a power be divided from the
power it self, as that a magistrate should be by his duty of magistracy keeper
of both tables, and yet should have no power given from God for the keeping of
these tables?

But, which is most al surd, how can the keeping of the two tables under the
Gospel be separate from the keeping of the doctrine and discipline of the
Gospel, as that the magistrate should be keeper of one, and the pastors of the
other? If the magistrate under the old Testament was keeper not only of the
decalogue, but also of the covenant of grace, by which the people of Israel was
distinguished from the rest of the world; what hinders but he should be under
the Gospells administration a keeper both of the law and Gospel? except Mr.
Gillespie say, that the priests were keepers of the law whereof David speaks
in the 19 Psalm, and the magistrate keeper of the two tables given in mount
Sinai.

As for the magistrates being a member of the church, and therefore no head or
governor of the church; I believe he is as much liable to submit and stoup his
will to the commands of Christ in the ministry, as the lowest in the
congregation: he must acknowledge his minister the better man, as honored with
the highest function that ever was, and which the Son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ took upon him. But were all the ministers of the Gospel as many Jesus
Christ's, I would yield unto them all alike jurisdiction over the wills and
minds of men; but deny them an external coercive judicial power over their
bodies, estates, liberties, etc.

CHAPTER VIII.
Mr. Gillespies manifest contradictions in stating the magistrates power in
matters of Religion.

BUt I will plainly show, that in this matter Mr. Gillespie does manifestly
contradict himself, and stands on no sure ground: for what he has taken from
the magistrate in some places, in others he restores to him: In some he grants
as much to the magistrate as if he had been another Erastus; in others he gives
him nothing at all, and makes ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction to be res
disparatae, or things as much different as wisdom and a candlestick, being of
several classes and predicaments, so that one has nothing to meddle with the
other. Thus page 253. these be his words: We deny that in a well-constituted
church, it is agreeable to the will of Christ for the magistrate either to
receive appeals, properly so called, from the sentence of an ecclesiastical
court, or to receive complaints exhibited against that sentence by that party
censured, so as by his authority upon such a complaint to nullify or make void
the ecclesiastical censure.

This indeed is imperium in imperio, a jurisdiction within a jurisdiction, and
independent from it. Mr. Gillespie would not have a man to appeal from the
presbytery or synod, or make complaints to the magistrate, nor a magistrate to
receive the complaints; but he is contented that the magistrate should act the
part of an executioner, in compelling the party censured to submit to the
church-censure: which indeed is a most ungodly and tyrannical proceeding, like
that of Pope Julius the 2. who would have King Lewis the 12. to execute the
sentence against the Waldenses by destroying them by the sword, and burning
their cities, without taking any cognizance of the fact. And since all
church censures do signify just nothing, without a power of magistracy giving
its sanction for effectuating the sentence of the church; here, if we believe
Mr. Gillespie, the pastor is like the intellect, and the magistrate the will,
this following with a blind obedience the dictates of that.

But who shall judge, when the church is well constituted, that then the
magistrate may not receive complaints and appeals? and may not sometimes wrong
proceedings und unjust sentences pass in a well-constituted church, so long as
a church never so pure is not infallible? and on the contrary, may not an
unsettled church be very just in their censures? why then should it be more
agreeable to the will of Christ to receive appeals from a just sentence in an
unsettled church, then from an unjust one when the church is well-constituted?
But when was ever such a well-constituted church, unerring in their judgment,
as all appeals from their judgment to another should be unlawful? was or is
that church well-constituted, that either ever clashed with magistracy, or was
divided in it self, as now it is?

Now we shall find Mr. Gillespie playing two other parts: under the one he
ascribes to the magistrate as much as ever they challenged; under the other
vizard he chalks a middle way of magistrates power in sacred things, in which
he seems to give something to the magistrate, but in truth gives nothing:
however he is sure to raise a dust of distinctions, that neither satisfy one
nor the other.

Page 259. he alleges the 25. article of the confession of the church of
Scotland, which says, that to Kings, Princes, rulers and magistrates chiefly
and most principally the conservation and the purgation of religion pertains;
so that not only they are appointed for civil policy, but also for maintenance
of the true religion, and for suppressing idolatry, and all superstition what
soever.

He who never had heard of a double jurisdiction, ecclesiastical and civil, or
of a power of excommunicating, deposing, making laws, and determining so
authoritatively about matters of faith and discipline, that the magistrate is
not to revise their judgments, or receive complaints from church-judicatories;
he who never, I say, had heard of these positions, would never deduct them by
any consequence out of the words of the confession of Scotland quoted by Mr.
Gillespie: for quite contrary, they unite all power into one; make the
magistrate sole governor of churches, national, provincial, and
consistoriall, and sole judge of heresies, canous, decrees, and
church censures; and besides overturn all Mr. Gillespies ground, upon which he
thinks to have laid very fast the fabric of his ecclesiastical jurisdiction
independent from the magistrate; and lastly, reinvest the magistrate with the
right and power which Mr. Gillespie has taken from him, when every where he
denies these three things, 1. that the magistrate as magistrate intends the
glory of Jesus Christ, no otherwise then a seaman or a picture-drawer as such,
(see p. 187.) 2. that he is to rule in the name of Christ, p. 235. 3. that a
magistrate as such is subservient to Christ as mediator. But let us examine by
parts the force of the words of the confession of Scotland, and how they agree
with Mr. Gillespies usual determinations.

1. That article of the confession ascribes to the magistrate at least an
equal jurisdiction over ecclesiastical persons and things which he has over
civil, for they say, he is appointed not only for civil policy, but also for
maintenance of the true religion: so that equally he is charged by God to
extirpate heresies, reform the church, and to purge the Commonwealth from
seditions, abuses, crimes, etc.

2. Yea the article puts a great deal more stresse of duty upon the magistrate
to govern the church, and maintain and reform the true religion, then to rule
the Commonwealth; besides, making the end and aim of magistrates and
magistracy not so much peace and quietness, as honesty and godliness; and not
so much the glory of his dominions, as that of Jesus Christ.

3. But how can it be that, as the article says, the magistrate should be
appointed by God chiefly and principally for maintaining the true religion, for
purging it from heresies, schism, idolatry, etc. and yet the while he should
not rule in the name of Christ, nor should be subservient to the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ as mediator, as Mr. G^llespie speaks? Can the Lord Jesus
appoint officers, whose office and place is chiefly and principally to promote
the interest of Jesus Christ, and yet those officers shall not intend that
which chiefly they are to intend, and are appointed for, namely the glory of
Jesus Christ, and the advancement of his Kingdom? How can the article stand
with what he says p. 187. that magistrates as such do not intend the glory of
Jesus Christ, otherwise then a seaman, a printer, a merchant? So that by what
he says, the magistrates act toward the promoting and advancing Christ's
Kingdom has no more congruity then the act of a physician building a house,
which he does not build as a physician, but as an architect and builder. Thus
Mr. Gillespie makes not a magistrate or magistracy, but his Christian
profession, subservient to the interest of Jesus Christ.

4. But how can the magistrates principal duty be to purge religion, extirpate
idolatry and heresy, with a power only depending on God, except his judgment,
in discerning what is true religion and what idolatry, be as absolute and
independent on any judicatory, as his power and duty is? It God has placed in
the same person or persons both a duty and a power to reform and purge
religion, sure he has not denied him the main condition required to the
discharge of that duty, and the exercise of that power; and that condition is
the duty of a judge, whose judgment of a law or sentence, whether right or
wrong, goes always along with his judicall power: so that the magistrate must
judge with a judgment of discretion, and approbation of the truth, the
goodness and equity of any matter propounded to (...) by presbyteries and
synods, before it be law, (...), decree, or judicial sentence, obliging
externally men to obedience.

This language of the article of the confession of Scotland falls sometimes
from Mr. Gillespies pen, as page 187. It lies upon the magistrate to advance
that high and eminent vocation of his, that Christ may be glorified as King of
the church: and p. 191. he says, magistrates are appointed not only for civil
policy, but for the conservation and purgation of religion. But Mr. Gillespie
may be well excused, if he let fall such passages from his pen, pulling down
with one hand what he has set up with the other; for Beza, a great advocate of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and by whom it has taken a great rise, will
sometimes thus forget himself, namely in an epistle of his (it is the 83.) to a
namelesse friend, beating down at one blow his ecclesiastical jurisdiction
independent from the magistrate. The words are: Docet nos igitur Dei verbum,
etc. The word of God teaches us, that it is the duty of magistrates, to be
even the chief guardians of ecclesiastical order. Therefore their charge is to
look and provide, that a presbytery rightly constituted according to the word
of God, do act all things lawfully, and when need is, to interpose their
authority, that things well judged and constituted be performed, that the ring
leaders of disorders be restrained and punished according to their deserts. So
likewise it is the office of the presbytery, to implore the aid of the
magistrate when needful, and obey him when he rightly admonishes. Certain it
is, the magistrate is made here sole judge, to pronounce when the presbytery
is well constituted, and its judgments are right, and to interpose his
authority as he sees cause. And at the end of the epistle, officium
magistratus vel hoc praecipuum est, ut qui Domino ministrant legitime vocentur,
and rite officio suo fungantur; It is even the chief duty of the magistrate,
that those that minister to the Lord be lawfully called, and perform well their
office. Thus the magistrate is made judge of the lawfullnesse of the call, and
when ministers discharge their places aright. Sure he that has the power to
judge of the lawfulness of a call, has likewise power to make the call null
and void, in case it be not valid enough in his apprehension and judgment.
Good Lord! what need is there to trouble the world with a distinct power from
the magistrate, which is thus evacuated and made void by another power?

CHAPTER IX.
The concessions of Mr. Gillespie, which come to nothing by the multitud^ of
his evasions and distinctions. The vanity and nullity of his and other men's
divisions and distinctions of power. Martyr, Musculus, Gualterus alleged
against the naming of a power ecclesiastical, when it is in truth the
magistrates power. The positions of Maccovius, about the power of the
magistrate in sacred things, not hitherto answered by any.

THus we see that even Erastus could say no more then Mr. Gillespie and the
confession of Scotland. But Mr. Gillespie has many evasions of modalities,
causalities, and distinctions of power, by which he seems sometimes to make
large concessions to the magistrate; but which, when he pleases, and it serves
his turn, he can elude and bring to nothing, throwing in the eyes distinctions
in great store, to confound the judgment; which is a strong argument of
weakness and unsoundnesse, as of a house, so of a cause, when they need so
many supporters: whereas those that plead for the magistrates power in sacred
things, have need but of one only rule, to state and define the whole
controversy about the magistrates power, and the measure of obedience which all
Christian churches, synods and presbyteries are to yield to them; and that rule
is, that all men, either single, or convened and met in a society, under
whatever name or title, do submit to and obey the magistrate in all things that
are not against faith and good manners. And these two things, 1. the internal
power in the ministry, 2. and the external power of the magistrate, nakedly
understood, make short work, and rid us of that army of causes, kinds and
distinctions of power and operations, which M. Gillespie opposes to a single
combatant; who notwithstanding is much stronger with his one only weapon, then
Mr. Gil^espie with his thousands; as the fable says of the cat, whose one only
caveat and shift to avoid (...), by climbing up the first tree or house, did
more avail for her preservation, then the whole bag-full of wiles and policies
of the fox.

It were an endless labor, to bring into a body all the divisions,
distinctions, causalities, modalities, forms and objects of powers, dispersed
in Mr. Gillespies book. Page 191. he makes two objects about which
ecclesiastical power is conversant: first, the object of the magistrates care
of religion, and the object of the operation of that care. Thus he and others
make a power which he calls a care of the religion, and another a care about
religion.

As for the power itself considered generally, they make it double,
ecclesiastical and civil: this is wholly the magistrates; in the other the
magistrate has also a share: for they say, this ecciesiasticall power is
exercised either in a politic way, or in an ecclesiastical way: thus they
make an ecclesiastical civil power residing in the magistrate.

Next, they divide ecclesiastical power into intrinsecall and extrinsecall,
into direct and indirect; the extrinsecall and indirect they yield to the
magistrate: thus you have again an ecclesiastical power belonging to the
magistrate. Again, they have an objective and formal ecclesiastical power,
which needs a further subdivision to be understood: for they make an
objective ecclesiastical power conversant about persons and things; and this,
they say, belongs only to the magistrate; and a formal ecclesiastical
power, in which the magistrate has his share with the ministers: so that of
these two ecclesiastical powers, objective and formal, it will prove that the
magistrate has 3. parts, and the ministers but one: for this ecclesiastical
formal power is again divided by them, into a power exercised ratione objecti
objective-way, about things and persons, which kind of power, say they, belongs
to the sole magistrate; and into a power exercised in an ecclesiastical way,
which they say is the ministers portion.

Page 261. he has an ecclesiastical power, which he divides into perfect and
imperfect, which he calls pro tanto: of this stamp is this division of
ecclesiastical power into the power of every way, and the power more suo:
which distinctions are so subtle, that they are beyond Scotus apprehension. He
has also a division of ecclesiastical power into imperative and elicitive;
this is proper to ministers, that to magistrates: and then an ecclesiastical
power and jurisdiction properly so called, and another improperly so called.
The jurisdiction improperly so called he and all his brethren ascribe to the
ministers: but the jurisdiction properly so called to the magistrate. Which
thing no way agrees with the division of ecclesiastical power into perfect
and imperfect abovementioned: for whereas they make the perfect
ecclesiastical power to belong to the ministers, and the imperfect to the
magistrate; here they make the ecclesiastical power properly so called to
pertain to the magistrate, and the power improperly so called to the ministers:
so that, if we believe them, the power properly so called shall be the
imperfect power, as on the contrary, the power improperly so called shall be
the perfect power; which is against any man's common sense and logic.

By the help of these distinctions, the Popes and their advocates have defended
the power of excommunicating and deposing Kings, yea of disposing of their
tempora^ties, saying, that the Pope has not a direct power over them, but an
indirect; but yet causing to be seized, or seizing directly of their dominions;
as Julius the II. the Kingdom of Navarre: per indirectam potestatem, and in
casu necessitatis in ordine ad spiritualia, potest summus pontifex manum
imponere regnis and imperiis cum plenissima potestate.

I have not done yet ranking in files the several ecclesiastical powers. They
further divide it into elicitive and coercive; into primary and secondary
power; into the power managed directly, and ex consequenti; into a power of
reforming abuses under the notion of formality of scandal, and a power under
the notion of formality of crime. And, to draw to an end of dividing, they have
more divisions of ecclesiastical powers, as into directive and coercive;
cumulative and privative; auxiliary and destructive; declarative and executive;
authoritative and constitutive: the auxiliary they derive from Charles the
great, capitulari Car. mag. Volumus vos scire voluntatem nostram, quod nos
parati sumus vos adjuvare ubicunque necesse est, ut ministerium vestrum
adimplere valeatis; we will have you to know, that we are ready to help you in
the ministry. Now of all these divisions of ecclesiastical powers, the
magistrate has always one half; the ministers sometimes none, except they
take for themselves the destructive and privative powers, which indeed signify
just nothing, and are ^nt^arationis; except also they content themselves with a
power and jurisdiction improperly so called, leaving to the magistrate the
opposite member of power properly so called, which is a silent confession that
they have none at all, since they can yet find no name for it.

I have one division more of ecclesiastical power, brought by Amyraldus and
some others, quite different from the rest, being not a dichotomie, but a
trichotomie; not a division into two, but three coordinate powers; the one
belonging to the magistrate, the second to layelders and deputies of the
church, and the third appertaining to ministers. These three ecclesiastical
powers he makes to be conspicuous in all ecclesiastical assemblies and
synods: where the magistrate has his ecclesiastical indirect extrinsecall
power, as they call it, the ministers have their intrin^call direct
ecclesiastical power, and the lay elders have a less intrinsecall direct
ecclesiastical power, for it has not found a name yet; for it is (say they)
neither of the nature of ecclesiastical power belonging to the magistrate, nor
of that which is proper to ministers, but a mungrell ecclesiastical power, in
regard they cannot perform by their power those acts that belong either to
magistracy or ministry. For besides that they cannot preach and administer the
Sacraments, Amyraldus will not allow them any voice, but consultative, not
deliberative, and only in matters of discipline and ecclesiastical policy: and
that power, they say, they have common with the magistrate, who over and above
has his ecclesiastical power, which neither the ministers nor lay elders have
any thing to do with. Lastly, the ministers have their ecclesiastical power
distinct from the ecclesiastical power of both.

The bare relating of these divisions of power and modifications of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is sufficient to confute them; so that there is
little need of authority to witness their nullity and vanity. Yet three grave
and learned divines, namely Martyr, Musculus and Gualterus, would have the name
and the thing to be abolished. Martyr loc. com. 13. class. 4. 9. shows the
little need of multiplying powers, whenas that of the magistrate is sufficient;
and that David, Solomon, Josias, being civil magistrates, did think that
religion belonged to their care; and Constantinus, Theodosius, Iustinianus, had
no greater thought then to constitute the true church of God.

Musculus is yet more pregnant, loc. com. de magistratibus: what hinders, I
pray, but that this may be ecclesiastical, which is done neither by the church
it self, nor in the name and by the power of the church, but is done, commanded
and enjoined by the magistrate within the church, in the name and power of God,
and to procure the good of the church, and repress the evils committed in the
church? A little lower he has these express and golden words: the way and
nature of government cannot bear, that in the same people there be two
authentic powers, two diverse legislations and dominations, except it be by
subordination; as there is no place for two heads in one body.

Gualterus Homil. in 1 Cor. 5. is no less express: They distinguish betwixt
ecclesiastical and political jurisdiction: but this distinction is taken out
of the shop of the papists, for it is not to be had in the Scripture; for it is
plain that the same way must be observed in the New as in the old Testament.
And a little lower: The same then must be observed in the new Testament, and no
need there is that the ministers of the word should have a peculiar senate,
taking upon them what belongs to the magistrate: they may be censors of
manners, such as are needful in a greater commonwealth, where ordinary
magistrates cannot attend all businesses; but these are created by the
magistrates authority, and ought to do all by his command, and not ly a
peculiar power of their own, distinct from that of the magistrate. Such
passages, and many more, I allege in my Paraenesis p. 16. and 17. No marvel
if those that recede from the plainness of the Scripture, have knit themselves
such nets and windings of powers, in which while they think to be safe^ they
lose themselves.

With the help of those distinctions and divisions of power, M. Gillespie
stretches and shortneth his ecclesiastical power as a leathern point:
sometimes lengthening it so far, as that the magistrate may take hold of it by
one end; and sometimes giving both ends and the middle into the hands of the
ministers.

I will allege one or two more places out of Mr. Gillespies book, by which his
art will appear in extending and contracting his ecclesiastical power; one
while making the magistrates and ministers to share the power between them,
another while giving to either, all or nothing.

Page 263. speaking of the extent of the ecclesiastical power of the
magistrate, he is useful, says he, and helpful to the Kingdom of Christ the
mediator; magistracy being serviceable to purge the church of scandal, to
promote the course of the Gospel, and the edification of one another. But how?
not perfectly, but protanto; not every way, but more suo; not intrinsecally,
but extrinsecally; not primarily, but secondarily; not directly, but ex
consequent^; not sub formalitate scandali, but sub formalitate criminis, or not
under the notion of scandal, but of crime.

I allege this not to confute it, having elsewhere showed the weakness and
nullity of such divisions: what a lame and impotent thing is eccle^asticall
power, that needs so many wooden legs and crutches? But, I pray, does not
the magistrate punish blasphemy as a scandal, and a contagious offense
communicative to others?

Page 264. The coercive part, in compelling the obstinate and unruly to submit
to the presbyteriall and synodicall sentence, belongs to the magistrate: not as
if the magistrate had nothing to do but to be an executioner of the pleasure of
church officers, or as if he were by a blind and implicit faith to constrain
all men to stand to their determination; God forbid. The magistrate must have
his full liberty to judge of that which he is to compel men to do; to judge of
it not only judicio apprehensivo, by understanding and apprehending aright what
it is, but judicio discretivo, by the judgment of Christian prudence and
discretion, examining by the word of God the grounds, reasons, and warrants of
the thing, that he may in faith, and not doubtingly, add his authority
thereto: in which judging he does judicare, not judicem agere; that is, he is
judex suarum actionum, he judges whether he ought to add his civil authority
to this or that which seems good to church officers, and does not concur
therewith, except he be satisfied in his conscience.

Whoever examineth narrowly the extent of power which he yields to belong to
the magistrate, will soon discover that all the ecclesiastical power is to be
managed by the magistrate. 1. He makes all synodicall or presbyterian power to
be of no force, without a coercive power: 2. that the magistrate must have his
full liberty to judge of the sentence, before he causes it to be executed: 3.
that the magistrate having both the last judgment of approbation, and of that
they call imperative, or command, to yield obedience to the declarations and
sentences of synods or consistories, it is plain, he is the sovereign judge of
all ecclesiastical judgments, sentences and debates, and that they are but
counsels and advices, till the magistrate approves of them, and commands
them.

This single passage of Mr. Gillespie granted unto him, might serve for an
answer to all his book, and would overthrow all ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
And indeed all the controversy lies in the narrow compass of these few lines
of his, the matter of which by right should have been the main subject and bulk
of his book, and not have been so slightly passed over: for this is the very
hinge, on which Gualterus and Maccovius conceive that the whole controversy
betwixt Erastus and his opposites hung, and which, as it is stated by
Maccovius, will give a bone to pick till doomsday to the assertors of an
ecclesiastical jurisdiction; it is a Gordian knot, which they will never
disintangle, but by cutting of it, the truth of it being so undeniable, that it
was never answered by Walaeus, Apollinus, Triglandius, nor by Mr. Gillespie,
who indeed in this paragraph alleges the substance of Maccovius positions,
but does not answer them to any purpose.

The three positions of Maccovius are brought by several in various terms, but
all to the same purpose, and are these.

1. It is the duty of the magistrate to look and take order that the word of
God be preached with purity, that the Sacraments and the discipline of the
church be duly administered, and to make a diligent enquiry into the ministers
performing of these, and to punish them if either they miss, or do amiss in
the d^scharge of their places. Which words of Maccovius, Rivetus upon the
decalogue does express in equivalent terms. It is the duty of ministers to
infuse doctrine, to wound by censures, to administer the sacraments immediately
and personally, and, as they speak, ex officio, by their office. Now the
magistrate, under whose authority these things are to be done, if ministers do
not perform them, by his grave and commanding power may and ought to force
them, and enjo^n them to do these things, and to do them well; and to punish
them that do otherwise then they should do.

2. The second position of Maccovius is; Since no determinations or sentences
of presbyteries and synods have any force of obligation in them to obedience,
without the sanction of the magistrate; therefore not the presbyteries and
synods, but the magistrate is the supreme judge, giver and maker of all
constitutions, sentences and determinations of consistories and synods.

3. The third is; The magistrate is either to put his seal of sanction, and
give his judgment of approbation to all the judgments, sentences and
definitions of synods, with a blind judgment, and stand, without disputing
within himself, to what they agreed and decreed among themselves; or he must
disapprove those things that in his own apprehension are not good and
convenient, and approve what he conceives to be true, just and fit. Whatever
the opposers chose, they are at a stand; for they make the magistrate either a
sovereign judge and arbiter over all ecclesiastical matters, or a sergeant and
blind executioner of the judgments and sentences of synods and presbyteries.

Mr. Gillespie being not able any way to make invalide the strength of these
positions of Maccovius, only says, that the magistrate, in having the last
view and cognizance of all ecclesiastical determinations, and giving his
sanction to them, does not judicem agree, but jud^care; which I know not how to
English, but that in so doing he does not the part of a judge, and yet does
judge of the thing. But what strength has this? That man does the part of a
judge, in whose power and breast it is to make valid and current, or to
disannull whatever is debated and determined by others. Of much like strength
is it, when he says, that the magistrate judges whether he ought to add his
civil authority to this or that, which seems good to church officers, and
does not concur therewith, except he be satisfied in his conscience. Which if
he may do, the magistrate has as much as Maccovius proves to belong to him:
for in that he is not satisfied, and does not concur with the judgments of
churchofficers, he makes all their judgments void and null and of no force,
to oblige either actively or passively any man or assembly under his
jurisdiction. Had not the states of the low countries approved and ratified the
synod of Dordrecht, their decrees would have been but counsels, advices, and
answers of prudent and wise men, and had not put any obligation upon the
ministers, churches, schools and academies within their dominions, more then
upon England or France, to be conformable to their determinations.

Next, in the conclusion, Mr. Gillespie says, that this does not make him
supreme judge and governor in ecclesiastical causes, which is the prerogative
of Jesus Christ; nor yet does it invest the magistrate with the subordinate
ministerial forinsecall directive judgment in ecclesiastical things or
causes, which belongs to an ecclesiastical, not to a civil court.

I understand not wherefore he brings this; for what he has said before does
sufficiently evince the magistrate to be sovereign judge and governor over all
persons, and in all ecclesiastical causes and censures, so long as they are of
no force, and cannot be brought to execution, except the magistrate approves of
them, and commands them. It seems Mr. Gillespie, by these words, would put it
to the vote, who must be the supreme judge and governor in ecclesiastical
causes; whether the ministers, or the magistrate. It is sure enough, if we
believe him, the magistrate must not be. It remains then that the ministers
should be the supreme judges and governors: for all M. Gillespies drift is, to
take from the magistrate that which he says duly pertains to the ministers,
and in short, to put, as he conceives, the saddle upon the right horse. For to
what end should he except against the magistrates being invested with the power
of supreme judgment and government in ecclesiastical causes, but to reinvest
the ministers into it, and to declare, that that usurpation in the magistrate
was done to the prejudice and wrong of the ministers, to whom it is due by
right?

Here then Mr. Gillespie makes the ministers of the Gospel supreme judges and
governors in ecclesiastical causes; whereas he always before declined those
titles, as belonging only to and being the prerogative of Jesus Christ. But
suppose ministers in synods and consistories had also the coercive power, and
were invested with that external jurisdiction, that gives force and sanction
to all their censures; this, I trow, would not make them more or less supreme
judges and governors in ecclesiastical causes, then the magistrate invested
with the same power. Since then the magistrate takes no more upon himself, then
such an external jurisdiction as ministers might well assume by the delegation
or concession of the magistrate; why should Mr. Gillespie hence infer, that
this power in magistrates makes not them supreme judges and governors, whenas
the same jurisdiction laid upon ministers neither makes them supreme judges
and governors in ecclesiastical causes? No hurt then to the magistrate by this
inference, only that it seems to acknowledge, that some do hold the
magistrate to be supreme judge and governor in ecclesiastical causes, giving
him a prerogative which belongs only to Jesus Christ. I believe none of his
opposites spoke in that crude manner. Magistrates are not unerring judges; they
fail many times in their judgment, both declarative and of discretion: so do
the ministers; and therefore there is no supreme visible judge and governor in
ecclesiasticalls, to whose decisions, determinations and commands a conscience
is obliged to yield further then it is enlightened or convinced: for there
being a tribunal in every ones conscience, usual appeals are made to it from
the magistrate, yea from the sentences of synods and presbyteries. This is the
prerogative of Jesus Christ, by a sovereign judgment and determination to
resolve the intellect, incline the will, and convince the conscience. The
magistrate is not made by any of Mr. Gillespies opposites, as far as I know,
otherwise supreme head or governor in ecclesiastical causes, then Martyr,
Zanchius, Pareus, etc. make him head of the church.

He further says, that what he stated about the power of the magistrate in
ecclesiastical things, does not invest him with the subordinate ministerial
forinsecall judgment in ecclesiastical things or causes. I think, if Scotus
were living, he would hardly understand what is the meaning of ministerial
forinsecall directive judgment; for the word ministerial is no way
forinsecall: for the style of forinsecall makes the minister sit in a court of
judicature as the judges at Westminister Hall, giving sentence which both
parties must stand to, except they can appeal, or expect a redress in a
superior court. Again, the word directive agrees no better with forinsecall,
then the Papal title of servant of servants with God on earth, and the spouse
of Christ: for whereas the word forinsecall gives no leave to the plaintiff or
defendant to interpret the judgment of the court to his own sense or
apprehension; on the contrary the word d^rective does it, and gives those that
attend the word, and hearken to the directions of the minister, a privilege
like that which St. Paul yields to the people of Beroea, who having heard St.
Paul, would be well satisfied ere they gave credit to him; for they searched
the Scriptures, to know whether it was so as St. Paul would have them to do, or
as he said unto them, and gave them directions.

CHAPTER X.
Whether the Lord Jesus Christ has appointed, as the Rever. Assembly says,
officers in government distinct from the magistrate. The strength of the place
2 Chronicles. 19. by them alleged, examined: That the elders in that place are not
church officers. An answer to Mr. Gillespies arguments, endeavoring to prove
that Iosaphat appointed two courts, one ecclesiastical, another civil.

IT remains in the examen of the first section of the 30. chapter of the
confession, we should speak a word of the church officers, in whose hands the
Rever. Assembly says a government was appointed distinct from the civil
magistrate.

God indeed has appointed in the church, officers distinct from the
magistrate; as he has appointed in the law the magistracy of Moses to be
distinct from the Priesthood of Aaron, and the Priests and Levites to have a
distinct function from that of the rulers, elders, captains, judges, etc. But
God never appointed the jurisdiction of Aaron and of the Priests and Levites to
be distinct from that of Moses and of the supreme magistrate; nor ever meant
with the diversity of offices and officers to introduce a diversity and
distinction of jurisdictions. For were the jurisdiction exercised by
church officers of so distinct a nature from the magistrates jurisdiction, as
the paternall jurisdiction is distinct from the maritall, and both from that of
the magistrate; one could not thence infer, that they are not all three
subordinate to one superior jurisdiction: Coordinate jurisdictions, as of
fathers, husbands, masters of families, Majors of towns, are all subordinate to
one supreme jurisdiction.

But to prove that church officers are not appointed by God in a government
distinct from that of the magistrate, but in subordination to it, the reverend
Assembly make use of one place of Scripture, in their humble advice for
government; which though they quote in the behalf of a double jurisdiction, yet
it does totally overthrow it: their words are;

As there were in the Jews Church elders of the people joined with the priests
and Levites in the government of the church, (as appears in 2 Chronic. 19. v.
8, 9, 10. etc.) so Christ, who has instituted a government and governors
ecclesiastical in the church, has furnished some in his church besides the
ministers of the word with gifts for government, and with commission to execute
the same when called thereunto; who are to join with the ministers in the
government of the church, Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. v. 28. which officers
reformed churches commonly call Elders.

One party or other is mightily mistaken, and do wrest the Scripture against
the sense of the holy Ghost, so clearly manifested in the literal meaning. I
wish with all my heart, that as the reverend Divines and Mr. Gillespie propound
to the Christian church, that of the Jews for an example of jurisdiction
distinct from that of the magistrate; so they would take no other umpire and
judge, to make good that double jurisdiction, then this text they have chosen:
for I am confident, they will find their condemnation in it; no place in the
Scripture more evidently asserting the confusion of jurisdictions amongst the
Jews then this. Me thinks the presbyterians and anti-presbyterians both
drawing this text to their advantage, are like Salmasius and the ministers of
Leyden, about the question of wearing long or short hair; the ministers making
use of the same text 1 Cor. 11. against long hair, that Salmasius does against
short. But the whole context, from the 8 verse to the end of the chapter, is
wholly for us.

1. The text says verse 8. that Iosaphat appointed for the judgment of the
Lord and for controversies, Levites, Priests and chiefs of the families of
Israel: here then you have first no distinction of judicatories, but rather of
the heads either of families, or so called for their wisdom, from all the 12.
tribes of Israel, to one Iudicatory or Sanedrim, as the Rabbis and the best
interpreters think.

2. In setting them over affairs there is no distinction mentioned, as that the
Priests and Levites should manage the ecclesiastical, and the heads of
families the civil; for expressly all kinds of debates, about matters
criminal and not criminal, were to be judged by them jointly. So then the
elders of the Jewish church cannot be a fit parallel with the elders of the
church of the new Testament; since the elders under the old Testament were
judges even in capital causes, but under the new they were not: besides that
the elders under the old Testament were to make but one council and one
judicatorie with the Commonwealth, with the Judges and Princes of the land; but
neither the Rev. Assembly nor M. Gillespie will allow the elders of the new
Testament, to have any thing to do to sit as church officers with the judges of
the land, and to decide causes betwixt blood and blood.

3. But the eleventh verse, concerning Amariah the chief Priest appointed to be
over all matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah for the Kings businesses, does
further clear, that there was no such thing amongst the Jews, as a government
distinct from that of the magistrate; though many cry here (...), as if it were
a strong place for a distinct and double jurisdiction: for it is plain here,
that Amariah the chief Priest was appointed to be, as Mr. Gillespie confesses
p. 146. the Nasi or Prince of the Sanedrim, and chief ruler of the Senate,
whereof mention is made in the 8. verse, and which was made up of Priests,
Levites, and the elders of the people of Israel, and judged of such causes and
matters as usually a high court of Parliament do. This Amariah, in that place
of chief-presidency in the Senate, is said to be over all matters of the Lord;
because, as all manner of laws, constitutions and ordinances, were all from
God the author and latour, and from Moses under God the giver of them all; so
every matter or business concerning any of those laws violated and broken, or
that needs further explanation, by reason of the infinity of cases, and the
seeming contradictions between one law and another, was truly and properly
called the matter of the Lord, and was debated in the Senate: for no doubt all
causes about ceremonial laws, and judgments concerning degrees of marriages,
inheritances and such like, were as well matter of the Lord, as the judgment
of leprosy, sacrifices and the like. In that Senate which debated such matters
of the Lord, was Amariah Mr. Speaker. Mr. G^spie acknowledges that he was the
ruler and judge of the people, for thus he speaks p. 140. that the high
Priest was a ruler of the people, as well as of the Priests and Levites, is man
fest from Act. 23. v. 5. where Paul applies to the high Priest that law, Thou
shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. Thus M^. Gillespie pleads
for us, with as strong arguments as we could ever produce for our selves: viz.
1. that the jurisdiction of the high Priest, as such, was not distinct from
that of the magistrate, neither before nor since Christ's time; 2. that his
jurisdiction was not annexed to the Priestly office, but to the office of a
judge and ^uler of the land; 3. that he judged of the matters of the Lord as
judge, ruler and Prince of the Senate, and not as a high Priest; 4. that, there
being not two Senates, as Mr. Gillespie acknowledges, in Christ's time, nor
before his time, one ecclesiastical, another civil; that one S^nate that was
standing could not properly be called either ecclesiastical or civil, ^ut the
magistrates Senate, endowed with one, and that external, jurisdiction in all
causes and matters, and over all persons.

4. Now for Zebadiah, the case is clear, that he was appointed either Steward,
or Mr. Controller, it may be chamberlain of the Kings household; or rather a
principal minister not of State, but set over his family, lands, armies,
moneys, jewels, etc.

5. This alone, that Iehosaphat appointed both Amariah and Zebadiah to be chief
magistrates and rulers, one over the matters of God, the other of the King,
evinceth, that all jurisdiction was united in the King, depended on him, and
was subordinate to him. For it is plain out of Josephus, lib. 9. cap. 1. that
these two magistrates, Amariah and Zebadiah, and the setting of them over the
matter of God and the business of the King, was an act of sovereign
jurisdiction or of magistracy; summos magistratus (...) ex amicorum numero
praeposuit.

6. The matter judged in that Sanedrim where Amariah was Speaker, argues that
it was no ecclesiastical court. Mr. Gillespie understands betwixt blood and
blood, not of capital offenses, but concerning forbidden degrees of marriages.
Which though it were, he must prove that matrimonial causes belonged to the
cognizance not of civil, but of ecclesiastical tribunals; which no man will
ever be able to prove.

7. To take away all doubt, but that Amariah was appointed the chief ruler of
the people of God under the King, in all matters that concerned the laws given
by God to his people, of whatever nature they were, and Zebadiah Governor
under the King of the Kings house and affairs; there is a pregnant place 1
Chronic. 26. verse. 30. and 32. For in the 30. verse Hashabiah and his brethren,
even one thousand and seven hundred officers on this side Jordan westward, are
said to be set over the business of the Lord and the service of the King; and
(...) the 32. it is said, that David made ruiers over the Reubenites, the
Gadites and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to God, and
the affairs of the King.

First, here we see neither Priests nor Levites, but men of other tribes, set
promiscuously over both the matter of the Lord and the affairs of the King.

2. Who sees not that the matter of God is the matter of the Commonwealth,
even all judgments, laws, constitutions appointed by God, by which the people
of God were judged and righted; and that the affairs of the King were those
that pertain to the Kings demeasnes, rents, army? etc.

3. And who sees not, that all the affairs and all the matters that needed to
be ordered and regulated in those places and tribes, are divided into two
classes, viz. into the matter of God or the people of God, and the affairs that
respected the Kings own business and service?

4. What absurdity then would it be to imagine, that the affairs of the King
were civil businesses, judged and handled by secular men, and the matter of God
ecclesiastical causes, judged by ecclesiastical men in an ecclesiastical
judicatory? For (even admitting Mr. Gillespies sense) why should not the
affairs of the church be the affairs of the King, since he was set by God, and
appointed to reform it? and why should not the affairs of the Commonwealth be
the affairs of God?

8. Mr. Gillespie p. 14. is of another mind then he means to be p. 140.
whence we have quoted him for us; for in the 14. page he approves, that the
reverend and learned assembly of Divines should draw an arg^ment for ruling
elders out of the 2 Chronicles. 19. see page 15. besides, whereas it is the opinion
of all Rabbis, and most D^vines, that in that place 2 Chronic. 19 there is
mention but of one Sanedrim which Iosaphat did ^form; Mr. Gillespie maintains
that there is mention made of two; one ecclesiastical, of which Amariah was
president, and another civil, in which Ze^adiah was Speaker: for, says he,
where was it ever heard of, that a Priest was President of a court, and ^n
sacred things and causes, that a civil magistrate was president of a court, and
that in civil causes, and yet not two courts, but one court? But where will he
make good that distinction of power and Senate among the Jews, one
ecclesiastical, the other civil? For 1. he himself does not deny, but that the
great Sanedrim was an intermixture of persons and preceedings: what need then
to have a partition of power? 2. He takes for granted, that the high Priest was
the president of the great Sanedrim: if he was, no absurdity then he should be
president of a civil court, such as they cannot deny the great Saned^im was. 3.
If he were president of a civil court, and Priests and Levites sat with him in
the same court, what need we suppose another court called ecclesiastical, when
the first court might supply both? 4. But that this was but one court, it is
plain by what he says p. 29. and 33. and so that there is no place for his
double jurisdiction and Senate or Saned^im, the one ecclesiastical, over which
Amariah was, the other civil, whose speaker was Zebadiah; for in these quoted
places he says, that the government of the Jews in Christ's time was not, as
Josephus thinks, aristocraticall simply, but was an ecclesiastical
aristocracy, and it was in the hands of the chief priests; that they judged of
all causes but only capital, because the judgment and the cognizance of them
was taken from them after the 30. year of Christ; which he proves p. 33. out
of Constantin l'Empereur. 5. So then, by these concessions, as he cannot make a
double Sanedrim in Christ's time, so neither in Iosaphats time. 6. What need to
call the Sanedrim in Christ's time ecclesiastical, since it had the judgment
of all causes and over all persons, as usually the magistrates tribunal has,
except in capital causes? 7. But could the judgment of capital causes taken
from them make the Sanedrim in Christ's time more an ecclesiastical assembly,
then when they had the judgment of the said capital causes? must a court be
called ecclesiastic^, because it has no power to punish by death? were it so,
all court leets and court-Barons and the court of the Exchequer were
ecclesia^icall courts, because they have no power to punish a man by death. 8
So then, before the 30. year of Christ, when the Jews had the judgment of
cap^all causes, their Sanedrim (if we believe Mr. Gillesp^e) was not an
ecclesiastical, but a civil court, and yet it was made up of Priests, Levites,
and elders of the people, and judged of all causes and persons: which shows
how weakly Mr. Gillespie proves, that there was an ecclesiastical and a civil
Sanedrim in Iosaphats time, whenas he cannot so much as deduce them unto
Christ's time, nor after Christ's time, but by one at a time, stiling that one
Sanedrim, as it serves his turn, sometimes civil, sometimes ecclesiastical;
hoping by this means to find his ecclesiastical Sanedrim Matthew. 18. to whom
our Lord sends the party offended for a redress, in those words, tell it unto
the church.

CHAPTER XI.
A case propounded by Mr. Caesar Calandrin, which he conceives to assert a
double jurisdiction, examined. Of the two courts; one of magistracy or
external, the other of conscience or internal. That ecclesiastical
jurisdiction must belong to one of them, or to none.

MY noble and reverend friend Mr. Caesar Calandrin propounds a case, which he
has often desired me, by word of mouth and by letters, to satisfy him in. He
is confident that by it a double jurisdiction is made good. I will set it down
in his own words.

A murderer condemned to death, if he be truly penitent, the spiritual court
does absolve him; and yet the civil magistrate shall punish him with death,
though he be never so penitent: which evidently proves, that the civil and
ecclesiastical judicature do not enterfear, but are of a quite different
nature.

Else how can the magistrate punish him as guilty, who is absolved by the
Consistory? or how can the Consistory absolve him, whom the magistrate does
condemn? The Consistory by absolving him in the spiritual court, does not
thereby at all opposethe sentence of condemnation which the magistrate has
given against him in the civil court. The condemnation in the civil court
stands in force, even then when in the spiritual court it is no longer a
condemnation, but is changed into absolution upon his repentance. The
magistrate does not regard repentance, because his office does not extend to
the care of souls: the Consistory must absolve and comfort the penitent, lest
Satan should tempt him to d^spair. The magistrate cannot take exceptions, that
the Consistory absolveth him whom the magistrate has cond^mned: nor can the
Consistory take exception, that the magistrate puts him to death whom the
Consistory has absolved. I add, for further illustration, if the absolution
given by the Consistory were upon grounds of his being innocent, or that his
crime did not deserve death; this, I confess, would thwart the sentence of the
civil mag strate: but the Consistory meddleth not with the s^ntence of the
magistrate, nor with his civil punishment, but labors to keep his soul, being
penitent, in a right posture, and to strengthen it against temptations. The
argument holds as well on the other side.

The magistrate may absolve a man after he has satisfied for his crime in the
civil court, though the same man should stand condemned in the spiritual
court. When the sentences are so directly contrary, and yet the judicatures do
not enterfear, nor at all meddle nor make one with another, these must be
acknowledged courts of a different nature.

The case propounded makes nothing against me, nor for a jurisdiction (of
presbyteries, classes and synods, to depose, excommunicate, and make laws
authoritatively) independent and distinct from the magistrate; which is the
hinge of all our controversy.

1. Properly ministers do not absolve or pardon, neither are they otherwise
pardoners then saviors; but only upon the demonstrations of repentance, they
do declare pardon of sins, and remission either past or to come. For I do not
enter into a controversy betwixt Rever. and learned Mr. Baxter (whom I give
thanks for his kind usage and civilities) and my self, whether repentance goes
before remission or follows it: but however, the minister does no further
forgive, then in declaring that God either has forgiven sins already, or will
forgive them. So that he, neither pardoning nor sealing forgiveness of sins,
can have no judicatorie or judgment.

2. I never denied the two courts distinctly set down Romans 13. one is the power
of the magistrate, to which we are subject for wrath, the other that to which
we are subject for conscience sake. In this latter God has set up a tribunal,
wherein the conscience passes sentence either of condemnation or of
absolution. The sentences passed in these two courts have no conflict; which
cannot be said of the sentences passed in presbyteries, which many times are
opposed and reversed by the magistrate: but the magistrates condemning is no
hinderance to the conscience from passing a sentence of absolution, either for
the fact committed, or for other sins.

3. Neither is the minister a judge whether the condemned person is penitent or
no, but the conscience of the man is, which more properly is the judge that
absolveth or condemns: only the minister furnishes evidences, helping the
man to plead guilty or not guilty.

4. The pastor comforting or rowzing up the prisoner, does discharge the part
of a messenger, and not the part of a judge in a court: for he is no judge of a
man, who leaves him to the judgment of another, as does the minister.

5. The nature of a court is, not to condemn upon supposition that the prisoner
knows himself guilty; but absolutely to condemn that person whom the judge
and jury have a particular knowledge to be guilty: and such is the nature of
the court of conscience, when it justifies only where it knows it self
clear, and condemns where it is conscious of its guiltiness. But no pastor
has a particular knowledge of any persons evidences for heaven, but what he
gathers by outward signs; and so all acts of his, either of absolution or of
condemnation, are merely upon supposition, and no acts of a judge, and
therefore no acts of a court. In short, both a court of magistrates and a court
of conscience, in absolving or condemning, know what they do; but the pastor
knows not, God only knowing it.

6. The action of a pastor absolving is no act of court, but an act of the
same nature with the preaching of the Gospel, by which pardon is pronounced to
all that truly repent, and lay hold on Christ by faith.

7. The party arraigned in a true court, (such is the court of the magistrate
and that of conscience) is dismissed clear or guilty, as the judge of the court
shall pronounce: but none can be guilty or not guilty, and stand or fall, as
the minister shall verbally pronounce; there being here no concurrence of any
act of his, but that of the spirit in the word by his ministry.

8. This arraigned person, who is necessitated to under go the sentence of the
magistrate either for absolution or condemnation, has no such necessity to go
to the church or pastor, except he has personally offended some of them, or
owes them money: in which case his reconciliation is no appearance in any
court; only a brother or a creditour may pardon him his debt or offense, that
is, pray God to forgive him. Here there is no footstep of jurisdiction of
either party on the other: but in case the party arraigned seeks to be
reconciled to God, none being able to make his peace with God but God himself,
nor to declare peace, but the testimony of his conscience; the pastor may help
to clear his evidences, and so may any godly gifted brother, and well read in
the Scripture; but neither of them properly judges him, or makes his peace,
neither is here any jurisdiction.

9. The nature of a court is to have power and jurisdiction over those that are
unwilling, as Jesus Christ says to St. Peter. Were it free for a thref to
appear or not appear before the court, and go to prison or to the gellows if he
listed, such a coure were a name and not a thing: but we pastor (...) in no
court that has power over the prisoner, except he be persuaded to call him, or
to admit him, and be convinced by him for if be let the minister alone, the
minister ^th neither power nor court to convene him to.

10. What he says, that the magistrate cannot take exceptions that the
Consistory absol^ whom the magistrate condemns, as if it would not concern
the magistrate to take an account of the fact of the minister in absolving
(...) prisoner, and as if the pastor were not ^ged to give an account of it to
him, may be questioned: for the magistrate is bound to take ^re that his
prisoner make his peace with God before he die, and to use all means toward
it; to that end he must appoint ministers; and if they will not be employed
about that work, or in case they do it amiss, I say, he may interpose his
power and authority: and so say most of the Divines, that if the minister do
not discharge his place in all its functions and acts, that the magistrate
ought to enjoin him to do it. And thus far the external acts of the minister,
visiting the prisoners and comforting them, are subordinate to the jurisdiction
of the magistrate.

11. What he also says, that the magistrates office does not extend to the
care of souls, may likewise be questioned: for the contrary is proved by
Scripture, and the authority of most Fathers and Divines. St. Austin against
Cresconius lib. 5. cap. 51. says, that Kings are Gods ministers, not only in
things that pertain to humane society, but also to Divine religion. Rivetus on
the decalogue says, that the ^esser care of the magistrate is the
administration of the Commonwealth^, but the first and chief care is the
government of the church. How can the magistrates be nursing fathers, ke^ers of
both tables, bound to reform, settle and preserve the true religion, and
promote the interest of Jesus Christ as magistrates, except they aim at the
saving of souls? But though the office of the magistrate should not extend to
the care of souls, yet this does not conclude a church-judicature distinct from
that of the magistrate: for neither does the magistrate meddle with the
physicians office in curing diseases, or look to the health of horses and other
cattle: every office has its several care, but not its several jurisdiction.

12. This may be also questioned, that the Consistory is not to meddle with the
sentence of the magistrate: for if he clears the nocent, and condemns the
innocent, he has as much to do with him as with the poorest wretch condemned
to die; he must tell him, as John told Herod, it is not lawful for thee to do
that, and cry abomination to him. There is no action of the magistrate, no
sentence or judgment of his, wherein there is either right or wrong, but falls
within the cognizance and reprehension of the minister.

13. Briefly, in the case propounded, there is not the least footstep of
jurisdiction or court, no citing, no witnesses, no plaintiff, no defendant,
sentence, condemnation, absolution, sergeant, jail, executioner, all
conditions necessary in every judicatorie; not so much as one of them is found
in the court of Mr. Calandrin. 1. They do not cite the party; they entreat him
to come: if he will not come, they have no remedy, they cannot compel him. 2.
They have no witnesses, nor evidences of the case, and therefore cannot
pronounce sentence. 3. The absolution must be null, when they do not know
whether it shall stand. 4. Neither do they know whether God will not absolve
whom they condemn. 5. They cannot put their sentence in execution. 6. This can
be no court, which the arraigned can dismiss when he pleases.

14. I shall willingly admit two courts, whereof I have spoken largely in my
Paraenesis, one called forum externum, the external court or the court of
magistracy, which is to be found in some measure of power in all assemblies and
societies of men, as churches, synods, presbyteries, families, schools,
colleges, corporations, etc. and the other called forum internum, or the court
of the conscience. 1. In this God has set a tribunal, a judge, a witness, a
plaintiff and defendant. 2. In that all is carried by outward evidences,
whether in a synod, presbytery, or any other court. 3. In that there is an
obligation of active or passive obedience to the laws, decrees and ordinances
that have the sanction of a law, whether just or unjust. 4. In this obedience
is due for conscience sake, and in obedience to God, to laws, ordinances, and
commands, either of God or of men, that are by the judgment of approbation and
discretion apprehended to be good, just and holy. 5. In this there is a
stronger stresse of obligation laid then in that; so that, as we ought rather
to obey God then men, a man is obliged notwithstanding all the sanction of the
magistrate, to appeal from the court of the magistrate to that of the
conscience, and to yield no obedience to any laws, injunctions or commands of
magistrates, pastors, synods, presbyteries, churches, till after they have
been there reviewed and approved of. There being but these two courts and
jurisdictions, in the case propounded by Mr. Calandrin, the minister cannot be
judge in another man's court or conscience; and in that court I do not conceive
he would put a greater tie, then the magistrate does upon any man, as to bind
him not to appeal from his judgment to the court of his own conscience, or at
least not to remove the cause and judgment of the ministers court to his own
court. Neither is the minister judge in the other court, except by a delegated
power from the magistrate, or by an assirmed power of magistracy, binding
either to active or passive obedience; neither from that court, do I think that
Mr. Calandrin would bind a man not to appeal to the court of his conscience.

15. To draw to a conclusion; in the case propounded by Mr. Calandrin, we have
acts of function, but none otherwise of jurisdiction then in the function of a
physician; whom in relation to his sick patient, either being alone, or sitting
in a college among his brethren, I might make to exercise a jurisdiction
distinct from that of the magistrate, and parallel the physician with the
pastor, the patient with the penitent, the college of physicians with the
consistory, the curing of the patient with the absolving of the penitent, and
so make the case propounded in the behalf of ecclesiastical jurisdiction
applyable to the medicall jurisdiction, changing only the persons. Yes I might
show, that a parallel being made, the medicall would outvie the
ecclesiastical, as being less inconsistent with the nature of jurisdiction,
and more distinct from that of the magistrate. For 1. the magistrates office
extends more to the care of souls then to that of bodies: 2. Physicians more
properly cure diseases, then ministers pardon sins: 3. Physicians judgments of
the nature of diseases are more certain and evident, then the ministers
judgments of grace and repentance; and therefore their sentences are more
peremptory. I might instance in more particulars; at least I could so match
both jurisdictions, as to make them alike distinct from that of the magistrate.

Mr. Calandrin in a postscript gives several exceptions against what I have
said in my Paraenesis, of the two courts. He says, I do not deny that
conscience may be called a court improperly: neither do I say that it has all
the properties of a court of magistracy; but it has the necessary conditions
required in a court: and that name it has by the common consent of all
Divines, Philosophers, schoolmen, heathens, Papists and Protestants, none
doubting of it; whereas many have questioned whether there be any such thing as
forum ecclesiasticum; and none of those that admitted such a forum or
ecclesiastical court, but, as they have confessed that ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is improperly so called, so have they thought no less of an
ecclesiastical court.

He also finds fault with me for saying, that excommunication was no act of
ecclesiastical power, because exercised in the court of man; and says, Is not
preaching as much an act of the external court as excommunication, when both
are done alike with words outwardly? I grant that the preaching of the word is
an external act, performed by outward moving of the lips, and lifting up the
voice; and so all outward actions of men, as buying, selling, walking, striking
with a hammer, eating, drinking, and the like; which are said to be performed
in the court of man, not because they are juridicall acts, but because they are
the subject and matter not only of suits and controversies depending on the
court of man, but also of laws and orders made in the same court: as if a man
preached not at all, or preached amiss, and erroneously or seditiously, that
act of his may create an action in the external court of man; so may all other
actions I have named; as if one sell another man's wares unknown to him, if he
walks in an undue place, and time, if he strikes his neighbor with a hammer;
and so one may make an induction of all actions of men, which otherwise are no
forinsecall acts, but are either natural, moral actions, or acts of function,
and not of jurisdiction: as in a physician, to cure the sick, in a seaman, to
set his ship to sail, in a merchant, to vend his wares, and so in a Divine, to
do the acts of his function; all which are actions performed outwardly in the
court of man, albeit they be not forinsecall. And by reason that
excommunication is an outward act, it is done in the court of man, as well as
buying, selling and walking; and besides it is a forinsecall and juridicall
act, binding men to outward obedience, either actively or passively, and of the
same nature with other juridicall acts in the courts of men: but such an act
preaching of the word is not, binding none to outward obedience, except he be
first inwardly convinced, though it may fall out to be the subject and matter
handled in a forinsecall court, as well as buying and selling, which are no
forinsecall acts, as excommunicating is. Thus Mr. Calandrin sees, 1. that it is
very consistent that a thing or action be done in the forum externum, and yet
not be an act or action of that forum; 2. that preaching need not to be an
action of that forum, for that it is performed outwardly, as well as
excommunication.

It may be (for I have not now my Paraenesis by me) I referred the preaching of
the Gospel to the forum internum, or the court of conscience; which I did, not
in regard of the outward act, but of the preaching to the heart, and of the
operation of outward preaching, as believing, loving, trusting, all which are
performed in the court of conscience.

This serves for answer to what he says next, If the key of the word, for all
it has external acts, may nevertheless belong to the forum internum, why may
not the key of censure as well? since both are alike in relation to the soul
and the inward man. The handling of the key of the word, as it is outwardly
pronounced, is an act not of jurisdiction, but of function, performed in the
forum externum; but as it is a preaching to the heart, it is an act performed
in the forum internum, or the court of conscience: but the handling of the key
of censure is an act of jurisdiction over the outward man, however the inward
man be affected, and compelling to an outward obedience; and therefore
belongs not to the forum internum, in which such acts as preaching to the
heart, loving, believing, denying ones self, are performed.

What he says, that both the key of the word and of censure have relation to
the soul and the inward man, proves not that excommunication is not an
external act of an external jurisdiction. For an act of outward jurisdiction
in the forum externum, may produce a good effect in the forum internum, even in
the soul of a man: such effect may excommunicationbring forth, though it be an
act of magistracy and outward jurisdiction; so may the laying hold of a
malefactor, and the sentence of the magistrate passed upon him, be a sovereign
remedy for the salvation of his soul, and be nevertheless an act of magistracy
and of the forum externum. In short, there being but two courts conceivable,
one external, the other internal, this of the conscience, the other of
magistracy; I know no medium between them two, no more then betwixt command and
counsel, and betwixt the power of the word and the power of the sword.

CHAPTER XII.
Of the nature of calling to the ministry. Ministers are not called by men,
but by God, by a succession not of ordination, but providence. The plea for
succession is Romanish. Ministers are no successors in their ministry to the
Judicial Priests, but to the Prophets.

SInce no religion can stand without a church, and meetings of Christians about
Divine worship, and no church without government, and no government without
governors, which the Rever. Assembly calls church officers, and no governors
without a commanding power and a rule to govern others by; it will be requisite
to enquire into four things; 1. the calling of the church officers; 2. the
extent of their power, and of the obedience due to them; 3. whether all
church officers are invested with the power of the keys, and of binding and
loosing, as the Rever. Assembly seems to say; 4. by what rule and discipline
they are to govern* For the calling of ministers, I have handled that subject
at large in my Paraenesis. I make the calling to be as much of divine
authority, as the reverend Ministers of London do in their jus Divinum of the
ministry, yea more; holding, that they have no call from men, but from God
immediately; that their mission is from Christ and the Apostles; that all the
acts of church-ministers, people, and magistrate about receiving a minister,
are not to send him, but to acknowledge Gods call and mission, and publicly to
declare their willingness and readiness to accept of his ministry among
them: for all these following acts are necessarily to be supposed, before a man
be acknowledged a Minister of the Gospel, and set apart by God for the great
work of saving souls.

1. The acts of his internal calling, or rather his disposition: which are a
strong desire and resolution to consecrate his life, time and studies, that he
may be a minister of the Gospel; and a persuasion that he is by God thereunto
called.

2. The acts which do make up his external calling, and by which men
acknowledge Gods call, are, 1. an examen (by a competent number of grave, pious
and learned ministers) of him that intends to take the ministry upon himself;
of his parts, abilities, learning, doctrine; also of his life and conversation;
which they must testify publicly, whereby it may appear to all, that they
hold him every way fit to labor in the word and doctrine. 2. The election of a
particular church, requiring his pains amongst them, and desiring him to be
their ordinary pastor and teacher, to administer unto them the ordinances of
the word and sacraments.

This act, though it has much of humane right, and seems to depend on man's
will and choice; yet in a right-constituted church, and in an assembly of good
men met in the name of Christ, there is much of Gods call concurring with the
choice made by men. Thus Ezech. 33. at the beginning, God declares by his
Prophet, that whatever watchman the people should choose, he would repute that
choice to be his act, in that he would punish those that should slight the
admonitions of the watchman, and did not take them for Gods warnings, and would
take an account of the watchman for his failing in the care of men's souls.
Which place of Ezechiel does much confirm what I have said chapt. 2. of the
nature of right; where I showed, that things that are of Divine right may be
said also to be of humane right, and things that are of humane right to be also
of Divine right. This observation I have from my precious and learned friend
Mr. Sadler; and much might a man say upon it, to show that as in the
administration of the church of the Jews, so in that of the Christians, Divine
and humane right, government, laws, injunctions, commands, go along together,
without needing to be parted into two coordinate distinct classes of
jurisdiction, the one ecclesiastical, distinct and independent from the other
which they call civil. One may also thereby see, that much labor is lost in
asserting the jus Divinum of the ministry, as if it had nothing of humane
right, or as if a call from men were not also a Divine call. For if magistrate
and people should choose themselves a watchman over their own souls, to divide
the word unto them, why should not this act be reputed a Divine choice, and a
Divine installing in the call, as well as the choice of the watchman whereof
mention is made in Ezechiel?

3. The third act toward the making up the external call, is a public
license to exercise the ministry whereunto he is called by the voice of God,
the choice of the people, and the public testimony of other ministers. This
act of giving license, being an act of jurisdiction, is performed under an
orthodox magistracy by the magistrate himself; but under an heterodox or
heathen magistracy, by the keepers of the confederate discipline, who supply
the place of magistracy.

The 4. act is, a solemn begging of God a blessing by the ministers met in a
coetus, presbytery, or synod, or otherwise, by prayer and fasting, upon the
resolution of the party that is to take the ministry upon him, the choice of
the church, and the license of the magistrate. This action may be performed
with laying on of hands; a rite which may be used for decency and ornament, not
for necessity, as if the calling was null without it: and so Musculus,
Bullingerus, Gualterus, Martyr, and Mestrezat, late reverend Pastor at Paris,
all tell us.

I know of no ministerial ordination, but that which is performed this way;
and it is much like for the nature of it to Gods making man and wife: to the
doing whereof there is no concurrence of a minister or ministers requisite, but
only to beg a blessing upon the man and the woman that intend to join
themselves in the state of matrimony: in which action the minister contributes
no more to the integrity of it, then his grace before dinner does to make it a
meal; though I confess there is more in the prayer of a minister toward the
perfecting of the last act of ministry, then in his prayer before the
consummation of matrimony, or before a meal. For I should think any ministers
call null before men, that was not first blessed by a solemn prayer, and a
consecrating to God both of the ministers and people. I have been induced to
believe, that ordination is completed by these 4. acts; because 1. I find it
most agreeable with the word; 2. by them the calling is no less, if not more
of Divine authority, for this way there is as much caution against those that
enter into the ministry by the window, and not by the door, as is observed in
Sion College. I make not only the ministry to be as much of divine
institution as the reverend ministers of London in their jus Divinum of the
ministry; but besides, I make the ministers call to be wholly divine, and
receiving nothing from or by men; which the reverend ministers do not: for as
men do not institute ministry, so neither ministers; it is with them both as
with the doctrine of a preacher, which we try whether it be from God or men,
but we give no authority to it. And as besides in ward evidences, by which we
discern a divine wisdom in the Scripture, we have some outward marks and
testimonies which make it current to be of divine authority, even among those
that do not believe: so may we say of the call of every minister; which neither
other ministers nor the people make either to be a call, or a divine call: only
by what they see of the man by his life and doctrine, and by those mentioned
conditions required in all those that God has inwardly called, they no way
doubt but whom God has called inwardly he also will call them outwardly
without any act of man, but to render a testimony to Gods call: which testimony
is given partly by the party himself, approving himself to all men; partly by
other markers, the choice of the church, and the license of the magistrate. 3.
By that method we answer, without any difficulty, the Papists question, how
reformed ministers came by their calling, and what succession they have; which
tie of succession is laid upon the presbyterian ordination; which will be
easily proved void and null, if the succession has been never so little
interrupted; at which time if we have recourse to Gods immediate call and
necessity, as the 31. article of the confession of the reformed churches in
France has, attributing more to the mission of God then to that of men; what
inconvenience is it to give the same glory to God at all times, and as well at
one as at another; and to hold, that God has no other succession then that of
his providence, that God and the ministry are more magnified, if ministers
receive their office immediately from God, then by the hands of men? what need
we endeavor to salve and make up a lineal succession interrupted by this shift
of necessity, the which if it gives more glory to God, it may be well converted
into a necessity not to be without it? For doubtless this plea of succession
making all ordinations valid, is a rank Romish one, and very strongly
asserting, if admitted by us reformed, that there is no visible church but the
Roman. For if it be granted to them, that as there is no church without
ministry, so no ministry without ordination, and no ordination without
lineall succession from the Apostles; they will easily prove that succession
failing, the ordination has also failed, and with it the ministry, and so the
church; which can never recover a being, without a succession be showed from
the Apostles downward; as the Vestall virgins, when their fire was out, did not
kindle it at the fire of men, but of God. 4. It serves to remove an old
mistake, that the ministers of the Gospel are successors to the Priests and
Levites; whereas they have rather succeeded the Prophets. It is true, the
Priests and Levites were also Prophets, as they were keepers of the law, and
were to read and expound the Scripture, and in that office I grant the
ministers of the Gospel have succeeded them: but in that the prophetical
office was not continued in all those that were only prophets by a lineall
succession of ordination, but merely by a succession of the providence of God,
who never left himself without witnesses, Seers and Prophets, whom he raised
not by any call of man, but of God; no doubt but now God calls the ministers,
the true Prophets of the new Testament, by the same succession and ordination
of providence, not by a creation and installing by man. That the ministers of
the Gospel did not succeed the priefthood, it is manifest; for that being
rituall and typical, ended in Jesus Christ, there remaining only the
prophetical office common to the prophets both under the old and under the new
Testament: to which first (which I note by the way, and it is much material to
our present purpose, and the main argument of the book) as no jurisdiction was
annexed under the administration of the old Testament, but what they had over
the uncircumcised in heart; so neither is it convenient the ministers of the
Gospel should have any other.

This being the nature of ministerial calling, or ordination (if a man will
call it so) and no superinduction of character, power, duty, gift or license
being conferred by the ordaining ministers; so neither is there any thing taken
away by any act of theirs, of deposition or exauctoration; only every one
withdraws his feather, protection and countenance: the magistrate withdraws
his license; the ministers say, they will not hereafter hold him a fellow and
partner in the work of the Gospel with them; the people declare their dislike
of the man, and profess they will make use no further of his ministry; which
act is no more an act of jurisdiction, then the refusing to take physic is an
act of jurisdiction over the physician.

CHAPTER XIII.
The nature of the ministers power, and of that of binding and loosing: the
power of the keys. Amyraldus and Mr. Lightfoots judicious exposition of the
power of binding and loosing. The power of governing and ruling is not the
ecclesiastical contended for. Mr. Gillespies arguments answered.

NExt we are to consider the nature and extent of the power of the ministers of
the Gospel, wholly the same with that the Prophets under the old Testament
had; a power not forcing the body, but enlightening the understanding, and
convincing the heart, ruling the affections, and bringing them captive to the
obedience of the cross. A power which the new Testament mentions in a hundred
places, either in the same words, or in equivalent terms, and yet never so much
as once understands by it a presbyterian synodicall or ecclesiastical power,
of deposing, excommunicating, and of making laws and canons authoritatively;
but always means the virtue and efficacy of the spirit of God in the word
and ministry, called the power of God Romans 1. v. 16. 1 Cor. 1. v. 14. and
chap. 2. v. 5. and chap. 4. v. 19, 20. Ephesians. 3. v. 20. 1 Pet. 1. v. 5. A power
by excellency called POWER, 1 Cor. 2. 4. by which we are the sons of God, Joh.
1. v. 12, 13. which no man can withstand, Act. 6. v. 10. by which the eyes are
enlightened, and men turned from darkness to light, Act. 26. v. 18. pricking,
burning and affecting the heart with sorrow, hope, joy, Act. 2. v. 7. Luc. 24.
v. 32. diving into the secrets of the heart, Hebr. 4. v. 16. where we have a
description of the powerful effects of the words, except by the word we are to
understand the word incarnate, before whom all things created are said to be
naked. It is a power which is called the power of the resurrection, Philipp. 3.
v. 10. also the power and demonstration of the spirit, 1 Cor. 2. v. 4. a power
of the wisdom and salvation of God, and opposed to the power of Satan and
darkness, Act. 26. 18. Col. 1. v. 13. a power described in magnificent terms
and mightily emphaticall, 2 Corinthians. 10. v. 6. etc. This is the power called
otherwise the power of the keys, and of binding and loosing, by which the
slaves to sin and Satan are loosed, and the despisers of the word by resisting
the holy Ghost become more hard and bound.

I know of no other power of binding and loosing, no other keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven committed to the church officers: though properly speaking, the keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the power of binding and loosing, are not
committed to ministers as the word is, but as the spirit is in the word; so
that it is not the ministers, but the word that bears the keys; the opening of
the heart with those keys as it is only the work of the spirit, so is it known
only to the spirit of God in the heart of man convinced and converted, and not
to the minister himself, who only apprehends his office of being the
word-bearer, but is not sensible of its efficacy and workings.

Amyraldus these. 10. de 5. falso dictis sacramentis says, that the power of
binding and loosing did only belong to the Apostles, and that that power
consisted in three particulars: 1. that being led by an unerring spirit,
whatsoever in revealing the mystery of the Gospel they preached, and approved
for sound doctrine, was to be received with like credit as if it had been
delivered by Christ himself, and whatever they said was amiss or false, was
likewise to be taken as if it had been pronounced so in Heaven: and this, says
he, is according to the Hebrew Idiome, to bind and to loose: 2. in inflicting
corporal punishments and vexation by Satan upon those that dishonored
Christianity: 3. in freeing those that were delivered to Satan upon their
repentance, and forgiving their sins. He is yet much more express and diffuse
upon this subject; but I study brevity, which makes me I do not here insert his
own words in Latin; but however he says enough to undermine the foundation
upon which the presbyterians build their excommunication, which hitherto being
mainly supported by that power of binding and loosing, and the two chief
stays, namely this place of Matthew. 18. of binding and loosing, and that of the
incestuous person 1 Cor. 5. failing, there now remains but a poor single
crutch to draw along excommunication, cut out of these words, tell it unto the
church.

Mr. Lightfoot, an exceeding learned and reverend Divine, gives a very
probable exposition of the power of loosing and binding, in his Harmony Matthew.
16. which doubtless does carry in it more solidity and weight then the vulgar
explication given by the Reverend Assembly and others, of the power of
censuring, excommunicating and absolving. He says, that the power of binding
and loosing was given only to the Apostles, as far as some part of Moses law
was to stand in practice, and some to be laid aside; some things under the law
prohibited were now to be permitted, and some things permitted to be now
prohibited: so that in these words, whatsoever, etc. Christ promises to the
Apostles such an assistance of his spirit, and gives them such a power, that
what they allowed to stand in practice should stand, and what to fall, should
fall; in short, what they bound on earth should be bound in heaven. And that
exposition is the more receivable, because the Greek text speaks not of binding
or loosing persons, but things, saying, not, whomsoever you shall bind, but
whatsoever things ye shall bind, etc. that is, whatsoever things ye shall
dispense with or oblige unto.

He also on the 1 Cor. 5. parallels this place of binding and loosing to Joh.
20. v. 22. whose sins yea retain, they are retained, etc. and says, that that
power was a peculiar gift to the Apostles, when Christ breathed on them, by
which they spoke strange tongues, healed diseases, killed and made alive,
delivered up to Satan, and bestowed the holy Ghost, or the power to work the
same miracles. Which exposition strengthens the precedent, which is but a
branch and an effect of that miraculous power conferred on the Apostles. For by
the same power of miracles, or of binding and loosing, whereby they delivered
to Satan, and healed diseases, they also prescribed how far some rites of Moses
were dispensable.

We have then three expositions of the words of Christ, whatsoever ye shall
bind, etc. none of which make for a presbyterian excommunication, but
contrarily they destroy it: for all these three expositions are suitable to the
literal and mystical meaning, which is absolute and without condition; Christ
promising to bind and loose in heaven whatsoever shall be bound and loosed on
earth: whereas those that expound that place of binding and loosing of
excommunication, are forced to put a condition to the absolute words of Christ,
telling us, that they must be understood clave non errante, in case there is no
error in him that excommunicates. And therefore Beza against Erastus and some
others, fearing the many inconveniences and absurdities that follow upon the
literal sense, that Gods binding and loosing in heaven should steer according
to the binding and loosing on earth by excommunication and absolution, expounds
the words of Christ as if he had said, whatsoever shall be bound and loosed in
heaven shall also be bound and loosed on earth, that is, the minister
excommunicating on earth does but declare what God has already done in heaven;
which is the opinion of some schoolmen, namely of Dominicus a Soto lib. 4.
did. 14. qu. 1. art. 3. saying, that the words, ego te ligo, I excommunicate
thee, are equivalent to these, I declare that God has already excommunicated
thee. But I think this exposition is cumbered with more absurdities then the
vulgar. 1. Who knows the mind of God? 2. and whether he has excommunicated
from the inward or from the outward communion? surely not from the inward, for
then excommunication should not be a soul-saving ordinance, as the Rever.
Assembly tell us; nor from the outward, this being an act of man, not of God;
except one say that the minister outwardly acted, what in his secret counsel
he has decreed: but still the difficulty will be, how the minister is
acquainted with Gods secret and not revealed will; and if he be acquainted with
it, how can an outward action, in which the pastor may err, be a consequent of
an unerring sentence of God?

But however the power of the keys and of binding and loosing is to be
understood, the new Testament speaks of governments in the church, and of
ruling and rulers, and it enjoyneth the faithful to obey those that rule over
them; and St. Paul bids Timothy not to receive lightly an accusation against
an elder. So far then the word of God allows a government distinct from
that of the magistrate, and endoweth the ministers of the Gospel with a power
of ruling and governing. But this power is neither of the nature of the
magistrates power, nor of that they call ecclesiastical, which we have proved
to be wholly the same with the magistrates power. This power of the ministers
ruling and governing is something like that power that Princes and masters of
heathen schools had over their disciples, scholars and auditors, as Plato,
Zeno, Aristotle; who had a great power over their minds, but no jurisdiction
over their bodies, estates and outward liberties: it is true, they kept them in
awe, respect and obedience; but it was a voluntary submission to their
precepts, like that of Alexander the great to the commands of the Physicians.

This being the ministerial power in a shadow, it is more expressly set down
in the Scripture: and no doubt that power is the noblest power and greatest
power in the universe, next to that of creating and redeeming the world; a
power that the Son of God had and managed in this world: none have such warrant
of authority, as to be Ambassadors from Christ; none have such an errand:
there is no tie of obedience like that to their commands. But still this
ministerial power, commands and authority, and the obedience due to them, are
not of the nature of the power and obedience observed in churches or
magistrates judicatories. For

1. The magistrates and churches judicatories do not only enjoin the commands
of God, but also their own: but the ministers of the Gospells power is only to
deliver what they have received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. even Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. v.
5. acknowledges that he taught nothing but what God enjoined him.

2. Accordingly a member of a church does not obey the word of his Pastor, but
of God, Col. 2. v. 22. Marc. 7. v. 7. 1 John 3. v. 24. and chap. 5. v. 3. When
the pastor has no command of the Lord, as 1 Cor. 7. v. 25. then he delivers
his own judgment and counsel; and that counsel a churchmember has no
command to obey; though he ought to have discretion and condescension enough to
follow it, if he conceives it tends to mutual edification. Yet in a church
constituted, there being need of a power of magistracy, either delegated or
assumed, by a confederate discipline, and a magistrate-like jurisdiction being
set up in his congregation, he ought, as every churchmember, even when he
apprehends no tie to obey the pastors command as Gods command, to obey, by an
obedience either active or passive, the commands of that magistrate which
himself has elected, when by a joint consent they all agreed upon a form of
discipline.

3. Church-judicatories, if they make any laws, decrees, or resolve upon a
censure to be inflicted upon a churchmember, they require obedience and
submission, without arguing or disputing the case, or having the liberty either
to yield to them, or to decline them if they list: But the true pastoral power
commands only understanding, free and wise men, that are able to judge, 1
Cor. 10 v. 15. like those of Beroea, who so hearkened to the voice of St. Paul,
that ere they obeyed it, they consulted the Scripture, to know whether it were
so as he taught them.

4. The ecclesiastical presbyteriall power, like that of the magistrate,
requires obedience to its laws, ordinances and decrees, not because they are
good, just and equitable, but because it so pleased the lawgivers; for a man
excommunicated never so unjustly is to submit to the validity of the sentence,
and not to the equity, which, as our brethren and Mr. Gillespie teach us, is
not in the breast of the party judged, but of the judge: But the true
ministerial power requires no obedience to its commands, but of such as are
persuaded or convinced of the goodness, truth and equity of the law and
sentence. The Greek (...) signifies both to believe, be persuaded, and to
obey; which intimates that he truly performs the pastoral commands, who
believes in the name of the Lord Jesus: for this is the main commandment of
Christ; as the next is, that we should love one another. Such commands are not
obeyed by the motion of the body, but by that of the heart and affections. The
power of magistracy commands the hand to give alms to the poor, but the
power of the minister commands to give them with a ready mind; one commands
the gift, the other charity and a disposition suitable to the giver. The
magistrate sets a day of humiliation, but the pastor commands the setting
of the heart apart from the world.

All this serves to answer all the arguments of Mr. Gillespie, drawn from one
and twenty places of Scripture, in the belief of his ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.

The place 1 Timothy 5. v. 19. against an elder, etc. he much urges: but the
following verse shows that in that context there is no mention of a
church-judicatory, where men are convented, witnesses confronted and heard, and
a judicial sentence pronounced. It is the duty of pastors to reprove sin and
sinners privately, if the offense be private, and publicly and in an open
assembly, if the sin be committed in the face of the church, and to the
scandal of all: and yet S. Paul gives a good caveat, that the pastor of the
church should not lightly aim at and point at any man, specially an elder, and
give credit to rumors, but be thoroughly informed. This rebuke is no
excommunication, nor a denouncing of church censure, but of the judgments of
God.

But were there any such thing in St. Paul's time as a church-judicatory,
judicious and learned Mr. Lightfoot will tell Mr. Gillespie, that it were no
inconveniency to say, that even in St. Paul's time Christian churches being
modelled after the platform of Jewish synagogues, besides ministry in them,
had also magistracy; and that it were neither improbable nor irrational to
interpret the place 1 Timothy 5. v. 17. according to that rule. See him on the 5.
of the 1. Cor. in his Harmony. Which being granted, the 19. verse will very
well admit the same interpretation. But let us take a general view of all the
21. arguments of Mr. Gillespie.

If it be possible for any man to make something of nothing, Mr. Gillespie has
that art; for he thinks all is fish that comes to his net: like the Papists,
who if they do but read of fire, of a pot, of a valley, of a ditch, it is
enough for them there to find purgatory. Thus Mr. Gillespie, where he finds
the words reject, rebuke, beware, take heed, flee, note, put away, withdraw,
weapon, sword, there he will be sure to have presbyteriall jurisdiction and
power of excommunicating. Who would think that Galat. 5. v. 12. I would they
were even cut off which trouble you, could serve his turn? and yet he bestows
three pages in striking excommunication out of this flint. That noble passage 2
Cor. 10. 4, etc. where the spiritual weapons are lively set out, he
understands of excommunication p. 292. and in verse 6. and having in
readiness to revenge all disobedience, he finds ecclesiastical power and
censure, no less then that of excommunication. But of all places, I much
wonder he can paraphrase 2 Cor. 2. 8. for ecclesiastical power and
excommunication. I beseech you that you would confirm your love toward him;
that is, as Mr. Gillespie expounds p. 290. I beseech you to show your
judicial power in absolving the incestuous man from the sentence of
excommunication. Of the same weight is that proof of ecclesiastical power and
excommunication out of Revel. 2. v. 14. and 20. where he says, the church of
Pergamus is censured for not censuring, that is for not excommunicating the
woman Jezebel. It Is a wonder he does not make the very censuring of the church
of Pergamus to be excommunication. Such proofs sometimes fall from the most
eminent of them: as when the Rever. Assembly, to prove a government of
church officers distinct from the civil magistrate, alleges in the margin
Esaias 9. v. 6, 7. merely because the word government is there mentioned; for
without that, the place that speaks of Gog and Magog had been as valid an
argument for a church government and for excommunication, as that of Esaias,
where it is merely intended to describe the Godhead of Christ, the assumption
of humane nature, and (...) gloriousness and strength of his spiritual and
mystical kingdom.

Yet trust I needs say thus much of the reverend Assembly, that in grounding
the government of church officers upon that place of Esaias, they have followed
the sense of all their presbyterian brethren; who making two powers of the
keys, one of science, of which Jesus Christ speaks Luc. 11. v. 52. and another
of authority, under which they comprehend the power of censuring,
excommunicating, and making laws authoritatively; they have no other authority
for it then this place of Esaias, and another Apocaly p. 3. 7. where Christ is
said to have the key of David, with which as he opens and no man shuts, so
he shuts and no man opens: which place, in my opinion, is no stronger a
plea for an ecclesiastical and external government placed in the hands of
church officers, then the place of Esaias alleged by the Rever. Assembly; for
this place, as well as the other, as Beza notes upon Revel. 3. 7. speaks of
the mystical Kingdom of Christ that has no end, of which Luc. 1. v. 32. and
33. but of this power in the hands of church officers we are to speak in the
ensuing chapter.

CHAPTER XIV.
That the power of the keys and of binding and loosing are not committed to
all church officers, but to the ministers of the Gospel only.

IN the third place, we are to take notice that the Rever. Assembly does not
declare, nor Mr. Gillespie, what they mean by church officers; whether the
dispencers of the word and Sacraments only, or with them the lay elders and
deacons: for they invest them promiscuously with the power of the keys, of
binding and loosing, and of remitting and retaining sins, against the opinion
of Amyraldus, Walaeus, Apollonius, and most of the presbyterians, who attribute
the power of the keys only to ministers ordained; as indeed it does not belong
to any others to preach, and to administer the sacraments. Therefore one would
have expected the assembly should make some distinction both of officers and
power. It may be by the word respectively they meant, that a part of the power
of the keys and of binding and loosing does belong to lay elders, as far as
concerns governing and censuring; but to the ministers belongs not only the
same portion of power common to lay elders, but, over and above, the power of
preaching, administering the sacraments, voting in synods, and determining
authoritatively of controversies of faith.

But how can they make good by the Scripture, that lay elders are invested with
the power of the keys, and of binding and loosing, since this power was
bequeathed only to Peter, and with him to all the ministers of the Gospel, as
ambassadors from Christ, to whom God has committed the word of reconciliation,
2 Cor. 5. v. 19, 20? Is there any mention in the Scripture of church officers
that have a power of the keys, and of binding and loosing, and yet have not
the word of reconciliation committed to them?

I cannot deny but that God sometimes makes use of private men to bind and to
loose in several acts of theirs; as when they convert others, which otherwise
is the work of the public ministry, and when a brother forgiveth heartily a
brother, and beseeches God to forgive him, or a wronged party complains to
God in secret of a notable injury received openly, for which he cannot have
satisfaction by men. And of this kind of binding and loosing by private men may
be understood the words Matthew. 18. v. 18. as Theophylactus, Erastus and
Gualterus expound them. But this private men do not by any duty inherent in
their outward calling and office, but by a dispensation of God, whose spirit
blows where it lists, employing the ministry of a weak simple woman or
artificer, either to confound or convert the great and wise ones of the world;
sometimes binding and loosing without any intervention of private men's prayers
and complaints, but only at the sight of some great oppression sustained, even
when the party oppressed is taken away, or of blood shed, which as it does cry
to heaven, so may it be said to bind in heaven.

Therefore ministers being by virtue of their office and calling to bind and to
loose, I do not understand how any other persons, as lay elders and members of
presbyteries and synods, should have an ordinary power to bind and to loose,
and have the keys of heaven committed to them, and yet not be entrusted with
the word of reconciliation, and with the preaching of the Gospel. Has the
Lord Jesus Christ given a commission by halves, so as that some church officers
shall have a power of binding and loosing (for the Rever. Assembly ascribes to
all church officers indifferently that power) who are not to have the power of
preaching and of administering the sacraments?

I further acknowledge, that the church has had from the time of the Apostles
helps of government, of which Ambrose speaks, and such as the Jewish
synagogues had; but that they had one part of the power of the keys (which
they will have to be the government) and had not the other part (which is of
preaching the Gospel and converting men to Christ) I read no where, neither in
Scripture nor in antiquity: for as the power of the keys cannot be severed
from the power of binding and loosing, so neither of these two qualifications
will admit a division; as that lay elders should have but a share in the
handling of the keys, and ministers should have them entirely.

Whosoever reads the outlandish divines, all presbyterians, will find, that
they ascribe no power of the keys to other church officers then ministers of
the Gospel; that what power other officers, as lay elders, have, is merely by
concession of the pastors, and, as Maresius says, by communication. Loco 15..
75. these be his words: sic residet penes senatum ecclesiasticum omnis
jurisdictio ecclesiastica, ut illa proprie sit radicaliter in pastoribus, in
senioribus vero qui illis assident communicative. So Capellus, the sium part
priore, dividing the church officers, these. 32. gives the whole power of the
keys and of excommunicating to the pastors, not the rectors. Pastores habent
potestatem docendi, arguendi and increpandi, and, si opus sit, a sacris arcendi
atque submovendi, quod excommunicare dicitur. So that they do but claw the
other church officers with the key of discipline, which, as Maresius speaks,
is radically in the pastors: and to that purpose speaks a great Divine, whom
I allege Paraenes. p. 600. when laymen sit in councills, and there deliver
their opinions as judges, about articles of faith and the use of the keys,
this is done more by the concession of pastors, then by any right or ancient
custom.

Here by the way it is observable, that as the power of binding and loosing and
the power of the keys are convertible and equivalent terms in a proposition,
so one of them is not more divisible then the other. Now sure it is, there can
be no such thing as a less measure of power of the keys committed to
lay elders, and a greater to ministers: for this power of the keys being a
power of introducing men into the church, either visible or invisible,
specially that power by which God opens the hearts of men by the preaching of
the Gospel; it cannot be conceived that it ought to be or is performed by
halves, as that the lay elders should have one half of that power committed to
them, and that Jesus Christ had given them the keys of heaven, but not the
main operation of the keys; as if one should give the keeping of his keys to
his steward, but not the power to open the doors with them. Since then it is
not likely that the Lord Jesus Christ has committed the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven by halves, the like also must be thought of the power of binding and
loosing, which are by all divines taken for one and the same.

It is the opinion both of the rever. dissenting brethren, and of the Rever.
Assembly, (in a book called reasons of the dissenting, etc. p. 6. and 58.) that
both keys are given together, and not one without the other; though, as the
Rever. Assembly says, one may be abler to exercise one then the other: which
shows that no church officer can (albeit abler to rule then to preach) be
endowed with a power of ruling without the power of preaching. But the Rever.
Assembly says, both keys are given together, but neither to be exercised
without a call, and sometimes one may be called to exercise the one and not the
other. It is not possible for me to apprehend what weight this has: for since
they acknowledge that no church officer does receive one key without the other,
it is not possible he can be called to the handling of one key only, except
they will say he is called to keep the other key idle, hung by his side.

It being thus made evident, that the power of the keys and of binding and
loosing are committed solely to the ministers of the Gospel, who are entrusted
with the word of reconciliation; it is likewise of necessary consequence, if
there be any such thing as a power of excommunication and inflicting
church censures, as a consequent of binding and loosing, that this said power
should appertain to the ministers of the Gospel only, and that neither
lay elders, deacons nor members of churches, be enabled to excommunicate by any
warrant of binding and loosing from Christ.

None of these things being, as I hope, deniable, and the power of
excommunication being thus restrained to the ministers of the Gospel alone; if
it be made good that excommunication is no law of Christ, it will follow
necessarily, either that excommunication is not an act of the power of the
keys, and of binding and loosing, committed to the ministers of the Gospel,
or that their power is none of the power of the keys, but exorbitant,
transcending the limits set by Christ, and bringing forth acts which are none
of Christ's.

CHAPTER XV.
That God has not given to the church officers of the Gospel a certain
platform of government, and that it is arbitrary and of humane institution, and
therefore not to be administered by a power distinct from the humane.

THe fourth and the last thing to enquire into in this 30. chapter of the
Confession of the Rever. Assembly is, the rule and model that church officers
are to govern by: which were it granted to be expressly set down in the
Scripture, would be no stronger an argument for a government placed in
church officers distinct from the magistrate under the new Testament, then it
was under the old, when there was a very exact form of church government, and
yet no way distinct from that of the magistrate. Which makes me much wonder,
that in that church, laden with such an infinite multitude of rites,
ceremonies, constitutions, laws, whereof the Christian church is wholly freed,
there was no distinction of government and jurisdiction from that of the
magistrate; and yet that there should be such a distinction of jurisdiction in
the Christian church, which has no model nor scheme of discipline, as the
Jewish church had, but such as in prudence is assumed by the joint consent of
pastor and people. That there was no platform of government given to
church officers by Jesus Christ or the Apostles, may be proved by a cloud of
witnesses: I will content my self with a few. Camero in his book of the church
p. 369. says, that the Christian church has no need of certain laws, seeing
it is made up of men of ripe years, not of children under pedagogy: and a
little lower, non est ecclesia certis circumstantiis alligata, the church is
not tied to certain circumstances. The like says his scholar and great admirer
Amyraldus, namely in his Synopsis Salmuriensis cap. 30. of the ecclesiastical
power. 4, 5, and 6. So speaks Capellus in his These. Theol. part priore de
potestate and regimine ecclesiae these. 40. where we have these words: in tantum
valet ecclesia constitutio and definitio, quantum est ratione subnixa; The
constitution and definition of the church is so far valid, as it is grounded
upon reason: therefore not upon the Scripture. Much more large and as express
he is in the third part of These. Salmurienses, de vario ecclesiae regimine,
these. 16. and 17. So is Mestrezat no less express in his book of the church,
lib. 3. cap. 12. God has defined nothing in the external order and polity
about the worship of God, but only has prescribed that all things should be
done decently and orderly. But were there any platform of government, judicious
and learned Mr. Lightfoot, the most able and unpartiall judge in this matter,
will tell us (Harmon. on the 1 Cor. 5.) that it was according to that of the
Jewish synagogues, which yet was assumed by a voluntary and prudentiall choice,
not upon any special command from Christ or his Apostles. Which notion of his,
which was also mine before we could or had conferred one another notes, does
lead us into many considerations.

1. It does decide the argument of the precedent chapter, proving that the
power of the keys and of binding and loosing is committed not to all
church officers indifferently, but to the ministers of the Gospel only. For if
it be reasonable, as the Rever. Assembly says in their humble advice to the
Parliament, and as we have examined before, that the Christian church should
have their elders as well as that of the Jews, it is alike reasonable, as Mr.
Lightfoot says, that the nature and extent of both jurisdictions and powers
should be the same; and that, if the elders among the Jews did not act in
synagogues as men invested with the power of the keys, and of binding and
loosing, but with the power of magistracy, the like should be conceived of the
elders of the new Testament. That the elders of the church of the Jews had
power of magistracy, it is evident by their acts, as fining, imprisoning,
casting out, whipping, and the like; and in that the elders of the new
Testament are most unlike those of the old: and therefore the Jewish elders
could be no president to the Christian elders: not de facto, because these
never exercise that power; nor de jure, for the Rever. Assembly will
acknowledge that the elders of the old Testament had a right to those acts of
magistracy which they performed in their synagogues, but will deny that now the
Christian elders have such a right: although for my part I know no
inconvenience to assert that the elders in both times had alike right to all
mentioned acts of magistracy, though for some reasons it is not found so
expedient under the Gospel by the presbyterian churches.

2. We may well conceive, that if the act of putting out of the church was an
act of magistracy under the old Testament, there is no reason it should be now
otherwise.

3. That likewise if the church of the Jews never knew nor exercised in their
synagogues a jurisdiction distinct from that of the magistrate, neither now are
the Christian synagogues or churches to know, or exercise such a distinct power.

4. But strange it is that, since God giving such very exact laws as he did to
the church of the Jews, yet he gave not to that church a jurisdiction distinct
from that of the magistrate, it should now be quite otherwise; and that God
that gave no express laws, discipline or rule for the government of the
Christian church, yet should invest them with a power distinct from that of the
magistrate.

5. It seems altogether incongruous that that power and jurisdiction, as is the
ecclesiastical, which mainly is conversant about laws, constitutions and
rules which are instituted and ratified by men, and do not oblige either
actively or passively, but as they are commanded by men, I say, it is
altogether unreasonable, that such a jurisdiction should not be placed in the
magistrate; he being the fountain and spring from whom all humane
jurisdictions, laws and constitutions do flow. And it is so much the more
absurd and unreasonable that constitutions, decrees, canons, discipline, merely
of humane institution, should be ordered and commanded by a power and
jurisdiction merely Divine, and distinct from that of the magistrate; when as
all constitutions, laws and ordinances given to the Jews, and all being of
Divine institution, were notwithstanding ordered and commanded by the
magistrate, and not by the keepers of an ecclesiastical jurisdiction distinct
from the civil.

CHAPTER XVI.
The 31. chapter of the confession made by the Rever. Assembly examined. The
use of synods. Two things are humbly represented: first, that for a reunion of
jurisdictions over all persons and in all causes, a convocation made up of
ministers only be re-established during the sitting of Parliament: the second
is, that ministers may be put into the same capacity as all other ranks of
freeborn people, to sit and vote in Parliaments. Of the power of synods, and
that of the magistrate in calling of them. The synod of the Apostles was
extraordinary, not exemplary. The exception of the brethren of Scotland against
the 2. article of the 31. chapter of the confession examined. The uses and
abuses of synods: that they are not the way to compose differences in matters
of religion, if their canons are beyond counsels and advices.

HAving examined what plea the Rever. Assembly can have in the 30. chapter of
their confession for a government distinct from that of the magistrate, the 31.
chapter, which is of synods and counsels, is more superficially to be handled:
for what we have said before of the jurisdiction of churches, plainly shows
that the jurisdiction of synods is no otherwise distinct from that of the
magistrate; for since synods must be made up of church officers, it is not
possible they should impart to synods what they have not in churches, and that
those that have not a jurisdiction in churches distinct from that of the
magistrate, should delegate to themselves a power which they never had.

I admit willingly the necessity of synods, as the first section does: synods
being necessary whether magistrates be orthodox or not, 1. for preserving and
restoring truth, 2. for uniting churches in one judgment, 3. for keeping an
external communion of Saints. And it were to be wished, as the magistrate of
England has set up again the Lords house, so they would re-establish a house
of convocation, or an assembly of ministers meeting at the same time that the
Parliament sits, treating such questions in matters of religion as should be
propounded to them by the Parliament, or they themselves should petition the
Parliament to be handled; not being invested with more judicial power then a
company of merchants or seamen, called by the Parliament to give their advice
about trade and navigation; in which convocation the major part of votes should
not be so much regarded by the Parliament, as the weight of their opinions and
reasons: and therefore, as it was in the last assembly, where 20. did not
prevail against one dissenting brother; so this convocation should return to
the Parliament, not the result of the whole assembly, because carried by the
major part of the members, but the names of parties assenting and dissenting.

This convocation I humbly conceive ought to be made up only of ministers of
the Gospel, that have wholly set apart themselves for the work of the
ministry and study of Divinity. For as the supreme magistrate usually calls
men of that calling and profession about which he is to make laws, as being
the most fit to give counsel in the thing they are called for; so doubtless
none are so fit to be advised with in matters concerning religion, as those
that are most learned and versed in it: for I hold them not only the fitter
members in an assembly convened to treat of matters concerning religion, but
also not unfit, yea as fit as any other men, to sit and vote in Parliaments.
For this opinion of a double jurisdiction, ecclesiastical and civil, that
laymen must be judges in civil courts, and ministers in ecclesiastical
assemblies, as it has barred laymen from sitting, at least from voting in
synods and councels, so has it removed clergymen from sitting and being
judges in civil courts and Parliaments: which opinion has out-gone the Papists
in some things; for though they do not permit laymen to have votes, yea hardly
to sit in synods, yet do the popish magistrates admit ecclesiastical men in
their courts and judicatories: thus lately Bishops in England sat in
Parliament. I confess that Popes, to advance the building of their empire
within the empires of magistrates, Kings and Emperors, would be sure to have
an oar in every boat, yea more, for though they have members of their own in
civil courts, yet they permit no members of civil courts to sit and vote in
synods and councels. But some Protestant magistrates in reforming popery, as
they have not so much relinquisht and parted with their own right as popish
magistrates, to loose their right in calling and voting in synods, so have they
more wronged the clergy, debarring them from sitting and voting in their
courts; which I humbly conceive to be a loss to the magistrate, and a wrong
and injury done to the ministers: and thereupon I propound these considerations.

1. Debarting of the ministers from sitting and voting in Parliament has
occasioned and confirmed men's minds, specially of ministers, in that opinion,
that there is such a thing in Scripture and reason as a government in the hands
of church officers distinct from that of the magistrate, and that there is a
double jurisdiction, and two judicatories, one civil, whereof the magistrates
and laity are members and judges, and another ecclesiastical, in which
ministers only must sit and vote: for ministers think it but reasonable, that
since they are kept off by the laity from being members in Parliament and in
all civil judicatories, so likewise the magistrate and the laity should not be
admitted to sit and vote in synods: whereas it being certain, that there is no
ground in Scripture or reason for a double jurisdiction, and a government
distinct from that of the magistrate, and all judicial proceedings in
whatsoever court, assembly, Parliament, synods, presbyteries, being acts of the
magistrates jurisdiction, the minister now considered as as member of a
Christian commonwealth, ought to enjoy the same privilege as the other members
of it. All which make me conceive, that it was more heat then reason that made
so many write against the Bishops voting in Parliament; besides it was no good
work to divide jurisdictions, which by the ministers sitting and voting in
Parliament, like other ranks of men, were reunited.

2. There being in a Parliament men of all sorts and ranks, gentlemen, lawyers,
physicians, apothecaries, merchants, and they all having an equal interest to
maintain religion, lands, liberty, laws, wife and children of their own; it is
altogether unreasonable, that ministers, that are alike concerned in all these,
and are as well members of the Commonwealth as the best of them, should
notwithstanding as it were be culled out from having that privilege that
others of their fellow-citizens enjoy.

3. It is known that men do not sit and vote in Parliament as merchants,
physicians, silk-men or drapers, and that if there be new laws to make, or old
to alter, suppose about some manufacture, as cloth-working, a member of
Parliament being professor of that craft which is in agitation, is the most
able to discourse upon that subject, and to state how the thing may be
regulated; and this he does as a professor of the craft about which the law is
to be made: but when the thing debated is to be carried by vote, and receive
the stamp of law, and of public authority, then, I say, none of the members
give their votes as professors of the art and science which they exercise in
the Commonwealth, and which is debated in Parliament, no not if a member were a
chief justice of England; but all sit and vote as men invested with power of
legislation, and at that time a physician voteth not in the quality and
capacity of a physician, no not when laws are made for physicians and
apothecaries, although when they are in debate, a physician may discourse
pertinently of physic, as a physician and skillful in his art. This is the
very case of ministers of the Gospel, who for that reason, that men do not sit
and vote in Parliament considered as men of such a calling or profession in the
Commonwealth, ought likewise to vote and sit in Parliament: for as the
profession of physic or manufacture does not divest a man from being a good
and understanding Commonwealths-man, so neither does the pastoral calling.

4. It seems to me very unreasonable, yea unconscionable, that any man's
profession or habit, how high or low soever, should lay an incapacity upon the
person of one, though never so much capable and sufficient, to contribute his
wit and counsel toward the commonweal; as if the magistrate would not take a
loan of money of 100000 l. of one that had a long cloak, but would be willing
to take it of one that had a short cloak; or a man in danger of drowning would
not take his neighbor by the cloak or by his hair, for fear of spoiling or
disordering of them: for thus do those which will not admit the advice of a
minister in public deliberations, were he never so able to serve the
Commonwealth by his wit, wisdom and industry, and the need never so great,
merely because of his habit, and his profession of the ministry. Which calling
I am so far from thinking that it does disinable him from sitting and voting in
Parliament, that not only it renders him the fitter, but also that he is not
thereby hindered from attempting any noble action which might turn to some great
public benefit. A minister having the valor of Caesar, and ability to subdue
Rome, or a secret to burn all the ships of the King of Spain in his ports, I
conceive that his ministry ought not to keep him off from being employed to
use all his industry to serve the Church of God or his country in such a way.
But why is not a physician disinabled by his profession to sit in Parliament,
and a Divine is? whenas there is a great deal more affinity betwixt the
profession of a Divine and the debates in Parliament, then betwixt them and the
profession of physic.

5. Although men do not usually fit and vote in Parliament by the right of the
calling and profession they are of in the Commonwealth, except they sit by
their birth; yet it were to be wished that men that are generally more skilled
in most professions, and best able to judge what is right or wrong, and are not
ignorant of affairs of the world, should be called: such as I conceive are
university-men, and ministers of the Gospel.

6. Since the greatest end of magistracy is to advance the Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus, and that for obtaining of that end it is needful to make laws and
constitutions subservient to it, why should ministers of all men be left out,
whose education and profession renders them more capable to advise for the
obtaining of that great end?

7. Since also there is such a complication betwixt the church and state, as
they cannot so much as be imagined asunder, and that most laws and
constitutions made by men are grounded upon (and have some warrant from) Divine
writ, and that those that appoint by law oaths to be taken, should at least be
well advised about the nature of the oath; I do conceive, that since all ranks
are promiscuously called to advise about these, of all men ministers, best
furnished and stored with knowledge, and acquainted with the right and plea of
conscience, upon which equity, right and law is grounded, should not be forgot.
Why should not men, who make it their whole employment to study the judgments
of God, be as fit judges in Parliaments and high courts of judicature, as
Physicians or merchants.

8. There is the same reason for ministers to sit in Parliament, as there was
for priests and Levites to sit in synagogues and judicial assemblies of the
Jews, and in all consultations of state; it being certain that the great
Sanedrim was a mixture of Priests and Levites with the Princes and heads of the
people.

9. There is equal reason, that if the supreme magistrate calls say-men to sit
and vote in synods, he should call the clergy to sit and vote in Parliament.

10. There was no such thing so much as heard for many hundred years after the
fourth age, that ministers and Bishops should be thought incapable to sit and
vote in the supreme courts of the nation. I could prove it by the practice of
Italy, Germany, France, Spain and England, for above 7 or 8 hundred years,
even far within popery; that though the Pope had much advanced the hatching of
his two eggs, ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction, yet all state-assemblies
were not distinguished either from synods, or from civil courts, but
promiscuously men of all ranks and professions, Senators, Bishops, Lords,
Priests, Gentlemen, did sit and vote in one assembly and place, about any
matter whatsoever, rite, law, discipline or ceremony. Neither is it to be
conceived, that the causes debated in these assemblies were divided into two
classes, and that when ecclesiastical matters were handled, clergymen did
then vote, and laymen sat mute; and when civil were in agitation, then the
clergy were silent, and laymen did only appear as judges: which is indeed a
pretty conceit, but will not serve for a double jurisdiction. He that will see
that further proved at large, needs but only read Blondellus de jure plebis:
etc. and Mr. Prinne in his book of Truth triumphing over falsehood.

A thing very considerable it is, that during all these ages clergymen,
because they were most skilled in controversies of d^vinity, and exercised to
speak in public, were also thought the fitter to judge right from wrong, and
to meddle with secular matters; and therefore in courts of law or chancery,
clergymen dispatched more businesses then the laity, handled all cases, except
(it may be) criminal matters and wills, not being permitted to be executors of
Testaments; otherwise they filled the courts so far, that there were no knowing
men, yea none that could read or write but they: hence to this day no court,
Justice of peace or lawyer, but has his clerk, and they say still, legit ut
clericus, he reads like a clerk. This I find much urged by a famous lawyer, a
Romanist, John du Tillet, in his memoires, who speaking of the encroachments of
the Popes of Rome, says that they have always endeavored to sever what from
the times of the Apostles was united, and to make of one jurisdiction two;
which yet they could not so distinctly separate, but that still to our days
one may see it was not so in the beginning: and this old form, says he, has
remained to the having, even in our days, a medley of clergy and laity in our
courts of Parliament.

But I foresee that some of the presbyterian brethren will take me at
advantage, for saying that ministers may vote in synods, and there being
invested with judicial authority, make canons, laws and constitutions, which
bind churches to obedience: for if they may have that judicial power in
Parliaments, which does oblige all men and societies, and so churches, to
obedience; why may not they have the same right and power in synods?

I hope the rever. brethren will not so require me for my pains in being their
advocate, retorting my plea made in their behalf against my self. But I
willingly grant, that the ministers of the Gospel have alike power of sitting
and voting in synods, and in supreme courts of the magistrate: but how? viz. if
they be called to it by the magistrate; and so their acts, whether they sit in
synods or Parliaments, are a production of the magistrates jurisdiction
delegated to them; and as such they oblige all men, societies and churches.
Besides, as I said, ministers sitting in Parliaments and synods do discourse
and debate matters touching doctrine and church discipline, as ministers of the
Gospel; but they reduce what they discoursed of into laws, and stamp their
authority and sanction upon it, as men invested with judicial authority from
the magistrate: just as I said of physicians, who vote in Parliaments not as
such, but as judges of the land.

Against the ministers sitting and voting in Parliament it may be objected,
that thereby they would be kept off from the main care they are to attend,
which is over souls, and from the preaching of the Gospel. I answer 1. that
their particular calling, which is to be ministers of the Gospel, ought not to
keep them off from a moderate taking care and looking over things that are of
less concernment, as that of family, land, estate, suits in law, much less
to mind the general good of the nation, in which religion and peace are mainly
concerned. 2. There being two branches of the power of the magistrate, one of
legislation, the other of jurisdiction; this latter power is exercised by
judges, Mayors, Sheriffs, Sergeants and the like: This power as men that have
otherwise a constant profession which takes them wholly up, as physicians,
soldiers, marine^s, and the like, cannot well manage, so neither ministers of
the Gospel: but for the power of legislation, the managing of which does not
take a man up so much, there is no doubt but that as a physician may take it
upon him, so also may a minister. For the making of a law is like the making of
a coach, which being made in few days, will be many years adriving by the
coachman, before there be need of a new one: so in a well-constituted state, a
good law, which requires but a little time to make it, will continue many
hundred years. A minister may be well dispensed with for a little intermission
of his ordinary calling, to contribute his counsel to the making a law, which
may be of very good use a long time; though there be no need he should busy
himself further, like a coach-driver, to see by a power* (...) jurisdiction,
the law to take right course, and be well obeyed. I believe if in the first
Parliament of Queen Elizabeth, that drove away popery and settled the
Protestant religion, many of the godly ministers that suffered persecution in
Queen Mary's days had been sitting and voting in Parliament, the
then-reformation would have been much more complete. 3. Some ministers may be
found, whose parts lie less for preaching, and more for government, and who
have wise politic heads: why may not such be fit members in Parliament? 4. As
there is no reason to deprive a man of his right, because he cannot always
attend to make use of it: so must not a minister be divested of his right to
sit in Parliament, because it may be he cannot always attend it. A physician
would be loath, because of his great practice, to be made incapable to sit in
Parliament; so would a Divine, however much taken up with the work of his
ministry.

The premises considered, I conceive that the Rever. Assembly does part with
its own right, when they say in the last section of the third chapter, that
synods and counsels are to conclude nothing but what is ecclesiastical, and
are not to intermeddle with civil affairs, unless by way of humble petition in
cases extraordinary, or by way of advice, for satisfaction of consciences, if
they be thereunto required by the civil magistrate. By which as they seem to
keep off magistrates and laymen from sitting and voting in synods, so they bar
themselves from sitting and voting in Parliament.

But if such assemblies as were the great Sanedrim, the synagogues of the
Jews, the conventions that I have mentioned for 7. or 8. hundred years in
Christian states, the politic ecclesiastical Senates among the Helvetians,
and that which was settled in the first reformation by the Prince Palatine of
the Rhene; if, I say, such assemblies, in which there is a mixture of men and
causes, are lawful, as indeed it were very fit there should be no assemblies
of public concernment but of this nature; why may not in these assemblies
laymen conclude in ecclesiastical matters, and ministers in civil? If they
may not, or it must be with distinction and caution, how shall the conscience
of a man sitting in those assemblies, if he be a layman, be resolved, when he
may intermeddle while ecclesiastical matters are debated; and likewise if
civil things be in agitation, how far a minister sitting in the same company
may interpose and vote? must, when civil affairs are handled, the
ecclesiastical persons first be required to vote, or must they petition to
have that liberty? It may be they mean, that when the assembly is upon
ecclesiastical affairs, that then the laity should likewise petition the
clergy for a liberty of voting and intermeddling.

But suppose a member of this assembly be both a Statesman and an elder of a
church, and therefore an ecclesiastical man, must he change his name and
personage as the nature of the matter handled requires, professing not to
interpose in such a business in the capacity of a church officer, but as a
member of the Commonwealth?

And how shall the conscience of a man be resolved what is an ecclesiastical
affair, what a civil, that he may not doubt when he may vote and intermeddle,
when he must sit mute and silent, or go out of the assembly? For the casuists
have not yet determined what is ecclesiastical, what civil: for some of them
make the discipline of the church of humane constitution, and therefore to be
ordered, directed and commanded by the same power that gives sanction to all
humane laws. And if it be put to the question, when, how often, in what place
synods are to be convened, what time they must sit, and what matter they must
handle, may not the layman then interpose as in a business of his classis?
may not also ecclesiastical persons do the like? Besides, 100. constitutions
may be found of such a mixed nature, that it is not yet resolved what classis
they pertain unto, whether ecclesiastical or civil: such are the laws about
wills, marriages, tithes, tenths, usury, collections for the poor, appointing
of days for fasting or thanksgiving, laws for pious uses, and the like.

Will this expedient serve to resolve the conscience, viz. if such an assembly
of mixed persons and causes be named neither a council or synod, nor a civil
judicatory, but an assembly, or some other name participating of the nature of
both? as if names could alter the nature of the thing, and satisfy the
conscience.

In short, I believe the reverend assembly both wrong themselves, and no way
satisfy men's minds and consciences, in not stating what is ecclesiastical,
what is not, and how far this or that man may meddle in ecclesiastical and
civil matters, what name is to be given to this or that assembly.

I am crowded with matter that were worth deciding about synods; which argument
I handled largely in the 22. and 23. chapters of my Paraenesis. The power of
synods is decisive, directive and declarative: they decide by way of discussion
and disputation; they direct by way of counsel; and they declare their
opinions as expert and well known and read in the thing that is in question.
Coercive and judicial power they have none, but what is delegated from the
magistrate or from private churches: so that though the authority of a synod is
greater then that of a private church, yet the power of that church is greater
then that of a synod.

If there be an union of churches, as there ought to be even under an orthodox
magistrate, all canons and decrees are no otherwise binding as laws, then as
they have the stamp of magistracy upon them: Supremi magistratus approbatio est
supremum arrestum, ut loquuntur, says Festus Hommius disp. 18. these. 4; and
disp. 17. these. 3. the approbation of the magistrate is the supreme decree. And
not only reformers, but also some Romanists, namely the author of the Review
of the council of Trent, a learned book, and which the learned Dr. Langbane
thought his pains worthy in his youth to turn into English. Lib. 3. cap. 13.
the Emperor, as is commonly known, the Monarch of churches, is president to
the synodall sentences, gives them force, composeth ecclesiastical orders,
gives law, life and policy to those that serve at the altar. Is it credible,
that a Romanist should be of a more sincere judgment in this matter then a
reformed Christian, such as Mr. Gillespie?

Those that are for a judicial power of synods over churches do allege the
synod of the Apostles; which being infallible, is no example to us, no more
then the miracles of Christ and the Apostles argue that ordinary ministers must
work miracles. When private churches can be sure that a synod in these days is
led by such a spirit of infallibility, they may yield to it without disputing;
yet not without examining, as did those of Beroea, who tried the Sermon of St.
Paul, whether it was agreeable to other scriptures: and were there now a synod
made up of 40. or 50. men like Peter and Paul, a church should reverence their
orders; but yet that synod should have no coercive jurisdiction over the
church, but such as overcomes the inward man by persuasion, and leads him as
it were captive to the obedience of truth. And in case men and churches were
not persuaded, or did delay obedience and submission, I say that such an
Apostolical synod could bring neither churches nor men to an outward
conformity to their sentences, laws and decrees, without a power del^ated from
the magistrate, or some magistracy seated in churches.

Let us come to the second section.

As magistrates may lawfully call a synod of ministers and other fit persons,
to consult and advise with about matters of religion; so, if magistrates be
open enemies to the church, the ministers of Christ of themselves, by virtue of
their office, or they with other fit persons, upon delegation from their
churches, may meet together in such assemblies.

There is nothing in this section but I will willingly grant. 1. They yield
that magistrates may call synods; 2. that a synod is an assembly of men
convocated by the magistrate; 3. who are to advise the magistrate about
ordering matters of religion and discipline; 4. under an orthodox magistrate,
as synods receive their jurisdiction from the magistrate, so private churches
under them ought to receive their orders and constitutions as laws of the
magistrate: but under an heterodox magistrate, synods receive their authority
from private churches; so that canons and decrees of synods are so far valid,
as they are approved or ratified by private churches, that have conferred the
power, they being then in lieu of the magistrate.

The general assembly of Scotland, perceiving that this article does much
weaken ecclesiastical power under an orthodox magistrate, has thought fit in
their general assembly at Edinburgh Aug. 27. sess. 23. to put a gloss or
comment upon it, saying that the assembly understands some part of the second
article of the thirty first chapter, only of Kirks not settled or constituted
in point of government: and that although in such Kirks a synod of ministers
and other fit persons may be called by the magistrates authority and
nomination, without any other call, to consult and advise with about matters of
religion; and although likewise the ministers of Christ, without delegation
from their churches, may of themselves and by virtue of their office meet
together synodically in such Kirks not yet constituted; yet neither of these
ought to be done in Kirks constituted and settled. So they will have the second
article to be understood of churches not constituted or settled: in which case,
they say the magistrate may call synods; else they say it does not belong to
him, but to the ministers, who then ought to assemble of themselves, without
any commission from the magistrate: which is expressly against the literal
meaning of the second article, which, as all others of the confession, is of
things that are to be received, believed and practiced at all times, and which
they count of Divine right, and for which therefore they allege places of
Scripture, namely Isa. 49. v. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers; a place
which, in my opinion, makes little to the purpose, no more then the place out
of 1. Tim. 2. v. 2. where we are bidden to pray for Kings, does to prove the
power of magistrates in calling of synods. Neither does that place, 2 Chronic.
19. v. 9. etc. avail much, but only that magistrates may call and constitute
assemblies in general: for there is no speech there of any ecclesiastical
assemblies, for they were not yet thought on at that time. The 29. and 30.
chapters of 2 Chronic. for the magistrates power of calling synods, is of the
same stamp. It is true, chap. 29. v. 4. Ezechiah gathered Priests and Levites
together, but it was to make an exho^tation to them; not that they should
congregate into a synod invested with judicial authority: I think that none
ever yet dreamed of it, that synods in the old Testament could be proved out of
that place. The last place Prove. 11. v. 14. speaks of counselors, in the
multitude of which there is safety; but not a word there of calling of them,
nor that those who were called were Priests and Levites, but rather any other.
One would almost think that they had a mind to weaken a good cause, and make
invalid the power of the magistrate, by alleging places that make nothing for
it: but however they will have them to pass for valid proofs, that magistrates
by divine right are to call synods. But to the matter: I am quite of another
mind then our brethren the Scots are, and I desire to be judged by any other
then by them, whether there be any spark of reason or truth in their saying. Is
it not more like that in a well-constituted church things must run their wonted
channel, and that the power of calling synods belongs to the magistrate; but
the church being in a troubled condition, then that ministers, yea any good man
should contribute his helping hand toward the reforming of the church, whether
by way of synods or otherwise, without expecting orders from the magistrate? In
turbata ecclesia omnis homo miles est Christianus and minister. But who sees
not but the drift of our brothers the Scots is, to constitute a jurisdiction
independent from that of the magistrate?

The third section or article of the 31. chapt: of the confession needs a
comment, to make it agree with the second: it belongs to synods and councels
ministerially to determine controversies of faith and cases of conscience, to
set down rules and directions for better ordering of the public worship of God
and government of his church, to receive complaints in cases of
mal-administration, and authoritatively to determine the same; which decrees
and determinations, if consonant to the word of God, are to be received with
reverence and submission, not only for their agreement with the word, but also
for the power whereby they are made, as being an ordinance of God appointed
thereunto in his word. First, they do not define what synods are here meant,
whether convocated by the magistrate or by private churches, or even convocated
by the ministers themselves. If by the magistrate, how can a company of men
called to advise him make constitutions valid, except they be first submitted
to the judgment and approbation of him by whose authority they were assembled?
The like judgment may we make of the decrees of sy^ods convocated by the
common consent of private churches. If the ministers assemble of their own
accord, were they so many Apostles, they must have some magistracy to give
vigor of law obliging to obedience, either actively or passively, else their
canons would have no jurisdiction, but over them they could overcome by
persuasion.

The fourth article or section is; all synods or councels since the Apostles
time, whether general or particular, may err, and many have erred: therefore
they are not to be made the rule of faith or practice, but to be used as an
help in both. A synod is no rule but to him that is willing to make it a rule.
All the synods power and authority is only so much as either the magistrates
will is, or a conscience enlightened or convinced is persuaded to yield unto. I
know no middle way to create authority. There is a rare saying of Festus
Hommius disp. 18. these. 2. de council. authoritate: the foundation of all
synodicall authority is an agreement with the divine truth and ordinance,
whereof we must be first evidently and clearly made certain, before the synod
get any authority with us. So that synods are of authority, when men and
churches are clearly convinced of the equity, reasonableness and truth of
their decisions.

I am not of the opinion of Gregory Nazianzen and Bazil, who condemned all
synods generally; for I believe they are of very good use, and necessarily to
be had, so that the members be not invested with any judicial power
independent from the magistrate, or from particular churches, whose decisions
be counsels and advices given to them both, not laws: otherwise I think
little or no good is to be expected from them, and that they are not a way to
decide controversies.

1. Judges in an assembly never so upright must be indifferent to persons and
causes; but so cannot ministers be in a synod: for a synod made up of orthodox
Divines, is no competent judge of Arminians. Therefore it is no marvel if the
council of Trent did condemn the Lutherans in the first Session, before they
ever heard them; or that a late synod at Charenton, prepossessed against
independent churches in England, did as it were anathematize them, though none
of the members of that synod, being 80. in number, had hardly seen the face or
writings of any of them. 2. It seems to be against all courses and
proceedings of courts, either of law or chancery, that both plaintiffs and
defendants should sit as judges in one judicatory to determine their own cause.
3. If there be but one party, either the defendent or plaintiff, sitting and
voting, no doubt but he will cast his adversary out of the court; therefore
there being no other then Protestants sitting and voting in the synod of
Dordrecht, the Arminians could not choose but loose their cause: besides that it
is no less unreasonable, that one party should submit to the judgment of his
adverse party. 4. It seems neither just nor reasonable, that churches and men
should submit to the major part of the members stating and concluding of any
matter of religion, rather then to the weight of the reasons of the minor part
dissenting. Should in synods always the major number of votes carry it; in a
general council, made up of Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, no doubt but that
party that is most numerous, though it carries it but by one vote, would give
religion and faith to all the rest: therefore the late long Parliament did
wisely decline to adhere rather to the major part of the members in the
assembly, who had voted for a presbyterian government, reserving to themselves
the liberty to weigh the reasons of both, not to number the persons. Hence we
may gather, how unreasonable it is in matters of faith and religion, that that
which is not the act of all, should be reputed as done by all; when as it may
fall out, that the major part has out-voted the minor but by one suffrage: for
usually all collections, syntagmes of confessions of faith, canons and decrees,
go current and are published to the world, as if all the members had consented
to them, with a nemine contradicente. Thus the late confession of faith and
directory go for current to be the opinion of the assembly, because they were
the act of the major part of them; albeit many godly and learned men among them
had no hand in framing the 30. and 31. chapters of the confession. In affairs
concerning temporal life it may be born with, when what has been voted by the
major part of the counsel or Senate goes for the act of all: and this was one
of the state-precepts that Philip the II. gave to Margerite Governess of the
low-Countrves by the report of Strada. 5. In all great differences betwixt
nation and nation, army and army party and party, the judges that are appointed
to reconcile them must propound conditions by which parties in extremes should
come to some accommodation and moderation, each side if need be complying and
parting with some of his right, to prevent a continuance of strife. But such a
composition cannot be expected in or by a synod, for making up differences in
religion, since each side apprehends his opinion to be the truth, and would
think it a great sin to baulk any part of it, or admit an accommodation.

CHAPTER XVII.
That the Jewish Church Officers had not a jurisdiction distinct from that of
the magistrate. Mr. Gillespies distinction, that they were not materially but
formally distinct, examined. The argument of Amyraldus, that though they had a
distinct jurisdiction, yet the example of the church of the Jews is no pattern
to the Christian church, discussed, and proved to be of no validity.

THis subject, touching the identity or diversity of jurisdiction
ecclesiastical and civil among the Jews, well understood, will decide the
whole controversy: which Mr. Gillespie well apprehends, and therefore
perceiving the strength of this plea, that good reason it is, that the
ecclesiastical power should be distinct or not distinct in the church of the
Jews as well as in that of the Christians, since the power of the keys and of
binding and loosing, of censuring, excommunicating, and making laws
authoritatively be the same in both churches; and therefore, that it cannot be
supposed without great inconvenience that the jurisdictions were indistinct
amongst the Jews, but distinct amongst the Christians; this, I say, being
considered by him, makes him withal endeavor to lay hold on that opinion that
makes jurisdictions distinct in the Commonwealth of Israel; for this
supposition he takes to be the groundwork of the ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

But I will not enter far into this matter, having in the examen of the 30.
chapter of the confession of the Rever. Assembly taken off the main objection,
from Amariah and Zebadiah; for I cannot think but Mr. Gillespie has embraced
this opinion for convenience, and more because it is subservient to the fabric
of his book, then that it has any great probability: 1. because most of the
learned Papists and others, even his fellow-presbyters, are of another
judgment, who if they had had never so little show or likelinesse for a double
jurisdiction among the Jews, specially the Papists, and with them Amyraldus
and others, no doubt they would have made as much of this advantage to further
their cause, as Mr. Gillespie thinks to prevail with it for himself: 2.
because Mr. Gillespie, when he has done what he can to assert a double
jurisdiction in the church of the Jews, reaps very little benefit by it; for
he pulls down by his large concessions with one hand, what he has striven to
set up with the other.

For the first, it were an endless labor to produce the names of the authors
that are for Erastus opinion in this particular; and for one Constantinus
l'Empereur which he pretends to be on his side, twenty may be brought of a
contrary opinion. Not long since discoursing with Manasseh Ben Israel, at the
house of my noble friend Mr. Sadler, about this same subject, he told me he
could not conceive how this opinion, that there was a double jurisdiction among
the Jews, was taken up by the Christians, and that he held it altogether
absurd, against Scripture and reason. Nothing can be added to what Grotius,
Seldom and Cunaeus have written on this subject. Amyraldus in his Theses de
spiritu servitutis these. 28. says, that religion and policy were so straightly
conjoined among the Jews, that one being overthrown, the other could not
stand, but must needs fall too: and in his book of the government of the church
p. 46. he says, the same man did judge Israel as a sovereign magistrate, and
was also over matters of religion. Lud. Capellus part 3. de ministerii verbi
necessitate these. 18, 19, etc. does not only conspire with Amyraldus, but outgo
him, in asserting that the 70. judges or elders, though laymen, and not of the
tribe of Levi, were not only to compose controversies and suits in law, but
also to instruct the people about the worship of God, and to teach them the
fear of the Lord; so far that from the time of Ezra to Jesus Christ any in the
synagogues, which were known to be gifted, might teach, read and expound the
Scripture: which he proves by the example of Jesus Christ Luc. 4. 17. who,
though unknown, was admitted to expound the Scripture; and of St. Paul, Act.
13. 15. My rever. Father is of the same mind, namely in the 19. chapter de
Monarchia temporali, where he says, that neither the Levites nor the chief
Priests made use of any other law then that which was common, and that they had
no ecclesiastical judges distinct from the civil. Judicious R. Hooker is very
express for us in his 8. book of ecclesiastical polity p. 144. Our state is
according to the pattern of Gods own ancient elect people; which people was not
part of them the Commonwealth, and part of them the Church of God, but the
selfsame people whole and entire were both under one chief governor, on whose
supreme authority they did all depend. I have alleged elsewhere Mr. Lightfoot
wholly concurring with Richard Hooker.

Mr. Herbert Thorndike, a judicious writer and much versed in the antiquities
of the Jews, is wholly for an identity of jurisdiction among the Jews. In 8.
chapter he says, that when Moses was dead, a President was chosen over and
beside the seventy, whom they called the Nasi, to be in his stead from age to
age, as R. Moses writes. Which refuteth what some say, that the President of
the Sanedrim was always a Priest; and shows, that the chief ruler of the
Commonwealth was ruler over persons and causes of all kinds, without any
distinction of civil and ecclesiastical. In the 9. chapter we have these
words; The Sanedrim consisted of the chief of that people, as well as of the
Priests and Levites, because the chief causes of that Commonwealth, as well as
of religion, passed through their hands.

Tostatus, a great Papist and writer, upon Matthew. 16. v. 19. will tell us the
opinion of his party: In the old Testament a distinction of jurisdiction was
not necessary, because it was one people and one nation, and one temple whereto
all the Jews did gather together: and therefore since they could conveniently
be governed, the unity of jurisdiction standing, there ought not to have been a
distinction: yea it was very convenient that there should be an identity of
jurisdiction, that it might be believed that it was the same God to whom they
all ministered. There was the same reason for the temple, for it was his will
that there should be one place in which they should offer sacrifice unto him;
lest if that had been done in many places, they might have thought there had
been many gods. Stapleton de Prin. doctrine. 197. acknowledges the same
indentity of jurisdiction among the Jews.

I come to the second, viz. to Mr. Gillespies concessions; which are as large
as I can wish: that the church and state were the same materially; that the
same man was both high Priest and chief judge of the nation; that elders of
synagogues did exercise coercive jurisdiction; that the Jewish Senate after the
thirtieth year of Christ was ecclesiastical, and yet was over all persons and
causes, except capital; and that there was not then any other senate extant;
but that before the thirtieth year, the same senate having the judgment of
capital causes, was civil. All these being granted, I see not what further can
be required in the behalf of unity of jurisdiction; since 1. the same men that
were members of the ecclesiastical senate, were also members of the civil
senate: 2. that the synagogues were invested with magistracy, since the elders
had a coercive power; so that in the very synagogues there is by his confession
a coalition of powers and jurisd ctions: 3. making but one senate both before
and after the 30. year, which judged of all causes and matters, and over all
persons, the civil before the 30. of Christ judging of ecclesiastical causes,
and the ecclesiastical after the 30. judging of civil.

But I could never understand why he calls the senate after the 30. year of
Christ merely ecclesiastical, because it did not judge of capital causes,
though it had cognizance and judgment of all other matters Can the judging or
not judging of capital and criminal causes alter the constitution and name of
an assembly or court, so as that when it judges of capital causes it must be
called civil, otherwise it must be called ecclesiastical?

Now because there is some obscurity in that concession of his, that the church
and state were the same materially, we will hear what his contrymen say to
that, in a late book printed anno 1657. called A true representation of the
present divisions of the church of Scotland, that we may the better weigh his
recantation, or rather modification, when he says, that though they were the
same materially, yet they were distinct formally: the words are page 18. The
church of God being restrained to that one people of Israel, their church and
commonwealth were materially the same by divine constitution, so that none
could be members of the commonwealth but such as were also members of the
church, and so professors of the true religion, as now under the Gospel it
may be otherwise. Now let us hear Mr. Gillespie page 6. They were formally
distinct in respect of distinct laws; the ceremonial was given to them in
reference to their church state, the judicial was given to them in reference
to their civil state. But if they were distinct in regard of the judicial and
ceremonial laws, why may they not be united in regard of the moral law? For
Mr. Gillespie passes over the moral law, and leaves it uncertain who is to be
the keeper and guardian of it, and whether it was given in reference to their
church state or in reference to their civil state, or whether a third power,
jurisdiction or state must not be constituted, that is neither civil state nor
church state, to which the moral law has reference: for sure there was some
union of jurisdictions in the protection and defense of the moral law, which
was as it were the bottom and the basis upon which the ceremonial and
judicial were grounded, and is of far more large extent then the ceremonial
and judicial put together; and from which, in so many difficulties that are
incident for the clearing of ceremonial rites and judicial sentences, there
must be continual appeals to the keepers of the moral law; which being at
least equally in the custody of the magistrate and church officers, and both
parties having a joint interest in the moral law, as to see all men and
businesses governed and squared thereby, they also to that end must conjoin
their power and jurisdiction. For indeed the moral law is no more different
from the politic, then from the law given to families, fathers, masters,
husbands; only the politic law is the practice of the moral, or is the moral
law applicable to cities, families, etc. In like manner the ceremonial law is
but the moral law applied in the practice of religious service: for the moral
law says, God only is to be worshipped; the ceremonial says where, how, when
and by whom. So that as all laws are streams from the moral law, so must all
jurisdiction be from one fountain of magistracy. It seems that Calvin had the
same thought, when in his harmony of the Pentateuch he reduces all laws under
one classis.

But to examine a little nearer his distinction of material and formal; I do
not understand what he means by formal in opposition to material: for the
jurisdictions that are one materially, must be also one formally. Let us
suppose two coordinate supreme senates, as Mr. Gillespie would have them, among
the Jews, one civil, and another ecclesiastical; and that (as he would have
it) the same men were members of one and the other: I say, if they do not
differ materially, neither do they differ formally, so long as no law, order or
constitution, civil or ecclesiastical, can have any force without the joint
consent of both, and except both senates put their seals of confirmation to
what either of them has decreed. For example, the appointing a day of public
humiliation by the ecclesiastical senate, must be also an act of the same men
sitting in a civil senate, who, if they will have the injunction to stand, must
make orders subservient to it, that there be no markets nor courts that day
kept; otherwise those that keep markets or courts upon such a day by virtue of
former warrants from the civil senate, will not know how far they are to obey
the injunction of the ecclesiastical senate, without a dispensation from the
civil senate. This double jurisdiction is in effect but one; for the same men
appointing a day of humiliation in an ecclesiastical senate to be kept, forbid
also in a civil senate all markets and courts to be kept: and though one part
of the injunction was made in one senate, and the other part in the other
senate; (which is very impertinent, and a needless multiplication of
businesses) yet those two jurisdictions must at length be resolved into an
integrall one; as when Protector, Lords and Commons, that make up one
Parliament, must unanimously agree that all the votes and orders shall end in
the same law and act. I confess there can hardly be clashing of powers,
judgments and votes, betwixt these two supreme senates, such as Mr. Gillespie
supposes, so long as the same men are members of both senates; but withal I
should count it a needless and senseless multiplication of senates, and that
in vain the same matter and cause were to be decided by two coordinate senates,
when as one senate would serve the turn: for however, at length the two
senates, as they meet in the same persons, so must they in the same accord and
agreement; which is all one as if it were but one jurisdiction.

Again, it is observable, that diversity of things and persons to which laws
and constitutions have relation, does not constitute a diversity of power and
jurisdiction, specially when the same men are to make the same laws and
constitutions: for as the same men making laws about navigation and the
militia, cannot be said to act from two powers and jurisdictions they are
invested with; so neither if the same men do make laws, as for example, about
Gods worship, and the militia.

Briefly, I believe Sir Thomas More in all his Utopia cannot parallel such a
piece of constitution of state, made up of two jurisdictions, both coordinate
and subordinate each to the other, materially the same, not formally, where of
the same men are members. A happy state indeed, in which there can be no
clashing, except the same man be opposite to himself, or that the members of
the ecclesiastical senate forget to day, what they decreed yesterday when they
met in a civil senate. But since these two senates are materially the same men,
what need we give them several names and forms, for some accidental
circumstances of time and place, either because they do not sit in the same
place, or that they are upon several businesses? must the same members of
Parliament, sitting to day upon religion, be called an ecclesiastical senate,
acting by an ecclesiastical power, and to morrow sitting to order the militia
of the state, it may be in another place, be called a civil or military senate,
acting by a civil or military power?

But most of those that are for ecclesiastical presbyterian jurisdiction,
finding no probability in the opinion of Mr. Gillespie, viz. that among the
Jews there was a jurisdiction in the hands of church officers distinct from
that of the magistrate, go another way, and admit willingly an identity of
jurisdiction, but withal say, that from the coalition of jurisdictions amongst
the Jews, it cannot be inferred that the same ought to be under the Gospel;
that that church in its pedagogy is no pattern to the church in its maturity:
thus speaks Amyraldus in his book of the government of the church chap. 3. p.
91. Whoever commits these two powers into the hands of the same persons, he not
only brings back the church into its infancy, as if it were still under the
pedagogy of the law, but also casts it into that confusion from which the
condition of those times did deliver it.

A man upon better grounds may invert this paralogisme, and make use of this
reasoning of Amyraldus to prove the quite contrary to what he drives at; and so
imitate smiths, who with the same tool pull out and drive in a nayl: for had
the Jews had a government of the church distinct from that of the
Commonwealth, I would thence infer, there is no further need among Christians
of such a division, but rather of a coalition of powers; that the Jews being
rude and weak in knowledge, under a burdensome administration, laden with
ceremonies and legal rites, where the sixth part of the people was either
judge, elder, leader, Priest, Prophet, Levite, or officer in the Leviticall
service, had need to have many keepers, guardians, tutours, many helps of
government; so the governors might be very well parted into ecclesiastical
and civil, and so the whole government might be shared betwixt the two supreme
powers, the keepers of each having wherewithal to employ themselves: but the
Christian church being wholly freed from the burdensome administration of laws
and officers, and having no platform of government, neither has it need of an
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, when there is no ecclesiastical law or
constitution.

Thus, were I of Mr. Gillespies opinion, that among the Jews the government of
the church was distinct from that of the Commonwealth, I would speak in the
language and words of Amyraldus, and infer, that for the same reason that the
Jews had a double jurisdiction, the Christians may be very well without it.

But the opinion of Amyraldus, that there was no distinction of jurisdiction
among the Jews, rendereth his inference for a double jurisdiction under the
Gospel much more groundless, weak and absurd: for if under a burdensome
administration, when they had need of many pedagogues, and schoolmasters, yet
they were governed without distinct government of church and state; much less
do the Christians need such a distinct government, seeing they are freed from
the necessity of having so many schoolmasters, guides, watchmen, and masters,
to govern them, and teach them so many rudiments, and unriddle them all the
ceremonies: besides that, sure God never gives distinct governors, but also he
gives a distinct law and discipline, to be a rule to govern by; which yet God
never did.

Though I am so far of the opinion of Amyraldus, that the government of the
church was not distinct from that of the state; yet I am not of his mind in
this, to think that identity of government would bring a confusion in Christian
states: for I count that identity so needful and necessary, whether the state
be never so much or never so little burdened by men, laws, constitutions, and
businesses to dispatch, that in a state laden with laws and businesses, as
the Commonwealth of the Jews was, two jurisdictions coordinate would have
brought an horrible confusion, and multiplication of suits and businesses, and
in a state less incumbered with laws and businesses, that double jurisdiction
would still bring more work then need be if there was but one jurisdiction.

The argument of Mr. Gillespie, to prove that there were two coordinate
jurisdictions among the Jews, because of the wide division and distinction of
offices amongst them, neither the King being to take upon him the Priesthood,
nor the Priest the Kingdom, as it makes nothing for him, so does it rather
plead for an identity of jurisdiction under the new Testament: for if when the
functions were so distinct, that the King could not offer incense and be
Priest, nor the Priest King, yet there was no distinction of jurisdictions;
much less is that distinction needful under the new Testament, when nothing
hinders but that Kings may be ministers, and ministers Kings.

CHAPTER XVIII.
The cause of mistakes in stating the nature of the church, and calling that
the true church which is not. Three acceptions of the word church in holy writ.
The meaning of the word church Math. 18. v. 17.

IN treating of the church, I conceive a world of writers, both Papists and
Protestants, might have spared themselves much labor about the nature, power,
trueness, fallibility, antiquity, succession of it, if both parties had not
walked in the dark, and if they had agreed upon some few and very easy common
principles, consonant to holy Scripture and reason. How many volumes on our
side are written, to state how far the Romish church is a true church, to
vindicate us from schism, to prove that we have a right succession of
churches, power and ministry, that the English church is a true Catholic
church, that the reformed in France have likewise a right to that title? One
party yields more then needs must; and fearing to want for themselves a right
of church-succession and Baptism, they will acknowledge the Romish church to
be a true church, and yet with such metaphysicall reservations and
modifications, that from a metaphysicall goodness they insensibly descend to a
moral, making of a magistrates power an ecclesiast call, of a cadaver and
carcass a living body, of an aggregation of churches under one presbytery of
the same extent with the jurisdiction of the magistrate, the only true church
of Christ. This made the late English hierarchy conceive, that their best
course was to approach as near as they could to the Romish, yea to be one
church with them; that otherwise they could not make their power, calling and
succession good, nor clear themselves from the guilt of schism. So that as all
parties have been equally mistaken in their grounds, so have they hardly
understood one another, raising doubts where there were none; some by that
weakening their own cause, and strengthening that of their adversaries, who took
all concessions for truths, putting their opposites to very great straights.
For not knowing well how to deny the church of Rome to be a true church, and
that salvation is to be had in it; and not being able to show an uninterrupted
succession from the Apostles time, as the Romanists can do, nor vindicate
themselves from schism; each party is very eager to call his neighbor
schismatic, rending the seamlesse coat of Jesus Christ, that name being
liberally bestowed by the Romanists upon the Protestants, and by some of these
upon those that adhere to the dissenting brethren: each of them, Papists and
Presbyterians, challenging that seamlesse coat of Christ, even right of church
and ecclesiastical power; and therefore for fear of schism and rendings, they
will be sure to cast lots upon it, that they may have it whole and entire.
Whereas had both been well informed of the nature of church and of schism, and
that suceession is a needless plea, neither availing the Romanists a whit, nor
prejudicing any way the reformers, Baronius, Bellarmin, and Stapleton, as well
as Whitaker, Chamier, and the like, might have saved the world so much labor
in reading them; the first in putting the reformers upon the task of proving
themselves a true church, and the latter in taking off the aspersion of
schismatics: for then no doubt all the hard task had been on the Romanists
side, who being not able to make invalid our grounds about the nature of the
church, the power of the church, the calling of pastors, their succession, and
of schism, had been wholly put upon vindicating themselves, and not weakening
our title; for it had been to little purpose, so long as we had retained the
same grounds, which do put us into a firm and unmovable possession. About the
nature of schism Dr. Owen (whose grounds, which is very strange, though we
never conferred our notes together, are those that I stand upon in treating of
the nature of the church) has so well resolved the world, that it is but in
vain for any one either to write after him or against him. And having in my
Paraenesis handled the nature of the church, and intending here only an extract
of it, I will say only so much of it as will make way to what I mainly intend
to prove, viz. that the parity and independency of churches each from the other
in power of exercising all church acts, best agrees not only with Scripture,
antiquity, and the opinion of Zuinglius, Musculus, Bullingerus and Erastus, but
also with the sense of the seven dissenting brethren, sitting twelve years
agone in Westminster together with the other members of the assembly of
Divines; yea that many foreign divines, and other learned men, Salmasius for
one, no way intending to favor the cause we have in hand, have been strong
patrons of it in several of their writings, and treating of the right of
churches and of the power of the magistrate over them, have laid the same
foundations as we.

I find in holy writ, specially in the new Testament, that the word Church is
taken properly three ways. I. for the mystical body of Jesus Christ, the
elect, justified and redeemed, whereof the Gospel is full; thus Hebr. 12. v.
23. and Ephesians. 5. v. 26, 27. etc. II. for the universality of men through the
world outwardly called by the preaching of the word, yielding an external
obedience to the Gospel, and professing visibly Christianity; of this mention
is made 1 Timothy 3. v. 15. and 2 Timothy 2. v. 20. III. for a particular visible
congregation, with one accord meeting in one place for the worship of God
according to his institution; which is spoken of Romans 16. v. 4. Gal. 1. v. 2. 1
Cor. 16. v. 1. 2 Cor. 8. v. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 14. Act. 9. v. 31. Act. 15. v.
41. 1 Cor. 16. v. 19. yea such a church as is confined within a private family,
as Romans 16. v. 5. St. Hierome upon the 1. of the Galatians takes the word
church properly either for a particular church, or for that church called the
Body of Christ, which has neither spot nor wrinkle: dupliciter ecclesia potest
dici; and ea quae non habet maculam and rugam, and vere est Christi corpus, and
ea quae in Christi nomine congregatur; relating to the words of Christ Matthew.
18. v. 19. where two or three, etc. which cannot be understood of a national
church.

There be two places in the new Testament where the word church is taken
otherwise: namely Act. 19. v. 41. for a concourse of people; and Matthew. 18. v.
17. a place so much controverted, and which when we speak of excommunication
requires we should insist upon it. It suffices here to say, that if by it
were meant an ecclesiastical assembly of pastors and elders, some other
parallel to it might be found in the old or new Testament. I am sure as there
is none in the new, so neither in the old; where the words kahal or gnedah are
taken sometimes for the whole congregation, as Deuter. 31. v. 30. where Moses
pronounced a canticle in the hearing of the whole church or congregation; and
yet the 28. verse shows that by the whole congregation the magistrates and
elders are meant: thus Levit. 4. v. 13, 14, 15, and 21. where if the people had
trespassed ignorantly, the church, that is the assembly of magistrates and
elders, are commanded to offer atonement for the sin; and Deuteronomy. 23. v. 1. the
eunuch, the bastard, the Moabite and the Ammonite are barred from the
congregation or the church, that is from public employment; for a converted
Moabite was not forbidden from the Jewish church. Sometimes for a senate of
judges and magistrates, called Synedrium; as Proverb. 26. v. 26. and so it is
interpreted by the LXX. and there you have a plain exposition of the word
church Matthew. 18. for the like cause of wrong and injury is spoken of in both
places, and the like judicatory: so Ecclesiasticus 23. v. 24. the adulteress
is convented before the church, that is before the judicatory of judges and
elders. Which places manifestly declare, that Christ meant such a judicatory
amongst the Jews, whereof the words heathen and publican make further proof;
and that Jesus Christ spoke of the same kind of judicatory and men, as
ordinarily were found when he spoke the words: but it is evident that neither
in Christ's time, nor ever since his time, the word church was taken for an
assembly or senate of ecclesiasticalls, or an assembly of pastors. So that, was
there any such sentence of excommunication or censure inflicted by the church
upon the party that did the wrong, this judgment or sentence must needs be
pronounced by such a Synedrium or senate of judges and elders, endowed with
judicial authority, as the word church was usually taken for among the Jews.
But suppose the word church was not used by Christ in that sense, our brethren
should show us that Jesus Christ did speak it in a Scripture sense, and as it
was taken in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, namely (as they
would have it) for an assembly of Christian church officers invested with
judicial authority. Here one controverted place of Scripture must be expounded
by another: and while there is very great likelihood that Jesus Christ meant a
senate ordinarily sitting amongst the Jews to decide controversies of wrong
betwixt brother and brother, and which was not made up of officers distinct
from the magistrate, or men delegated by him; if they will weaken our plea and
exposition, which is very rational and natural, and make it as probable and
likely that he spoke of a company of church officers distinct from the
magistrate, they must look out some parallel place either in the old or new
Testament, where the word church is so understood; which I am confident they
will never find.

But to yield as much as I can; though I find no where in the old Testament the
words kahal and gnedah, church, signifying such an assembly of church officers,
yet I find 1 Samuel 19. v. 20. the word lahakath mentioned, where it is spoken of
a company of Prophets, which word our brethren might as well interpret a
church: but neither would this serve their turn; for in that place of Samuel
quoted, those prophets were not sitting in a senate, church or college, nor
were they about any church act, but were traveling in the highway: and
however, our Lord Jesus Christ had no reference to such a church or assembly of
prophets, who as prophets were never endowed with a judicial power. Samuel
indeed was over them as an Arch-prophet; but as such he had no jurisdiction in
Israel, but as a Prince and Judge of the people.

CHAPTER XIX.
That a particular assembly of Christians meeting in one place about the
worship of God, is the only true visible church mentioned in Scripture. That
that church considered as an assembly of Christians, brings forth other kinds
of acts then it does considered as a society of men: by which the nature and
extent of the power of a private church is made clear and evident.

HAving mentioned the acceptions of the word Church in the new Testament; there
being not any visible assembly either according to the first or second
acception, it remains, that a particular assembly of Christians meeting in
one place with one accord, about the worship of God, enjoying the same
ordinances, has the true denomination of a church. This church, presbyterian,
particular church or congregationall, is the true adequate subject of all
churchright, discipline and power; which it enjoyes partly by a divine positive
right, as it is a congregation of Christians, partly by a divine natural civil
politic right, as it is a society of men endowed with wisdom, prudence and
liberty, to govern themselves by such laws as they find most convenient for
their subsistence.

The first is a divine positive right: for however men are so, or otherwise
commanded by some external power, yet the pastor is to look for a flock and
people, and the people for a pastor; and both are to meet in as convenient a
place and competent a number as they can, to enjoy the ordinances of Christ, by
hearing the word, praying, and partaking of the Sacraments, by a warrant and
command from Christ. By the same right, warrant and command, the pastor or
pastors of the church are to perform all the pastoral acts, as to preach to
those that will hear, not by constraint, but willingly, to command in the name
of Christ, to exhort, to dehort, to beseech men to be reconciled to God, to lay
out Christ in the promises of the Gospel, to denounce the judgments of God to
the impenitent and unbelievers, to admit to the Eucharist all baptized persons,
and visibly professing Christianity, who are not ignorant, or public infamous
offenders', or profane, refusing none by any judicial act of theirs denouncing
sentence of excommunication, or any other censure, but by their general duty
as Christians, by which they are bound not to have communion with such
unfruitful workers of darkness. Otherwise they are to impose nothing, no
injunction, no censure or punishment, but on such as without constraint and
willingly undergo it, and are contented so to do. The other acts of a pastor
out of the congregation are, to offer himself, sent or unsent, to visit and
comfort the sick, the prisoner, the widow, the fatherless, to see all persons
and families that are of his flock, to be the same at home as at church, of the
same Gospell-conversation, and that all ranks be filled with the knowledge of
the Lord, to respect no man's degree or person in delivering his message from
Christ, saying even as John Baptist to Herod, it is not for thee to keep thy
brothers wife; briefly, to do the office of a faithful minister in season and
out of season.

The acts of the people in a society of church members are double; some do
respect the pastor, others the fellow members. Those that respect the pastor or
pastors are, to maintain, observe, respect and honor them, first for their
callings sake, looking upon them as Ambassadors from Christ, and then for
their work, and the word that they bear; to receive their commands as commands
of Christ, and yet not with a blind obedience, but first being persuaded and
convinced, yea judging them by the judgment of spiritual men, and by a
judgment of discretion and approbation, proving the pastors doctrine, though
it came out of another St. Paul's mouth.

The acts and duties of church members as such one toward another are, to
love, edify, forbear, and submit one to another. But a main act of a
churchmember as such is, not to submit his own reason to the number of his
fellow members, in assenting to or dissenting from such a doctrine, act, or law
made by them, but to the weight, and to what he by his reason enlightened by
the word conceives to be most good, true, just and reasonable; yet, for
conformity sake and mutual edification, yielding as far as he may.

The acts of the power of the church by a natural divine politic civil right,
not as they are Christians or church members, but as they are a society of men
endowed with humane prudence, freedom of body and mind, and have discretion as
to govern themselves and their private families, so to contribute their advice
and help toward the government of any society of men, whereof they are
members, these acts, I say, are common to all other societies, as to a company,
a hall, a corporation, a college or school: these acts are, to do all things
orderly; to choose their own church officers; that orders made by the major part
of the society shall oblige the minor dissenting part; to choose time and place
of meeting; to admit or reject such officers or members as the major part of
the members shall think fit; that each member shall stand to any order of the
discipline once consented unto by him, till the order be reversed by the
consent of the major part.

All these acts are to be guided not only by the light of reason and common
prudence, but chiefly by that measure of light of grace or faith that God has
imparted to every churchmember; which light being not known but to him that
has received it, and the springs and motives which induce each member of a
church-society rather to be of this then of that judgment, in ordering and
governing the society, being unknown to the universality of the society;
therefore church members are to be governed as the members of any other
society, by the dictate of men as men, and not as Christians, submitting,
either actively or passively, to an order and law, because it is an order and
law, not because it is good and reasonable. It is better in such things, as
they say, that a mischief should happen then an inconvenience: for if one
member, though alone in the right, should dissent from the rest of his
fellow members, no man but will judge that it is much better that this one
dissenting member should submit to that which is wrong, either by acting or
suffering, then that all proceedings for order and discipline should be stayed.
Were no law valid but to him that thinks it so, the world would be in a
strange confusion.

So then, an assembly of Christians being a society of men, and a Christian
having the face like a lawyer, a physician or a merchant, and nothing being
seen but the outside, they must be all governed by the same dictate, which
appears prima front to be reason to a man considered as a man, and not as he
is a Christian, lawyer or physician. And as Dionysius governed his Kingdom and
school by the same dictates of reason; so must a society of merchants, a
college of physicians, a family, and so a society of Christians.

Of these two kinds of acts, as every society has one proper to it self, as it
is a society of merchants, physicians, lawyers, Christians; so one kind of
these acts is common to all, as they are equally a society of men, that must
have a government and magistracy set up within themselves; and so must a
society of Christians meeting about the worship of God, have.

But to make it evident that all church-acts are not acts of men as
church members, but as members of a society, and not as Christians, but as
invested with magistracy, either assumed by a confederate discipline, or
delegated, I might instance the like necessity of two kinds of acts in all
societies of men that can be imagined, not considered as Christians. For
example, these two kinds of acts will be found in a college of physicians,
who, as physicians, join in consultation upon a case propounded to them, send
bills to their apothecaries, examine and judge of the worth of those that are
candidates, or have license to practice physic, discourse of their art either
asunder, or in a body as in a consultation: but as a society of men invested
with jurisdiction and magistracy, they choose a president, censors and officers;
they make choice of time and place to sit; they do all things orderly; they
admit or expel members; they give authority and license to practice physic;
they bind themselves to stand to those orders that are made by the major part
of their fellows; which act is no act of physicians as physicians, but a
dictate of any other society, who usually take that for a law of the society
that has passed by the major part of their members. By this (by the way) we
see what plea synods (except they be infallible, as the synod of the Apostles
was) can have for making decrees and canons by an ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
it being in truth no other then what is assumed by all societies, whose orders
do pass for laws as to themselves, if made by the major part of their members.

But some of our brethren will interpose, and say, that if the Lord Jesus
Christ has appointed a set rule for governing of particular churches, as some
of them are of opinion, and this rule be not arbitrary, nor left to the dictate
of men's common reason and prudence, then it follows, that those acts for
taking care that those set rules of Christ for government be according to the
mind of Christ, are duties of church members as such, and not as members of a
society. To this I answer, were it so that the Lord Jesus Christ had appointed
an exact and express rule for government in particular churches, I confess
that those acts, to see the mind of Christ fulfilled, are acts of
church members as such, so far as both pastor and members do act in obedience
to God, and not unto men, not by constraint, but willingly; for so the
preaching and hearing of the word are to be performed by church members as
such: but these same acts, specially about government, as far as they are
commanded and imposed, and require external obedience, and that the
constitutions that are made about them are acts of the major part of the
members, are valid not because they are laws of Christ, and approved to every
ones conscience, but because like laws and orders of other societies, they do
oblige as such, and as consented unto in the making of them by the major part
of the members, though it may be the minor part were in the right; for as the
acts of a magistrate commanding things directly commanded by God are the
magistrates acts, so those acts performed in a particular church, though
commanded expressly by God, in as much as they require external obedience,
either actively or passively, are acts of that magistracy set up in that church.

I find in a result of a synod in New England, printed at the end of the book
of Mr. Cotton of the Covenant of Grace, some conclusions wholly consonant to
what I now write in this chapter, of the two kinds of acts that are performed
in every particular church, the one done by them as church members, the other
being an effect of magistracy set up in every particular church, considered not
as a church, but as a society. The first kind of acts is proper to those
church members, who by any power of magistacy are not put upon stronger
engagements of oredience then if there had never been any. The second is
exercised by magistracy, either in the church, or out of the church, against
the obstinate and unruly, and such as need to be compelled. I find the synod
speak much to that purpose; namely p. 40. the collectour says from them, that
for remedying disorders, and taking away or preventing gross errors, there
must be a power of restraint and coercion used; and in regard that every
particular church is to be as well considered in the quality of a civil
society, as a society of church members.

CHAPTER XX.
That the power attributed to private churches by the reverend dissenting
brethren does very well accord with the power of magistracy in matters of
religion, as it is held by Erastus, Bullingerus, Musculus, Grotius, Mr. Seldom,
and Mr. Coleman. This same is proved by reason, and by the testimony of Mr.
Buroughs, writing the sense of all his brethren, as also by the practice of
the churches in New England.

WHen at first I undertook to write of this subject, I had no other design but
to assert the nullity of a double external jurisdiction, and to prove that,
there being no such thing, neither in Scripture nor reason, as an
ecclesiastical power, all jurisdiction that was not united under and
appertained not to the magistrate, and was not a power of coercion, was no
jurisdiction. Neither was I then less dissenting from the church way and power
retained by the rever. brethren of the congregation, then from the presbyterian
brethren; and the rather because I saw both parties carried with as much
eagerness of opposition against Erastus and Mr. Coleman, as they were among
themselves: besides, not fancying to my self otherwise, but that all
jurisdiction called ecclesiastical, and assumed by whatsoever society of men,
either single or made up by the aggregation of many societies, which was not
subordinate to the magistrates power, was alike against reason and Scripture.
But being not able to study my main matter intended, without enquiring into the
nature of the power that both parties assumed to themselves, I found that the
tenets of the brethren of the congregationall way could very well accord with
mine, and, which was not yet by any considered, that the right of particular
churches, as the dissenting brethren hold, might very well consist with that
measure of power that Erastus, Bullingerus, Musculus, Gualterus, Grotius, Mr.
Seldom, and Mr. Coleman allowed to the magistrate in matters of religion and
over churches; and that independency of private churches (I mean independency
from presbyterian classical and synodicall judicatories) does no way hinder
their right and liberty, nor their dependency on the magistrate, nor cutteth
short the magistrate of the sovereign power he ought to have overall societies
and persons, and in all causes and matters. Lastly, I found that this way of
reconciliation was most agreeable with Scripture, reason, the practice of the
Jews, and of the primitive church of Christians; besides was confessed so by
many learned men, who though seemingly otherwise affected, and carried by more
heat, then knowledge of what was passed or held in this Island, have
notwithstanding in their tracts about the power of churches, and discipline,
laid the same grounds that the dissenting brethren have delivered.

I need not be very long in proving, by reason that this reconciliation betwixt
the advocates of the magistrates power in matters of religion, and those that
plead for the right of churches, is already made to our hands by what I have
already handled. I add further these following considerations.

1. Since every private church has within it self a power of magistracy, and
that all magistracy, in whatever society it be seated, is subordinate to the
magistrate of those societies; it does consequently follow, that that
magistracy wherewith every private church is invested, is also subordinate to
the magistrate: for, as I have demonstrated, since no society of
church members, (no more then of citizens, merchants, physicians and the like)
can be imagined without laws, discipline, and power of restraint and coercion,
so neither can it be imagined that such a power is not dependent on the
magistrate: for if a member of a society be obstinate and refractory, and will
not be ruled but by coercion and compulsion, and it be more then church members
as such can do, to reduce him by exhortation and good advice; then
church members must act also by a power of magistracy, either assumed or
delegated: however it be, that power of magistracy is subordinate to the
sovereign magistrate.

2. It is a maxim in Scripture, Philosophy and common reason, that theorems
or propositions that are true asunder, are no way contradictory one to another.
Now these two following propositions are of an undeniable truth, viz. The
magistrate is a sovereign governor over all persons and societies, and in all
matters and causes, whether they pertain to religion or no; and this, Every
particular church has a right and power to govern it self, without any
dependence either on other churches or church-judicatories. Each of these
propositions being considered as true asunder, must also be very consistent,
and no way clashing one with the other.

3. That the right of churches may well stand with the power of the magistrate,
may appear by example of many societies, as families, corporations, halls,
whose intrinsecall power of magistracy agrees exceeding well with that of the
magistrate over them: for none doubts but every father of a family has a
power to govern his children, household and servants as he lists, being in his
own as it were house a magistrate and a Priest; yet none hitherto questioned
but that paternall and oeconomicall powers are subordinate to the power of the
magistrate, for even the civil law and so many constitutions about regulating
the power of fathers, masters and husbands, and yet allowing them their
authority at home, are an argument that their fatherly power is consistent with
their subordination to the magistrate.

4. There be, as I showed above, two kinds of acts to be performed in a church;
one as they are church members, the other as they are a society, that for their
government must assume some part of jurisdiction of the same nature with the
magistrates power. In the managing of the acts of the first kind there is no
subordination of the church to the magistrate, but only in the second: for
preaching, hearing the word of God, administering the sacraments, walking
holily, submitting one to another, are no acts of power subordinate to the
magistrate; and under that consideration I will grant the right of churches not
to depend on the magistrate: but as these acts in a church way cannot be
exercised without a power of magistracy assumed, in this regard a church may be
said to be subordinate to the fountain of magistracy. For it is with these two
kinds of acts in subordination to God and the magistrate, as with the body and
the soul. For none doubts but the faculty and gifts of reasoning, apprehending
truth, loving God and our neighbor, believing in Christ, are no acts
subordinate to the power of the magistrate: but as reasoning, faith, love, must
be supposed resident in the body of man, and that the man in doing acts
subordinate to the magistrates power, as going, ordering, commanding and
obeying, does carry along his reason, faith and love; in like manner, as it is
not possible to consider a man performing the acts of reason, faith and love,
and not being the while subordinate to the power of the magistrate; so a church
even performing those acts of church members as such, in as much as the second
kind of acts that are subordinate to the magistrate must be joined with the
first, cannot be considered without it be subordinate to the magistrate.

5. If the power of churches were not subordinate to the magistrate, many
inconveniences would follow. 1. That some churches gathered by the magistrate
and his acts of appointing time, place and stipends, should not be subordinate
to him. 2. Or if he should gather none, and besides appoint no public worship
to take place in all parts of his dominions, but leave that wholly to the will
of those that congregate of their own accord, this, I say, would in a very
short time breed irreligion or heathenisme in most places and most tanks of
men: for then it must be conceived, that not one of 20. would congregate of
themselves, and that the 19. parts not being called upon, nor any way invited
by public ordinances set up in all places of men's abode, atheism or neglect
of all religion would soon ensue in most parts. And a persecuting magistrate,
as in the primitive church, were ten times rather to be wished, then one
careless and neglecting to set up ordinances: for by one of these two ways,
either by persecution, or by countenancing and commanding the worship of God,
the magistrate causes religion to flourish; by doing neither one nor the
other, he takes the way to abolish it, as Julian the apostate was about to do,
if God had not the sooner cut him off.

6. But suppose it be granted on all sides, that the magistrate is bound to do
what King Edward did or Queen Elizabeth, to banish popery, to set up
protestantisme and an orthodox ministry in all parishes throughout England
(which acts cannot be performed by a few particular churches with all their
church power;) sure it must be also granted, that all those acts of a
magistrate in ordering affairs of religion are in his disposal, and depending
on him.

7. Since then the magistrate must have the ordering of those affairs of
religion which he himself has constituted, if he should not likewise be the
supreme governor of those churches which he has not erected, but were
gathered by the members of churches of their own accord, there could not but a
great confusion arise in men's minds, as well as in the state; it being no small
business to distinguish the power of the churches that are subordinate to the
magistrate, and the power of those churches that are not.

From reason I descend to the authority of the rever, brethren, both in old and
new England, dissenting from the presbyterians. In old England the reverend
pious Jeremie Buroughs will be in stead of all the rest of his brethren; for
in the eleventh chapter of his Irenicum he professes to deliver not only his
own judgment, but also that of his brethren with whom he had occasion to
converse. Whoever shall peruse his book throughout, specially the fifth
chapter, will find that he attributes as much power to the magistrate over
churches, as any of the opposites to the presbyterian brethren. Which power of
the magistrate while he asserteth, he never conceives it should overthrow his
other positions, namely, in the seventh chapter, concerning the right and power
of churches; or that his stating the right, liberty and power of churches,
could not consist with the power of the magistrate over them. Now he is very
express in the said chapter for the power of the magistrate in sacred things.

Page 21. he says that magistrates in their magistracy are specially to aim
at the promoting of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ the mediator; and there and
throughout that long chapter you have these conclusions. 1. That the church and
Commonwealth of Israel were mixed in one: that there is no reason it should be
now otherwise. 2. That the power of the magistrate is alike in the times of the
old and new Testament; and were it so that nothing were set down of it in the
new Testament, that it is enough it is a law not only granted to the
Israelites, but also of the light given to the very heathens, whose power of
magistracy was to govern religion as well as other things. 3. That it is most
unreasonable, that a magistrate turning either from the heathenish or Jewish
religion, should enjoy less power in matters of religion then he had when he
was a Jew or heathen. An infidel magistrate (says he) converted to Christian
religion is thereby better enabled to perform the duty of his place, then
before; but he had the same authority before. 4. He holds, that the magistrate
has a sovereign judgment of his commands, though unskilful in the things
commanded. A magistrate that is not skillful in physic or in navigation, yet
he may judge physicians and mariners if they wrong others in their way. 5. He
asserts largely the power of the magistrate in matters of religion, by the
example of the Kings of Judah and Israel, yea of the Kings of Niniveh, and of
Artaxerxes interposing his power in matters of religion, for which Ezra
blesses God; whosoever will not do the law of thy God and the law of the King,
let judgment be executed upon him. Here one may see, as the law of God and the
law of the King may stand together, so the power of the magistrate may very
well consist with the power, right and liberty of a private church. And the
like he does by many passages of Scripture which he urges; namely Isa. 49. v.
23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, etc. and Esa. 60. 10. Revel. 21. v. 24.
the Kings of the earth shall bring their honor to the church, and Romans 13. 4.
and 1 Pet. 2. 13. He adds, since the Scripture speaks thus generally, for thy
good, for the punishment of evildoers and the praise of them that do well, we
must not distinguish where the Scripture does not.

Now let us go to New England, where none will deny but a power and right of
churches is maintained sutably to the sense of the dissenting brethren in old
England, and yet they ascribe no less to the magistrate in matters of religion
then Mr. Buroughs. Witness the result of a synod at Cambridge in new England,
published an. 1646. They say, magistrates must and may command matters of
religion that are commanded in the Word, and forbid things therein forbidden;
by the Word meaning the whole Word both in the new and old Testament. In short,
they hold for substance what I said before of the two kinds of acts performed
in every private church: one looking immediately at the external act of the
body, and the duties and sins which appear in the carriage of the outward man;
and this they say the magistrate looks at, and commands or forbids, in
church and out of church; see page 15. and therefore they say page 40. every
church considered as a civil society needs a coercive power. They say
further, that this power is needful in churches, to curb the obstinate, and
restrain the spreading of errors.

Page 49. they invalid the example of Uzziah, often alleged by the Romanists
and the presbyterians (though Mr. Gillespie, as I remember, never makes use of
it in his great book) and say, that this act of Azariah thrusting out Uzziah
was an act of coercion, and so of magistracy, and a civil act, which priests
and Levites were allowed to do, and which they made subservient to that command
of God, that none should burn incense but the sons of Aaron. For I believe any
officer under the sovereign magistrate might do the like, in case this later
should go about to violate a command of such a high nature; for being an
under-magistrate, and invested with power of coercion, he obeys the greater
master, and makes use of his power to hinder a notable breach of Gods express
command.

Having thus made good that there is a fair correspondency and concurrence of
the right and power of private churches with the magistrates power over them, I
do not see but my principles and those of the dissenting brethren are very
agreeable and consonant in the main. It may be a few of them will call that
power in every particular church ecclesiastical, which I call a power of
magistracy; and they will call excommunication an act of the ecclesiastical
power, which I conceive to be rather an effect of the power of magistracy
settled in every particular church. But the difference is not great, since we
both make that church power (call it what you will) a power of jurisdiction and
coercion, which must needs be subordinace to the power of the magistrate, since
both are of the same kind; and upon that account excommunication is a law of
the power of coercion, and so of magistracy. In short, whereas some of them
will say of all church censures, that they are the product of a positive divine
power, I say they are the result of a natural civil power, subservient to the
divine power in the exercise of the first kind of acts of church members as
such: and sure Mr. Buroughs and the result of the synod in New England come
very near, if not altogether to my sense. For Mr. Buroughs page 27. makes but
two powers residing in a private church, one of admonishing, persuading,
desiring, seeking to convince, the other a power restraining. This latter power
I call a power of magistracy, because by the first power men are not outwardly
restrained nor rought to outward conformity; and accordingly, excommunication
must needs be a product of that restraining power. So that the difference is
not at all real, but nominall.

I find in Musculus, in his common-places concerning magistrates, the same
power of magistracy in churches. The passage has been alleged above: there he
says, that that power exercised in churches is notecclesiasticall, but the
power of the magistrate.

CHAPTER XXI.
That a church made up of many particular churches under one presbytery
invested with a judicial power over them, is not of the institution of Christ.

WE are brought insensibly to know the nature of a Christian church instituted
by Christ, which, as I said, is a particular visible one meeting in one place
to celebrate the same ordinances, whereof mention is made 1 Cor. 11. v. 18. and
chap. 14. v. 23. and Act. 13. v. 42. and 44. In this church the Lord Jesus
Christ has properly instituted the ministry: for Christ has not instituted a
catholic visible church, much less a national church under one presbytery:
but this appellation of church is like the word man, which denotes a nature
common to many singulars, and yet is properly said of John or Peter. For as
many fountains are not a fountain, and many schools are not a school, and many
families are not a family; so many private churches are not properly a church.
We shall find below Amyraldus saying most truly, and very pertinently to our
argument, that the appellation of church does not properly belong either to the
catholic visible church, or to a national church, such as are the English,
French, Helvetian churches; which are rather a knot or collection of churches,
then a church.

That such a church, made up of many private churches under one presbytery, is
not of the institution of Christ, nor ex necessitate praecepti, but of the free
pleasure of each private church, who without any violation of the command of
Christ, may either remain single, or aggregate it self to other churches under
such a presbytery, may be proved by several arguments.

1. I begin with the testimony of the Rev. Assembly in their humble advice, who
lay no greater stresse of necessity upon it, then that it is lawful and
agreeable to the word of God that such a thing be.

2. If the Lord Jesus Christ had instituted such a presbyterian church, it were
fit it should be told us what is a competent number of churches requisite to be
under a presbytery, whether only three or four, or more, it may be two
thousand. If so many, why may not a hundred thousand churches be under one
presbytery? If so many, why not all private orthodox churches that are
dispersed through the world? If a presbytery may be over all the catholic
visible church, since this presbytery must have a president and overseer, why
may not this overseer be called Bishop? if Bishop, why not Pope, who, in
reference to his cardinall-consistory, is the same as this Arch-president is
related to his presbytery, both being over the whole catholic church?

3. The Lord Jesus Christ has stated what number may constitute a private
church, for where two or three are gathered in his name he has promised to be
in the midst of them; and whatever number of men shall meet in one place, with
one accord, in a church way, to hear the word, it may be denominated a church,
and have warrant from Christ to be so called. But our brethren cannot show us
that all the private churches of Scotland under one presbytery can be called
properly a church, being rather a political and prudentiall consociation: and
could they show us that such an aggregation is of the institution of Christ,
how can they disprove, but that all the private churches in the world may be
likewise by the institution of Christ under one presbytery?

4. It being then equally the institution of Christ, that 100000. yea all the
churches of the world, as well as four or five thousand (for so many may be in
Scotland) should be under one presbytery; were such a presbytery not over all
the churches of the world, but only over all the churches of France, Scotland
and Holland, and invested with judicial power from Christ to make laws
authoritatively, to excommunicate, to exauctorate, and inflict censures without
any appeal, then this would be such an Imperium in imperto, a jurisdiction
within the jurisdiction of others, as our brethren the Scots have raised within
the dominion and jurisdiction of the magist rate of Scotland. Such a
presbytery, no doubt, might excommunicate as well one of the States of the
United Provinces, as once the presbytery of Scotland did the Marquess of
Huntley, who 8. years after, viz. in the year 1616. was released from that
excommunication by the Archbishop of Canterbury in England; for which, I
believe, he had as good warrant from Jesus Christ, as the presbytery of
Scotland had when they excommunicated him: and so both might by the like
warrant excommunicate or absolve any man sentenced in the church of the
Abyssins. And therefore it cannot be thought so monstrous a thing in the Pope
and his Conclave, to excommunicate the Emperor of Germany and the King of
France, as they often have done: it being certain that a presbytery in Scotland
has no greater jurisdiction over one of the subjects of the magistrate of
Scotland, then the Pope has over the King of the Romans.

5. A thing very considerable it is, that the holy Scripture, as it often by
the word church understands a particular church, so sometimes (as 1 Corinthians.
11. v. 22.) it means the place where a particular church is assembled: but
the Scripture, as it never means by the word church the place that contains a
national presbyterian church, so neither the national church it self.

6. It is no less considerable, that a true visible church is not
circumscribed by the jurisdiction of the magistrate, except that church be also
the Commonwealth, and that he that is head of the church be also head of the
Commonwealth; as it was with the people of Israel: for members of a particular
church need not be dwellers in the same jurisdiction; it being ordinary beyond
seas, for particular churches to be made up of members dwelling in several
dominions, in the confines of Geneva, Savoy, Burgundy and France.

7. But is there any command or institution of Christ, that no more churches,
or so many churches as are within one magistrates jurisdiction should be united
under one presbytery? and that that presbytery, power of the keys, and of
binding and loosing, should be bounded by the limits of the magistrates
territory? If their power does extend as far as heaven, no doubt it cannot be
bounded by the limits of any earthly Prince.

8. This aggregation of many private churches under one presbytery is either
voluntary, or commanded by God. If commanded, let our brethren bring us any
passage of Scripture prescribing a certain measure of judiciary power of the
presbytery over private churches. If it be free and voluntary, and every
private church may, without violation of divine prescript, either associate or
not associate, then those churches cannot be blamed if they forbear to
associate under one presbytery; and in case they should associate, if they be
their own carvers, and do not enstive their liberty to a power that is not of
their own tempering and moulding. It is true, a woman has no tie to marry, no
more then a private church to associate; she has that liberty either to
subject her self to the power of a husband, or remain single: but she cannot
either before or after she is married put what condition she pleases to the
power of a husband. It is not so with private churches, who have no set rule of
obedience due to the power of an ecclesiastical judicatory.

8. That this power of presbytery over many particular churches is a power of
magistracy, either assumed by common consent or delegated from the civil
magistrate, may be proved, in that under the heathen Emperors it was a power
of consent, every particular church reserving to it self such a measure of
power as they thought fit: and that it was so, we shall see (God willing) when
we come to the history of the nature of the power that the Christian churches
had under the heathen Emperors. But under Christian Emperors no
church-judicatory ever had any power but by commission from the magistrate, as
we shall likewise show afterward. And the diversity of rites and customs of
churches, as in fasting, keeping Easter, using diverse forms of liturgies,
forbidding of appeals from Africa to Rome, though all these churches were under
the magistrates jurisdiction, does show, that as the supreme magistrate
permitted many countries to enjoy their customs and municipall laws, so did he
the like for rites and ceremonies, which every church took up as they liked
best. Which is an argument that there was not such a power as an
ecclesiastical presbytery, binding all private churches to their
constitutions, and that every church was independent; there being amongst them
no other consociation, but only that which consisted in a communion of the same
faith and doctrine.

9. As the intensivenesse of the power of a national church has ever been,
and ought to be still, so much as private churches were willing to yield, for
they always reserved to themselves a full church power, taking the decrees and
constitutions of other churches rather as examples and friendly advises; so the
extensivenesse of that power has been always limited by the bounds of the
magistrate, so that each church was more or less independent, as the
magistrate over them had a larger or narrower territory. If so many Kings as
Moses and Josua did subdue should turn Christians, so many independent churches
would there be, even 33. for so many were overcome; but should all these 33.
Kings be subdued, these 33. Churches would cease to be independent on each
other, and in stead of 33. churches depending each on their magistrate, one
national church should be molded, of the same extent of power as the
magistrate that rules over them.

CHAPTER XXII.
That the greatest opposers of the dissenting brethren, namely Salmasius,
Amyraldus, and others, have laid down the same grounds for the right and power
of particular churches, and so confuted rather their own fancies, then
invalidated the tenets of the brethren. The question whether Rome be a true
church briefly resolved. That Amesius, and John Mestrezat late minister of
Paris, in their writings, have held the power of private churches to be
independent from any church-judicatory.

THe spirits of men are now a little more calm, and not so eager either at home
or abroad, and the quarrel not so fierce with the independents, as it bath
been these 15. years: I having my self been a poor instrument to disabuse some
of my countrymen, who partly by their misunderstanding, paitly by the false
reports and ill will of the common enemy to all goodness and good men, were
possessed of very harsh opinions and conceits of them, and passed a strange
censure upon them, as enemies to all order and discipline, and men of dangerous
and pernicious tenets to all humane societies. The very children amongst them
did question whether they were shaped like other men. Amyraldus made a great
book of Invectives against them, and turned them into Sodomites, franticks, and
enemies of all order and discipline. Salmasi^s and Maiesius were no less
bitter against them. A national synod net at Charenton, where Amyraldus had a
standing, but no vote, condemned them. But as this synod condemned them as the
council of Trent did the Lutherans, before they heard them; so did all these
authou^s I have named fall upon them without mercy, before they had any
particular knowledge of them, or any certain information of their supposed
pernicious manners.

Yet for all that, those very men that wrote so much against them, as they
refuted rather their own fancies, then any thing those they call independents
believed, so they did handle this matter of the nature and power of the church,
and that of the magistrate over it, much to the advantage of those that they
made as black as they could; namely Amyraldus, in declaring both his own sense,
and that of the ancient church next to the Apostles, has laid the same
groundwork for the parity and independency of churches, as the reverend
brethren dissenting from the assembly of Divines have done.

He alleges Vignier (a French author writing above 70. years agone, highly
valued, as the truest historiographer that ever put pen to paper, by the most
learned and pious Prelat Dr. Usher) in his ecclesiastical history relating the
opinion of Irenaeus, Eusebius and Nicephorus, concerning the state of the
government of the church soon after the Apostles. The form of the government in
this age was almost democraticall; for every church had equal power to teach
the word of God, to administer the sacraments, to absolve and excommunicate
heretics, and those that led a d'ssolute life, to elect, to call and to ordain
ministers, to depose them when occasion required, to erect schools, to call
synods, to ask the opinion of others upon doubts and controver sies. I find the
centuriators of Magdeburg, cent. ^. cap 7. to have these or equivalent words
with little difference, but that they wrote in Latin, and Vignier in French.

Here then we may see our brethrens sense, 1. that every particular church is
independent, free to govern it self and to exercise all church acts, not
rejecting a consociation with other churches, but such as equals have among
themselves: 2. for the power of synods they acknowledge none, nor judicial
authority, only a liberty to admonish, advise and counsel.

In the 8. chapter he has a long passage, whereof the drift is, 1. that
particular churches are no less free asunder, then provinces and towns before
they join in a confederation; 2. that all aggregation and consociation is as
free for churches, as for free towns or cities; 3. that a particular church,
for example that of Saumur, considered as not united by any voluntary
confederacy to other churches, owes the same duty of respect to the orders and
constitutions of the churches of Leyden, Heydelberg and Basil, as to to those
of Paris or Rouen; 4. that the power of synods over churches is of the same
humane and civil right with the power of a judicial senatover cities and
towns. Page 144. he has these words: The Church and the Commonwealth have some
things that seem common, and they may be almost al^ke managed, both by
ecclesiast call assembl^es and by the power of the magistrate. How does this
agree with what we have heard him say, that it were an horrible confusion for
the church and state to be governed by the same men? Page 198. and 199. he
speaks of the authority of synods in the language of our brethren; It is
true, that the mere authority of councils ought not to move us to receive a
point of religion: the knowledge of the truth of the thing ought to be the
chief motive and ground.

But we have him very expressly teaching his scholars and auditors at Saumur,
that the appellation of a true visible church does properly belong to a
particular church. I shall cite his words, Disp. de ecclesiae nomine and
definitione, these. 28. in English: I know that a communion, and as it were a
confederation of many the like societies, which are associated either by the
same use of tongue, or the same form of Commonwealth, or else by the same
government and discipline, is called a particular church: thus we speak of the
French, English and German churches, as of particular churches, to distinguish
them from that universal society of Christians which comprehends all nations
that bear the name of Christians: but, as we said before, the word church is
not proper to the society of all Christians, as it is to the particular
assemblies of Christians; so that consequently we say that the word church is
not to be said in the like manner of a consociation of many particular
churches. Let then that communion which is between the churches of France be
said to be a church, and that the church is a confederation of many churches;
for if taken according to the use of the holy Scripture, St. Paul calls the
several particular churches which were in Achaia, not by the name of the
church of Achaia, or the Achaian church, but of the churches of Achaia. A
passage very considerable, which force of turth has drawn from the mouth of
the greatest enemy to the brethren: for their greatest advocate could not say
more in justification of what they have always urged about the nature of the
church, but could never be heard till of late; viz. that there was no true
proper church but a particular church; that therefore a presbyterian national
church made up of many particular churches under one presbytery, is not
properly said to be a church. I am of opinion that the Roman church upon that
account is very improperly called a church, but most improperly a true church:
for if it hardly deserves the name of a church, how can it be called a true
one, at least morally, though it may be metaphysically; it being a consociation
of erroneous and heretical churches? for if every priva^e church within the
Roman communion is so disfigured, that I do not think it deserves the name of
a church; how improperly then is a systern made up of those particular churches
styled a church? And so I conceive that the question about the trueness of the
Romish church, which has so puzzled men, may be easily resolved.

I have but one passage more of Amyraldus to allege, which a man could hardly
believe to be the language of a professed enemy to the cause of the brethren.
For if they should state their own opinion, of the power and independency of
churches, they cannot use more significant words then those of Amyraldus, who
in his disputation de council. author. these. 28. says, that private churches
ought to retain their full right, li^erty and power untoucht, specially in
matters of great concernment, as points of faith, not submitting slavishly
their own judgments to synods, but expecting that synods should define and
decree nothing till they have had the advice and approbation of particular
churches. This is the passage in Latin: Alibi diximus, pulcherrimum and
saluberrimum esse earum ecclesiarum institutum, quae concillorum decreta ad res
magni moment^, qualia sunt dogmata fidet, pertinentia rata esse noluerint, nisi
prius consultis synodis and ecclesiis particular^bus, quarum quaeque symbolam
suam ad veritatis cluc'dationem conferat.

Salmasius follows the steps of Amyraldus, or rather Amyraldus of him, for
Amyraldus wrote last. He is very large in his apparatus ad libros de primatu:
and I should be tedious to the reader, to set down here all that he has
handsomely stated about the nature of a church. I will only quote two pages,
which are 265. and 266. The substance of his discourse is comprehended under
these 4 or 5 heads. 1. That all churches by right are equal in power and
dignity, and are independent. 2. That the consociation under the heathen
Emperors was voluntary and by consent. 3. That under Christian Emperors a
consociation was introduced by humane right; so that what was at first by free
and mutual consent, came afterward under the Christian Emperors to be of
humane institution and constitution. 4. That the unity of churches consisted
not in an united collection of private churches, but in an agreement in faith
and doctrine; for such an union there is betwixt the Helvetian, Belgic and
French churches, who agreeing in the same faith and doctrine, do
notwithstanding differ in discipline; so that these churches may be called
independent each on the other, and yet they keep an union and communion among
themselves. No other communion and independency do the reverend dissenting
brethren admit and practice, either among themselves, or with the presbyterian
churches both at home and abroad. 5. The fifth head is, that a consociation of
many particular churches joined with the same band of discipline, and under the
direction, counsel, advice, not the command or judicial power of any synod or
presbytery, does much conduce to the keeping the unity of faith, the band of
charity, and the communion of saints. In the same place, and many others
throughout his apparatus, he says, that the communication betwixt particular
churches was voluntary, and by way of counsel, every church reserving to
themselves full right and power as to those acts of their discipline, and the
acts of binding and loosing; so that every church had power to take cognizance
of any fact and crime committed in their body, to censure and excommunicate
them, or reconcile them again, without any appeal to other churches or synods,
except it were to beg their friendly intercession; for so they were wont to
consult and entreat Bishops, and namely him of Rome, to review the sentence,
repairing to him as to an umpire, not a judge, to disannull or evacuate the
judgment: which makes the Romanists take those applications to the Bishop of
ROme, as an acknowledgement of supremacy over all the churches.

To these authorities Iwill add that of learned and moderate Spanhemius, who
did not use invectives as others, but arguments and reasons as good as he
could; yet in my opinion the good man mistaketh much in his Epistle to David
Buchanan, not so much through ignorance of the right, as of the fact: yet in
the 55. page he has these words, which are much to the advantage of the
brethren. A particular church has no power at all over another, but they are
all collateral, and of equal right and authority.

Let us now hear other advocates of the brethren, before the word independency
came to be given to Protestants in the world. The first is learned Amesius, in
his first book of the marrow of Divinity chapt. ^0. where after he has in the
17, 18, 19, 20. and 26 sections, spoken of the parity and equality of
particular churches in right and power, in the 27. section he tells us what
consociation of particular churches may be admitted: these be his words;
Particular churches may, yea ought to have a mutual confederation and
consociation amongst them in classes and synods, that by a common consent they
may be helpful one to another with as much commodity as may be, chiefly in
things of greater concernment: but this combination does not constitute a new
frame of church, neither ought it in any sort to take away that liberty and
power which Christ has left to his churches, since this form is only useful
by way of direction.

John Mestrezat, a very learned orthodox Divine, lately deceased minister of
Paris, goes upon the same grounds with Amesius in his book of the church
written in French; and his testimony is most considerable, because being a
Frenchman, he could not know or foresee, as Amesius perchance might, any such
plea in England about right or power of churches aggregated. It would be too
long here to set down his own words at large. For those that understand French,
they may see specially the 1 chap. of the 3. book, where he says that all
power to do any church acts is placed in the particular church; that all
church priviledges and promises were made and granted unto, and in
consideration of a particular church assembled in one place. As for aggregation
and consociation of churches, he holds it not to be grounded upon any pattern
or command from Scripture, or even from a judicial power given by Christ to
classes, synods and presbyteries over particular churches, but merely assumed
prudentially for mutual preservation against the common enemy, and for keeping
communion, as of saints, so of churches; that those church judicatories were
set up not for conscience sake, or in obedience to any prescript of Christ, but
for orders sake; as the reverend man wrote to me but a few weeks before he died.

CHAPTER XXIII.
The consistency of the right and power of private churches with the
mag^strates power in ordering public worship, proved by the example of the
Jews: that they had through all the land particular convocations, synagogues
or churches, called also colleges or schools, where the Prophets and sons of
the Prophets taught, especially on the sabbath day: that they were independent
from any church-judicatory. How synagogues were altered from their first
institution, and that being converted into Christian churches, they retained
the same right, power and way of government.

THe most convincing proof for the consistency of the right and power of
particular churches with the magistrates power, in ordering, settling and
commanding the public Divine worship of the Nation, is the example of the
Commonwealth of the Jews; wherein we are informed of three main things, which
taken into consideration, will clear all doubts about the right and power of
particular churches, and the magistrates jurisdiction in matters of religion
and public worship. 1. That in the Commonwealth of Israel, at their first
institution, there were particular churches throughout all the land, near every
families dewlling place, called synagogues. 2. That these churches were
independent both from any of their own, and of the Priests or Levites
judicatories. 3. That the while the magistrates power and jurisdiction remained
whose, entire and undivided, over all persons, and in all causes and matters,
particularly in ordering, settling and commanding the public national worship
of God.

For the first, that such churches were instituted in the land of Canaan, we
have a very express proof Leviticus 23. v. 1, 2, and 3. Speak unto the
children of Israel, etc. six days shall work be done; but the seventh day is
the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation, ye shall do no work therein, it is
the sabbath of the Lord in all your habitations. 1. We have here a convocation
and an holy one every sabbath: 2. near every families dwelling place, at that
distance which is called in the Gospel a sabbath days journey; and to travel
a sabbath days journey was equivalent to go as far as the house of convocation,
which was esteemed a fulfilling of the command Exodus 16. v. 29. abide every man
in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day. For he that
went no further then the place of convocation or meeting, to attend on the
ordinances, where they use to tarry from morning to evening, obeyed that
command, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day. For how could they
keep a sabbath day holy, without an holy convocation? and how could that be
frequented, and they not stir from their own place, except by not going out of
his place be meant, not going any whither but to the place of convocation? For
they could not keep the sabbath without a holy convocation kept near every ones
dwelling. Now that this convocation cannot be meant of national and festival
meetings, is evident for those were appointed but thrice in the year, and far
from every ones dewlling place, and after the building of the Temple they were
celebrated either before the Tabernacle, or in the fore-court of the Temple.
Now had they been bound to repair to Jerusalem every sabbath day, it would have
been against the command, not to stir from their own places on that day.

These convocations or synagogues were particular churches assembled in a
temple or house, called also schools or colleges, where Prophets and their
sons or scholars dwelt and taught daily: but on the sabbath day they had a more
solemn meeting of all those that dwelt near, for prayer, expounding of the law,
exhortations, conferences; the main action being performed by the Rabbis: yet
the disciples were not silent, but sat at their feet, asking questions, and
hearing their answers and resolutions: sometimes a new comer in might
interpose, as we see in the example of Jesus Christ, Luke the fourth, who being
unknown, had the privilege to expound the Scripture, and to ask questions and
give answers; so had St. Paul, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles chap. 13
v 15.

But to speak more particularly of the place, the teachers, and the matter and
form of worship in those places of meeting or synagogues; I say, first one may
trace the place in the old and new Testament. In the 26. Psalm David says, he
will bless the Lord in the congregations, and Psalm. 68. v. 26. bless ye God
in the congregation: which doubtless ought to be understood of those
convocations in temples, which are called synagogues Psalm. 74. v. 8. they have
burnt up all the synagogues of God in the land. Which texts make it good, that
such places for an holy convocation were erected through all the land. Calvin
upon the place says, that the people met in syngogues every sabbath day, to
read and expound the Prophets, and call upon God by prayer. The 29. Psalm v.
9. does not obscurely mention them, for the Psalmist relates that while the
works of God sounded by hail, rain and thunder, the faithful, not only under
a shelter of stones and timber, but of Gods gracious providence and protection,
did attend the service of God. Of this House and Temple David also speaks
Psalm. 87. v. 2. The Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings
or tents of Jacob. The sense of which words paraphrastically I think to be
this: although God graced with his blessing and presence those convocations
which at first were kept under tents in the wilderness, yet he is much more
taken with that glorious manifestation of his between the cherubins, whereby
God sets out the Lord Jesus Christ. Also Solomon, Ecclesiastes 5. v. 1. and
2. speaks of these houses or meetings, when he warns men to be more ready
to hear then to speak in the house of God; intimating, that there was a
freedom for the faithful in those convocations and synagogues, more then one,
to speak; and besides that there were no other sacrifices performed in them,
but those of preaching, praying and thanksgiving.

This house of convocation was also a place to train up disciples, called the
sons of the Prophets, which were indifferently of all tribes; and therefore by
the way, the ministers of the Gospel, that do not succeed the Priests and
Levites, but those Prophets, who had neither ordination nor jurisdiction,
cannot pretend other call or power then such as these sons of the Prophets had
So then these house or places for convocation were also colleges and schools;
and therefore Philo in the life of Moses calls them both (...) and (...),
houses of prayer and of learning: of which you have mention 2 Kings 6. v. 1.
where the sons of the prophets multiplying, and their house, temple or auditory
being too little, they enlarged it; and chap. 22. v. 14. Huldah the prephetesse
is said to dwell in Bamischnah, in a college or school of learning. So from 1
Samuel 19. v. 18. and 20. one may gather, that Samuel, being the chief Rabbi
and Prophet, having many disciples under him, had his house of oration, school
or College at Naioth in Ramah, where he did not only teach publicly upon
sabbath^ ayes, but also instructed upon other days his disciples or young
prophets, called his sons, as appears by the 20. verse; except by prophesying
be meant uttering mavelous things of Gods greatness, goodness, providence:
for the ordinary gift and charge of the prophets was, not so much to declare
hidden and foretell future things, as to expound the law, and to exhort the
people, and pray with them; in which sense John Baptist is called by Jesus
Christ a propher, who yet never wrote nor uttered any prophecies; and Exodus 7.
v. 4. Aaron is called the prophet of Moses, because he was his interpreter to
the people. And the great number of those prophets shows manifestly, that
their ordinary employment was to do what the prophets of the new Testament do,
to exhort, teach, comfort-rebuke; no less number being required for that work
under the old then under the new. In the 1 Kings chapter 18. when Jezabel did seek
to destroy the Prophets, Obadiah hid 100. in a cave; and in the 2. book chap.
2. v. 16 the sons of the Prophets sead of their own body 50. men to seek after
El jah. Sure there was no need of so many to foretell future things, when one
of a 1000. Prophets might undergo that charge well enough, to satisfy all the
people of the mind of God concerning future things, wherewith but few of the
people need to be acquainted; but all the people had need of teachers and
instructers in the law of Moses, and that in a considerable number, for 1000.
had not been enough to instruct the fourth part of the people in the ordinary
way of prophesying, that is teaching and exhorting; for the Rabbis say that
there were 480. such houses of convocation or prayer, otherwise called
synagogues, in Jerusalem. There is mention made of two houses which were
famous, one at Bethel, the other at Jericho, whither the sons of the Prophets
repaired to Elisha. They were frequented not only every sabbath day and new
moon, for praying with the people of the neighborhood, as appears by 2 Kings
v. 22. but also for teaching their disciples, and resolving any that should
come to them upon any doubt: whither it is likely David did go Psalm. 73. v. 16.
when being inwardly perplexed with distractions, he could find no settlement,
till he went to the sanctuary of God, to be instructed better then he was;
where by the sanctuary doubtless is meant such a house of convocation or
school. And in the 27. Psalm, that one thing that David desired of the Lord
was, no doubt, to have communion with God and with the faithful people in the
Temple or house of prayer, whereto he resorted every sabbath; for it is not
likely he understood this of being partaker of the legal rites and sacrifices
in the Temple at Jerusalem, which was not yet built.

What was the form and matter of the exercises in those houses the Scripture
mentions not: only we gather by what the Prophets of Baal did 1 Kings 18. v.
26. that likewise the Prophets of God in those synagogues or houses of
convocation did pray from morning until noon, and then till evening taught by
catechizing and expounding; for in the 29. verse the word prophesving is
equivalent to teaching and instructing. And Samuel 1. book c. 12. v 23. makes
two parts of his prophetical office, viz. to pray, and teach: God forbid that
I should sin against God, in ceasing to pray for you; but I will teach you.

Now as those prophets had no dependence on the Priests and Levites, no more
then the houses of convocation where they taught; so neither do we read that
there was any consociation of all these convocations into one national church,
under some church-judicatory made up of Priests and Levites, or that they had
any dependence on the Sanedrim or state-court, prescribing them any orders how
to govern themselves; only they were not to teach and expound ought but the
law, whereof the magistrate was the keeper and guardian, nor to thwart the
duties of the public worship commanded, such as were the killing of the
passover at set times, the appearing of the males three times in the year at
the place that God was to choose, and performing all the sacrifices, oblations
and rites enjoined: and so far were the convocations depending on the
magistrate. For in the first institution we do not read that these convocations
or synagogues, or those that were over them, were or needed to be invested with
any jurisdiction, but were like schools of learning, whose masters and teachers
were also like Plato, Zeno, Aristotle, over the schools in Greece, who had
scholars men of ripe years and discretion, that with a withing fulmission
embraced their sayings and precepts; so that the Prince or Dr. of the school
needed not any restraining or coercive discipline to order them. And indeed it
is very likely that those heathenish schools of Philosophans had their first
rise and ouginall from those (...) wish schools. But that each of those
convocations where Prophets taught and expounded were independent from other
convocations, saving only so far as they were all members of the same
Commonwealth, will appear anon, when we enquire into the nature of these
convocations, when they went currently under the name of synagogues, and all
jointly were not one Commonwealth in one country, but lived dispersed: for
then every lynagogue was sui Iuris, and governed it self; though some R^manists
would persuade us that many synagogues were aggregated under one Archisynagogue
or chief (...); which is a great mistake, for some synagogues had sometimes
many Archisynagogues. It is true, we read in the Theodosian code of Patriarchs
of the J^wes, lib. 8. tit. 18. de Iudae^s coelicolis, or Samaritanis; but those
Patriarchs were not over any matter concerning law or religion, but were only
public treasurers of money levied for the poor, for building of synagogues, and
the like. It Is true also that the nature of those synagogues being changed, as
long as the Senate at Jerusalem had any repute, other synagogues did defer very
much to it, requesting letters of advice from them; but submitted not to any
command, as from a superior to an inferior, as we gather by Act. 9. v. 2. and
3. and chapter 28. v. 21.

But to follow the history of these convocations a little farther: their
independency is clearly to be seen when the faithful people lived under
idolatious Kings, as under Jeroboam and his successors; for they could not
depend on the Sanedum at Jerusalem, since it was a capital crime to appeal or
repair about any matter to Jerusalem, or attend at those solemn meetings
enjoined by the law of Moses three times in the year, and every seventh year:
and therefore to keep themselves free from idolatry, they frequented as much as
they could those places of convocation, as appears by a notable example 2
Kings 4. v. 22. For when the Sunamitish woman desired an ass to ride on to
Elisha, her husband told her, wherefore will you go to him to day? it is
neither new moon nor sabbath.

The greatest part of these houses of convocation (for some of them did not
much alter from their first institution, but remained schools and nothing else)
in process of time did not properly degenerate, but changed their nature, and
lasted longer thus then in their first institution, and that begun from the
time that they were led into captivity, and so continued under the Babylonians,
Persians, Grecians, and then the Romans: for whereas at first they needed no
other discipline then the law of their nation, which received vigor, strength
and protection from their own magistrate, who was a friend and protector of
their law, religion and liberty; when afterward they lived under those that
were no good friends to their laws and religion, and yet were suffered to
enjoy them both, being dispersed they were fain to alter the frame of their
assemblies and convocations, and make of them so many little Commonwealths
endowed with judicial authority, yet retaining still some prime face of a
church or convocation, and besides more mixture of ranks of men: for not only
Prophets were governors and members, but also Priests, Levites and elders of
the people, and all matters were handled as in a court of magistracy; and yet
reading and expounding of the law was not forgot, as we see Act. 13. v. 27. and
chapter 15. v. 21. Nor was it grown out of use for scholars or young Prophets to
sit at the feet of the Rabbis, and receive instructions, as St. Paul at the
feet of Gamaliel Act. 22. v. 3. and Marie at the feet of the Lord Jesus; or for
the young Prophets to ask questions of the old, as 1 Cor. 14. v. 29. And as the
form and matter handled did alter, so also the Prophets and teachers did change
their names, and were called Doctors, Rabbis, Lawyers, Masters, Scribes and
Wise among the Jews. And such were the synagogues in the time of Christ, which
Mr. Gillespie is not certain whether he ought to call churches or civil courts:
yet he is rather of opinion that before the 30. year of Christ, when they had
power to judge of capital matters, they were rather civil courts then
churches; but after the 30. year of Christ, this judgment of causes for life
and death being taken from them, then they were to be called churches or
ecclesiastical assemblies. Which is a very frivolous exception as ever was
devised, and shows the weakness of his cause. For is a court more or less
civil, because it has or has not the judgment of capital causes? By that
reason most courts in England should be ecclesiastical, as the court of
Exchequer, court Baron, and court Let.

But the nature of those convocations, synagogues or particular churches of the
Jews, having been for many hundred years, since they were carried first into
captivity, such, that they were invested not only with a faculty to perform
duties and acts of worship to God, but also with a power of magistracy; when a
great many of them from synagogues of the Jews were after turned into churches
of Christians, they retained the same constitution and qualification in
performing church-duties, and exercising power of magistracy; which sometimes
was assumed by the consent of the members, sometimes delegated by the
Emperors. For as the Jews began to be the first professors of Christian
religion, so the first churches were synagogues of the Jews converted to
Christian religion: but yet before the conversion of an entire synagogue, those
that were Christians concealed themselves for fear of the rest, and yet did not
depart, but when they were persecuted, or thrust out of the synagogue. So that
some synagogues, for some Christians that were among them, were called
churches, as we may see if we compare Gal. 1. v. 13. with Act. 22. v. 19: for
in one place St. Paul says that he persecuted in every synagogue those that
professed the name of Christ; in the other, that he did persecute the church.
And Act. 18. v. 19. it is like that either the greatest part, or the whole
synagogue was a Christian church, though it retained still the name of a
synagogue: And no doubt at Antioch the whole synagogue professed Christ, since
they durst openly take the name of Christians.

But the words of Christ John 16. v. 2. they shall put you out of the
synagogue, show, that sy^agogues of the Jews should become Christian churches,
and that those that professed the name of Christ, or at least believed in him
secretly for fear of the Jews, were not to depart, that by their means the
whole synagogue might be won: and therefore the Lord Jesus Christ takes this
expulsion for an injury done to them in the foregoing verse, These things have
I spoken to you, that ye be not offended. Had not the Lord Jesus a mind to make
of these synagogues churches, he would have bidden those that were Christians
amongst them to flee from them, and go from them, as he biddes his people flee
out of Babylon. And indeed we do not read that Crispus, chief ruler of the
synagogue, and other believing Jews, did forsake the synagogue; or that when
the whole synagogue was converted, it did presently loose the name of a
synagogue, but kept it, as we see James 2. v. 2. If there come into the
synagogue, and Hebr. 10. v. 22. The very heathens did not put a distinction for
a good while betwixt Jews and Christians; for Suetonius says that Claudins
did restrain the Jews, who by the impulsion of Christ did raise tumults. So
that in expelling the Jews, the Christians were comprehended; for it is said
Act. 18. v. 2. that Aquila and Priscilla, though Christians, were commanded to
depart from Rome. And as the Christians suffered as Jews, so what privileges
they enjoyed, it was a grant unto the Jews: and as in the 9. of Claudius the
Jews, and with them the Christians, were banished; so in the first year of his
Empire the same liberty that was granted unto the Jews, did also belong to the
Christians.

So then the synagogues were the first origin and platform of Christian
churches, and after those synagogues the gentiles converted did model their
churches, retaining the same power of magistracy as the synagogues had, as Mr.
Lightfoot does very well observe; yea in their way of teaching following the
Prophets in their synagogues, which were also schools of learning, as namely
when they spoke by turns, and the younger Prophets submitted to the judgments
of the elder, 1 Cor. 14. v. 29, 30, etc. Therefore since the churches of the
Christians were but synagogues, changing somewhat the doctrine, but not at all
the discipline, we must conceive of all churches and their acts of power as of
synagogues, and of church-excommunication as of Jewish excommunication or
putting out of the synagogue; that of Christians being no more a law or
ordinance of Christ then that of the Jews was a law and ordinance of Moses: for
neither of them was. For it never came to be in use among the Jews, till they
took it up upon the want of their own judges and magistrates, by consent and by
a confederate discipline, in ^e^ of magistracy. The Christians, imitatours of
the Jews, and who had the law and the covenants, yea the Lord Jesus Christ
from them, did also take up excommunication upon the same grounds as they did.
Bullingerus in an Epistle to Dathenus an. 1531. tells us, it was thought so by
Zwinglius; the Apostles lived under a heathenish magistrate, who yet did not
punish wicked actions; but that the church might infl^ct some kind of penalty,
they took up admon^tion and exclusion, because they could not make use of the
sword, which was not committed to them: and this was the cause of bringing in
excommunication. Now that the Christian magistrate may punish wicked deeds,
there is no further need of excommunication.

CHAPTER XXIV.
That the Christian churches under heathens were governed by a confederate
discipline, or a power of magistracy, as the synagogues were, appointing men,
which Ambrose calls elders, to decide such matters as otherwise were to come
under the magistrates cognizance. This practice is grounded upon 1 Cor. 6. v.
1, 2, etc. and confirmed by Origin, Justin Martyr, Ambrose and Mr. Lightfoot.
That the power of these elders continued still under Christian Emperors, with
some alteration, they erecting in lieu of them Episcopal courts. That all
churchpower was the Emperors power. That the very heathen magistrates knew no
other but that all power was annexed to them.

HAving hitherto made good that there is no such thing as a government in the
hands of church-office^s distinct from that of the magist^e, and proved the
nullity of that distinction (...) ^call and civil jurisdiction by reason,
Scripture and the example of the Jews; it follows we should prove that since
the time that the (...) church began, whether under the h^ the ^or under
Christian ^mperours, it was not governed by a jurisdiction distinct from that
of magi^acy; and that neither ^he h^hen no^ the Christian Emperors ever knew
any (...) as an ecclesiastical power not sub(...) to the magistrates power;
yea that the (...) did but in words challenge a power (...) from that of the
magistrate, and that (...) they made but one of two, and acknowledged that it
could not be so much as (...) they should be exercised asunder: and (...)
reason that the learned of them, as (...) and others, maintain that one of them
(...) subordinate to the other, er^ing on^ (...), that they subordinate ^e
civil to the (...).

(...) then being converted into (...) churches, and also turned over to (...)
same jurisdiction of confederate (...) power of magistracy assumed by (...) the
members of each synagogue, yet (...) ^ewish synagogues had been always (...)
^ccuted, and had enjoyed their confe^ d^cipline for the most part by edicts
from (...) magistrate under which they lived, that was the reason that they bad
a greater measure of freedom to ex^ their confed^ are ^cipline and acts of
coercive a^ (...) dicall ^wer over all persons of their own body and religion,
and in all causes, except in causes capital, and the meddling with any thing
whereby to free themselves from paying taxes and (...) But the Christian
churches, though mo^ed after the pattern of the Jewish synagegues, being
continually either under perse^o^, or in rear of it, could not put forth those
acts of coercive ^risdiction, unless it were a putting ^ut of the
congregation, which thing may be done without much noise: but inflicting b^dly
or p^cu^ia^y punishment could not ^e w^l made use of, without discovering too
much and laying themselves open to persecution. Besides that the members of
Christian churches, being not members of the same notion, and therefore led by
the only interest of and love to religion, a coerc^e jurisdiction was nothing
so necessary, nor was it any thing so frequent to put out of churches as out of
synagogues: so that the differences between church members being rather
differences in their judgments then any want of chari^, that magistracy
assunted at first by the sy^agogues when afterward it was devolved to the
Christian churches, looked rather like an a^trators judgment and counsel. Yet
still by that modified magistracy they decided and composed not only matters of
faith, but also all differences in matter of wrong, either in goods, money or
good name, between brother and brother; setting over, besides the most eminent
that labored in the word and doctrine, some of less eminency among them, to
decide differences and controversies of another nature. And no doubt but St.
Paul points at this practice 1 Cor. 6. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 7. a notable
place, which yet was never pressed to the utmost meaning. For

1. St. Paul there enjoyneth the Corinthians, rather then to go to law, to
appoint some men besides those that labor in the word, to decide all matters
that one man might have against another.

2. He gives the same measure of power in settling matters of religion or
faith, and in composing differences that are usually judged in the magistrates
court: for learned Diodati by (...), matter or business, says we must
understand civil business; and the Dutch Annotations say that this matter is
worldly business. So that St. Paul makes the church power no more
ecclesiastical then civil: for the same confederate discipline gave power to
ministers to preach, and administer the sacraments, as did to chosen men of
their body to compose friendly, by their wisdom and authority, such
differences as are usually the matter of all courts of magistracy.

3. The words of the Apostle, Do ye not know that the sa^nts shall judge the
world? I conceive to be equivalent to these; Seeing ye do now live under a
heathen and persecuting magistrate, and yet there arise such contentions and
debates amongst you, as are judged for the most part in secular courts, with
the breach of charity, and loss of time and money, specially the judges being
no friends to your persons and religion; your best way is to have them taken up
friendly by Christian arbitrators of your own churches, until God at length,
after you have long suffered, be pleased to set over you a Christian
magistrate, to whom you may repair when such differences arise amongst you.

It is observable, that the holy Apostle, when he says, is it so that there is
not a wise man amongst you? etc. and, set them to judge who are least esteemed,
speaks ironically, implying that were there no wise men amongst you, such as
you must appoint, yet the matter they are set over is not so knotty and hard,
but that men the least esteemed amongst you, so that they were honest men,
might well understand and decide it.

Reverend Mr. Lightfoot, upon the closure of the fifth chapter and the
beginning of the sixth of the first to the Corinthians, is of opinion that this
is the meaning of that place: these be his words; Afterward to take the
Corinthians off from going to infidel judges, he requires them to decide the
matter themselves, till the time come that the saints shall judge the world;
that is, till the time come that there shall be a Christian magistracy.

Origin upon the 21. of Exodus Homil. 11. makes it clear that this is the
meaning of the Apostle, by telling us the practice of churches in his time:
Principes populi and presbyteri plebis debent omni hora populum judicarc,
semper and sine intermissione sedere in judicio, dirimere lites, reconciliare
dissidentes, in gratiam recordare discordes; The heads and elders of the people
ought every hour to judge the people, always and without intermission to sit
in judgment, decide controversies, reconcile those that have differences, and
make those friends that are at variance. Here is magistracy assumed by
church members, when, by their consent, elders and wise men are appointed to
take up such differences in a friendly way, and such controversies betwixt
brother and brother, as otherwise were to be adjudged before secular judges. I
should ask here our presbyterian brethren, by what power, ecclesiastical or
civil, were from metters decided and judged in Origens time? and in case by
that assumed power of mag^acy any one had been either put by from the
communion, or put out of the assembly; what needed he to have recourse to the
ecclesiastical power, when the other power was sufficient to have do^ it? yea
when the ecclesiastical power could never do it without a power of magistracy?
These be the words of Anton. de Dominis lib. 5. cap. 2. without a lay-power we
can do nothing; we cannot by our ecclesiastical power put out, take off, and
expel.

The same Origin, in his 1. book against Celsus, speaks of that magistracy
assumed by consent and mutual agreement, called by him (...). There be some
appointed to enquire into the manners and ways of their living who frequent
churches; that so they may keep those off from coming into their assembly, that
stain their lives by foul and unworthy actions, and admit with all readiness
those that are otherwise, and make them daily better.

Though by their power of magistracy assumed by consent they might put out any
one that was already a churchmember, yet it seems it was not the settled
practice in Origens time; but only, as to admit good men, so not to receive
into their society those that they did not know to be such. No excommunication
was then in use with him: for as the admitting a good man into
church fellowship is no absolution, so the not receiving a bad man into the
church is no excommunication. This is confirmed by Justin Martyr in his 2.
Apology, where he says, No man else is permitted to receive that aliment
called with us the Eucharist, but he that believes our doctrine is true, and
has been washed by the washing for remission of sins. For there Justin
speaks not of church members; only he says, that heathens and unbaptised men
are not to partake of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, or to have any part in
those mysteries. Of the custom of excluding church members, I confess we read
in Tertullian and Cyprian, answerable to the Niddui and Cherem of the Jews.

Tertullian, in the 2. chapter of his Apologetick, speaks of the like
confederate discipline or power of magistracy taken up by consent; and in the
39. chapter he makes an enumeration of all the parts of that discipline.

I should now have done with Origin, intending next to allege Ambrose
confirming what Origin says concerning the practice of the church, agreeable
to the counsel and command of St. Paul; only I will take notice farther from
Origin, of the face of the church in his time, and of the power assumed then by
the Christians. Celsus, a great Philosopher, and enemy to the Christians, did
accuse them that they had a discipline quite different from the laws of the
Romans, that they kept private conventicles, and there had a particular secret
covenant, law and discipline, no less repugnant to the laws of the Emperor,
then if they had been in open rebellion. And indeed even among the Grecians
these private meetings were sometimes forbidden, although the state were
nothing concerned in them, they being to no other end but to perform some
religious service. For Cornelius Nepos, that Alcibiades, was condemned to dye
for performing some religious worship, it may be sacrifice at his own house.
Origin answers, by alleging an example very fit to our purpose, and
applyable to the nature of the power that Christians and private churches do
exercise under a persecuting magistrate. He brings an example of a stranger
living among the Scythians, who must either conform himself to the ungodly
laws of that nation, or be a law unto himself. This same stranger, says
Origin, cannot be said to violate the laws of the Scythians, if he does not
worship Statues, but does privately worship the true God, and in a right
manner, and if he be a law unto himself. This is the case about the nature of
the power exercised by churches, and an answer to that so much urged objection,
that the Christian churches have been long without a magistrate, therefore
governed by a power distinct from that of the magistrate. For

1. Origin implies, that if the laws of the Scythians had been good and
tolerable, that then this stranger had been obliged to obey them.

2. The laws of the magistrate being ungodly, this stranger living in his
dominion must do his best, that he, his family and adherents be a law and a
magistrate unto themselves, and perform by a dictate of conscience what the
magistrate was to enjoin and command. Here none will say, that this stranger,
living among the Scythians, governs himself by a power distinct from that of
the magistrate: for so Philosophers and Mathematicians, who were often
forbidden in Rome, and banished, yet lurking in corners, and having private
conventicles, might likewise be said to be governed by a power Philosophical
and Mathematical, distinct from that of the magistrate; and a son, to whom
God has given the grace not to hearken to a bad father, must not be said to
govern himself by a power distinct from the paternall, for indeed such a son is
a father to himself. The like may we say of private churches under a
persecuting magistrate, who are fain to settle a magistracy by consent of all
the members of the churches; as the synagogues were faign to be used when they
lived under a magistrate that was not of their own nation and religion: then
they performed by a confederate discipline, what the magistrate was to enjoin
and command them. The confession of Basilartic. 6. has a notable saying,
speaking of the duty of magistrates to propagate the Gospel as they are
magistrates: This duty was enjoined a magistrate of the gentiles; how much more
ought it to be commended to the Christian magistrate, being the Vicar of God?
If then the heathen magistrate fails of his duty, in not propagating the
Gospel, those that live under him, and are better minded, ought to supply the
part of the magistrate in that particular; and yet in doing of that they do but
perform their own duty and business: like as a master leading his horse down
the hill, his man being out of the way, does both his own business and that
of his man, and both employeth his own strength in guiding an unruly horse, and
supplieth that of his man: or (which expresses more lively the thing in hand)
as the Duke of Somerset, in training up Prince Edward in the true religion, did
both do his own duty and that of Henry the 8. his father; who being wanting to
his duty in showing his power and authority to have his son brought up in the
true Protestant religion, Somerset, Cranmer and others were not to be wanting
to theirs; and yet were not to act by a power distinct from the power of the
King: for if so, then when ever a power is exercised rightly, and yet against
an unlawful command of a superior, we had need to give a new name to that
power, and there would be as many kinds of power, as duties to be performed.

Having done with Origin, I come to Ambrose, whom I was to allege upon the 1.
of Timothy, relating to the places of St. Paul and Origin, and to the power of
magistracy assumed by churches. There he teaches the custom both of the
synagogues and of Christian churches, of having elders that composed, in stead
of the magistrate, controversies arising amongst church members; saying that
first synagogues, and afterward churches had elders, without whose advice
there was nothing done in the church; and wondreth that in his time, which was
about the year 370, such men were out of use: which he thinks came by the
negligence, or rather pride of some Doctors, who thought it was beneath them to
be esteemed the less in the church, as S. Paul says of them, while they are
to decide controversies, not as judges invested with a coercive power, but only
as arbitrators and umpires.

But the true cause why these elders ceased, which he wishes had been still
continued, he mentions not: but the true cause is, when the magistrate, that
was for above 300. years heathenish, became Christian, these arbitrators and
elders ceased in great part, at least they were more out of churches then in
churches, and in stead of them the Emperors created judges, which yet retained
much of the nature of those whereof Origin and Ambrose speak, and which were
invested (as most of the Lawyers affirm, as Cujacius for one, and with them my
Rev. Father, in his book de Monarchia temporal, and in his Hyperaspistes lib.
3. cap. 15.) not with a coercive jurisdiction, but, as they term it, audience:
hence comes the Bishops and Deanes and Chapters Audit. However such arbitrators
sat in a court, and were chosen by the Christian Emperors, and were not
members, as before, ever since St. Paul's time, chosen by the members of that
church where the contention did arise betwixt brother and brother: and at that
time it was not thought a violation of the command of St. Paul, if a wronged
brother had gone to secular judges, because they were not infidels, but
Christians, faithful, and saints, as the Apostle terms them, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
therefore it was free for any layman or other, either to repair to the Audit
of the Bishop, or to the secular judge. Which custom Ambrose does not like so
well, as when Jews and Christians were obliged by the law of their discipline
to have controversies decided by their own elders. Certain it is that these
elders, (though they were not, as Ambrose wished they had been, in his time
arbitrators in those churches whereof they were members) kept that office a
long time under Christian Emperors, but with more authority and dignity,
because they were countenanced by the Emperors their masters. We have them
mentioned pretty late, even in Theodosius, Honorius and Arcadius time: for in
one law they enjoin that ordinary judges should decide the contentions between
Jews and Gentiles, not their own elders or arbitrators. Thereupon it is worth
considering, that that title which in the Theodosian Code is de Episcopali
audientia, in the Justinian Code is de Episcopali judicio: a main proof, that
these judgments in episcopal courts had much still of the nature of those
references in churches under the heathen Emperors.

These episcopal courts were set up by the Emperors, to favor the clergy,
that they might be judged in prima instantia by their own judges: for if either
party had not stood to the sentence of that court, they might appeal to the
secular court. The words of the 28. Canon of the council of Chalcedon are very
express: If a clerk has a matter against a clerk, let him not leave his
Bishop, and appeal to secular judgment, but let the cause first be judged by
his own Bishop.

Now this episcopal court being in substance the same power with that of the
elders mentioned by Ambrose, which were first in synagogues, and then in
Christian churches under the heathen Emperors, one may plainly see how weak
and sandy the grounds are upon which ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the
power of the keys, and of binding and loosing, in the hands of church officers
is built; which government, say they, is the government of Christ, and is to be
managed by those church officers by a warrant from Christ the mediator. For
Constantine erecting an episcopal court, and empowering the judges of the
court to decide causes and controversies, did not intend to give them a
commission of binding and loosing, or to put into their hands the keys of
Heaven, so delegating a power which was none of his to give; but only granted
what was in his own power, namely, that some magistrates under him should set
all things in order in the church, and among the clergy. Besides, he intended
to set up that magistracy, which was through the necessity of the times assumed
first by synagogues, then by Christian churches under persecution: for sure
Constantine did not place the power of the keys and of binding and loosing in
the exercise of that power managed either by the elders, which Ambrose
mentions, or by the episcopal court erected by himself. Neither Constantine
nor any of his successors did ever conceive, that churches were to be governed
by any other power then their own, as all other societies of men were.

In this episcopal court any cause between man and man, clergyman or not, was
decided; capital only excepted. For matters of faith, I confess there be many
Emperors sanctions, forbidding secular courts to meddle with them: but this
does not argue that the clergy had any power more then declarative, not
sancitive. For

1. This very sanction, that secular courts should not meddle with matters of
faith, was a law of the Emperor, and the episcopal courts or synods could not
challenge any power therein, but by a commission from the Emperor.

2. The Emperors did not conceive themselves obliged to receive laws
concerning faith from the Bishops, or that coming from them they had a stamp of
authority through all the Emperors dominions, except they were approved of and
ratified by them.

3. The Emperors did not think themselves much obliged to receive laws of
doctrine and faith from the Bishops, in regard that most of the laws and
constitutio is concerning the fundamental points of faith were composed,
reduced and inserted into the Code, without so much as taking counsel or
advice of the Bishops; though we never read that they ever complained thereof.
Only a late famous Lawyer and a Papist, in his book de Iustinianei seculi
moribus cap. 2. makes a great complaint thereof; which is a strong argument
that the magistrate did not then acknowledge any ecclesiastical power seated
in the clergy.

4. And the power that the Emperors challenged to belong solely to them, to
call synods, to choose members, to review their acts, to approve, ratify,
disannull, or give them the vigor and strength of laws obliging all churches
and men to obedience, either active or passive, is an argument, that what ever
combined churches under the heathen Emperors did, in calling of synods, making
laws and decrees, and requiring from all churches and church members obedience
to them; the Emperors did not conceive otherwise of those acts of theirs, but
as of acts of magistracy taken up by consent, for want of a Christian
magistrate, and which was to last no longer then till the time that God should
send a Christian magistrate. For had not these been the thoughts both of the
Emperors and the Bishops at that time, how came it that Constantine the Great,
and the other Christian Emperors that came after him, did not rather wish the
Bishops and clergy to call synods upon their own authority, as they were wont
to do? and how came it that O^ius, Spiridion, and Paphnutius did not dissuade
Constantine from taking upon him to call synods, telling him that it was more
then did belong to him, and speak in the language of Mr. Gillespie, that
ministers by virtue of their office are to call and assemble synods; that it is
altogether unreasonable that they should be abridged of what they had enjoyed
for 300. years, and now loose a main branch of their ecclesiastical power;
that hitherto it was not so much as thought on, that magistracy, which is not a
thing essential to the church, should so far entrench upon the government of
Christ, wherewith the ministers are solely entrusted? But these notions came
not into the minds either of the Emperors, or of Osius, Eustatius, Paphnutius
and others, nor of Hierom, who questioned the validity of a synod that was not
convocated by the Emperor. These good men did not quarrel either at the
convocation of synods, or at the making or giving of laws to churches by the
sole authority of the Emperors.

5. A further proof that neither the Emperors, nor the Kings after the Roman
Empire was broken in pieces, conceived that Bishops and clergymen had any
judicial power distinct from theirs, is, that for many 100. years in most
parts of the Roman Empire, as it then was, Emperors and Kings kept
state-assemblies, where both clergy and laity sat and voted, without any such
distinction of power ecclesiastical and civil.

I should here show, as I promised in the beginning of the chapter, that the
very heathens never knew any such distinction of power: for although the law of
nature and nations taught them, that there must be a sacred function distinct
from others, yet they never knew nor understood that the jurisdiction of that
function was distinct from that of the others: for many thousand years neither
the people of God nor the heathens knew any such distinction. Aristotle in the
third of his politics chapter 10. speaking of heroic Kings, the Kings, says he,
were judges and moderators in all divine matters. So was the Roman Senate, both
before and after it was governed by Emperors; for it was wont to consecrate
Emperors; and the name of Pontifex Maximus, of which they were so jealous, was
taken by the Emperors even till Gratians time. In short, they always
conceived that a common magistracy and sovereign power was made up of these two
main ingredients, viz. ceremonies about religion and humane laws, both put in
trust with the sovereign magistrate.

One thing I cannot but observe: that the very heathens by the light of nature
have gone here beyond Mr. Gillespie. For, to confirm a common error, that the
church jurisdiction is wholly independent from the magistrate, and that the end
of magistracy is only the protection of temporal life, having nothing to do
with promoting the eternal good of the soul, to confirm, I say, this error,
he teaches us that magistracy is not subservient to the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ the Mediator ex natura rei. But this error is refuted by the very
heathen, namely Aristotle, in his 3. book of Politics chapter 16. where he says,
that the scope of politics is not simply to live, but to live well. I should
ask Mr. Gillespie, when a magistrate turns from heathenism to Christianity,
whether his first duty is not to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, both for himself
and all that are under his charge.

There is also a notable passage of Pareus among his Miscellanea Catechetica,
artic. 11. aphoris. 18. where he lamenteth that heathens should surpass
Christians in this particular, in attributing more to the magistrate for
ordering matters of religion, and that they in this point should be more
orthodox: these be his words; Ac sane dolendum est, rectius in hoc capite
sensisse olim ethnicos, qui unanimi consensu regi suo demandarunt curam
religion^s and cultus Deorum, idque persuasi tam jure naturae quam gentium.

As pregnant a proof, that the same persons amongst the heathens had the
managing of religious as well as civil affairs, is that of Cicero, in his
Oration pro domo sua ad Pontifices: the words are these; Praeclare a majoribus
nostris constitutum est, quod vos eosdem and religionibus Deorum immortalium
and summae reipublicae praeesse voluerunt; ut amplissimi and clarissimi cives
rempublicam been gerendo, religiosissimi religiones sapienter interpretando,
rempublicam conservarent. It was excellently well ordained by our ancestors,
that the same persons should be put in care with matters of religion, and the
supreme government of state: that so, whilst the most noble and renowned
citizens should see to the right ordering of the Commonwealth, and the most
religious to the right interpreting of religious matters, the frame of the
Commonwealth might be preserved and secured.

But I will not enter farther into this large subject handled by others.

CHAPTER XXV.
That ecclesiastical jurisdiction as it is held by the Romish church, better
agrees with reason and the letter of the Scripture then that of the
presbyterian brethren. That some Romanists have ascribed more power to the
magistrate in sacred things then the presbyterian brethren.

THat ecclesiastical power of deposing, excommunicating, and making laws
authoritatively, as it is assumed by the Pope and the Romish clergy, is not
only more consonant to reason, and the literal sense of the Scripture, but
also very agreeable with their corrupt principles in doctrine and practice:
whereas quite contrary, the ecclesiastical power with all its appurtenances as
it is assumed and held by the presbyterians, is altogether dissonant from the
holiness of their life and doctrine, and is more repugnant to reason and the
letter of the Scripture.

1. Neither the papists nor the presbyterians have any express place of
Scripture for a double jurisdiction, except they both make use of that of St.
Luc. 22. v. 38. alleged by Bonifacius the 8. behold, here are two swords.

2. Though the Popes speak big of their jurisdiction as distinct from the
magi^trates jurisdiction, yet de facto they make of two but one, in that they
subordinate the temporal jurisdiction to the spiritual, conceiving it
altogether inconvenient to constitute two coordinate powers, since one must be
supreme, and the supreme must include the inferior; and that the end of the
temporal being subordinate to the end of the spiritual, those that have the
managing of the temporal jurisdiction must likewise be subordinate and subject
to the spiritual jurisdiction. These are the arguments of Bonifacius and
Bellarmin; and upon these grounds all states and magistrates, being but
ministers of God in managing the temporal power, must be obedient to all acts
and sentences of the spiritual jurisdiction, which the ministers of God in the
Gospel are entrusted with: so that the magistrates power being subordinate to
the ecclesiastical, all appeals from civil judicatories must be valid, and so
all sentences of excommunications of what persons soever. But the same
ecclesiastical power, as it is challenged by the presbyterians to be
coordinate to the power of the magistrate, renders all acts of excommunication
altogether unreasonable and unwarrantable.

For it is but reasonable that a man should submit to a power that is either
subordinate to another, or that has no supreme or collateral: but it would
trouble one to be sentenced by a power that is neither sovereign nor
subordinate, as is the ecclesiastical. Neither is it less unreasonable, that
the same man, subject both to the ecclesiastical and the civil power, being
condemned by one of the powers, cannot so much as seek for remedy in the court
of that power that ought to give him defense and protection. The Pope well
foresaw he could not depose a King, except the power of the King were
subordinate to that of the Pope. But Zanchius and some others though they do
not make the temporal power subordinate to the spiritual, yet they hold that
Kings and magistrates are no less subject to the censure of excommunication
then the meanest member of a church.

3. The denosing of a King or other magistrate is a result (...) flowing from
excommunication: for if by excommunication a man is made a member of Satan,
whose address, conversation and company is to be avoided by all good men, it
comes much to one pass either to depose him, or to put him into such a
condition, in which he has but the name of a King, which is done by
excommunication. And therefore Emanuel Sa well expresses the sense of the
Romanists, and with it the true consequence of excommunication; which indeed,
if there be such a thing, must be as he defines it, aphoris verbo
excommunicationis: An excommunicated person is suspended from his office and
benefice, and cannot judge, accuse or witness,. 27. But that excommunication
held by presbyterians, by which Kings excommunicated may still retain their
authority and power as before, is altogether inconsistent with reason. Can a
man delivered to Satan make laws obliging for conscience sake? Can a sovereign
put to shame and confusion, yea execration, by a sentence of excommunication,
be trusted by his subjects? or can a subject excommunicated and rejected by
such a solemn act, as unworthy to have any communion with Christians, be
entrusted by his sovereign with the managing of the great affairs of state, by
which union and communion is maintained among all ranks of people?

4. Excommunication is very agreeable with the headship of the Pope under
Christ in the government of the Catholic church; for he does but expel a man
out of the pale that bounds his jurisdiction. But a minister or a presbytery
excommunicating either a King or any other man, cannot say that their
excommunication extends as far as the bounds of their jurisdiction, since
they have not yet defined how far it extends: surely, not so far as, and no
further then the jurisdiction of the magistrate under which they live: for the
ecclesiastical and spiritual jurisdiction is not limited by men's bounds; for
it is like the place of the Angels; one may say they are here, but one cannot
say that they are not there. If it reaches all over the world, then a
presbytery of Scotland may as well excommunicate a man in Germany, as in
Scotland.

5. The Papists arguments, namely Bellarmin's and others, are very urging,
that, supposing there be but one true church and body of Christ, and that that
church and body is the Rom^sh church, there cannot be a Commonwealth within
another Commonwealth, and a jurisdiction within another jurisdiction, except
one be subordinate to the other, and one depend on the other; therefore that
either the spiritual power must depend on the temporal, or the temporal on
the spiritual, for fear of a continual clashing and conflict. But our
brethren not allowing the necessity of dependence of one jurisdiction on the
other, do unavoidably run upon many rocks of inconveniences (which the papists
prudently avoid) such as is an endless crossing and thwarting of contrary
laws, commands and orders, one of the other, while men do not know which to
obey first; as I have largely showed in the 15. chapter of my Paraenesis.

6. Besides, it does very well stand to reason, (what the Romanists would have)
that one body of a church should have one governor, and one government, which
is that of Christ: but so does it not, that the presbyterian government should
be the government of Christ, and yet not be received by all the members of the
church of Christ; as they cannot deny but that there are many churches, which
yet do not hold presbytery to be the government of Christ.

7. It is very compauble, that in one government there should be many ^anks and
sorts of men contributing their ca^e toward it; so that all these cares be not
coordinate, but subordinate, and every rank of men take care in its proper
place, and with subordination to some principal power, that must have the
chief care of it. This the Papists as they hold, so they practice: for they
make the magistrate but subservient to the care that the Pope is to take in
governing the church, yielding to his judgment and commands, and executing his
decrees and bulls without control. But the presbyterians, that are not yet
agreed how to level the duties of the ministers and of the magistrate about
taking care of the government of the church, have cast us into an endless
unce^tainty, which of them is to have the greatest and ^hiefest care. For
whereas Rivetus says, that the magistates chief and first care is the
administration of sacred things and the government of the church, and his
second care the government of the Commonwealth; Walaus, Apollonius, Mr.
Gillespie, and a hundred more will tell us, that that care does mainly and
first belong to ministers, and next to them that magistrates have an auxiliary
ecclesiastical power, by which they are to aid the ministers in the government
of the church. So that if each party conceives that the care of the church
does not belong chiefly to the other, but that he is to look to it as he thinks
fitting, and not to trust the main care with any one but himself, I fear we
shall need a third party to take care that these two may care but for one thing.

8. Those words of Jesus Christ, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and, whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. and, against that church (which
they say is the Romish church) the gates of Hell shall not prevail, seem
literally to confer a very great power, yea to give an infallibility; the power
of remitting and retaining sins, and of granting indulgences, being not
repugnant to the non-erring power. But the giving this great power of the keys
of Heaven, and of binding and loosing, expressed in very high and emphaticall
terms, cannot be applyable to a presbyterian church, against which the gares of
hell shall not prevail; nor can it stand with the little modulus of power of a
presbytery, which yet has found no legs to walk on; they not resolving us yet
whether the pastor, or the people, or both must excommunicate, that the
sentence of excommunication may be valid, nor how far it reaches.

9. Particularly, that saying of the Papists, that there cannot be a greater
argument that their judgments are infallible then this, that God ratifieth
them in Heaven, is much according to the literal arguing of the Scripture,
saying, that whatsoever shall be bound, etc. that is, as they interpret it,
whatsoever shall be decreed by them and passed on earth, shall afterward be
ratified and approved in Heaven. For were their judgments fallible, then God
would not have tied himself by his promise to approve of all the erroneous
judgments of men, which they say cannot be said without blasphemy. But the
fallibility of the judgments of presbyterian judicatories is repugnant to the
letter of the Scripture, which promises to ratify all the judgments that are
passed by men on earth.

10. So for the power of the Pope in absolving and loosing men from their oaths
and promises, and fidelity due to their sovereign, it does very well agree with
the letter of the Scripture, whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed
in heaven, for here is a power given without any modification. But that of
presbyterian j^dicatory not challenging such a power, and yet grounding their
power upon the same Scripture, must so much the more recede from the Scripture;
and therefore they need a place of Scripture as pregnant for their power, as
the Romanists have for theirs.

11. Lastly, the jurisdiction held by the Papists is a true and valid
jurisdiction, for it is coercive, and extends to the body, estate, liberty
and good name; the Pope and Bishops have their prisons: but the presbyterian is
a name without a thing; for they are loath to call it coercive; it must be then
persuasive. I wish they would hold there, and suspend their excommunication of
any person, till he be persuaded so to be, which I think he will never be: or
till they can inform him, that excommunication is an ordinance of Jesus Christ,
as well as the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments,
as they tell us in the 63. page of their answer to the reasons of the
dissenting brethren; which neither do I think they ever will be able to do.

12. But though the ecclesiastical presbyterian power, as it is held to be
independent, and not subordinate to the magistrate, is less consonant to
Scripture and reason then the papal ecclesiastical power; yet I must say thus
much for the brethren of the presbytery, that their excommunication, as they
hold it from a power coordinate and independent from the magistrate, is more
consistent with reason, then that excommunication held by the learned and
rever. Dr. Hammond, agrees with his subordinating the ecclesiastical
episcopal power to the magistrate, as supreme governor of the church under
Christ: for according to the Doctors opinion, one cannot conceive of the power
of excommunicating, but as the power of the magistrate, and of excommunication
but as a law of the magistrate; which yet I believe he will not grant. For were
he willing to grant thus much, then besides that he and I should not differ, he
would get reason and Scripture more on his side, then (...)ur brethren of the
presbytery or the Pap^s have.

Now that some remaining within the communion of Rome have acknowledged as much
as we concerning the nullity of a double jurisdiction, the power of the
magistrate in sacred things, and the nature of the Kingdom of God, I could
prove by many of them; truth breaking forth through the darkness of popery,
whereas Mr. Rutherfurd and Gillespie were blind in so clear day of revealed
truth.

I have already al^edged Claude Fauchet and John du Tiller, who t^ll us that
there was no such thing as a double jurisdiction for many hundred years after
Christ: and with them agrees the author of the Review of the Council of
Trent wh^ the 6. book chap. 5. says, that the (...) F^ance hold their
jurisdiction not from the Pope, but from the King of France. We have also
alleged Tos^atus upon the 16. of Nauhew, asserting that among the Jews there
was no distinction of jurisdiction.

Hotomannus, a famous Lawyer and a Papist, in his book of the Liberties, has
these words: It is certain that ecclesiastics as ecclesiastics have neither
fisck nor territory, nor any jurisdiction, but only liberty to declare what is
fitting to be observed, without receiving or execut on of their opinion.

But I will insist only upon two or three considerable places out of the said
Review of the Council of Trent, that one would think had been spoken by
Frastus or Mr. Coleman.

In the 3. book cap. 11. he has these words: If the Prence be learned and
capable, what reason ^s there to exclude him from presidency? It were indeed
more beseeming and becoming his dignity, to let the Bishops a^sp^te, yea one of
them to manage and order the action, or such as he himself will choose, res^ving
to himself the presidency, yea the determination, the confirmation and
execution, after he has viewed and understood all: the importance and
consequence is too great, when it concerns salvation, a Prince has no less
interest then a Prlest. Here we have a Paput granting, that the magistrate is
not only to preside in synods, but also to have the last determination and
judgment of all-debates.

In the 7. book chapter 6. he ascribes a function, but no jurisdiction, to the
clergy and pastors; and he has this passage worthy to be written in golden
letters, for it does disannull and make void all consistoriall, classical and
synodicall canons, sentences and definitions, which are no acts of the
magistrate. Kings ought not to meddle with the administration of the
Sacraments, nor with the business of ceremonies, or preaching, or other
ecclesiastical ministerial acts: but for appointing of the order of
ceremonies, purging out of abuses, extirpation of schism and heresies,
church-policy, and the like, they may, they ought, and they have always done
it, either by putting their own hands to the work, or by commanding of it, or
else by appointing and constituting laws, statutes and ordinances.

The author did here only forget to tell us by what power the magistrate must
do this. Is it by a political or ecclesiastical power, direct or indirect,
intrinsecall or extrinsecall? None but Mr. Gillespie could tell us. Sure he
that takes all and does all by his own power and authority, needs no
copartners in the managing of his power, but delegates and substitutes in the
exercise of it.

CHAPTER XXVI.
The description of excommunication in terms received by most of our opposites,
though otherwise variously defined by them. That for four thousand years no
such excommunication was in use, either among the heathens or the Jews. An
answer to some objections. That the legal uncleanness was no type of the
moral. That the Priests judging of the leprosy is no plea for excommunication,
nor for ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

ALthough I made this subject the greatest part of my Latin book, yet I had
much more to say then I did write, purposing one time or other to discover,
that excommunication has been the principal and main tool in the hands of the
man of sin to build up the Roman Hierarchy, or that dominion which the Pope
has procured himself in all states and Empires round about him; which is the
very mystery of iniquity spoken of by S. Paul: To avoid prolixity therefore,
intending here sut an extract, I will strive to contract my self, and give but
a breviary in few chapters of what I design, if God gives me life, in another
tongue.

I must first state what my opposites mean by excommunication, that by the
description they make of it, I may with less difficulty make good, that it is
repugnant to reason, Scripture, and the practice of all nations, heathens,
Jews, yea of many Christians in all ages; for except they give it me
themselves, it is as impossible for me to delineate it, as to give the true
definition of purgatory, or of limbus patrum; for all parties are not yet
agreed what the exclusion is from and by whom, and what men are excommunicable.
For some hold that excommunication, at least the less, is from the Eucharist,
as the greater is from the assembly of Christians: others not only from the
external communion, but also from the internal. Some hold that only Bishops,
yea that one only Bishop may excommunicate, as Ambrose did Theod^sius: some
think that p^es^yters and ministers may do it; and of these, some say that one
may do it, others say there must be three at least. Ca^vin and some others hold
excommunication is v^d^ except it be the act of a whose p^v^church. Many are of
opinion tha^ the p^b, t^y without the concurrence of the people may
excourmunicate. As for the subject or object o^ ^xcommunication, some think
that Kings and ma^rates, as well as any other (...) ch^members, may ^e
ex^ommunicated: othe^s e^e^t them Those that make three communions, according
to the three several acceptions of Church in Scripture, say that
excommunication is only an exclusion or a putting out of the communion which is
amongst members of a (...) church: others that it is an ^xclusion ^t of the
communion of the whole Catholic (...) ^hu^ch; whereby they warrant the power
of the Pope in excomm^n cating Emperors and Kings, who, since they are members
of the Cath^k church, may be put out of the communion by the pallor within that
communion. But some hold, that the virtue of excommunication ^x^s no further
th^n the jurisdiction of the ma^ate where the excommunication is pronounced.

There being such diversity of opinions amongst our opposites about the true
notion of excommunication, it is not possible for any of them to give a good
account and description of excommunication to satisfy all, much ^sse can I do
it: yet must I give some description of it, allowable, as I conceive, ^y most
of them.

It is a judicial act or sentence of excluding scand^lous persons and
offenders from some church priviledges, by churchmen or churchmembers invested
with a power of jurisdiction distinct from the power of the magistrate; which
sentence ought not to be reviowed or voided, but either by the same power that
first gave the sentence, or by a superior judicatory in ead^m serie (as they
call it) of the same kind and nature, if any is to be had.

This description, I trow, will go near to be received by all the patrons of
excommunication, even by those that make excommunication no less a saving
ordinance then the preaching of the word and the administration of the
Sacraments; as the ^ever. Divines have defined and determined in their assembly
at Westminster. Now of this excommunication I shall here give this short
account.

1. That for four thousand years no such excommunication was in use, either
among the heathens or the Jews.

2. That at that time when some think it had a beginning, even when the Jews
were carried into captivity, it did not begin.

3. That there is no ground for such an excommunication communication nor
practice in the new Testastament.

4. That soon after Christ and the Apostles time excommunication begun, and was
mainly subservient to the working of the mystery of iniquity.

5. Excommunication being retained by the reformers, did occasionally
strengthen the mystery of iniquity.

For the first, it is easy to show that there was no such excommunication among
the heathens as we have described. It is true, that many learned Grammarians
and Lawyers, as Polydore Virgil, Tiraquellus, Fortatulus and some others, hold
that excommunication was in use among the heathens before it was practiced
among the Jews: but it had nothing of the excommunication agreed on by all
parties. The example of Alcibiades, condemned for keeping holy conventicies in
Cornelius Nepos, does not concern excommunication, since it was a judicial act
of the people of Athens: neither was that an excommunication whereof Caesar
speaks in his Commentaries, being a forinsecall sentence pronounced by the
Druides, who were judges of the land, and meddled with any such kind of matters
as are usually judged at Westminster Hall in term time: for there was not then
any division of power. Draco, says Demosthenes, amongst other penalties
imposed, ranketh exclusion from courts, pleading, temples, and performing their
idol-worship. Dionysius Halicarnasseus in the year from the building of Rome
254 says, that the Senate made a decree to expiate all those that in the civil
wars were necessitated to shed blood. And Diodorus Siculus has a notable
example lib. 16. sect. 23. that though amongst all the nations in Greece there
were variety of functions, yet there was an identity of jurisdiction: for the
Council of the Amphicty ones did proceed against the violators and plunderers
of Temples and Altars, and made laws concerning their public worship. Also
Lampridius tells us, that Alexander the Emperor reviewed the sentences of
the college of Augurs: also Tertullian in his Apologetick cap. 5. says, that
it was the prerogative of the senate to consecrate their Gods, and to order the
religion that was to be observed among the people.

Let us now come to the Jews; and first examine what they have to show for
excommunication before the law was given. Beza and others make excommunication
as ancient as the creation: they say, God did excommunicate Adam and Cain.
Others would have those Angels who did not persist in their integrity to have
been thrust out of Heaven by excommunication. But these acts being judicial
acts of God, not as Pastor of his church, but as loveraign judge, cannot serve
the turn: besides that excommunication supposes a possibility of absolution,
and returning to the former condition; and such could not the excommunication
of the bad Angels be, nor that of Adam, who was never to return to Paradise.

Since the Law, they allege for excommunication, cerith or cutting off; which
Mr. Rutherfurd confesses was done by death or otherwise, and so can be no plea
for excommunication: besides that it was inflicted by the magistrate, and was a
corporal punishment, which concludes nothing for presbyterian excommunication.

Zanchius, in an Epistle to Frederick the III. Prince Palatine, says, that
Marie the sister of Moses was excommunicated being put out of the camp. But was
the camp any more a part of the church then of the commonwealth? or why was
this act of exculsion rather an ecclesiastical act then a civil? And was this
penalty inflicted upon Mary by the Priests and Levites sitting in a judicatory
distinct from that of Moses?

No great stresse or strength is there for excommunication in the judgment
that befell Korah, Dathan and Abiram: for this example rather teaches us, that
the nature of excommunication stands not in an expelling or removing any one
from us by a judicial sentence, but rather in excommunicating and withdrawing
our selves from the communion of the wicked: for so are the words Numbers 16.
Separate your selves from among that congregation, and bid all the people to
depart from the tents of these wicked men. Such excommunication I shall
willingly grant, whereby we may avoid and reject heretics and heresies; flee
from the devil, but not put the devil to flight by excommunication. The best
way to eschew the unfruitful works and workers of darkness, and to have no
communion with them, is to withdraw from their communion.

They urge much legal uncleanness, for which they say men were separated from
the rest of the congregation. This, Mr. Rutherfurd says p. 285. was a
ceremonial excommunication; thereby silently confessing that real
excommunication was not in use, till all the ceremonies were taken away.
Suppose that the legal uncleanness had been a type of the moral, it could
not be a type of a thing then present, but of a future: but we have proved that
the legal cleanness was a type of Christ's righteousness, and the legal
uncleanness a type of those that being not clad with Christ's righteousness,
were separated from Christ and his elect, as the goats are from the sheep. A
perfect righteousness, such as was the legal, cannot be a type of the moral
righteousness, which is imperfect: and the want of legal cleanness does very
well prefigure the want of Christ's righteousness, but it does not so well
shadow out the want of moral righteousness, which does not as such separate
men from Christ. Since then, as Mr. Rutherfurd confesses, this separation of
lepers and such as were polluted with legal uncleanness was but a ceremonial
excommunication, I long to hear from him but one only example in all the old
Testament of a real excommunication, which was typified by the ceremonial
excommunication, or that ever any man was kept from the passover or the
sacrifices for a moral uncleanness: which he will never be able to show.
Besides, this sequestring or separating of a leprous or legally unclean person
was no judicial act of the Priests and Levites, more then of the elders of the
people; and so by that, excommunication should not be a sentence agreeing with
the description we have given of it, and which is agreed on by all sides that
plead for excommunication.

It is observable, that not all the Levites, but only Aaron and his sons could
judge of the leper, therein prefiguring Christ, who only knows his own, and
discerns his elect from others, and the sheep from the goats: so that this
legal rite cannot be applied to excommunication, which they say is a judicial
act that may be performed by every minister of the Gospel. And therefore the
Papists have very good reason on their side, who being not willing to loose
their power of excommunicating, nor to forgo the usual plea taken from the
Priests judging of the leper, saw, that since only Aaron and his sons were
invested with the power of judging the leper, it was therefore fitting that the
power of excommunication, prefigured by that power of discerning leprosy,
should belong only to the Bishops, who succeed the sons of Aaron, and are in
the Christian church what the sons of Aaron were in the Jewish. Now I have
showed elsewhere, that Gospell-Prophets or ministers did not succeed the
Priests or Levites, but the Prophets of the old Testament, who had nothing to
do with judging of the leprosy: and that therefore the Priests judging of the
leprosy apart from other men, is no plea either for excommunication or for
ecclesiastical jurisdiction: besides that the Priests did judge of the leprosy
not so much by their office, as by the skill annexed to their office; and so
they did but as physicians, who are best able to judge of the pestilence, yet
are only to give their judgment, but not to separate any one from the rest of
men by their jurisdiction, no more then the Priests did.

CHAPTER XXVII.
That neither in the time of Ezra such an excommunication began. That the
casting out of the synagogue did not answer that excommunication. That there is
no ground for it nor practice of it in the new Testament.

SOme are of opinion that excommunication had its beginning in Ezra's (chap. 7.
v. 27.) and Nehemiahs times, Nehem. 10. v. 29. and chapter 13. v. 25. where Aben
Ezra expounds I cursed them, of the two kinds of excommunication, Niddui and
Cherem: though others question it, and say that these three kinds of
excommunication, Niddui, Cherem and Scha^natha, were not invented of two
hundred years after. However it is certain, as some Rabbis observe, that in
the time of Ezra and Nehemiah something like excommunication begun; for the
people being led captive, and wanting their wonted magistrate, and usual
legal proceedings, and having no power within themselves to keep up their
religion without mixing with the heathen, or to restrain those that would run
after Idols; the best-minded people, yea most of the nation who as yet had not
consulted with themselves how far they were to persevere in the religion they
were born and brought up in, did body themselves into several synagogues,
where they bound themselves mutually by a sacred oath (some say they broke
bread upon it) to keep the law of Moses, and not to join themselves by
marriages to the heathens, and to hold close to the customs and constitutions
of their elders and ancestors, even of those that were the keepers of such a
confederate discipline, and were to see all things performed according to oath
or covenant, and to take order that whosoever did break it should suffer the
penalty imposed by the discipline.

These synagogues supplied the defect both of magistracy, and of all those
godly meetings which were kept every sabbath day in the houses of Prophets: for
in them not only the law of Moses was read and expounded, and prayers made; but
also all those causes and matters which usually were handled and determined in
higher and lower courts or Sanedrims, were adjudged, so far as the Princes
under whom they lived gave them liberty, and enlarged or shortened their
privileges: for sometimes they were not permitted to put any man to death;
sometimes they were allowed, even out of Judea, to have their Ethnarcha or
Prince of the people, who did not so much govern the country as the nation.
Hence we are satisfied how the chief Priests came to give Paul power to lay
hold on the Jews living out of Judea, and bring them captive to Jerusalem, for
they could not have given such a commission to apprehend a Gentile.

Amongst other penalties that the several synagogues, dispersed in Judea,
Egypt, Greece, Pontus and Galatia, inflicted, casting out of the synagogue was
one. The Rabbis say, for the Scripture is silent in it, that this casting out
comprehended many degrees of excommunication; so that when they were permitted
to put to death, to be put in Cherem was thought as much as to dye. But what
ever were the degrees or species of excommunication, and by what title so ever
called and distinguished among the Jews, it is certain that none of these
censures inflicted by the synagogues, or by the keepers of their liberties,
were of the nature of the excommunication we have described in the precedent
chapter. For

1. These synagogues were a mixed assembly of men, betwixt a corporation and a
church, and had not within their body a jurisdiction of Priests and Levites
distinct from the rest of the synagogue, for the high Priest was a long time
the chief magistrate.

2. There being other censures inflicted besides casting out of the synagogue,
(which they make excommunication) as stoning, burning, whipping, cutting of
limbs, as learned Mr. Despagne tells us in his judicious piece of the Harmony
of times; there is no reason at all to make one censure more ecclesiastical
then any of the rest, as if casting out was a censure inflicted by churchmen,
and whipping and cutting of limbs were civil censures inflicted by others.
Sure a magistrate, by the same power that he causes a cutpurse to be whipped,
also banisheth a seditious man: so were all penalties in those synagogues acts
of the same power and the same men, and equally using force upon the body; for
as yet they knew no such distinction of powers and censures, nor were the
distinctions of ecclesiastical and civil, spiritual and temporal, found out.

3. Those that were cast out of the synagogue, were alike restrained from
church and from Commonwealth-priviledges; the church and the Commonwealth being
not yet taken for two distinct bodies.

4. We do not read that those that were put out of the synagogue were kept off
from the Temple, and from being partakers of the same mysteries that others not
put out of the synagogue enjoyed: which shows that excommunication was not
answerable to (...) or casting out of the synagogue; for those that in the
synagogue had power to put one out of it, had not power to bar him either from
killing the passover in the temple, or from eating of it at his own home, or
from being partaker of all other sacrifices and ceremonies in the Temple.
Christ and his Apostles taught daily in the Temple, though excommunicated and
put out of the Jews synagogues.

5. Neither do we find to the contrary, but that a man put out of one synagogue
might in the same town or country be entertained by another synagogue: for
Gemara Babvionica says, that he that was excommunicated in one town, was not
thought excommunicated in another.

6. Many Rabbis say, that one private man used to excommunicate and absolve
another: and hereupon some are ready to say, that Jesus Christ related to that
Matthew. 18. when he said, Let him be to thee, etc. as if he had said, Since he
will not hearken to thy good advice, nor that of two or three, nor yet to the
church, thy last refuge is to excommunicate him in thy private name, and as to
thy self only, having nothing farther to do with him. And in that manner will
they have the 40. men, who had conspired to kill Paul, to have excommunicated
one another, in case any one had been slack in the enterprise.

Now let us see what plea there is for excommunication in the new Testament. We
have showed, that the Christians succeeding the Jews, retained by the same
confederation of discipline, under a magistrate no friend to them, the same
power of magistracy as they, though not in that high measure of jurisdiction;
because the Christians were always more persecuted, and never had so large
privileges and liberties granted them as the Jews had: but yet as little as
they had, they could do that which every society, though never so much kept
under and in awe, can, viz. expel any member of their society, without giving
an account of what they do herein to the magistrate. And upon that account
might the Corinthians very well expel the incestuous person: which act should
I hold to have been of the same nature with casting out of the synagogue, I see
not how any of my opposites could allege any thing to the contrary.

But I believe the Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles had no need to have
recourse to that power of magistracy like that of the synagogues, assumed by
confederation of discipline: For

1. In the first preaching of the Gospel there was less need of discipline,
because the number of pastors was greater then of church members; the great
work of the ministry being laid upon every man, and women converted were to
strive to convert others.

2. The Apostles and the disciples, as Timothy, Titus and others, who were
looked upon as secundary Apostles, being conceived to be led by an infallible
spirit, the people in all controversies arising needed not go far to be
resolved, or take much time in discussing of them by overseers or elders set a
part for that purpose.

3. The gift of miracles, striking a terror, supplied the place of a
discipline: therefore Bucer on the 16. of Matthew. gives us this reason, why no
external power and jurisdiction was used in the time of Christ, which serves
also for the time of the Apostles: these be his words; No commonwealth can be
governed without inflicting punishment upon the wicked. What was wanting to the
church in external power, the Lord Jesus did supply it by a miraculous and
singular power, and by special weapons, and a sword, called (...) 1 Cor. 12.
v. 10.

But that extraordinary way of striking terror into new converts by the power
of miracles ceasing, Christians being grown numerous, and confirmed in the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus, it was now convenient they should settle churches,
which they did, following the example of the Jews under a magistrate of a
contrary religion: for indeed at first Christian assemblies were but synagogues
turned into churches; so that they needed not to look out for other manner of
power and discipline then that which was exercised by the Jewish synagogues.
Were it granted that excommunication is to be proved by those words Matthew. 18.
tell it unto the church, or by the example of the incestuous person put out of
the church of Corinth, or by the eleventh chapter of the same Epistle; yet this
act of exclusion could not be made good, not to be such an act of magistracy
assumed by confederate discipline, as was the casting out of the synagogue.

Beza, in his preface to his book against Erastus, alleges the opinion of
Musculus and Bullinger to be the same with what we now speak of: that the first
Christians wanting the power of magistracy to restrain them that walked
disorderly and wickedly, assumed such a power of magistracy to themselves, and
devised excommunication; and that if there had been a power of magistracy in
Corinth to punish the incestuous person, there had then been no need either of
excommunication, or of delivering the man to Satan. And so far we allow
excommunication, as it is an act of magistracy assumed by a confederate
discipline by the first Christians, in imitation of the Jews, for want of a
Christian magistrate, and not upon any commission granted to the ministers of
the Gospel independently from the magistrate, or grounded upon the power of
the keys and of binding and loosing: for it were a less matter to discard and
keep off the magistrate from concurring in acts of exclusion, if for the
placing it in the ministers the Scripture were not so grossly abused, and made
to speak what it never intended, and that which has as much strength for
upholding the Romish hierarchy, as the presbyterian ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.

Before therefore we come to speak how excommunication, from a law of the
confederate discipline, became to be the main engine to advance the mystery of
iniquity, we will examine all the places of the new Testament usually alleged
by the advocates of the presbyterian jurisdiction, to prove that
excommunication is a law of Christ and a church-ordinance, as well as the
preaching of the word and the administration of the Sacraments, which are a
like committed to the ministers of the Gospel only.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
That the whole context Matthew. 18. v. 15, 16, 17, and 18. makes nothing for
excommunication; neither Judas non-admission (if granted) to the Eucharist, nor
the delivering of the incestuous person to Satan, nor yet the self-examination
required 1 Cor. 11.

THe first place is taken from the context in Matthew 18. v. 15, 16, 17, 18. a
place clear enough, had it not been handled by men of prejudiced judgments. I
will not loose so much paper and time, as Mr. Rutherfurd and Gillespie have done
to make it difficult, nor throw so much dust in the eyes of the readers, nor
repeat all I have said upon this subject in another book. I will chiefly
restrain my self to Calvin's authority, to evince that the whole context makes
nothing at all for such an excommunication, as is a judicial act pronounced
independently from the Christian magistrate by the ministers of the Gospel.

1. Calvin, in the fourth book of his institutions chap. 12.. 3. and more
expressly in an Epistle to the Neocomenses, says, that the offense Matthew. 18,
15. If thy brother, etc. ought to be understood of private offenses, and known
only to the party offending and offended. These be his words: We understand the
words of Christ of concealed offenses, as the words sound: therefore if thy
brother has trespassed against thee, and it be known to thy self only, and
there be no witness, Christ commands that thou should repair to him
privately. And a little lower; here it is not meant that hidden sins should be
brought to light, thereby to shame our brother. So that this offense not
breaking forth into an open scandal, it is not like that the wronged party
would have taken a way to put his brother to an open shame, or that the Lord
Jesus Christ had wished him so to do: but rather to make first one or two privy
to it, and then some more trusty secret friends, it may be a college of three,
called a church amongst the Jews, appointed to reconcile disterences between
brother and brother, which were like the Morum Censores, censors of manners; or
it may be such as are mentioned 1 Cor. chap. 6. who were like the elders spoken
of by Ambrose, which were not invested with any authority to constrain, censure
or punish the offender: for the words in the 17. verse, let him be to thee,
show both that the offense was private, and that the offended party was not to
take any other course, but only to have no further converse with him. For if he
offender had been excommunicated by a public judgment, he had been a publican
and a heathen, not only to the offended party, but to all others. But Jesus
Christ seems to a private offense and a private way of proceeding to give a
private counsel, how the party wronged ought to behave himself to wards the
offender.

Learned Mr. Lightfoot thinks that in all the context there is nothing
intended either of Jewish or Christian excommunication; that there was no
judicial sentence pronounced, nor constraint put upon the offending party, but
only shame; and that not public, but only within the walls of the synagogue or
of the school. As if a man would not provide for his family, after a first and
second admonition he was put to shame in the synagogue by these or like words,
Such a one is cruel, and will not nourish his children.

2. This makes way to know both what power that church in the Text had, and
what is meant by it. Calvin upon the place has some remarkable concessions
much to our purpose. 1. That Jesus Christ alluded to the custom of the Jews,
and had respect to the form of discipline among them. 2. That the power of
excommunication belonged to the elders of the people, who represented the
church. Which concessions are convincing arguments to prove, 1. that Jesus
Christ by the word Church did not mean an assembly of men whose power was
distinct from that of the magistrate; since no such thing as was called Church,
Kahal, Gnedah, in the old Testament was ever taken for an assembly of
churchmen, invested with jurisdiction and distinct from those of the
Commonwealth. 2. Since the elders of the Jews were no more elders of the
church then of the Commonwealth, and that they had the sole power of
excommunicating, it follows that the act of excommunicating was not more an
act of church then of state: and therefore if Christ speaking of the Christian
excommunication, alluded and had a regard to the custom of the Jews, that
likewise their excommunication must be like that of the Jews, and be as well
an act of magistracy as an act of the church. Which is confirmed by what he
faith upon the 18. verse, speaking of the government of the church, where he
makes two kinds of elders in the Christian church answerable to two kinds of
elders in the Jewish church. Now as these were not invested with a power called
ecclesiastical distinct from the civil, so may we conclude of the elders in
the Christian church. These be his words: Legitimam Ecclesiae gubernationem
presbyteris injunctam fulsse, non tantum verbi ministris, sed qui ex plebe
morum censores illis adjunctierant.

But above all he is express upon the 17. verse, where he says that the Lord
Jesus Christ in modelling the churches discipline, sends them to the
institution under the law: admonuit in ecclesia sua tenendum esse ordinem qui
pridem sub lege sancta institutus fuerat. If we all stand to Calvin, the
quarrel is ended; and the church Matthew. 18. will prove such a church as was in
Moses, Joshua, and David's time: by which is never meant a congregation of
Priests or church-elders distinct from the commonwealths elders.

So then we see, even according to Calvin, if Jesus Christ spoke in the context
of a church Christian (as I do not believe he did) it must be a church of the
same nature with the Jewish; in which excommunication being an act of
magistracy, so must it also be in the Christian church. But I do not believe
that in this whole context there is any thing meant either of the Jews or
Christians excommunication, or of such a church as our opposites would have to
be understood by the word church, viz. an ecclesiastical senate or presbytery;
being certain that neither in the old nor in the new Testament the word church,
in Greek or Hebrew, is taken in that sense. Is it likely that Jesus Christ
would mention a church that was never recorded in all the old Testament, and
whereof neither the Evangelists nor the Apostles speak?

Doubtless Christ speaks here of such a church or assembly of men, who were,
as Calvin says, Morum Censores, censors of manners, much used among the Jews
and Romans; not invested with any judicial power, but yet of such authority
and gravity, that whoever did reject their wholesome advice and counsel, was
as much discredited, as if he had suffered corporal punishment. It may be
those censors of manners were rectors and teachers of schools; men who for
their gravity and learning were highly esteemed among the people: and such a
school some say Christ and his Apostles made up, much like those schools of the
Prophets in use in Samuels time, in which the scholars or young Prophets did
sit at the feet of the Rabbis, as Mary at the feet of Jesus, who for that was
called Rabbi-However those words, if he neglect to hear the church, do argue
that the church spoken of in this context was not invested with a power of
censuring the offender, as Bilson and Sutliffe do judiciously conclude from the
words. For thus speaks Dr. Sutliffe in his 9. chapter de presbyterio; Christ
speaks of a church that had no power to constrain, and which one might
despise without insurring punishment: for if it had had power to constrain, in
vain had he added, if he will not hear the church, for the church would have
constrained him.

In short, these words, tell it unto the church, are made, like regula Lesbia,
a nose of wax by Papists, Episcopal men and presbyterians: it is to them a
wood, which if a thousand men go into, none will fail to shape himself a stick,
a mallet, or a hammer. Bellarmin will tell us, that tell it unto the church
signifies, tell it unto the Romish church, or tell it the Pope. Mr. Gillespie
will expound it, tell it unto the presbytery. Dr. Hammond, tell it to the
Bishops, called by Chrysostom (...).

I will not urge much the words, let him be to thee an heat hen or a publican,
which if they do not make void excommunication, I am sure they do not help it
much; seeing that neither a publican nor a heathen were the object or subject
of excommunication. I conceive that the true pataphrase of these words may be
this, and that this was the meaning of the Lord Jesus: If the offender refusech
all honest ways to right thee, then prosecute him in the court of the
magistrate, where heathens and publicans have their own judges: deal with thy
brother as if he were (and as thou would do with) an heathen or a publican:
for since thou must now repute thy brother (as to thee) as an heathen or a
publican, and since thou would not scruple to implead an heathen or a
publican, so neither must thou scruple to sue thy brother. For sure neither
Jesus Christ in this place, nor St. Paul in the 1 Cor. chapter 6. forbids Saints
to go to law against an heathen before an heathen magistrate. Since then an
irreconcilable brother ought to be esteemed as an heathen, is it any whit
against Christian charity for the party offended to sue him before an heathen
magistrate? This exposition is very natural, having nothing strained, but most
like to be the sense of Jesus Christ.

As for the 18. verse, concerning binding and loosing, we have examined what
strength can be in it for excommunication: not discussing whether it may not be
as well applied, as Chrysostom, Austin, Theophy lact thought, to every private
man, as to the operation of the word in the ministry; or whether this verse
has any coherence with the precedent discourse of Christ.

Neither will I enter into the controversy, whether Judas was partaker of the
Eucharist, for it is not much material to know it; all agreeing he was not
removed by any excommunication or casting out, and that he did eat of the
passover, which eating was equivalent to that of the Lords Supper.

Now, lest more heads of objection of this Hydra of excommunication should
arise, if all should not be cut off, we must examine what strength the example
of the incestuous person 1 Cor. 5. has for excommunication. But this extract
being already too much lengthened, and the drift of it all along being, to
prove that the casting out of any member of a church, being the same with the
putting out of the synagogue, is no act of ministry or of church members as
such, but an act of magistracy, I need not to speak of it at all: besides that
these 3. or 4. observations will take off all hold for excommunication. 1. It
is granted by Calvin, Beza, Walaeus, Apollonius, Mr. Rutherfurd and Mr.
Gillespie, that St. Paul mentions but one censure inflicted upon the
incestuous person, viz. excommunication, and that the delivering of him to
Satan was the casting him out of the congregation. 2. Now it being evident that
this delivering to Satan was no excommunication, but a judgment quite of
another nature; it is likewise equally evident that the putting away of the
incestuous person, being the same with delivering him to Satan, was no
excommunication. 3. This casting out of the incestuous person makes nothing for
that excommunication which is only a putting a man by from partaking of the
Eucharist: for though examples may be brought out of the Scriptures, of men
cast out or kept from the temple or synagogues, yet there is no one example,
nor any reason for it, that a man admitted to enter either into the temple or
the synagogue, should not be partaker of the same mystery or ordinances
celebrated with the rest. 4. Calvin thinks that St. Paul by these words, put
away the wicked from among you, did not point particularly at the incestuous
person, but rather at the devil or the wicked one indefinitely, as the plotter
and contriver of all evil, which St. Paul says was put away from them by that
delivery of the incestuous person to Satan. 5. Wendelinus in his common places
of excommunication says, that the putting away of the incestuous person from
among the Cormthians, was not only an exclusion from godly converse, as
praying, hearing and receiving the ^ucharist with him; but also from civil
commerce, in eating, trading and talking with him. Which exposition is the most
natural I know, and proves that this putting away was no act of
ecclesiastical power distinct from the civil: for always every court
punishes according to its kind: a court of Exchequer does not summon men for
causes that are of the cognizance of a court-Martiall; so neither should an
ecclesiastical court impose penalties that are to be inflicted by a civil
court, such as is the depriving of a man of civil liberty. 6. Learned Mr.
Lightfoot says, that all the power of the church of Corinth in delivering the
incestuous person to Satan was, by the strength of Paul's spirit that went
along with them; so that the people of Corinth acting by no power of their own,
no church ought to do as that church then did, except they be sure of the
assistance of the same spirit.

Next in order follows the necessity of self-examination, 1 Cor. 11. made an
argument to prove that ministers must examine every communicant, and judge of
men's worthiness. For Beza, Walaeus, Mr. Rutherfurd and Mr. Gillespie thus
argue: If it be the duty of every man to examine himself, much more is it the
duty of a minister to examine him. Never was an argument more inconsequent, and
less concludent, by which the Papists may as well prove auricular confession:
If men must confess their sins to God, much more must ministers require every
man to confess their sins to them. For (quite on the contrary) from this Text
these or the like inferences should be drawn: If all men must examine
themselves, much more ought ministers to examine themselves: or this; If every
churchmember ought to examine himself, then ought the ministers to exhort them
to that self-examination: or this; If every churchmember ought to prepare
himself for the word and Sacraments, then ministers are not to prepare them
otherwise, then by showing them and giving them directions for their due
preparation, leaving every one to do the work himself.

CHAPTER XXIX.
That excommunication is contrary to common sexse and reason.

THere being no Scripture for excommunication, in the next place we shall see
that there is no reason for it. I do not deny but that a private church, as
well as any other society, by virtue of a power of magistracy seated in them,
may expel a member out of their society: but that this is done in obedience to
a p^sitive command of Christ, by a jurisdiction independent from the
magistrate, and by warrant from those words, whatsoever ye shall bind on carth,
etc. I conceive to be absurd, impertinent, and a yoke laid upon Christians
necks which is none of Christ's; as if whomsoever pastors do bind or
excommunicate on earth, Christ also does bind or excommunicate in Heaven, and
whomsoever they absolve or loose on earth, Christ also does absolve and loose
in Heaven.

1. Since the words Matthew. 16. and 18. be the very same words, it is absurd to
understand them in the 16. chapter absolutely, but in the 18. conditionally.
Now they would have the words Matthew. 16. whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. spoken
to Peter, to be without condition and absolute, that God should approve of and
ratify whatever opening, loosing and binding should ensue upon Peter's preaching
and converting of souls; for Calvin, Pareus, and most Divines will not have in
that place any thing understood of church censures, but only of the operation
of the word by the preaching of Peter. But though it were granted that in the
18. chapter Christ spoke of church censures by excommunication, what reason is
there why they should not be understood as absolute and without condition in
one chapter, as well as in the other? For in the 18. chapter they put a
condition to the absolute words of Christ, saying that all that is bound on
earth by excommunication is not always ratified and approved of in Heaven: for
were not, as they say, a modification put to the words of Christ, all the
judgments and sentences on earth had need be infallible. It is true, that
parallel places of Scripture may admit various senses, as it may be these very
words of Christ; or that something more may be employed in one place then in the
other. But yet whether both places or either of them be meant of the operation
of the word, or of the miraculous power granted unto the Apostles, and
particularly, as Mr. Lightfoot expounds them, of a power to dispense with the
Christian church in something that was to be retained or quitted of the
Mosaicall laws and rites; yet it must be acknowledged that both places are
alike to be understood absolutely and without condition, that whatever should
be bound or loosed by them on earth, should also infallibly be either bound or
loosed in Heaven. For to understand one place absolutely, and the other
conditionally, and clave non errante, when no error can intervene, I conceive
ought not to be admitted in Divinity. In short, either the words Matthew. 16.
absolutely spoken must be false, and admit some exception, (which cannot be
said without blasphemy;) or the same words repeated in the 18. chapter must not
be understood of excommunication, nor of any church-censure.

2. Since it is evident that the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the power
of binding and loosing, are equivalent expressions, and those both equally
committed to ministers; if by the keys are not meant the power of
excommunicating and absolving, neither can the power of binding and loosing
mean excommunication. For sure these keys cannot be understood of an outward
admission or exclusion, but only of the conversion of a sinner by the preaching
of the word. But suppose that these keys were also to admit into the visible
church, yet they can not be employed to put out of the church; a key being an
instrument either to let in or keep out, but not to expel those that are in.

3. Who can conceive that those words Matthew. 18. whatsoever ye shall bind, etc.
being uttered by the Lord Jesus Christ with such a prefatory asseveration,
verily I say unto you, should not be true without a condition and an exception
put to them, and yet that the same words Matthew. 16. without such a preface
should be perpetually and absolutely true? And who would believe that the Lord
Jesus Christ had pronounced in such an emphaticall way, vertily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. only to signify an external admission or
exclusion; in the doing of which acts, ministers may err out of ignorance
either of right or of fact, if not out of hatred, or too much indulgence and
favor?

4. Since they say that a man by excommunication is delivered to Satan; what an
uncharitable act do they commit against any one, be he never so wicked, by
putting him into such a condition, as they know is worse then his former, when
they are not sure whether occasionally it may better him; neither is it in
their power to drive away Satan again from the man, as it was in St. Paul?
Besides, no man would punish a child, a servant, or a malefactor, with a
punishment that shall last to his life's end, as to torture him till death, or
to whip him as long as he lives, or put him in a prison that may prove
perpetual: for still the earthly father or judge reserveth to himself the
liberty to give over correcting when it pleases him. But those that deliver a
man to Satan by excommunication, do inflict a penalty which it is not in their
power to take off again, being not able when they list to recover a man out of
the Devils paws.

5. Most schoolmen and Divines hold, that the sentence of excommunication is
of a quite different nature from the laws and sentences of men, which have the
force and validity of law, be they never so unjust, and must be obeyed either
actively or passively: for if no law were valid but that which is just and
righteous, then should no law be obeyed by any but those that could see equity
and justice in it. Which shows the nullity of excommunication: for whosoever
doubts whether such an excommunication was pronounced upon right grounds and
good information, or whether excommunication in it self is lawful, may well
count the excommunication null and of no weight: yea if the party
excommunicated does but say that he was wrongfully excommunicated, and clave
errante, or that those that did it had no power so to do, he may disannull, as
to himself, and so to all others, the excommunication. For as long as the
knowledge of a valid excommunication is grounded upon matter of fact, which is
known but to few, most men may still question that which they are not concerned
to believe, and whereof they have no certain knowledge.

6. Some to avoid that inconvenience, that God should be made to ratify what
the pastor acts in excommunicating, say, and it is the opinion of Beza, that
excommunication is rather a declaration of what God has already done in
Heaven, then an act preceding Gods, in approving or disapproving the ministers
sentence. But one and the same inconvenience follows thereupon, whether
excommunication be taken for an act preceding the act of God, or subsequent to
it. For if excommunication be a declaration of what God has already done, or
decreed to be done; it would follow, that all the acts of pastors in
excommunicating were infallible: for if they were fallible, it were not
possible to know when excommunication ought to be received for a valid act,
until the mind and counsel of God were revealed, and it were known to be
agreeable with the censure of excommunication. And therefore Wicliff thought
all excommunications void and null, except he that excommunicateth were first
informed that the party whom he was to excommunicate was excommunicated by God;
and this was held one of his errors in the council of Constance Art. 11.

7. Calvin in the 3. book of his Institutions chap. 4. 14. says, that
excommunication is no farther valid, then as binding in heaven answers to
that on earth: for he has no stronger argument to make void the Romish
excommunication, then by retorting, that many among them are either bound or
loosed on earth unworthily, which notwithstanding are not bound or loosed in
Heaven. If this exception against all Romish excommunication is good in Calvin's
mouth, why should it loose its strength in my mouth? for by the same argument I
disannull all excommunication, because all sentences of God in Heaven do not
always correspond to those that are pronounced upon earth.

8. The same Calvin upon Matthew. 18. pleading for the nullity of Romish
excommunication, uses this argument; that the power of the keys and of
binding and loosing belong only to those that have received the holy Ghost.
Which indeed overthrows all kind of excommunication: for if the validity of
an outward act depends upon the inward grace, the validity of the act will be
uncertain till doomsday, to those that know not whether he that has
pronounced the sentence of excommunication is endowed with the holy Ghost or
no. Perkins goes along with Calvin, upon the third of the Revelation, making
all excommunication void which is not pronounced by one that has the spirit:
For, says he, to the society only of the regenerate and faithful is it said,
Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc.

9. But were it so, that every pastor excommunicating had received the holy
Ghost, yet the validity of all excommunication could not be thence inferred,
since even a man endowed with the holy Ghost, except he has received a spirit
of divination, may be ill informed, and err ignorantly, ignorantia facti aut
juris.

10. Those that by binding and loosing in Heaven understand only approving of
the sentence past on earth, have no stronger plea for excommunication, except
all sentences of excommunication be the product of an infallible judgment: for
God is so far from approving of an unjust sentence, that his will is that it
should be disannulled.

11. But how can it consist with reason, that God at once should ratify,
approve, and dislike a sentence pronounced on earth? for they will have him to
ratify in Heaven an unjust sentence passed on earth, because, they say, his
will is that the party should stand to the sentence though unjust, and not
intrude to the Sacrament without he be legally absolved; and yet the while they
say that God does not ratify or approve of an unjust excommunication, because
unjust; so that at once the same sentence will be valid and invalid: valid,
because legally passed; yet invalid, because unjust.

12. Those that by binding and loosing understand pardoning and retaining sins,
though they speak truth, making the place Matthew. 18. v. 18. parallel to that of
John 20. v. 22. whatsoever sins, etc. yet they say nothing for excommunication,
which is neither pardoning nor retaining of sins. It is not pardoning, for then
excommunication must be counted a blessing: neither can it be retaining of
sins; for since, as they say, the end of excommunication is, that the soul may
be saved, retaining of sins, or rather of pardon, cannot be a means to that end.

13. Since excommunication is a putting out of the communion, I would fain know
whither that outing is from the communion of a private church, or from the
communion of the catholic visible church, or else from the communion of the
Saints, which is spoken of in the Creed; for I know but of these three
communions. If it be only a putting out of the communion of a private church,
then a man excommunicated in one congregation or parish, is not excommunicated
in the neighbor church. If it be a putting out of the catholic visible
church, then a man excommunicated in London shall be likewise excommunicated in
any part of the world. And if the virtue of excommunication extends all over
the world (as indeed so it must be, since it reaches to heaven) then any
church or pastors of that communion whatsoever may excommunicate any one within
that communion, and a presbytery in Scotland may excommunicate a man in
Switzerland: and therefore it must not seem strange, that the Pope does
excommunicate Emperors and Kings, since they are of his communion.

14. Excommunication cannot be a putting out of the communion of Saints and of
the invisible church; of which none is outed but by his falling from grace.

15. Neither can excommunication be a putting out of a presbyterian church, nor
out of such an hierarchy as was lately in England, which are but mere politic
systems of many particular societies, either under the magistrate of the land,
or under a power of magistracy assumed by common consent, as is the body of the
reformed churches in France: for then such an excommunication were rather like
a banishment or deprivement of liberty, then a spiritual censure, which are no
more bounded and circumscribed by the limits of the magistrate, then remission
or retention of sins, or the virtue of baptism, are.

16. Neither can it be proved that those words, whatsoever ye shall bind, etc.
are to be understood of exclusion rather from the Eucharist then from the
assembly, or from either; and that there is greater danger of corrupting good
manners in receiving the Eucharist with a dissolute man, then in conversing
with him: when as quite contrary, to eat with carnal and deboist persons is a
more contagious commerce, then to partake of the Eucharist with them.

17. Neither can they infer out of that Text, whatsoever, etc. or any other,
whether a church, a synod, a presbytery, whether one minister or two, may
excommunicate. But if the power of excommunicating be included within the power
of the keys, and of binding and loosing, which we have made good to belong
only to the dispensers of the word, and not to church members or to lay elders;
it will necessarily follow, that one single pastor, set over four or five
thousand communicants, must have power to excommunicate alone, without the
assistance of other ministers: for every single minister having received
entirely the power of the keys, and of binding and loosing, must needs also
have received ability to do whatsoever is included within that power.

18. It is to be noted, that Christ does not speak of binding and loosing of
men, but of things; for he does not say, whomsoever, but whatsoever: and
therefore our adversaries the Papists extend the power of excommunication
further then the presbyterians do, for they excommunicate not only men, but any
other living creatures, as Mice, whereof Thuanus has a notable example.

CHAPTER XXX.
That excommunication was mainly subservient to the working of the mystery of
iniquity. That the corrupting of the doctrine of the Eucharist made way for
excommunication.

I Should next show that excommunication was mainly subservient to the working
of the mystery of iniquity; but this I have handled at large in my Paraenesis.
St. Paul says, that in his time the mystery of iniquity began to work. Satan
was then very busy to infuse bad principles, which first put forth themselves
in the affectation of primacy, and in the corruption of the doctrine of the
Eucharist. The laity had no hand in it: for as Ministers have always been the
principal channels to conveigh knowledge and grace, when assisted by the spirit
of God; so when God gave them over to the guidance of their own spirits, they
have been still the only agents and instruments to bring in tyranny and heresy
into the church. The corruption then beginning at the head, and amongst the
leaders of flocks, their main care has been to set up themselves not only over
the inheritance of the Lord, but also over their own fellow laborers and
colleagues: for the attaining of which, and to seem great in the eyes of all
men, they turned the Eucharist into an idol, and this into a sacrifice, hoping
that these mysteries taking once Gods place, the pastors would be soon
respected with a veneration beyond and above that which is due to magistrates;
having with the dignity of their function, a special privilege and power to
distribute those mysteries, particularly the Eucharist, to such as they should
count worthy; from whence came excommunication.

But before excommunication could come to be the standard of an ecclesiastical
jurisdiction distinct from that of the magistrate, the corruption of the
Eucharist must precede: which was a work of many hundred years.

1. The Fathers, though they had no intention of contributing to the working of
the mystery of iniquity, have occasionally given a rise to it: for either
because they lived among the Jews and heathens, or because they newly came
from amongst those, who thought there could be no religion without sacrifices
and altars, condescending to the capacity and weakness both of Jews and
Gentiles, they borrowed many rites and ceremonies from them, yea their very
discipline; they called the Eucharist by the name of sacrifice, and gave the
name of altar to the communion table, to the bread, the name of the body of
Jesus Christ, and to the wine, the name of his blood. All which made way for
Transubstantiation; which has taken so deep root, that the very reformers,
amongst the rest Luther, thought it too great a leap to recede too far from
Transubstantiation, but stuck in the midway, and kept to Consubstantiation:
yea the best of ours, though they took away both Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, and have allowed no real presence of Christ but in the
believer, yet, to the dislike of some of their brethren, they have retained the
very outside and phrases which clothed Transubstantiation, borrowed from the
6. chapter of St. John, of eating the flesh of Christ and drinking of his
blood, and feeding on the substance of his body; which expressions Bullinger
wholly disalloweth, as he openly professes in an Epistle to Beza, and finds
fault, that in a synod at Rochell, where Beza was president, in the year 1571.
a canon was made, which condemned all such as would not grant that the
faithful in the Eucharist were fed with the substance of the body of Christ:
all which we are beholden for to the Fathers. Tertullian lib. de oratione cap.
6. says, that the body of Christ is in the bread. Ambrose upon the 17. of St.
Luke, besides the body that suffered, says that there is also a body whereof
it is said, my flesh is meat indeed. The Fathers usually make three bodies of
Christ; a body natural, mystical and Sacramental: yea Justin Martyr and
Hilary make a mystical union of the divinity of Christ with the bread in the
Sacrament.

2. Next came the crying up of the virtue of the Eucharist, near upon to as
great an height as that of baptism. Thus St. Austin, the best of the Fathers,
thought the Eucharist was needful to children for their salvation: which when
they had made more mysterious then ever the holy Ghost intended, they devised
several degrees of penance; 1. of hearers or catechumeni, 2. then of
competents, 3. of penitents, and lastly of faithful men and Christians; thus
making themselves judges and arbiters of ranks and places that men ought to
hold in the church: all which brought along with them excommunication, which
from a law of confederate discipline, answerable to that practiced among the
Jews, grew to such ripeness as to pass for a law of Christ, for a spiritual
sword, an arrow to be kept in the quiver of the church, and to be shot at the
will and pleasure of the ministers. This is the weapon that has proved so
effectual in the hands of the Pope, that with it and by it he has built up
his mystery of iniquity, and founded an empire within the empire of Emperors,
Kings and States. By the same weapon the great church-judicatory in Scotland
keeps all inferior judicatories and churches in awe and subjection: for were
this taken away from them, or were the people well informed of the fond and
panick dread they have of it, then they would upon more rational grounds be
subject to order and discipline.

But whatever height the power of excommunication arose to, it could never yet
be had, but one of these two things ever attended the possession of it: for
either the Pope had it by a power of magistracy of his own, by which he kept
all magistrates in awe; or it was always disputed and controlled by the
magistrate of the place, where the Popes agents did endeavor to exercise their
jurisdiction. This may be proved by the practice of all states within the
communion of Rome, specially of France, where the Popes Bulls of
excommunication have been often disannulled and evacuated by acts of Parliament
and inferior judicatories, yea by synods convocated by the King. I will
produce but one example, which I have read in an old French History, of the
life of Lewis the ninth, written by Ionville above 400. years agone, cap. 82.
where when a Prelat did desire of the King the help of the secular power, for
making his excommunications good, the King answered, that with all his heart he
would do it; but that first ^t was fit he should be acquainted with the
validity of the excommunication. Which evinceth 1. that all excommunications
are null, without a power of magistracy to put them in execution: 2. that in
the darkest time of ignorance and Popery, magistrates could disannull and make
void the Popes censures, and that they did not conceive themselves obliged to
hold his censures valid, with a blind judgment and obedience, but were to
judge of them, and so either to confirm them or abrogate them; for so did the
Emperors, (before the Popes grew up to their height) from Constantine the
great to Justinian, and did regulate, order, and disannull or make void
excommunications.

CHAPTER XXXI.
The History of excommunication from the first reformation from Popery: how it
was received in Geneva, but not settled without disputes and clashings betwixt
the consistory and the magistrate.

THus the abuse of the doctrine of the Eucharist went hand in hand with the use
of excommunication, until that in Luthers fuller reformation the first was
reformed, the other not taken away, but by some of the reformers retained upon
the same grounds of Scripture that the Romish was; though not in that height,
yet not with moderation, which in vain is looked for in an action that in its
very use and practice is altogether unlawful, as excommunicat on is. But
nevertheless excommunication, a^ongst other practices of the Romish church,
was also abrogated by Luther, and all thoughts of it we^e quite cast off, as of
a yoke and relick of Popery, for above 20. years after Luther first preached
against the Pope: and it was near to miscarrying at its first new birth: for in
the year 1538. he having sounded the minds of his hearers, how it might be
introduced, there was a great clamor and complaining amongst them, as if
Luther had a mind to lay again upon their shoulders that yoke which they had
shaken off from their necks. Some few years after, having again propounded,
that his intent was not to put excommunication into the hands of the ministers
alone, but to make it an act of the jurisdiction of the whole church, some
seemed to consent to it; but most being against it, we do not read that either
it was settled at all, or that it was done quietly in his life time.

We read indeed that Luther did commend it to other churches, and even at the
conference or reconciliation that was made betwixt Luther, Bucer and Capito, he
did much urge how necessary the use of excommunication might be; and that Bucer
declining to deliver his opinion concerning the same, lest he should cross
Luther, and thereby retard the main work that they were met about, did only
say, 1. that many cities, in lieu of excommunication, had strict laws to
punish those that were unruly and wicked: 2. that he professes in the name of
his colleagues of the churches of Switzerland, that they did not intend to give
the Eucharist to those whom they should know to be wicked, and to live in
impenitency. Bucer in that did but deliver the sense and practice of the
Helvetian churches, who at their first reformation received excommunication no
otherwise then as a law of the magistrate, and not either as an ecclesiastical
censure, or an exclusion from the Lords Supper. For so says Gualterus in his
Homilies upon the 1 Cor. 5. The laws of our city punish by excommunication
those that are negligent in hearing of the word, or in coming to the Lords
Supper, and those besides that by their wicked lives offend the church: such
they expel from their tribes, lest they should keep company with others. Let
other towns do what they please, since one discipline will not fit every place:
we do not envy them their felicity, who receive any benefit by the use of their
excommunication, or rather exclusion from the Lords Supper. As in the first
reformation at Zurich they had not a presbyterian excommunication, so neither
had they a presbytery or ecclesiastical senate, distinct in jurisdiction from
that of the magistrate. For the same Gualterus, upon the first Epistle to the
Corinthians chapter 12. v. 28. speaking of governments, which he says are those
whereof St. Paul speaks 1 Cor. 6. v. 12. has these words; At this day there
is no need of such governors, being under a magistrate: let none therefore
overturn the order instituted by God, and trample under their feet the
authority of Princes and magistrates, by instituting a new senate, that assumeth
power and empire over them.

But I must tarry a little longer in Germany, and see what the attempt of
Luther for introducing excommunication did produce after his death. Matthaeus
Flaccius Illyricus did yet with more eagerness endeavor to establish
excommunication, and for that was perpetually at discord with Melanchthon, who
did not so much dislike the retaining of the Romish excommunication, as the
introducing of a new one: for Melanchthon was such a lover of peace, that he
would willingly have endured the Romish Bishops should have kept their
jurisdiction still, so that they had parted with other abuses and practices.

I could make a volume if I should rehearse all the journeys and removes that
Illyricus made from place to place, urging every where the necessity of
receiving excommunication: and for that very reason was he always expelled,
either by the Prince or the magistrate of the place, who looked upon Illyricus
as a man aiming at setting himself up, under a specious pretense of setting up
the government of Christ, and one who continually jingled the keys not of
Gods, but of his own Kingdom, which he endeavored to set up wheresoever he set
footing. At length, partly by his much clamouring (being a very eloquent and
learned man) and the workings of his emissaries, partly for the respect that
most men bore to the memory of Luther, who first went about the same business,
there was a kind of excommunication received in many Lutheran churches,
agreeable, as they thought, to the mind of Luther, as he propounded it to them,
and as he speaks in his comment upon Joel chapter 4. where he makes two sorts of
excommunication; the one internal, when God excludes men from the assembly of
the faithful; the other external and politic, like an act of magistracy
placed in the whole body of the church, and not in the ministers: and from that
excommunication they do not forbid appeals; neither do they ground it upon the
words of Christ, whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. as Chemnitius and Gerhardus,
the best expositors of Luthers mind, tell us.

But excommunication had not the same entertainment in Switzerland, where
Zwinglius begun the reformation, almost as soon as Luther did in high Germany.
For Bullinger, in an Epistle to Dathenus, relates, that in a conference that
Zwinglius had with an Anabaptist in the year 1531. this was his opinion
concerning excommunication; That because churches under a heathen magistrate
had no coercive power to punish wickedness, they in lieu of it took up
excommunication: but once having a Christian magistrate, who punishes and
restrains vices and enormities, the use of excommunication cease. In the
same Epistle Bullinger says, a church may be true that wants this
excommunication: again, we maintain that there ought to be a discipline in the
church; but it is enough if it be administered by the magistrate. Beza
acknowledges that this was also the opinion of Musculus, as we have alleged
before, when he says that St. Paul would not have delivered the incestuous
person to Satan, if the magistrate at that time had been a Christian, and a
favourer of churches. Gualterus, as we have said but now, was of the same mind
with his father in law Bullinger; for which Mr. Rutherfurd and Gillespie are
very angry.

So then excommunication, finding no good entertainment in Switzerland, is
carried to Geneva by the great man Calvin, whom God permitted to be deceived in
that particular, lest the reformed world should have taken him for infallible.
There excommunication grew into a great tree, that spread its branches far and
near, into France, England, Scotland, the Palatinat, and the Low Countries: but
before it could shoot out, it had many rubbs and oppositions. For some years
before Calvin was settled in Geneva, the reformation had been happily begun by
Farell and Viret, and yet no excommunication was thought on or practiced. At
the first proposal he made of it, many of the town flocked to the Syndics and
the other magistrates, as he confesses in an Epistle to Myconius, beseeching
them not to part with the power and sword which God had committed to them, lest
it should cause seditions: and indeed they proved true Prophets, as we shall
see by and by. Beza in the life of Calvin, in the year 1^41. relates what
troubles and ado there was to bring it in, and that many alleged the examples
of the neighbour-churches (meaning Zurich, Bern, etc.) among which
excommunication was not in use: some saying that b^t the Popish tyranny was
recalled. But all these difficulties (says Beza) Calvin surmounted; yet he did
not censure other churches as unchristian, that had not proceeded so far, nor
those pastors who did not conceive their flocks needed to be restrained by such
a bit or bridle. And indeed Calvin himself, though very eager to bring in
excommunication, insomuch that sometimes he calls it the yoke of Christ, and
the discipline of Christ, and professes to be ready to endure either death or
banishment, rather then to suffer that the towns senate should take upon them
the right of excommunicating, as he says in an Epistle to Viret; yet he cannot
but speak very respectfully of his neighbor ministers, who acknowledged no
such necessity upon excommunication, as that it should be accounted amongst the
ordinances of Christ. These be his words, in an Epistle to the pastors of
Zurich, in the year 1553. All men are not of the same opinion concerning
excommunication: neither am I ignorant that there be many godly and learned
men, who think not excommunication necessary under Christian Princes. I should
not care much to err in that point of excommunication with Bullinger and
Musculus, upon condition that I were as godly and learned as they.

But however the opinions of the neighbor churches and ministers about
excommunication stood, Calvin's great authority prevailed to set up
excommunication. In an Epistle to a person not named, page 409. and 410. in
folio, he declares at large which way he went about it; and there he has
these words, which carry as much authority, as if his will had been a
sufficient rule for Geneva, and so for other churches to be governed by: Volui,
ut aequum est, spiritualem potestatem a civili judicio distingui; ita in usum
rediit excommunicatio: It was my will that, as it is fitting, the spiritual
power should be distinguished from the civil judgment; and so excommunication
came again to be in use. But however his will was, he was never able to make
good his ecclesiastical or spiritual jurisdiction distinct and independent
from that of the magistrate.

1. Because the same spiritual senate was made and constituted by the senate of
the town, as Calvin acknowledges in an Epistle to Bullinger in the year 1553.
and therefore it was subordinate to the jurisdiction of the civil magistrate,
not only in its first making, but also all the time after: just as when
Constantine the great instituted for a Episcopalia, Bishops courts, he looked
upon them as depending on his jurisdiction, not only in their first
constitution, but also in their duration, in the reviewing, and ratifying their
laws and sentences, or disannulling them.

2. It is true, Beza says in the life of Calvin an. 1541. that at the first
constitution of that ecclesiastical senate and its laws by the magistrate and
the people, there was a sovereign law made, that no sort of men, ministers,
magistrates or people, should hereafter presume and attempt to disannull what
therein was established by the lawmakers of Geneva. This indeed would have
been a very foolish and absurd law, like that of Clodius, whereof Cicero
speaks, that could not be repealed or abrogated either by the senate or
people; for when ever the law is abrogated, that clause also that the law
cannot be abrogated is likewise abrogated. Who would think that either the
magistrate and people of Geneva should so enslave themselves, and tie their
hands, as not to be able to repeal, review or reform laws formerly made by
them; or that they should believe their laws were composed and given by them
with such an unerring judgment, that they needed no further recognition?

3. This jurisdiction, called by Calvin ecclesiastical, could not be exercised
and managed without a coercive restraining power, or a power of magistracy,
either seated in the ministers and consistory, or delegated from the
magistrate. For among the laws of discipline of Geneva this is one, If any
one, in contempt of the ecclesiastical sentence or judgment, is so bold as to
attempt to come to the Sacrament, let him be repelled and driven back by the
minister. Here then there is a power of magistracy, or a coercive power assumed
by the ministers, without which he confesses that all ecclesiastical censures
are null and of no effect. So in an Epistle to Viret an. 1547. speaking of a
woman within the consistory who declined the presbyteriall court and judgment,
and besides did tire them out with her too much prating, she (says he) would
have overwhelmed us with her thundering language, if she had not been put out
by force. I ask here, by what power was this woman thrust out? was it
ecclesiastical and spiritual, and a power of binding and loosing, or a civil
coercive power? and of the two keys they say they have, which of them was
taken in hand, and by which end of the key was the woman driven out?

4. But the nullity of that spiritual jurisdiction is evidently demonstrated,
by the perpetual conflict and clashing, in Calvin's time, betwixt the sentences
and judgments of the consistory of Geneva and those of the magistrate, whereof
I have given many examples out the life and Epistles of Calvin. Among others of
one Bartolier, who being excommunicated by the consistory, did appeal from that
sentence to the magistrate, who once did confirm the judgment of the
consistory, and another time did evacuate and disannull it. Whereupon there
being a great contest betwixt the magistrate and the consistory, to whom the
judgment and right of excommunicating did belong, Calvin with much
earnestness obtained, that ere any thing were concluded, the opinion of four
cities of the Switzers should be desired. Bullinger makes mention only of one
city, namely Zurich, in an Epistle of the Senate of Geneva to that of Zurich;
wherein among other quere's this was one, Whether there is no other way to
excommunicate a man, but by the consistory? In that Epistle Bullinger, though
very fearful to offend Calvin, yet manifestly shows his dislike of the whole
business, and exhorts him to moderation and mildness. Whatever was the
issue of the contest, we do not read that the magistrate of Geneva did ever
repeal this decree of the court, that the last judgment about excommunication
falls under the cognizance of the Senate of Geneva.

CHAPTER XXXII.
A continuation of the History of excommunication in France, the Low Countries,
Scotland, the Palatinate. How it came to pass, tha^ amongst reformed states the
Scottish ecclesiastical jurisdiction ascended to such a height. What plea the
reformed churches in France have for excommunication. That it is more
justifiable among them then in churches under an orthodox magistrate.

THe reformed churches of France took their pattern of discipline, and
therewithal excommunication, rather from Geneva then from the Protestant
Cantons: for being to live under a cross magistrate, they could not exercise
their discipline as a law commanded by the magistrate, nor execute their
censures of excommunication as acts of the magistrate: and therefore the
reformed churches of France have upon much better grounds retained
excommunication, then the churches of Geneva, who living under a magistrate
that was himself part of the church, were not necessitated to divide
jurisdictions; since the same men who were members of churches, were also
members of the city and magistracy: and since the discipline, yea
excommunication was a law of the magistrate, there was little need to divide
powers and jurisdictions; which when they should have done all they could, must
needs stream from the same springhead. But in France they could not be so
happy; and therefore since they could not have a jurisdiction immediately
derived from their ^agistrate, it was requisite they should take up one ^y
mu^uall consent, and by a confederate discipline. For when the magistrate (as
it was among the Jews in their captivity) is no countenancer of the true
religion, nor a keeper of the two tables, nor a nursing father of the churches
that live under him; they mus^, if they can obtain his leave, be a magistrate
and a law unto themselves, and set up a kind of magistracy by mutual consent,
not only in their private churches, but also in their consistories and synods,
by which religion and piety may be asserted, and errors in lise and doctrine
be restrained. So that when a private church excludes a man either out of its
communion, or assembly, this it does by no other power, then a magistrate, a
town, a co^poration, or a hall should act by, in banishing or expelling a
member of their own body.

I confess few of the ministers in France will acknowledge that their
discipline is taken up upon such grounds, but rather that it is according to
the pattern in the mount, and the discipline of Christ; as if it were a
spiritual censure, and a sword committed only to the ministers by a Scripture
warrant, and from the power of the keys, and of binding and loosing.

But I much wonder that wise men, having a good foundation upon which they may
firmly ground their discipline, should rather choose to build it upon the sand
and upon the sea shore, where it may be soon washed away. What man, possessing
an inheritance by a good title, would renounce that, and rather feign a false
will and testament, and upon that ground his title, which proving invalid will
put him by the inheritance he had a good title to? Yet this they do, who will
acknowledge no discipline but from Christ, and will not put a man out of their
assemblies but by a power derived to them from Christ. But it being proved to
their faces, 1. that Jesus Christ never chalked out any form of discipline, but
left it to the prudence and discretion of Christian magistrates, pastors and
people, who in general are commanded to see that all things be done orderly,
2. that excommunication is no otherwise a law of Christ, then is the act of
putting away a hurtful member from any society; these two things, I say, being
made out to them to be Scriptu e, reason and common sense, and yet they
pers^sting to have no other grounds for their discipline, then those feigned
ones, who sees not that their discipline must be groundless, since they cast
away that which might strongly support it? Thus they are like a man that cuts
off his good legs, and buys himself wooden crutches to walk upon.

This is that doctrine that my Paraenesis was so much blamed for by my
contrymen, yea nearest kindred, as if I went about to take away all
discipline, and to bring in stead of it disorder and confusion; yea further, to
lay the reformed churches open to the persecution of their adversaries. But my
conscience tells me, I never had any such design; and my reason prompts me,
that no such thing can be concluded from what I have written of that subject.
For it is with the discipline of the reformed churches in France under their
magistrate, as it was with that of the Jews under the Babylonians, Persians
and Romans: for whereas before their captivity they had no distinction betwixt
church and state, no other discipline then the law of the land, no jurisdiction
distinct from that of their magistrate; afterward, when they lived under
magistrates who were no friends to their laws and religion, they were fain, as
far as they were permitted, to set up a discipline by consent, which was in
lieu of the magistrate, whereof one law was to be casting out of the synagogue,
which we may call excommunication. So that their jurisdiction was no otherwise
distinct from that of the magistrate, then as the power of a son, in ordering
his own affairs and religion contrary to the unjust commands of his father, is
distinct from the paternall power. When a man cannot go to the charge of lead,
he must thatch his house with straw; if he wants means to keep a servant, he
must serve himself; and if he wants one to govern him, he must be his own
governor: and yet that power whereby he governs himself, and is master of
his own actions, is not distinct from that which a governor was to have over
him.

The very same thing the reformed churches in France may say, who make use of
what magistracy they can contrive and set up among themselves, in lieu of their
own magistrate, who cares not for their religion. If they be persecuted, while
they hold that their discipline is taken up by consent, as the Jews was under
strange magistrates; I do not see how they will be less exposed to
persecution, when ever they hold that their discipline is not of man's devising,
but of Christ's own appointment. For the magistrate does not give them the
liberty (...) their discipline under any such notion, either as it is
confederate and arbitrary, or punctually set down in Scripture: for either way
he counts their discipline to be but a departing from the true church, and
their reformation to be a mere deformation. So that it matters not much as to
their safety, what foundation they make their discipline to stand upon.

Sure, it is not like, that those that were the authors of the discipline of
the reformed churches in France, did look upon it as a model left by Christ to
his churches, but rather as a collection of rules well digested by humane
wisdom and prudence, alterable according to time and place. For so much says
the last article of their discipline: These articles contained in this book
concerning discipline, are not so determined and ratified amongst us, but that
they may be altered as the emolument and benefit of the church shall require.

I hope, when all prejudice shall be laid asides no rational man will deny my
principles. I have alleged John Mestrezat, a very learned man, late minister
at Paris, both in my Paraenesis and in my Corollarie, in a letter of his
written but a few weeks before he died; where his judgment is wholly consonant
to my opinion, that all church government is prudentiall, arbitrary, and taken
up by consent, for necessity of order, and not for conscience. Besides, I have
the testimony of a very reverend preacher in a famous church in Normandy, in a
letter of his to me, wherein after he has delivered his own judgment
concerning the book, he adds that of one of his fellow-ministers in that
church, in these words: One of my colleagues, who has read your first book has
given this testimony of it, That he is much satisfied upon the reading of it;
and that your opinion is so far from weakening our discipline, that on the
contrary it does rather streng then it, and places it upon its true and
natural bottom.

Geneva's excommunication had the greater influence upon the minds of the
Non-conformists and Puritans in England, for the respect they bare to Calvin,
more then to the Hierarchy metaphorphosed from Romish to English. For whatever
were the thoughts of some Romish Episcopal Doctors, such as the English
Hierarchy has always had, the practice of all Bishops courts witnesses, that
excommunication was but a law of the Land, and of the opiscopall jurisdiction
annexed to the Crown. Excommunication was not much feared, since Prince and
subjects left off to be afraid of the Popes thunderbolts. Wicl^ff begun first
to pluck off ^ts vizard, and to condemn both the abuse and the use of
excommunication: for the council of Constance recon'd up amongst his errors,
this tenet, That it was a comfort to the faithful church, that excommunication
and suspension, and such like lying and feigned censures, are not grounded on
the law of Christ, but are craftily devised by Antichrist. But that it may
appear that Wicliff held no other excommunication then that which is made in
the Court of Heaven, the 13. article objected to him as an error clearly
shows it; Whoever leaves off preaching or hearing the word of God, because of
man's excommunication, they are excommunicated, and shall be so held in the day
of judgment, for betrayers of Christ: and the 11. article. says, that no man
must excommunicate another, except he knows him to be excommunicated by God.

In short, whereas our brethren the Scots held that all jurisdiction of
ecclesiastical assemblies, synods and presbyteries, was derived from Jesus
Christ, the English people, at least the magistrate, who would never permit the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction to get up, held no jurisdiction but such as was
derived from him: for even from King Edward the sixths time, the sovereign
Princes have been very shie of Bishops keeping any courts or calling synods,
but only in their name.

Our brethren the Scots had their excommunication from Geneva, as well as the
reformed churches of France: only Andrew Melvin did mightily improve and
heighten it. But they and the Geneva churches have this disadvantage, which
those of France never had, that these have two pleas for their discipline and
excommunication: The one is the necessity of a confederate discipline taken up
by consent under a cross magistrate; by which plea they may justify all the
acts of their jurisdiction: the other plea, if the first prove not strong
enough, they have in common with all other reformed churches living under an
orthodox magistrate; and that plea is the discipline of Christ; which as it is
a second string to the bow of the reformed churches of France, if the first
should break, so it is the only string and hold that the Dutch, Scottish, and
Geneva churches must hold by: so that if they cannot make good their jus
Divinum of discipline and excommunication, they have no plea at all for their
jurisdiction distinct from that of the magistrate, as the reformed churches of
France have.

This book would swell too much, if I should make it good, as I have done in my
Paraenesis and Corollarium, that they have outgone all the reformed in the task
of building an empire within the empire of another, or in the endeavor to
settle a jurisdiction distinct from that of the magistrate, having while they
strive to run furthest from Popery, gone so far about, that they have joined
issue with Popery in that particular.

I find three main causes why in Scotland, more then in any other nation where
religion was reformed from popery, the ecclesiastical jurisdiction has
highest lifted up its head.

The first is; it was not so much any humor or design of the godly people, as
opportunity that brought it in. For reformation taking its beginning there not
at the head, but at the foot, and in opposition to a persecuting magistrate, it
was not possible to settle the pure worship of God, without a government and
jurisdiction assumed within the jurisdiction (and distinct from that) of the
magistrate. They having had it some time under a Romish magistrate, conceived
it was to continue in the like manner under a reformed magistrate; and so
turned the nenessity of a confederate discipline taken up by consent, as it was
by the faithful people of Judah under a heathen magistrate, and by the reformed
churches of France under a Christian, into a necessity of Divine ordinance:
which being much countenanced by the great ones of the land, who rescued the
sovereign magistrate from the Popish party, and brought him up from his infancy
in the reformed religion; the same men, who were assertors of the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction against the magistrate when he was no friend of
theirs, had a fair opportunity to keep it still up, when the magistrate was
their friend, and in their power and possession; who when he was grown up to
years, found the ecclesiastical jurisdiction too deep rooted for him to
master, and overbalancing the power that by right (as all other magistrates and
Kings in the world) he was to have over all causes, matters and persons. So
that from that time when King James (in his ^per years) came to understand that
he was a King, and no King, till he came to be King of great Britain, we read
of nothing but clashings and conflicts betwixt church and court, Parliament and
ecclesiastical assembly: it being impossible that two coordinate
jurisdictions, and of the same nature, could stand together amongst one and the
same people in the same country.

Another cause is, that the members of Parliament, specially the nobility and
gentry, being also members of ecclesiastical judicatories, and the
ecclesiasticalls having over and above an addition of strength by all the
ministers of the land, who were not members of Parliament, it could not
otherwise fall out, but that the jurisdiction assumed in churches,
presbyteries, synods, and assemblies, should not only appear distinct from that
of the magistrate, but also be raised to a greater height.

A third reason is, that the Kings of Scotland having never had that majesty,
power, revenue and splendor that other Kings abroad had, and yet the land full
of nobility and gentry, who had great jurisdictions, many vassals and
retainers, the greatest part of which received no luster or increase of dignity
or wealth from their Prince; these had reason, in emulation or opposition to
that small number which the King favored and protected, to join themselves
with the Kirk party, there to find what the court could not afford them.

I have nothing to say concerning excommunication in the Low Countries, but
that they have no better plea for it then the churches of Scotland or Geneva.

I should now close up the history of excommunication, by relating how it sped
in the Palatinate; where I think it was received the last of any reformed
church, though that place was one of the first that was reformed from Popery.
This may be seen in an Epistle of Zanchius to Conradus Hubertus in the year
1568. where he relates, that for many years there was an attempt made to bring
in excommunication; which was withstood by many, not so much that they had a
dislike of it, as that for some politic reasons it was not judged yet
seasonable to stir further in it: however, by the mention that was made of it,
the spirits of men have been much alienated one from another. Then he tells us
of one George Withers an Englishman, who being to dispute for his degree of
Doctor under Boquinus, among other positions had one touching the necessity of
introducing excommunication; which was opposed with much eagerness, so far
that one of his opponents, being straightened for time, so that he could not
allege all that he had to say against excommunication, desired another day of
dispu^ation: which being granted, Zanchius says, that the disputation grew so
hot, that one of the opponents, a Minister, protested openly against the
falsity of the position, as contrary to the word of God. At which time Erastus,
amongst others, wrote against excommunication. It is observable, that Zanchius
did but favor underhand the advocates of excommunication; for he says, for
many honest reasons I would not intermeddle, but keep silence.

By what I have related of the practice of excommunication in several churches
and countries, we may easily conceive and apprehend

1. That excommunication, when retained upon the account of confederate
discipline, and as answering to the casting out of the synagogue among the
Jews, may very well consist with the peace, safety and integrity both of life
and doctrine, in the churches of France, or any other, under a contrary
magistrate.

2. That excommunication retained by churches under a contrary magistrate, upon
the plea of jus Divinum for their discipline and excommunication, may be
exercised with as little outward disturbance and dispute, as if they did retain
it only upon the account of confederate discipline: but such churches then will
not only usurp a power which has no warrant from Christ, but besides will
enslave men's consciences, laying upon them a yoke which is none of Christ's.

3. But that excommunication, upon what plea soever retained by those churches
that live under an orthodox magistrate, is inconsistent both with the outward
peace of the nation where they live, and the inward peace and satisfaction of
men's minds.

4. That excommunication as it is retained by the reformed churches in France,
or any other, under a magistrate differing from them, and upon what plea soever
exercised, either of confederate discipline, or as had by Divine right, is not
attended with those clashings, disputes and inconveniences, that it is subject
unto among those churches that live under an orthod^x magistrate, keeping with
them the same unity of faith: and that for these reasons. 1. A churchmember
excommunicated in France will hardly complain to the magistrate, for he would
but slight his complaints, and make a mock of the man; and therefore the party
excommunicated must needs sit still, and stand to the sentence against him: but
a member of a church excommunicated in Geneva or Scotland, looking upon the
magistrate as a friend to the religion he profess^th, and a defendour and
protector of his own church discipline, will be ready, if he can make his
cause probably good and plausible, to sue and seek for redress. Hence we see
there were more appeals in Calvin's time from the church-judicatory to that of
the magistrate in the little territory of Geneva, then are in a whole age
through all the churches of France. 2. Church Members under a contrary
magistrate will be more united in affections and minds, and so will keep closer
to the observation of the discipline. 3. Under a contrary magistrate members
are usually such as believe what they outwardly profess, and not like those
under an orthodox magistrate, where there is more of outward conformity to the
religion of the state, which is no hinderance, but rather a furtherance to
honors and pr^ferments: and therefore where there is more evennesse,
foundnesse, sincerity and zeal, there must be also a greater submission to the
church discipline, and less clashings arising from the variety of dispositions
in the members. 4. There is a great necessity of exercising a jurisdiction
among the reformed churches in France, for the composing of such differences
among themselves as have relation to their doctrine and religion, which
otherwise being opened to the popish magistrate, would but bring our religion
into contempt and derision. But under a magistrate that is a friend to religion
these differences may be, with as little fear of scandal and derision to the
profession and doctrine, made up and reconciled by men of his own appointment
and choosing, as within a consistory; and as well and better by the consistory,
if delegated thereunto, and invested with authority from the magistrate, then
any other way, so that there be but one jurisdiction. 5. As there was a great
necessity of discipline among the Jews living under an adverse magistrate,
which should be in some sort distinct from their jurisdiction; so was there
less need either to have it divided from that of the magistrate when he was a
countenancer of their religion, or to have any at all more then the law of the
land. The like may be said of the Christian churches.

I will conclude this charter with two or three passages out of Andrew Rivet,
my much honored Uncle when he lived, and whose authority is of great weight
with all the Divines of this land, namely the presbyterian ministers, and which
taken into consideration, will be found to deliver as much as ever I have
asserted, though none yet has inveighed against him as an Erastian, and an
enemy to order and discipline. They are all to be found in his exposition of
the decalogue, tom. 1. about the 1373. page.

It cannot be denied but that the principal duty in asserting and vindicating
religion, yea in establishing it, pertained to the King of Judah; for when ever
the Kings mind changed, there was always a change in religion; which change,
whether for good or bad, is always attributed to the King, as his act and
deed: neither could ever the chief Priests procure a change for the better, or
hinder a change for the worse.

The King, or another magistrate, as he does not ordain, so he does not depose
formally, as I may so speak, or administratorily; yet he does it of himself,
not only by his counsel, command and authority, for he may command it, when
there is just cause of deposing a minister, to those that have that power in
the church, who in that case, and there being just cause for it, if they do not
obey, and do what he commands, are subject not only to wrath, but also to
Gods judgment.

Ministers as ministers are subjects to the sovereign magistrate: why then
should it not be lawful to appeal from the judgment of subjects to the
supreme magistrate? and why may it not be lawful for the supreme magistrate to
review the judgments of his subjects, to ratify them if they be good, and to
abrogate them if they be bad?

There is a subjection of the magistrate to the ecclesiastical senate; but not
of jurisdiction, as under a command, but of direction and counsel.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
The judgment of some Divines yet living both of the argument in hand, and of
the writings of the Author. Of some men's strong prejudices against, and harsh
censures of him.

I Have through all this book, and in the first section of my Corollarium,
proved, that I have digressed nothing in my Paraenesis from Scripture and
reason, about the right of churches, and the magistrates power in matters of
religion; but my opinion is also confirmed by two kinds of authorities of
learned and orthodox Divines.

The first kind of authorities is of those that, for the main, concur with me,
or rather I with them: such are Zuinglius, Musculus, Bullingerus, Gualterus,
Mestrezat, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, Mr. Lightfoot, etc.

The second kind is of those that, though in general they profess to be for a
church government distinct from that of the magistrate, yet if one take notice
of all the positions concerning that argument which each of them admit and
grant, will be found jointly, though not every one of them considered a part,
to say as much as I; just as the Protestants doctrine will be found in all
(though not in each of) the Romish authors, overcome by the evidence of truth
in the handling of some points controverted betwixt them and us: as Scotus
confesses that Transubstantiation has no ground in Scripture; Cajetan denies
the Popish indulgences; Bellarmin after he has much heightened the merit of
works, concludes with a ^utissimum est, and flies to the righteousness of
Christ apprehended by faith, as the safest anchor to stay a staggering
Christian; Jansenius is right in the doctrine of grace; all the rest in some
positions or other hold with us. And of this kind are Bucer, Martyr, Jewel,
Zanchius, Reynolds, Camero, Rivet, and many more; who besides by yielding an
inch, have given us a whole handful to believe, that what we have discoursed
of the nature of power, laws, judgment, the right of churches, and the
magistrates power in matters of religion, is both reason and Scripture. For
whoever admits (as most of these authors do) that the judgments of Pastors in
presbyteries and synods are subordinate to that of the sovereign Christian
magistrate, and that appeals from church-judicatories to the magistrate are
grounded upon Scripture, reason, and the practice of all nations, and besides
says, that the magistrate is the supreme governor and head of the church over
all causes and persons; whoever, I say, grants these to be truths, must needs
overthrow ecclesiastical jurisdiction and power of excommunication, except it
be in subordination to (and dependently on) the magistrate.

But among all the reformed Divines who appear in the throng of those that hold
an ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and a government distinct from that of the
magistrate, none has delivered positions in print so near the language of Mr.
Coleman, as Ludovicus Cappellus, pastor and Professor at Saumur, yet living,
has done; which passing current for truth from the mouth of Cappellus, if they
had fallen from Mr. Coleman, would have been taken by our brethren the Scots
for pernicious and dangerous tenets, and mere Erastianisme.

In the first part of his Theses Salmurienses, de potestate and regimine
Ecclesiae these. 12. he says, that pastors have properly no other jurisdiction,
then that which subdueth the affections of the world and the flesh, when the
spirit of Christ in the word restrains the assaults of Satan; that there is
no other authority of governing the church, then what is seated in Christ the
head, when by the efficacy of his spirit he enlighteneth the mind, and
convinces the conscience.

In his 40. thesis, he says, that the constitutions of the church have
authority no further, then as they agree with reason.

In his 41. and 42. he puts equal stresse of duty upon the magistrate in
governing and ordering the church and the commonwealth, as being keeper of one
table as well as the other. These are his words in Latin: Porro, his de rebus
dispiciendi atque statuendi ita penes ecclesiam (hoc est, ecclesiasticos quos
v^cant viros) est potestas, ut si magistratus pius and Christianus sit, fier^id
non debeat non modo sine ejus consilio and conscientia, verum etiam sine ejus
authoritate, qua ea quae videbuntur in hoc genere conducibilia confirmentur,
vimque legis obtineant. Is nempe est utriusque divinae legis Tabulae vindex
atque custos, ad quem propterea pertinet, etiam pastores, si cessent, vel
peccent in officium, movere, objurgare, and, ubi opus fuerit, castigare;
denique prospicere atque providere, ut omnia, tum in ecclesia, tum in republica
seu politia, recte and ordinate fiant, utque ordinis legitime constituti
turbatores and violatores pro merito puniantur. This he seems to speak after
Pareus in his Miscellanea Catechetica art. 11. aphoris. 18. where he lays
upon the magistrate a greater duty in governing the church then the
commonwealth, and more in keeping the first table then the second. Hoc vero jus
gubernandi ecclesias sacra Scriptura disertim magistratui attribuit: ut ei,
quemadmodum tenetur procurare ut bonum civil in foro and judiciis legitime
administretur, ita non minor, imo long major ejus cura esse debeat, ut jus
Divinum, bonum illud animarum, hoc est, vera religio and pietas, subditis suis
in ecclesia and scholis, ad aeternam eorum salutem, proponatur, juxta legem and
testimonium: idem docent exempla laudatissimorum regum, Davidis, etc. Sic
Paulus affatur Christianos Romanos, Minister est Dei tuo bono: ubi intelligit
omne bonum, tam civil and terrenum, quam ecclesiasticum seu spirituale; secus
namque magistratus homini Christiano non plus commodaret quam infideli. Ac sane
dolendum est, rectius in hoc capite sensisse olim ethnicos, qui unanimi
consensu regi suo demandarunt, etc.

In his disputation de summo controversiarum judice these. 52. he says, the
power of the church and ministers in delivering their judgments about
controversies is merely declarative, having no authority further then their
reasons are persuasive and convincing.

In his theses de diversis ministrorum evangel. gradibus and ordinibus these. 2.
he allows ministers a function, but no jurisdiction, and urges 2 Cor. 1. v.
24. not that we have dominion over your faith, etc. and 1 Cor. 3. v. 9. we are
laborers together with God.

In his 2. thesis he says, that Jesus Christ Matthew. 20. v. 28. takes off all
jurisdiction from the ministry.

In his third thesis he says, that the power of excommunication does no more
argue a jurisdidiction over the flock, then prescribing a diet to a patient
argues the physicians power, jurisdiction, command and dominion over the
patient; making the jurisdiction in both alike in these respects. 1. As a
physician may suspend his own act in administering physic; so the minister in
giving the Eucharist. 2. As a physician inflicteth no censure upon the patient
for refusing to take his physic, only warns him of the hazza^d he runs, upon
the neglect of taking it; so does the minister: he that receives not and
obeys not the commandment of God delivered by the minister, cannot be
punished for his neglect of the tender of grace, any more then a sick man for
refesing to take physic.

In his disputation de clericorum immunitate and privilegiis thesis 10. he
says, that Princes have power to inflict punishment upon transgressors of the
laws that concern the worship of God, the administration of the Sacraments,
and the doctrine of faith; and besides, that these laws have no force except
they be confirmed and ratified by them.

In his 12. thesis he says, that the laws about faith, the Sacraments, divine
worship, discipline, and ecclesiastical order, cannot be defined or decreed in
a synod, nor any controversies therein decided, without the knowledge and
consent of the magistrate, if he be godly and Christian, as being the keeper of
both tables; who ought to confirm and ratify the laws agreed on, if they be
just, else to amend and correct them, seeing he is the servant of God both for
the spiritual and temporal good. The Latin is much more pregnant: Sane aequum
and juilum est, leges and canones de fide, Sacramentis, disciplina and (...)
tota ecclesiastica, primum constitui, deque illis deliberari a viris
ecclesiasticis legitime in concilio and synodo congregatis, litesque and
controversias de illis ortas in foro ecclesiae, hoc est synodis, agitari and
definiri; at non tamen sine cognitione, conscientia and consensu Principis and
magistratus politici, si pius and Christianus est, (est enim ille custos
utriusque legis divinae tabula:) a quo, si been constitutae sunt leges, and
lites definitae, confirmari, and ipsius authoritate sanc^ri debent, and ratae
haberi; si minus, corrigi ab eo and emendari eas oportet, siquidem servus est
Dei in subditorum suorum bonum tum temporale tum spirituale, cujus curam and
procurationem pro sibi a Deo, demandato munere debet suscipere, ac Deo de illa
cura rationem reddere. De clericis lib. 1. cap. 28. propos. 1.

In his 13. these. he confirms the same by the example of the commonwealth of
Israel, when the Kings, even against the will of the Priests, did set up and
order the true worship of God. But in his 14. these. he would not have this so
to be taken, as if the faithful were to receive decrees and orders, because
decreed or ordered by the council or magistrate, in case they be not agreeable
with the word; but only that nothing can be decreed, bearing the name and force
of law, obliging and requiring external obedience, without the consent and the
sanction of the magistrate.

I might add a third sort of authorities, of some in England, France, Scotland
and the Low Countries, who not only differ little or nothing from me, but also
give their approbation to what I have lately put forth on the subject I am
writing of: which may be more wondered at in the F^ench, who are i^ured to a
discipline of their own modelling, and exercise a power uncontrolled by the
magistrate, who instead of inspection, gives only a toleration. Yet some of
these later have given me a large testimony, to have delivered nothing but
truth; and acknowledged themselves to be now convinced (which they were not
before) that excommunication is merely of man's devising, and not an ordinance
of Christ.

I could name many, but that some of them are like Joseph of Arimathea,
acknowledging fully that truth which we maintain, but secretly, for fear of
their fellow-ministers, that are so strongly possessed with prejudice against
it. Others being like those that have told a tale so long, that at length they
believe either that it is truth, or at least that there is some truth in it:
for having, since Calvin's time, every communion-day pronounced this clause in
their Liturgy, I excommunicate such and such sinners in the name and authority
of Christ; they are rather prone to believe there is some truth and ground for
this commination, then to search too far into it: besides, their colleagues
strongly believing that excommunication is an ordinance of Christ, if they
should never so little question it, they might be in danger of suspension from
their offices and benefices.

But all (God be thanked) are not afraid to countenance this truth; as will
appear by the judgment which the rever. Ministers of Diepe in France have
given of my Paraenesis and Corollarium, here annexed, as related by one of
them, whose gravity, piety and learning is so eminent, that he not only
deserves to be believed when he speaks in the name of himself and his
brethren; but also were it his own single testimony, it might well over-balance
hundreds of those that dissent from him, but have not penetrated to the bottom
of the controversy, as he has done.

The Gentleman being unknown to me, but by report, I sent him my Paraenesis,
and desired him not to spare me, in delivering his censure and judgment freely
both of the book and argument, and to do me rather justice, then show me
favor. He some weeks after returned me this answer, in this excellent
well-penned letter in Latin.

PAraenesis tita (Vir clarissime and eruditissime) sero ad me pervenit; sed
tandem pervenit, co^gratior, quo diutius expectata, and ardentioribus votis
expetita: nec immerito; nam praeterquam quod mihi pignus extat illius
tu^benevoli erga me animi, quem doctissimus and mei amantissimus Dominus
Cong^ard mihi conciliavit, eas tam celebres, quae hod^e apud vos inter
Presbyterianos and Independentes versantur, controversias quasi in speculo
nobis exhibet; ac pro^nde, instar facis micantis, tot mendac^orum ^ebulas, quae
aerem nostrum obt^nebrobant, a nobis quam longissime fugat. Non defuere quidem
apud nos, qui falsis rumoribus, quos impuri quidam nebulones ad invidiam
conslandam huc and illuc disseminarunt, (...) sinistras and parum aequas de
Ind^endentibus opiniones conceperant. Sed multi etiam extitere, qui non passi
sunt se eo usque abrip^, ut ^nd^cta causa calculo nigro notarent, quos dein^eps
post cognit^onem causae absolvi posse pro certo ten^bant. Vtr^sque Paraenesim
tuam in apt^ssimum remed^um praebes: illis, ut rubore a^quo suffusi, sese
tandem in damnandis fratribus, quorum vita inculpata, and doctrina sana, nimiae
credulitatis arguant; his, ut sibiipsis gratulentur, quod ab omni temerario in
fratres innocuos judicio sibi temperarint, quos nunc, veritatis certiores
facti, non tantum non anathemate feriendos and diris devovendos, sed etiam pro
veris fratribus agnoscendos, and amore sincero amplexandos censeant. Eo vel
inviti adigentur quicunque Paraene sim tuam legent; his duabus rationibus:
primo, quia fratres nobis exhibet in omnibus quae fidem spectant nobiscum
prorsus consentientes: secundo, quia, ut mihi saltem videtur, ita solid, ita
dextre quaestiones circa quas controversiae hodie agitatae versantur,
pertractat, ut nullus dubitationi locus relinqui videatur; fundamenta quibus
huc usque superstructa fuit excommunicatio subruit; ministros evangelii in
ordinem cogit; immotos summae potestati tibicines supponit; tyrannidem Papalem
radicitus evellit; ecclesiae, id est coetui eorum qui Christo nomen dederunt,
debitam authoritatem restituit; abusus qui a multis retro seculis in eam sensim
irrepserunt, ab origin deducit; adversarios suis contradictionum retibus
saepissime involvit, nec raro eos proprio jugulat gladio; and tandem, quod rei
caput est, doctrinam fratrum sub proprio ac naturali vultu ita manifest
proponit, ut nullus sit, nisi sponte caecutiens, qui non pervideat mera esse
aegrorum somnia, ne quid pejus dicam, quae fratribus falso imputare nonnulli
non erubuerunt, and independentiae^stigma illis inurentes, and tanquam politiae
omnis ecclesiasticae eversores, ac acerrimos omnium coetuum synodalium hosts
eos traducentes. Haec, inquam, Paraenesis tua praestat: unde promptum est
colligere, quantae and quam eximiae sint animi tui dotes, quam indefessum
studium in evolvendis omne genus authoribus, tum sacris tum profanis, quam
tenax in tam varia lectione memoria, and per quam perspicax judic^um in tam
multiplicis materiae discretione, ita ut falsum non obrepat sub^imagine very.
Hac nota te prodis verum ac genuinum Petri Molinaei filium, cujus laudibus
adhuc personat totus orbis reformatus. Hoc nomine se multum tibi debere
profitebuntur quicunque rem literariam amant: hisce me accenseo; Deum
suppliciter orans, ut te d^u incolumem servet ad nominis sui gloriam and
ecclesiae aedificationem. Vale.

Tibi addictissimus Vauquelinus.
Diepae Pride. call. April. 1657.

The Gentleman speaking more in commendation of my book then I deserve, modesty
makes me forbear to English it: only I think it not amiss to English here the
judgment he gave of the same to a friend of his in London, to whom he wrote
with mo^e confidence and freedom.

I Have read Mr. du Moulins book through, and am much satisfied by reading of
it. He is a man of great reading, of excellent reasoning, and a solid
judgment. Methinks he overturneth clearly all the foundations on which
hitherto excommunication was grounded: and till some body appears who by
stronger reasonings can set it up again, I shall remain of his opinion, that it
is a mere humane invention. I was glad to know that the differences between the
Presbyterians and those they call Independents were not about points of faith;
and this joy of mine was more increased, when I saw that the said Independents
do not (as they were falsely charged to do) reject synodall assemblies, yea that
they are so far from rejecting them, that, on the contrary, they hold them to
be of Divine institution, acknowledging that they are constituted to give good
and wholesome advice for the making of laws. I could have wished one thing of
Mr. du Moulin; that he had not made the apology for his father against Mr.
Daille and Amyraldus in a controversy that was so different from his: for
besides that it may incense them to return him a sharp reply, very many Pastors
who are of their opinion, will bring with them a malignant prejudice to the
reading of his book, which will cause them to loose the benefit that otherwise
they might have reaped by the reading of it.


About one month after, when I sent him my Corollarium, I gave this answer to
his former letter in the same language, as follows.

TUus and idem meus Cognardus, vir praestantissimus, transmisit ad me, Vir
reverende, literas tuas amicissimas, politissimas, succo and sanguine plenas,
and vere Latinas; ad quas deterrerer Latin respondere, nisi plane patria
lingua balbutirem. Non facile est dicere quantum illo affectu tuo, quem prolixe
testatus es, mihi gratuler, nec minus triumphem in tuo judicio de opere meo:
quod ab authore licet lauds, attamen ita sum tenuitatis meae conscius, ut tuam
commendationem potius ab argumento mereri existimem. Vtut sit, est quod tuum
judicium, quod mihi instar omnium est, opponam sexcentis in Gallia, Anglia and
Belgio viris, qui excaecati praejudicus, omnis rationis usu sibi interdixerunt,
ne agnoscant veritatem summae rei, quam in nostra Paraenesi astruimus. Hanc,
vir magne, cum retexeris, and multa authoritate polleas, oro, obtestor,
d^gneris vindicem esse meum adversus saltem vestrates, nec procul a viciniatua,
qui me, tanquam Divini humanique juris, ac disciplinae in Gallia nostra habita
eversorem, tum Ministerii deturbatorem, proscindunt. Indignus sim vita, si
horum criminum reus; sed si me tam intus and in pectoris recessu nosces, quam
sensa mea tibi sunt scriptis comperta, omnino me exolveres hac imputatione, and
diceres haec omnia ficta esse ad invidiam conflandum mihi, and deterrendum
lectores a conspectu l^bri. Sane mihi mea conscientia fidem facit, cum verbi
ministros, tum ipsum ministerium ea a me veneratione coli and suspici, quanta
non puto a quoquam; nec minus cultorem esse and vind cem disciplinae (quanquam
non po^estatis ecclesiasticae) in ecclesia retinendae. Quid? an is est
d^sciplinae eversor, qui statuit sub mag^stratu amico and orthodoxo, ut sub
Ezechia, ^o sia, etc. concedere in ejus jura; at sub infenso, haberi per
disciplinam confoederatam, qualis retinebatur in ecclesia Iudaica sub regibus
Idololatris? Tantum abest ut invid^am placare velim, virtute and defensione
hujus veritatis relictis, aut me incoepti poeniteat, ut constitutum sit, si
vita superstes, ulterius porrigere and edocere, nunquam argumentis and
rationibus cogentibus hierarchiam Romanam cum toto mysterio iniquitatis
debellatum iri, ut nec potestatem excommunicandi and solio deturbandi reges, a
Protestantibus and reformatis, quamdiu ipsi retinebunt potestatem
ecclesiasticam in summa rei eandem quae Romana est. Contra vero, principiis
nostris de natura potestatis, juris, imperi^, legis, and fori, tum interni tum
externi, intellectis and receptis, and excommunicatione probata and posita
inter figmenta humana, minimo impulsu corruet moles mysterii in^quitatis,
nullis tibicinibus supportata; quos tamen tantillum sustinendae supponunt
nostri, sua potestate ecclesiastica and excemmunicatione; and hac ratione non
nisi molliter, neque armis decretoriis and jugulum petentibus, argumenta
Bellarmini and Stapletoni impugnant. Nam rogo, si licet excommunicare privatum,
cur non and regem? si privatus excommunicatus ultimo judicio, scu presbyterii,
seu synodi, debet illius stare judicio, nec lites movere, sed expectare Deum
vindicem; cur idem rex praestare non debeat, a presbyterio communione aut coetu
pulsus? si rex sic potest excommunicari a presbyterio, ut ejus consortium
quisque fugere debeat, annon eadem pene est censura quae solio dejiceret,
quatenus jam in nullum usum solium occupet traditum Satanae mancipium, quod pro
Christiano magistratu subditus ulterius non agnoscat, non colloquatur, ei non
supplicet? At nullo negotio haec deliramenta evertit Parae^eseos nostrae pars
(...), dum docet, tum potestatem pastorum, ac proinde Paparum, in volentes
tantum esse, and quibus persuaserint; tum nullum judicium, nullam legem, nullam
sententiam a qu^quam in quenquam latam, validam esse, nisi ratam a potestate
externa cogent^, and ad quam fiat provocatio. Verum enimvero, siquae pastoribus
in foro externo datur potestas judiciaria, cum Scriptura ad literam loquatur de
potestate maxima quae coelum claud^t and recludit, cujus actus interni,
quicunque d^mum ^lli fuerint, rati habeantur in coelis; contra quam ne quidem
portae ^f^rni praevalebunt; supra qua ecclesia aed^fi^ata; si quae, inquam,
potestas judiciaria ad^udic^nda sit pastor^bus, plane modus ejus habitus a
Pap^s and clero Romano ma^orem invemet fidem, quam modulus a Presbyterianis
retentus. Hac via omnino procedendum est ad evertendum Antichristum; non
impugnando ceassos errores de purgatorio, coel^batu, transubstantiatione,
ciborum abstinentia, pueris notos and obvios: qui tamen sub umbra potestatis
^cclesiasticae ortum and auctum acceperunt. Neque enim dubitandum jam tempore
Pauli non orsam fu^sse aed^ficationem impertii ^n imperio; quod imperii
aedificandi mol^men fuit g^uinum iniquitatis mysterium, quoaque cave credas
aliis fulcris supportatum f^sse quam excommunicatione and potestate
ecclesiastica long lateque porrecta, and in omnes nationes, reges, homines,
causas and res vendicata and habita. Id thematis, vir magne, tibi ultro
suggero, in quod prolixius and felicius commenteris. Id dum animo agitabis,
cape Corollarium ad nostram Paraenesim: hanc and illud juxta tuo judicio
subjicit

Tibi addictissimus L. MOLINAEUS.
Datum Oxoniae 3. Non. Maias 1657.

Soon after I had this answer in French.

SIR,
I Have received in due time the letter and book which you have honored me
with. I have read both the one and the other with satisfaction; both because
they give me fresh assurance of your affection, and chiefly for that they
strengthen in me the persuasion that the reading of your first book had very
deeply imprinted in my spirit. Your positions seem so well grounded, and backed
with so many authorities of the contrary opinion, that except you can be
convinced of falsehood in the citation of the said authors, I do not see how
your said positions can be overthrown. Therefore, for the love I bear to truth
when it is made known to nee, I will adhere fast to that which you have, as I
think, so clearly demonstrated unto me, till a greater light causes me to see
that I am gone astray in following your steps: and I will not only carefully
entertain that truth my self, but also strive to impart it to others, that they
being well acquainted with the matter treated of in your books, may have more
charitable thoughts of you then those have, who go about to make you a professed
enemy to the holy ministry and the discipline. One of my Colleagues, who has
read your first book, has acknowledged unto me, he is much satisfied by the
reading thereof, and told me, that your opinion is so far from pulling down or
shaking the stability of our discipline, that quite contrary, it is clear to
him, that it builds it up firmly and strenghthens it, laying it upon its
natural and true foundations. Another of my Colleagues has not indeed so
openly declared to me, that he found himself overcome by the strength of your
reasons; but yet he has been brought so far, as to doubt and make a question
of what heretofore he held to be indubitable. Mr. Lagnel, the fourth of my
Colleagues, a person endowed with a most solid judgment, upon the description I
made him of the nature of the controversy between the Independents and the
Presbyterians, and of the reasons you bring in the behalf of the opinion of the
first, adjudgeth the victory unto them. And I doubt not but that those who
shall read your writings, laying aside all prejudice, and weighing, as they
ought, your reasons, will give glory to God, and entertain so clear a truth,
which renders to the magistrate and to the church what belongs unto them,
and plucketh up by the root the remnants of Papal tyranny, which have been
retained still in the exercise of ecclesiastical discipline, specially among
the Scots; of whom you give us a notable example, which ought to make the
hearts of all good men start and tremble. So then, although your book has
suffered in its birth those contradidictions which usually are incident to them
that fetch out a truth from the tomb, yet you have reason to hope, that the
truth delivered in it will render it victorious, and make you see by experience
that, tandem bona causa triumphat. Now when I answered your first letter, I
thought I was not to write to you, but only of the principal subject of your
book, without speaking of the additions; for I had well o^served, that what you
said of the holy Supper, might be ill interpreted; but I also clearly perceived
by the sequel of your discourse, that you understood it in the sense that you
explain in your Corollary: so that if all the readers of the book had brought
with them such a spirit to the reading of it as mine, you had been freed from
the trouble of giving a clear exposition of your meaning. I had also taken
notice of the digression you make in your Preface against Mr. Daille, and
Amyraldus; and indeed I did then write to Mr. Congnard my opinion thereof, and
that I could have wished for many reasons that you had not meddled with them:
but what is written is written; which I hope will not hinder, but that those
that follow their opinion concerning the universality of grace, as conceiving
it to be grounded upon Scripture and upon the authority of most Doctors, both
ancient and modern, and chiefly of our first reformers, will embrace, if they
be good men, the truth which you present unto them, so that they may perceive
it without any kind of prejudice. I pray God they may do it. I am sorry I
delayed this answer so long but, besides that I am entangled with a law suite,
which a naughty man has troubled me with, I had a great desire that my
Colleagues should first have your book communicated to them, that I might tell
you their opinion, what they think of it. Be pleased therefore not to take this
delay in ill part; and to favor me so far, as to believe that I honor you,
and value as much as possible the gifts of God which shine in you; which will
readily put me upon studying all occasions to testify that I am most
sincerely,

Your most humble and most obedient servant VAUQUELIN.
From Diepe this 16. of August, 1657.

Having since the receipt of this letter desired him to gi e me leave to publish
it in print, he granted it me by this ensuing letter.

SIR,
YOur work carries its commendation with it, and needs not to borrow it from
others. Yet if you, and those to whom you communicated my last letter, conceive
it will signify any thing, and think it fitting to be printed either at the
beginning or at the end of the extract of your Paraenesis, I willingly give my
consent. I shall not fear to own a truth of that nature which you propound in
your book: Amicus Plato, etc. If any body undertakes to confute it, and by the
strength and evidence of his reasons, can convince me that it is not truth, but
an error colored over; I will not then fear to disavow it. Those famous
authors, whose authorities you bring to defend all your conclusions, will be
obliged to do the like, and to sing a Palinodia, when they see that you are
gone astray in going the way they led you. But until I see this demonstration,
which at present I think impossible, I will stick to that I have embraced; and
in the mean while will assure you, that it will be a great satisfaction to me,
if I can be serviceable to you in any thing, whereby I may testify to you, that
I am in all sincerity,

Your most humble and most obedient servant VAUQUELIN.
From Diepe the 2. of Oct. 1657.

Among the persons living that have given their approbation to my Paraenesis, I
might mention the late reverend and learned minister of Paris, John Mestrezat,
because he was then living when it came forth. I have in my Corollarium
inserted his letter written a few weeks before he died; wherein, as in his
treatise of the Church, one may see he wholly concurreth with me in the
following particulars.

1. That all private churches are independent from any church-judicatory, and
that what power so ever is given, or promise made to a church, ought not to be
ascribed to the catholic, national or presbyter^all church, but to the
private church, made up of Pastor and flock, meeting in one place about the
same ordinances.

2. That combinations of private churches are of very good use, but yet are
arbitrary, and of humane institution, and not commanded in the word.

3. That Jesus Christ never appointed any form or model of church discipline;
only has in general commanded that all things in the church should be done
orderly.

I might add the testimonies of many English Divines, who have approved of the
book and argument, with no less good liking then the ministers of D^epe, or
Mr. Mestrezat. For I do not doubt but that reverend and learned Mr. Baxter (as
it seems to me in the Preface to a late book of his) will come as near me in
the main question handled in my Paraenesis, as I differ from him in the other
controversy betwixt him and me. But I forbear to name either those that like of
my Paranesis or those that dislike i^; having no leave from either of them so
to do I am however thus far satisfied, that these later have condemned it
before they read it, and when they never intended to read it, either out of
contempt o^ prejudice: whereas the other have taken the pains to read it over,
and been as m ch in the extremes to commend it, as those to discommend it.
Should I set down here the va^io^s j^dg ments of men, both in England and b
yond the seas, it would hardly be believed, that godly and learned men,
agreeing in the same holy doctrine of faith, and in fervent charity one with
the other, should be so opposite and contrary in their judgment of my book:
some condemning it as most pernicious and dangerous, adam i^ga^d damnable book;
as if they had spoken of some pieces of Socinus or C^ellius, or of ^n^ther and
eternal Gos^ell, written some ^ndred years a gone by the Friars; besides, a
book full of hes casummes and slanders, and wounding the interest of Jesus
Christ: on the contrary others commending the book, both for the matter, and
the way of handling it, and for the Christian moderation that the author
o^serveth enrough the whole work, equally res^ecting and honoring those he
assents to, and those he dissents from. The later, since they have known me by
my works, have had more Christian converse with me by letters and otherwise:
but the other, except they be my noble and old friends, did flee from me since
as from an heathen and a publican, and an excommunicated person, only for
denying excommunication to be an ordinance of Christ; yea so far, that a
reverend person protested to a friend of mine, that he would not come in the
company where I should be. I thank God, I cannot find in my heart to value and
honor any one more or less, for loving me either better or worse for my books
sake, so that I find godliness and sincerity shine in them, though in some
with much prejudice. I pardon them their uncharitable and somewhat rash censure
both of the work and the Author.

The Lord knows my heart, that in delivering what I did, and now do in this
present work, I look upon Father, Brother, Kinsmen, English, French, Scots,
Dutch, Calvin, Independents, Presbyterians, Erastians, with an indifferent and
unpartiall eye; not seeking to close with any of them, or fearing to dissent
from them, nor so much as taking notice whether I please any body or no body;
so that I may abstain from known error and sin, and deliver that which to me
is truth, and tending to the honor of the ministry; to the rooting out of the
churches of God all power that is none of Christ's; to the unsettling the Romish
Hierarchy, which has now no longer any plausible plea from Scripture and
reason, for their setting up an empire within the dominions of others; and
lastly, conducing to the building up of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in many
men's hearts, and making it appear to be wholly internal and s^rituall, and
only over those that are convinced and persuaded by the spirit of God in the
ministry of the word.

The Lord persuade his people of this truth, as I my self (and I hope rightly)
am persuaded and informed, undeceiving them, that he may have all the glory, by
their endeavoring with one accord to preserve saving truths by this truth.

FINIS.

