TWO LETTERS

The one being sent to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough.

The other sent from the Bishop of Bangor, to the Ministers of his Diocese.

Wherein is discovered the readiness of the ill-affected Clergy, toward the
furnishing of his Majesty with moneys for the mayntaining of War against his
Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed for Ed. Husbands, and John Francke, and are to be sold at the
Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.

Two Letters, the one being sent to the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the other
sent from the Bishop of Bangor, to the Ministers of his Diocese, etc.
MY LORD,
THough I have deferred to give you an account of your last Letters, yet I have
been no way forgetful of your commands in them; For upon the first
opportunity offered, I acquainted his Majesty with the affection and zeal
expressed by you to his service, which neither the meannesse of your fortune,
nor the multitude of your troubles, could so quench, but that you were ready to
the utmost of your power (and something above it) to give your assistance. His
Majesty's gracious Answer was, that he was very well persuaded of the truth of
it, but as then, things were not ripe, nor did he look much from his Clergy,
till he were in a Posture to defend them. Upon this (and wanting withal a
convenient Messenger) I forbore to venture a Letter toward you, till I saw his
affairs drawing nearer toward an issue. They that are able to help, must
either do it at this time, or never, nor can your Lordship do better service
then in a private way (till a public way may be protected to deal with the
ablest and likeliest men of your Clergy to that effect. The King is now coming
nearer to you, but I stay yet at York with a part of my charge, till we are
sent for. I beseech your Lordship afford me a place in your prayers, as you
have in mine, who am

Your most affectionate friend, and Brother, Br. S.
York Aug. 14.
Gentlemen,
I Have received a Letter from my Lord Strange Lieutenant General to his
Majesty for these parts, to excite my Clergy to a free and full contribution
for his Majesty's support in these his urgent extremities. For the expediting
of this request you shall receive by the Bearer the very original. It would
be superfluous to use any arguments to move you to this purpose, otherwise
then to say, that a Sovereign (which if Plutarch were now alive, he could not
find a parallel for him) is he, the gracious Prince that receives our myte*
therefore lay your hands upon your hearts, and like good Christians out-goe the
liberality, which not only reason but nature will dictate, that every
particular will forgo his own conservation, if it tends to the preservation of
the Universe. Speed is the second thing required, so that I expect to receive
by the return of the Bearer Doctor Lloyd the expression of loyal and free
hearts. So commending all to Gods protection, exhorting you to prayers for the
peace of Jerusalem, I rest

Your loving Friend and Brother, William Banger.
Landurnog ultimo Aug. 1642, The Bearer can acquaint you with what alacrity
these parts have dispatched this business, I am unwilling to appoint any
proportion, the iniquity of the times have sufficiently instructed you, what
his Majesty deserves at our hands, treble tenth will be the least quantity that
will make a visible sum, but I hope the meanest will far exceed that.

VV. B.



A Copy of the Letter sent to the Ministers of Arnstley, from their Diocesan,
the Bishop of Bangor.

FINIS.

