DUKE HAMILTON'S GHOST, OR THE UNDERMINER Countermined.

Ex proprio praesidio periculum.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

DUKE HAMILTON'S GHOST.
1.
A Mate not your selves, though hither I Am come
From that dismal Place, that infernal Cell,
Where many a Wight does feel his sad doom,
(With your patience and leave) my Story to tell;
1, Hamilton hight, a Marquess well known,
Learnt Machivel's sleights, but prosper'd in none;
The more I did study, the more I did show
A Web I had spun for my own overthrow.
2.
When Jeamy was dead, and I grown to be
In titles more strong, by the power of his Son,
To forfeit my Faith, and my Loyalty,
That erst I had plighted to him I begun;
The Beacons of Zeal I caused set on fire,
In England, and Scotland, and every Shire;
My Accomplices were in this handiwork,
This City, Pym, Hampden, the Devil, and the Kirk.
3.
A broad a Prophecy fomented was,
A second Jeamy in this Land should reign,
I thought my self he, and to bring to pass
The Plots and Designs I had lodged in my brain,
To tolerate Projects I counseled the King,
And then to accuse him the same I did bring;
By no other means I thought I could rise,
Than making him odious in his Peoples eyes.
4.
Hampden distaste at the Ship money took,
Opposed his Prince in's Prerogative Royal,
And Pym his Oath, and Allegiance forsook,
As well as some others that swore to be loyal:
There Is some in the World, I need not them name,
I Am sure stands as guilty in the black book of Fame;
But Oaths at that time with us were held wind,
Though the breach of them now I bitterly find.
5.
This quick-pated gang me highly did please,
For still their pretense was for the Public good,
Until their Ambition was found the Disease
Corrupted the Nations, and spilt so much blood;
I plied with all Factions, especially theirs
Wore the face of Religion, called, the Presbyters;
To the Book of Liberty I did consent,
To bring in my Countrymen was my intent.
6.
Whose rigid conditions would never agree,
I very well knew, to such an inlet
(As they pleased to term it) of Popery,
Though it by wise heads was found a thing fit;
When Subjects dare into their Princes Acts pry,
To lull them asleep asleep is safe'st Policy:
But finding the Kirk did it ill resent,
(Though I wished nothing more) I seemed to repent.
7.
My Countrymen up, the King was drawn down
With a strong Army their Forces to quell:
Brooks, Essex, and I, with others well known,
Of the Cabinet Council did order't so well,
To the Petition of Right the King did consent,
Which caused the calling of the short At York.
Parliament; * 3 Weeks.

But the malice of some too soon breaking forth,
Dissolved it in And then Pym's Study and others were searched.
course: Then back to the North.
8.
Where, while we remained, our Confederates here,
At Black-beath did raise a Rascally rout,
That put the Metropolitan Bishop in fear,
For Libels against him they had thrown about;
In Souhvvark.
Prison doors were thrown open, many Outrages done,
Until the Train-bands made the loose Knaves to run;
And some apprehended were punished by Law,
For example sake, to keep others in awe.
9.
This News pleased my Countrymen, though not the King,
Who wisely yet pent in his discontent;
Alas (Sir) quoth I, there can be nothing
So cordial to you as a Parliament,
Your safety and happiness on it depends,
It maugres your Foes, and advances your Friends,
It beats down Sedition, and breeds up good Laws,
For the good of your People, whose Obedience it draws.
10.
The Parliament called, they subtly did pass In 1640.

A Subsidy Bill to flatter the King,
Who then wanted money; but alas, alas, Triennial Bill,

Another succeeded that brought with it a sting,
Which poisoned the Commons, and knocked the Peers down.
Died the Surpless in blood, and battered the Crown:
However by it I had partly my ends,
My Countrymen paid, and the Nations made Friends.
11.
From Traitors and Rebels good Subjects were made,
But forgot to prove so, and followed him,
The forger and foreman of the treasonous Trade,
Entitled by some to be Bell-weather Pym:
This caused the King, as justly he might,
To accuse some of Treason, and secure his Right;
Then new Wars ensued, which caused me to laugh,
That English men should each others blood quaff,
12.
For weakened by War, (whose Events are unsure)
From either side I a Fabric might raise
(My Countrymen here) to seat me secure,
And lengthen with Glory my declining days:
To fashion out which, two faces I bent,
The one annenst the King, the other the Parliament;
But whilst I did think I danced in a ner,
Insinuating Wits caught me in the feat.
13.
In Cornwall I was attainted of Treason,
For holding Irtelligence with the Enemy,
And fifteen Articles grounded on Reason,
Did question my Life, and my Liberty;
In Pendennis Castle I cast was a space,
Until, undeserved, from the King I found grace,
Whose Mercy was such, as most men do know,
To whom he showed most, most evil did flow.
14.
Success, against Reason, forsook the Kings Cause,
And forced him to fly, where I shame it to tell,
To Men that professed for Religion and Laws;
But oh! I instructed them first to Rebel;
I read them this Maxim, Who once draws his Sword
Against his Prince, must never sheath it, nor yet take his word;
But I now confess, so much Goodness abused,
May render me justly a Man unexcus'd.
15.
In the Personal Treaty I (too) had a hand,
And sided on both sides, yet nothing would work
On my sides until the Army did stand
Upon their Punctillioes, for which I did lurk:
The King being surprised, and to Trial brought,
Gave a life to my hopes, and an end to my thought,
By his weakness I did accumulate strength,
His death seemed to add unto my life length.
16.
For now on the wings of Ambition I flew,
And Crow'd like a Cock, whilst the Cromwell
Lion did tremble,
My sudden approach in him a fear drew,
However he seemed the same to dissemble;
I formidable was to give the defeat,
Had my heart been answerable to my conceit,
But faintingly fled, such was my sad lot,
The odium of which will never be forgot.
17.
My Army was cowed and dispersed in a trice,
Without scarce a blow, to my Countrymens shame,
While Langdale his life set at no cheap price,
But havok'd and forced his way where he came;
So stout were the English, so fearful were we,
They drew their Renown from our Infamy;
Which had we had Souls like Men, and adhered
To Langdales sure Counsel, we need not have feared.
18.
To Ashbydelazouch I was conveyed,
The manner of my surprisal needs not,
No doubt but there were some had me waylaid,
Whose fingers did itch at me as a Scot:
But oh Jeamy Ballatyne thou lymer loone,
That sell'd thine none Countrymen kyb'd as they wone, Without shame.

To Corfew, and Zant, and such places remote;
May some of thy Frieuds slit thy Weesil'd throat:
19.
From thence to the Tower of London was brought,
In reference to my Trial in hand;
Then how to escape I busied my thought,
Which having effected, I was at a stand,
Not knowing to whom, or whither, to go,
I At the three Pilgrims in South wark * In the Palaceyard in Westminster
retaken was to my mickle woe,
My Conscience condemned me er'e their judgment past,
And my head from my shoulders was severed at last.
20.
As I like a Hocus pocus did live,
Carrying on my Designs by Legerdemaine,
So dealt they with me, in hopes of Reprieve
I spent my last minute, like to Pedringave;
A Traitor I lived, and a Travtor I died,
And yet with both Parties I ever complied;
It Is strange you will say, but here is the reason,
I true was to neither, so suffered for Treason.
FINIS.

