AN ODE, For the Anniversary Feast made in Honor of St. CAECILIA.
Nov. 22. Anno Domini, 1700. Set to Music by Dr. John Blow. The Words made by
Mr. D'urfey.
I.
TRIUMPHANT Fame, a thousand thousand Years
(Since MUSIC did the Globe inspire:)
Divine Apollo, equal to the Spheres,
Extolled for Wonders on his charming Lyre:
Great God of Wit, and Harmony still owned,
His sacred Brows with Bays unfading Crowned,
And through the lofty Sky in Heaven as Earth renowned.
Conquered Amphion Homage paid;
Arion quelled too, silent lies:
Orpheus, whom Trees and Rocks obeyed,
All yielded him the Prize,
Chorus. Conquered Amphion, etc.
II.
^is Stan^^ the Ode (...) too long, (...) not set to ^^ick.
Long, thus the Harmonious Deity,
Superior in the Science reigned
Ambitious Pan, no more aspired,
No more the Phrygian King Midas.
admired
The rustic Pipe's dull Melody,
For which, he once, such Shame Ass's Ears.
had gained;
But amongst the Sons of Art with joint Consent,
Feasting each greedy Ear,
With the delightful Strains they hear,
The blessed Musician they adored, adored the Instrument.
III.
Till in succeeding Times, a Wonder more Renowned
Sprung from the Noble Organ's sound;
So sweetly fingered by a lovely Maid,
'Twas thought on Earth some Goddess played;
Close by a purling Brook that ran
Down, through a shady Cypress Grove,
Where seeking his obdurate Love,
Apollo wandered all alone,
This wondrous Masterpiece was done,
He paused, when first the warbling Echo came,
But soon each Accent did his Soul Inflame;
So much the Charmer charmed, Caecilia was her Name,
Caecilia was the Charmer's Name,
Caecilia was the Charmer's Name.
Chorus. So much the Charmer, etc.
IV.
Caecilia, over the Plains,
Was Empress of the Swains,
With Roses round
Her Temples, Crowned:
She Plays, and Sings, and Raigns
Attending too, in Consort joined
Were gathered all the Artful kind
Attending too, etc.
Now brisk Violins they employ,
That fill every hearer with Joy;
And skilfully Show,
With Finger and Bow,
What Mirth they can raise
In Hearts when they please,
And Sorrow how quickly destroy.
V.
A bolder Touch is next Inspiring,
Hearts with Martial Ardour firing,
A Point of War and Trumpets sounding;
Echoing Notes aloud Rebounding:
To Battle move, and now they Wound, they Kill.
A fierce Alarm the Drum does seem to beat,
Well tym'd strokes with Martial heat,
Who when they mingling Sounds repeat,
A noble Chorus fill.
Chorus. The Trumpet Sounds, etc.
VI.
But now, Ah! now, a softer Strain she plays,
The lovely Artist can all Passions raise;
Each melting Note is Love, and well does suit,
The moving Lyre, and Soul-delighting Flute.
This charming Air, the amorous God gave Pain,
He looked and sighed, but sighed and looked in vain,
He saw no yielding Daphne on the Plain.
He saw no yiedling, etc.
The varying Notes then louder grew,
And soon from Love his Thoughts to wonder raise,
Caecilia's Art admired anew;
Less, then himself had Envied too,
Who now dissolv's in Praise:
Here Is the Precedence did Confess,
As Musick's Queen and Patroness,
And Crowned her with his Bays.
VII.
His Heavenly Voice too, then the God Essayed;
Apollo sung. Divine Caecilia Played:
The Spheres in Consort Powers Divine employ,
And Nature, midst her Labor felt a Joy.
Perfection here in Harmony was found,
Angels, and listening Cherubs hovered round,
Whilst Universal Praise exalts the more than Mortal Sound.
Grand CHORUS.
Join all then, and Sing
To Poetry's King;
And Musicks fair Queen,
The Chorus begin,
So great is the Theme,
We er lost in Extreme,
And only with Joy,
A Wish can employ.
May Arts be encouraged with Noblest Endeavor,
May Wit, Love and Harmony flourish for ever.
LONDON: Printed for Henry Playford at the Temple Change in Fleetstreet, where
are to be had the 1st. and 2d. Part of the Book of PILLS, with the Catch Book,
and the Orders for the Musical Society, 1700.


