THE SOULS SOLILOQUIE: AND, A CONFERENCE WITH CONSCIENCE.

As it was delivered in a SERMON before the KING at Newport in the Isle of
Wight, on the 25 of October, being the monthly Fast, during the late TREATY.

BY The Right Reverend Father in God, Brian Duppa, Ld. Bp. of Salisbury.

Printed for R. Royston, 1648.

THE SOULS SOLILOQUIE: AND, A Conference with Conscience.
PSALM. 42. v. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me?
THis Psalm was directed to the Sons of Core, but with this Inscription, In
finem intellectus filiis Core, implying a caution, that they should be sure,
they understood what they sung; which that they might the easier do, you shall
find this very Verse thrice repeated over; twice in this Psalm; once in the
next: such Repetitions being usual, when God would awake the Memory: As he
does in the 136 Psalm. where, that his Mercy might not be forgotten, (without
any danger of Tautologie) seven and twenty times he repeats it over, For his
mercy endures for ever.

If we look on This Psalm in the General current of it, we shall find it
divided between Light and Darkness; Here a Clowd, and There a Sunshine; Here
a Soul Cast down, and There Erected: But if we look upon these words only,
we shall find more clowd then sunshine. Like a picture, Commended rather by
the shadowing of it, then the Colors. For however the Anthemes sung in the
upper Choyre in the Triumphant Church, have ever been of joy, yet in the
Militant, Gods lower Choyre has ever been of Mourners. Among us, he that Sets
the saddest tunes, proves the best Musician: For, where the groundwork is our
Sin, the descant on it, must needs be our Sorrow.

As Saint Ambrose therefore told his Auditory, That they should not look in
his Sermon for matter to Applaud, but Mourn with him; So, while I touch upon
this string of sorrow, if any here sensible of their sin, or misery, answer
me with a sigh, or GOD that speaks to them By me with a Tear, it shall be my
Joy, as St. Paul told the Corinthians, That I have made them sorry.

But, if there be others that think the Text too melancholy for this Place,
that come rather to have their Ears pleased, then their Hearts wounded; To
these, I must alter my Note, and say, as St. Hierome did to Sabinian, Hoc ipsum
plango, quod vos non plangitis, This makes me sorry, that nothing can make you
so.

But, as many that go to see dead bodies cut up, although they came not with
the purpose to learn Anatomy, yet go away informed by that sight, what kind of
substance the Heart is, the form and posture of it; where abouts the Spleen
lies, or where the Liver; so you, that came not hither purposely to hear of
sorrow, yet when you have looked a while on this Anatomy, when you have seen
this Prophet how he dissects himself, rifling his breast, and cutting up his
entrals, you may chance to go away instructed too, (perhaps against your wills)
what the Soul is, or what the Conscience, what is that sorrow of the one, or
what that disquiet of the other; for these are the Lessons that I am now to
read you, These are the Troubles that made David cry, Why art thou cast down,
o my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?

Athanasius counseled his friend, that when any trouble should fall upon him,
he should fall presently to the reading of this Psalm; For there was a way,
(he thought) of curing by the like, as well as by the contrary: for it is
observed indeed that when two instruments are tuned to the same Unison, if you
touch the strings of the one, the strings of the other will move too, though
untouched, if placed at a convenient distance: That therefore you may try the
same experiment in your selves, do but set your affections for a time in the
same key, in which these words were spoken, if really you feel none, Imagine
some affliction laid upon you; when you have done so, that you may be the more
fully moved, place your attention at a Convenient distance, look narrowly on
this Holy Prophet, observe how he retires himself, shuts out the world, calls
his sad soul, to as sad a Reckoning, Quare tam tristis? O my soul! thou that
were infused to give me Life, nay, says Philo the Jew; A spark, a beam of the
Divinity, thou, which should be, to this dark body of Mine, as the Sun is
to the Earth, inlightning, quickening, cheering up my spirits, tell me, why art
thou clowded? why art thou cast down?

This is the first Interpellation of the Soul, as Saint Ambrose calls it; but
the next is more abrupt, more troublesome, caused rather by pangs, and gripes,
and tumults, then by sorrow; when the Sinner feeling thorns in his sides, fire
in his bones, war in his Conscience, can hold no longer from expostulating,
Not only why art thou cast down? But as Symachus renders it, Why art thou
disquieted, not within me only, but against me?

You see then the two maine parts of my Text. The subject of the first, The
Dejection of the Soul: the Argument of the latter, the Disquiet of the
Conscience. But because there are other observations worth the looking after,
We must first make a general discovery of this Enquiry, Why art thou cast
down, O my Soul? etc.

The words imply rather a Soliloquie, then a Dialogue: yet Clemens of
Alexandria calls it a Prosopopoeia, where one is made two by way of fiction.
But however, there are not many at this Conference, Only two, if two, Man and
his Soul: for Tota domus duo sunt: yet two sometimes such strangers, that man
may say of his soul, as the Epigrammatist did of his sullen neighbor, In Urbe
tota, nemo tam prope, tam proculque nobis, None lives more near me, nor none
farther off: or as Myrrha complained, She could not enjoy her own Father,
because he was too much her own: Nunc quia jam Meus est, non est meus, ipsaque
damno est mihi proximitas. So because my Soul is mine, therefore it is not
mine. Nothing so much as nearness makes us strangers. The truth is, that
though Aquinas tells us, That it is one of the Prerogatives of the soul, to
reflect upon her self; yet the ordinary Glass we use, is rather Diaphonous
then Reflexive; We look not in it on our selves, but through it on others;
which has made some imagine the Soul to be of that nature as Moisture is,
which Philosophy concludes to be bounded, facile alienis terminis, difficilime
suis, with any thing easier then it self.

But to examine this farther. Why should my soul and I become such strangers?
Why like my two eyes? There is not an inch between them, yet one eye never
sees the other. It is as Saint Bernard confesses of himself, Nihil est cord
meo fugacius. The heart is a kind of Runagate, harder to be fixed then
Quicksilver. So that, if I would I cannot find it out. Or is it, that few of
us can look on our Wounded Souls, with that patience, as on the souls of
others; Like some Chyrurgians, that (I have seen) faint at a scar of their
own, yet could unmoved either fear, or scarrifie, or lance the flesh of
others? Or (to look no farther for it) Are we else in that strait which Bishop
Anselme was in his Meditations, when he cries out, Gravis Angustia! Si me
inspicio, non tolero meipsum; si non, nescio meipsum; si me considero, terret
me facies mea; si non, fallit me damnatio mea: si me video, horror est; si non
video, mors. What shall I dee? If I look into my self, I shall not endure my
self; if not, I shall not know my self: If I consider what I am, the face of
my sins affrights me; if not, my damnation steals upon me: to see my self is
horror; not to see my self is death.

But, what ever the betraying motives are, the effect (I am sure) is dangerous:
For he that willingly puts out the Taper of his Conscience, the Candle which
God has set there for him, to see himself by, let him know, that he is
passing from that voluntary darkness to a worse; that like an Offender on the
Scaffold, he does but blind his eyes to have his head cut off. But Saint
Augustines Prayer shall go along with me, Noverim me Domine, noverim te: Let
me know my self, O God, so shall I know thee. In my Afflictions (what ever
become of my other friends) let me have, at least, my Soul to talk to. May
Sin never divorce us, nor the Devil never make us strangers; That, when Thou
shall set me up for a mark for all thine Arrows, when thou shall fill me with
bitterness, and cover me with sorrows, I may not then fear to ask, Why art
thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou, etc.

It was a Proverbiall speech among the Jews, when they would Characterize an
extravagant Busie-body, to say of him, Ben-Zoma nunquam est domi, This man is
never at home: But God loves no such straglers; you shall hear him call to his
people, by his Prophet Esaias, Come my people, enter into your chambers, shut the
doors upon you. But Quaenam ista cubicula, says Saint Augast. nisi ipsa
corda? What are these Chambers that God calls us to, but our own hearts? What
is it to shut the doors upon us, but to shut out the world? Yea but this is
not all: I have heard of men that have barred, and locked, and bolted doors
upon themselves, and yet all that while have been playing with a feather, or
with some thoughts as light. Therefore in the fourth Psalm, God goes farther,
In cubilibus vestris compungimini, as the Old Translation has it: Or, as our
Bibles render it, Examine, or Commune with your own hearts in your chambers.

Yea, but this is not enough neither; for the fool could do as much, he could
commune with his own soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years, Live as ease therefore, eat, drink, and be merry, take thy pleasure.
The ambitious man can do as much, he can talk of such an honor, such a
preferment, as if he now enjoyed it.

But this is not the Argument we are to treat on, this is not to shut out the
world, to have so much of the world within us. The Roman that Seneca speaks of,
had a better way then this, to keep his soul as clean, as good Huswives keep
their Plate; for every night he looked into it, wiping off the dust, clearing
the spots of it, examining it on several Interrogatories, Quod malum hodie
sanasti? cui vitio obstitisti? qua part melior es? Tell me, my soul, What sin
have thou this day conquered? what passion have thou powerfully resisted? how
art thou improved since the morning? or how decayed? But when he had done this,
when he had made this account with the day, O qualis somnus! quam altus! quam
tranquillus! how sweet a sleep did ever follow! how innocent I how untroubled!
What think you, beloved? Shall not this Moral Heathen rise up in judgment
against them that lie down in their beds, as the beast does in the Litter,
without any such enquiry made upon themselves, nay without so much as bidding
their own souls Good night? Or shall he not rise against them, who when God
visits them with crosses, have a conceit, they can drown their grief in
excess of Wine, or out-roare their Conscience with loud Instruments, calling
for company, when they should call for Prayers; Businesses, or sport, or any
thing, rather then their own souls that troubled them? The Jews had a custom
indeed to give them Wine that were to suffer death, that they might less feel
their torments, (a custom not yet out-dated in some Foreign Parts, at
Executions.) But it is observable, that when they offered our Savior Wine at
his Passion, he received it not; but when they gave him Vinegar, he took it:
Not because the Wine was bitter of the Myrrh, as many of the Interpreters
conceive; for Vinum Myrrhanum or Myrrhinum, as Plantus calls it, may be sweet
Wine, for any thing I find. But the reason rather was, (if we believe Saint
Chrysostom) that, that Wine being of a stupifying quality, the Son of God
that took on him all our sorrows, He would be sensible of every nail that
pierced his hands, or feet, of every thorn that ran into his head: And was he
sensible of his sorrows, and shall not we be sensible of our sins, that
caused those sorrows? Shall we still deal with our souls, as Women when they
grow old, deal with their Looking-glasses, turning the wrong side toward
them? How comes it else, that we that have the courage to dare to sin, have not
the courage to look back on our souls when we have sinned? Had we the least
wound in the Body, we should not sleep till we had seen it dressed; But we have
Souls all mangled over, ulcerated with Lust, impostumated with Malice, wounded
with Temptations; yet as the Levite passed by the wounded man, so every man
passes by his own soul too, not so much as asking bow it came hurt.

But how shall I move thee wretched and careless finner? Shall I tell thee,
that as thy soul is an immortal substance, so the wages of thy sin is as
Immortal as thy soul, an immortal and everlasting death: That in the next
life thou shall see thy self with trembling, if in this life thou turnest away
thine eye in wilfulness. But I forbear; It is an argument that concerns us
all so nearly, that I will not doubt, but it has already made impression: That
there are some here, that by this time, are beginning a Dialogue with their
souls, that are resolved to renew their acquaintance with them. You have a
Royal Example for it, I am sure, for you have no less then a King that has
led the way; He it is that begins the account, commends the Inquisition to you.
If therefore any trouble arise, away every one of you to his own home,
discuss examine, commune with thy self, Why art thou cast down, O my soul,
and why art thou disquieted, etc.

Having done therefore with the examination in general, the Parties, the
Manner, the Necessity; Our next work must be to survey the first interrogatory,
Why art thou cast down O my soul?

Sorrow is Sin's Echo, which made the Prophet say, Peccata nostra responderunt
nobis, our sins have answered, and (as it were) ecchoed to us: But as the Echo
answers not the voice so well, as where there are broken walls, and ruined
buildings to return it: so neither does Sorrow answer unto sin, unless
reverberated by a broken, a ruined heart: For, I have read of a melancholy man,
that could not believe he had an Head, till his Physician having made a Leaden
hat for him, with the weight of that, forced him to cry out, O his head! so
there are men amongst us, so lost in sensual pleasure, so buried in their
flesh, that til mischief, like sheets of lead, be thrown upon them, to squeez
out a Confession, they have much ado to remember, that they have a Soul
within them. Not to go farther then this Prophet for an Instance, when almost
an whole year (as Cajetan computes the time) he lay asleep in the dregs of his
sin, (his foul adultery with Uriahs Wife) where was his sorrow? or where then
was his Soul? well then might he cry out, O his Body, says S. Augustine, but
o! his Soul was clean forgotten; nay, they farther had a conceit, that
during all that time, Ipsa anima Davidis transierat in carnem, the very Soul
of David was turned into flesh. But no sooner did God begin to shake his rod
over him, to punish him with the ravishing of his Daughter, the murder of one
Son, the rebellion of another, but instantly we find him, mourning as a Turtle,
chattering as a Crane, sitting alone as a Sparrow on the house top. The Devil
had given him a Fall, but he felt not that, Sin had given him many, but he felt
not them neither; At last God undertook him, he at whose very word the
mountains smoke; he threw him down, and this fall only made him feel all the
rest; This only made him cry, Why art thou cast down, O my soul?

It is memorable in Job, that upon the ill news that was brought him, instantly
surrexit Job, says the Text, when one would have thought he would rather have
swounded and fallen down for grief, then he arose. But we find our Prophet in
another kind of posture, dejected, prostrate, cast down in his more noble
part, yet S. Hierome goes not so far, who translates it according to Symmachus,
Why art thou bowed down? Affliction is a burden; true, but though it bow us,
yet we may stand under it; But sin is a burden that goes beyond the extent of
that word, that does not only bow, but cast us down, which makes Saint
Chrysostom say, Nihil est grave nisi peccatum, that nothing is heavy but sin;
nothing so heavy, as to cast us down, not poverty, not sickness, not disgrace,
nor any thing, that the wit of sullenness, or melancholy can devise. As for
such afflictions as those, Know you not, says Saint Paul, that all ye that are
baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his death, that is, says Saint
Hierome, as into his faith, so into his sufferings too: so that it is part of
our engagement in our Baptism. Besides, think of it well, and what is there in
that Cup of bitterness, which thy Savior has not tasted, for prior bibit
Medicus, ut bibere non dubitaret aegrotus, says Saint Augustine: He began to
thee in all, to encourage thee to follow him; nay, to thy comfort, Ambrose adds
a degree farther, Non tam haec ante te quam pro te sustulit, His sufferings
were not only before thee, but for thee. Would not thou think him a strange
Physician, who when he came to cure thee of a Fever, should himself drink up
the Potion? Yet thus did thy Savior, Thine was the sickness, but he that was
not sick he kept the diet: Thine the fever, but it was he that sweat: Thine
the Plurisie, but 'twas he that bled for it: Who then can consider this without
erecting his dejected Soul? at least, without a serious inquisition into the
reason of this melancholy? For, be not deceived, God is not always taken with
the head that hangs down, with the folded arms, or with the melting eyes: For
instance, when God told Ezekiel, that he would show him a strange abomination,
what was it but, Behold there sat a Woman weeping for Adonis? for Tammuz faith
our translation, for so (according to Saint Hierome) the Hebrews named the
Adonis of the Heathen, for as Venus mourned for her lost Adonis, so sinners for
their pleasures, when they are either snatched from them, or outdated. The
exhausted Adulterer, whose lust outlives his body, that mournes not for having
offended God, but for not being able to offend him longer, he is one of those
plangentes. He again that has his wealth taken from him, the occasion of his
riot, that is temperate only because he is needy, and sorry, because he is
either; he is another Mourner of the train: so that you see, there may be a
kind of wantonness in Grief, an effeminatenesse of the mind, that melts upon
all occasions.

But consider I beseech you the value of the Soul, that is thus cast down,
That your Sights are the breath of Heaven, your Tears are the wine of Angels,
your Groans the Eccho's of the Holy Ghost, that therefore to employ this
sacred Treasure in profane expenses, to lay it out on the trifles of this
world, is a Sin no less then Sacrilege; Be therefore more thrifty of your
sorrow, for the time may come, when you shall want those sighs, which now so
impertinently you throw away; nay, says Bonaeventure, should the Devil set
thee on that Pinnacle where he had our Savior, should he offer thee all the
Kingdoms of the whole world for one Tear, to be spent in his service, O do
not give it him, for on thy deathbed, for that One Tear, perhaps thou would
give a thousand worlds.

Think of this, ye that feel the heaviness of your Soul, think of it ye that
do not, for ye may feel it. Know there is a sorrow that works repentance,
not to be repented of; Know again there is a sorrow that works Death.
Remember there were tears, that got sinful Mary heaven, Remember again, there
were tears that could get Esau nothing. For as in Martyrdom it is not the
sword, the boiling lead, or fire, not what we suffer, but why, that makes us
Sufferers: so in our sorrows, it is not how deep they wound, but why, that
justifies them. Let every one therefore, that has a troubled heart, ask his
soul the why, Why art thou cast down? Is it not for thine own sins, or for
the sins of others? take either of them, thine eyes will have a large field to
water; Is it for that thou have been a Child of wrath, a Servant of the Devil?
Is it for that thou art a Candle set in the wind, blown at by several
temptations? or is it for that thou would be freed from them? Woe is me that
I dwell in Mesech, that I dwell so long in the tents of Kedar. Art thou
troubled, as Saint Augustine was, when he read that the way to Heaven was
narrow, the number small, that travailed thither? Or have thou put on Saint
Bernards resolution, who had made a compact with his Soul, never to joy till
he had heard his Savior call him, Come thou blessed, nor never to leave
sorrowing till he had escaped the bitter sentence, Go ye cursed? If any of
these be the Why, the ground of thy sorrows, if such thoughts have cast thee
down; know, that thy Savior has already blessed thee; For, Blessed are they
that mourn. The Angels are thy servants, they gather thy tears; God is thy
Treasurer, he lays them up in his bottle; the holy Ghost is thy Comforter, he
will not leave thee. Fear not then to be thus cast down, fear not to be thus
disquieted within thee. Thus having sailed through one sea of bitterness, the
Dejection of the soul, we are again to set forth, but in a roughet storm,
the Trouble of the Conscience, employed in the next Interrogatory, Why art thou
disquieted within me?

The Conscience is in the soul, but none can tell well, whether a portion of
it; none can tell you what, whether it be an Habit, or an Act, or both; whether
in the Understanding, or in the Will, or in both; whether Practical, or
Theoricall, or mixed of both, is still disputed. But Saint Augustine gives me
the truer satisfaction, Sentio, quam non Intelligo, I feel thee Conscience,
though I do not understand thee. For as they whom Statesmen employ as Spies,
though they mingle with all companies, yet keep themselves concealed: so the
Conscience which is Gods Informer, sent by him, as a Spy into the Soul,
mixeth with all our thoughts, as well as actions; and though we know not what
the Conscience is, yet what We are, our Conscience knows full well. Yet as I
have seen Lines drawn upon a wall with a coal, so far resemble a face, as he
that looked on it at least might guess at it: so the Ancient Fathers have
ventured at some Expressions of this subtle, spiritual thing, the Conscience.

First, if we look to the Nature of it, they tell us, that Conscience is an
habit of the soul, not acquired, but created with it: That it is an Invisible
Instinct, or a Practical Syllogism, by which we conclude what we should do,
and what not. If we look farther for the use, for the Office of it, Origin
calls it Paedagogum Animae, the busy Paedant of the Soul, varying as our
actions vary, now discouraging, straight heartning, approving here, reproving
there; Or, if this be not enough, Tertullian shall tell you, that it is
Praejudicium Judicii, a kind of Antidated day of Judgment, a domestic
Doomes-day, or as Saint Basil tells you, that it is Natural Judicatorium, the
very Consistory of the Law of Nature. A strange Court, where (almost against
nature) the Plaintiff, the Defendant, the Judge, the Witness, all is but one.
For, -- Me mihi perside prodit, may every man say, the Conscience against the
Conscience, bringing in Evidence; producing the Law, proving the Forfeit,
urging the Penalty, giving the Sentence, beginning the Punishment.

But art thou sensible of this, O my soul? that thou carryest thine Accuser,
thy Judge, nay thy Hell, or if not Hell, I am sure, one of the pains of it,
about thee in thine own bosom? Do thou know withal, that it is a Volume
which no Jesuit can corrupt, nor no Index Expurgatorius strike a Letter out of
it; That it is the only Book of all thy Library that shall go along with thee
into the world to come? Art thou verily persuaded, Saint John has not deceived
thee, when he tells thee, in the 20. of the Revel. That on that terrible day of
Judgment this Book of thine (though now never so close shut up) shall be then
thrown open in the sight of God, in the view of all his Angels: Do thou not
reckon of these things, only as bug-bears to affrighten thee? But art thou
persuaded thus in earnest? If so, O my soul, were thou cut out of the rock, or
marble, yet these are thoughts would make a way into thee, were thou as rugged
as the Alps, yet this vinegar would cat into thee, no wonder then, that such a
Meditation cast thee down, or that thou art disquieted within me.

They that call the Conscience scintillam Animae, the spark of the Soul, make
an enquiry, whether this spark may be put out or no? But the general verdict
goes, it never was extinguished, no not in Cain, nor Judas, it never will be
not in the most desperate Sinner; for cast this spark into a sea of thy
sins, yet it will live there even in that sea: scatter it abroad even in the
wilderness of thy thoughts, or cover it with the multitude of thine
employments, yet it will live there too: no Cord can strangle it, nor no hand
stifle it. Perire nec sine Te, nec Tecum potest, It can neither die with thee,
nor without the: yet as the pulse does not always beat alike, but sometimes is
more violent, sometimes more remiss; so neither is this spiritual pulse, the
Conscience, always in equal agitation, sometimes it beats, sometimes it
intermits, but straight again is recurrent. If it come not so fast, as a
Quotidian Ague, yet look for it as a Tertian, or if it forbear thee longer,
imagine it a Quartan, or if it observe no time, prepare for it in every piece
of Time, for these fits will come again, there is no avoiding them.

Saint Bernard, a tried Physician of the Conscience, distinguishes four
several habitudes, or states of it; the first, Tranquilla, non Bona, a quiet
Conscience, but not a Good: the second, Bona, non Tranquilla, a good
Conscience, but not a Quiet: the third, nec Bona, nec Tranquilla, neither Good,
nor Quiet: the last, tam Bona, quam Tranquilla, as well Good, as Quiet. The
first, seared; the second, wounded; the third, desperate; the fourth, happy.
They that are in the first state, go the way of Naball, who when he had slept,
(says the Text) found his heart dead within him. They that are in the second,
go the way of David, still blessed with Gods protection, yet still complaining
of his Anger. They that are in the third, go the way of Caine, with their backs
against the Sun, not so much are with a look to Heaven. They that are in the
last state, go the way of Saints, with joy above their fellows. Give me leave
therefore of these four ways, to make a short description, which when I have
done, let every one of you tell his own soul in which of these paths, he now
is traveling.

First, to the most beaten way, Tranquilla, non Bona, the quiet Conscience, not
the Good. I may safely say, Hell gets more Passengers by this path, then by
any; which makes the Devil so careful in the dressing it, that he will not
leave a small pible in the way, nor an uneven molehill to offend thee, as if
he had bin once one of those Angels to whom God had given the Charge that thou
should not hurt thy foot against a stone. If thou chance to travel on the
way, he sings to thee; if to sleep, he sits by thee, whispering as softly, as
the Spouse to the Daughters of Jerusalem, (though to a far worse end) I charge
you, O you Tormentors of the heart, that you stir not up, nor awake my beloved
until he please. Let there be no outcrie of sorrow, no noise of fear, no
alarm sounded of Repentance, but Peace, peace, Lie down, lie down in peace,
with thy warm sins cleaving to thy bosom. This is the opium, these are the
charms, by which so many souls are laid asleep, but if ever sleep were the
true image of death, this is the sleep. Saint Hierome knew the danger of it,
when he made that passionate exclamation, O qualis Tempestas ista
Tranquillitas! what storm so cruel as this calm? what rock, what shipwreck?
None; Let thy winds rage O God, and the sea roar, let the waves of thy
punishments like Mountains fall upon me, split and tear, and sink this vessel
of my flesh, rather then ever to let my soul be thus becalmed.

We read, that the Grecians, had an Hill so high above that region of the air
where Winds are bred, that he that had drawn his name in the ashes of the last
years sacrifices, might the next year at his return find the same Letters
un-blowne away: but if any ones heart here be so calmly seated, that the Devil
may at this instant read in the sluttish dust of it, the sins which long ago
he wrote there, if no thunder have cleared the air about thee, nor no wind
scattered those guilty Characters; if all be hushed, silence, and rest, and
sleep about the Conscience, like the Country of the Sibarites, where not so
much as a Cock, the Remembrancer of Saint Peter, was left alive to trouble
them; If so, know then, that as long as this soul is thus benumbed, thy God
has given thee over, he will not so much as favor thee with a frown, or
bless thee with his anger. It may be true that perhaps thou do not feel thy
misery, but therefore the more wretched, in Saint Augustine's judgment, because
thou do not feel it; for, Quid miserius misero, non miserante seipsum?
Cleopatra that had not a mind to feel her death, poisoned her self with Aspes,
that she might die sleeping; and just so is thy state, thy habitual customary
sins, those which thou drinkest down like water, as if they were no sins,
these are the Aspes that do benumme thy soul, as cold poison does the brain,
that casts thee into a sleep never to be awakened till the Worm that never
sleeps awake thee.

But, shall I leave thee so? As the quartan Ague is called opprobrium Medici,
the shame of the Physician; so this dead sleep, this Lethargy of sin may be
opprobrium Theologi, the shame of the Divine. I confess, I never liked those
that put so much Vinegar in their Sermons, as if their only errand were, to
eat out the hearts of their hearers; so much of the Law, as if the Gospel were
not yet given; for though bitter pills may be good physic, yet he that should
let his Patient eat no other meat then pills, would prove a mad Physician: yet
for all this, something of bitterness does well, there must be a searching of
the wound, before there be a skinning. Fear not then thy remedy O my soul,
but if thou find this hardness, this stupidity, this senslesnesse, within
thee, get thee to Mount Ebal, see the Curses that were given there, if they
wound not deep enough, add to these some few serious thoughts of Hell, of the
utter darkness, the eternal fire, the everlasting Worm. But when thou have
done this, do not dwell there, but be sure to look upward again to thy
Savior, Down with thy knees, though thy heart be stiff, up with thy Hands,
at least, to Heaven, though thy soul stir not; hope in thy God against hope,
as Abraham did: get out but an ejaculation, a piece, a word of prayer, ever
cleaving to the Rock of thy salvation Christ Jesus, till from the clefts of
that blessed Rock, thou hear his Mercy answer thee; for so in stead of a quiet
conscience, but not a good, God will give thee a good Conscience though for a
time unquiet, turning thee out of this sleepy way of Nabal, into the sighing
way of David, which gives us the next prospect of the Conscience. Bona, non
Tranquilla, a Good, but not a Quiet.

It is a Maxim in Philosophy, that no Element is heavy in the proper place of
it; For should we dive into the bottom of the Sea, we should not feel the
weight of all those waves that roll upon us; but out of the Ocean, to carry a
small pitcher of that water, would prove a burden. The like experiment we may
find in our selves, as long as we are in the Proper place, the Element of
sin, we do not feel the weight of it, but once being out, the easiest sin
seems heavy: We then start at a sinful thought, who before would have leaped
confidently from that thought, into the action. Or have we gone farther then
thought? have we actually offended? Instantly our hearts strike us, we
complain, we grieve, we melt into repentance, our very Souls are disquieted
within us. But let us take heed we do not always measure Gods anger, by this
disquiet; for the disquiet may be the means to take away his anger. It Is true,
that there are sins of infirmity that will still creep upon us; there will be
a continual fight of the flesh against the spirit: But yet, if with an
unfeigned reluctance we can then but cry, either as this Prophet did: O that I
had the wings of a dove, that I might fly away, and be at rest: or as the
Apostle did: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? assure your self you shall not die, Sin may hang upon you, as the
Viper did upon S. Paul's hand, but poison you it cannot: It may bring a
damnability (as the School speaks) but not damnation.

Yea, but this is not all; Does not God sometimes would deep the hearts of them
he loves? Does he not leave them in the sense of his bitter wrath? Has not
this Saint of his felt as much, when he was enforced to cry, Will God cast me
off for ever? will he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone, does his
promise fail for evermore? has he forgotten to be gracious? has he shut up
his tender mercy in displeasure? Nay, has not the Son of God felt as much?
Were they not his words upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? What then can we vile worms expect? He that could hide his face from thee,
O blessed Savior, how shall he ever turn again his face to us? Yea but says
Saint Bernard, that turning away his face from him, is become the only cause
that he will look on thee. Since that time, says that Father, if God troubles
thee, it is, that thou should pray to him; if he flies from thee, it is that
thou should find him. Origin knew as much, when he said, Discedit Deus meus,
sed expecto iterum; venit, sed elabitur; elapsus redit, sed nondum teneo. My
God forsakes me often, but still I wait for him again; he comes, but again he
vanishes; and again I have him, though I cannot hold him. Saint Cyprian knew
as much, when he likened the accesses and recesses, these commings and goings
of God, to the quick flashes of Lightning; the entrance and departure sudden:
for Heaviness may endure for a night, but as sure as the morning Sun shall
arise, so sure shall thy morning joy, for joy comes in the morning. And so from
this way we pass unto the third, a way rather to look on, then walk in: for
this is Cains way, nec Bona, nec Tranquilla, a Conscience that is neither Good
nor Quiet.

An ill Conscience is a sleeping Lion, as soon as it awakes, it murders; or
like a Match laid to fire a train of Powder, it burns dimly on, till at last
at one fearful clap it blows up all. For this is the Devils method, first he
makes us senseless, we feel not sin at all; next, he makes us desperate, we
feel our sins too much. In the senseless Fit, we live as if there were no
Hell; in the desperate Fit, we die as if there were no Heaven. But make haste
to get out of this way, all ye that love your souls. Do but conceive of God
that he is not such an one, as by any absolute, peremptory decree has either
designed, or ordered, or sealed you to damnation beforehand; nor such a one
that necessitates any of you to perdition: but as that communicable, diffusive
good, that has so often proclaimed, he would have All men saved. For though at
the Tribunal of your unquiet Consciences, your sins stand up against you as a
Cloud of witnesses, though the Evidence be brought in, the Accusation proved,
the Sentence given, yet as the condemned Felon at the Bar has his Book to
save him, so God this day reaches out to every one of you a Book, that
learned, unlearned, all may read in; the Leaves of it, the pure flesh of your
blessed Savior; the letters of it drawn in blood; the pens that wrote it,
thorns and scourges; the clasps of the Book, Nails; the binding, the wood of
the Cross; and the Title of it, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. Read
then, O desperate sinner! Read but in this Book thy Miserere mei: read it
with a lively and active faith: and though thy soul be even at the brink of
death, the Sentence shall be reversed, thy Accuser shamed, thy Pardon sealed,
and thy Conscience quieted. God, I say, shall snatch thee as a brand out of the
fire, and pulling thee out of this way, shall direct thee to a better, the way
that we are now to speak of, tam Bona, quam Tranquilla, a Conscience as well
Good as Quiet.

As the end of all motion is Rest, so the last of these ways, the end of my
Sermon, is the way of rest: where the day is a perpetual Sabbath, the diet a
Continual feast, a Conscience Quiet, and Good too. Sure this must needs be the
Paradisus sine gladio, which Saint Bernard speaks of, the Paradise without a
sword, or Temp^^m Solomonis sine Malleo, the Temple built without the noise of
an Hammer. This, none but this, is the spiritual Arc of the Covenant, the
Court of God, the Closet of the Holy Ghost, what shall I add? But I have a
already said more then Saint Augustine did; for he had but named the Peace of
Conscience, to his Auditory, and they were so moved with it, as if in those few
words, he had shown them all the joys of Heaven: Beloved, my desire shall be
to leave you so affected, to leave you all in love with a good Conscience. So
far in love with it, as to prefer it infinitely beyond whatever else in this
life is dear unto you.

But the hearts of Men are in thy hands O God, to thee therefore we turn our
prayers, warm us all, we beseech thee with the comfortable beams of thy mercy,
inflame our cold affections, raise up our downe-cast souls, speak in thy soft
whispers, to the wounded Conscience, in thy loud thunder to the seared: Make
the Good Conscience Quiet, and the Quiet Conscience Good, that thy Judgments
may Reclaim the one, thy Mercies may Relieve the other, and thy Everlasting
favor Crown us All world without end, Amen, Amen, Lord Jesus.

THE END.

