DUKE Hamiltons Conditions, FOR Surrendering himself with all the Officers and
Soldiers under his command, and three thousand Horse and Arms to the
Parliaments Forces in the County of Stafford.

A hundred and thirteen Scots Colors brought up to the Parliament, with their
Order to send them to Colchester to be hung up in sight of the Earl of Norwich,
Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the Defendents in the said Town.

Also the taking of Sir MARMADUKE LANGDALE with eight other eminent Commanders,
and carrying them Prisoners to Nottingham Castle.

A Message from Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell to Major General Monrac about
putting to death 4000. Scots Prisoners.

A Letter sent by a Committee-man from the E. of Norwich, Sir Charles Lucas,
etc. to the L. General, to march away with Drums beating, and Colors flying.

The Surrender of Deal Castle in Kent to Colonel Rich, and Colonel Hewson.

Printed for R. B. 1648.

Duke Hamiltons Conditions for surrendering himself, and all Officers and
Souldidiers under his Command, with 3000. Horse and Arms to the Parliaments
Forces.
FRiday the 25. of this instant August, were brought to the House of Commons by
one Mr. Noble (who came from Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell) 113. Colors of
Horse and Foot, which were taken from the Scots upon the taking of their whole
Body of Foot in Lancashire, consisting of about nine thousand, and putting the
Duke with such Horse as he had left to flight.

Amongst these Colors are Duke Hamiltons own Standard of white Searsnet, with
a Crown in the midst, and underneath this Motto,

DATE CAESARI.

The rest of the Colors for all that Regiment of Horse had the same Motto.

The Dukes Colors for his Regiment of Foot were also white, and (which is more
then usual) had this Motto,

For Covenant, King and Kingdom.

A great number of Horse-Colours are yet to come in, and when they are all
brought together, it is conceived the Parliament will give order for hanging
them up (as Trophies) in Westminster Hall, the Abbey, or some other eminent
place.

The Duke fled with a party of Horse into Cheshire, where the Country rose
with so much gallantry and resolution, that with some help of the Soldiery in
those parts, they took above a hundred prisoners at Namptwich; Colonel Moore,
who at this time was joined with Major Harley, and the rest of the Party which
of late gave the great blow to the Cavaliers Party commanded by Sir Henry
Lingen, and took himself and almost all the rest Prisoners, had intelligence
hereof, and fell down into Shropshire (a thousand effective) where they lighted
on many of the Scots in a frighted and most despicable condition, ten men
chased a hundred.

The Duke finding himself in a great straight, the Country rising on either
side of him, forces ready to encounter him before, and impede his march into
the Isle of Anglesey; and his Forces feared to look back, for that they
conceited, they always heard the noise of the trampling of the feet of
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwells men, who were more terrible to them then Lions;
the Duke with those remaining with him being in a fainting condition, turned on
one side, and rolled down upon Utcester in the County of Stafford.

When he came thither, he heard that the Lord Gray of Groby had a gallant
Brigade of Horse, and attended the motion of the Scots; presently comes news
that Major-Generall Lambert with a considerable party of Horse was but about a
days march behind; hereupon the Duke thinks of a way of submission, and
finding he and his Party could no longer escape the fury of the people, wish
themselves under terms of mercy, within the protection of the Lord Gray, and
the rest of the Soldiery, on condition he might have a Convoy, which he and
Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with the rest of the Officers, Nobility, Gentry and
Soldiery of Scotland that are with him, will doubtless have within few days
to bring them to the Parliament, or such other place as they shall appoint.

The Earl of Traquaire has already submitted and yielded himself prisoner,
with many others; and none of the rest are like to have better quarter, they
being environed, and little or no possibility of their escape.

Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell is in pursuit of that party of the Scots Horse
that fled North-wards, and to oppose the rest of their Forces commanded by
Munro; some small recruit added to him in this conjuncture of time, would soon
clear the North, and be a terror to any other that shall presume to invade that
part of this Kingdom.

Duke Hamilton finding the County to rise against him, who had taken about a
thousand of the three thousand horse, marched with him toward the South, and
the souldierie to pursue him, and the remaining party with him fearful of
being knocked on the head by the Country, sent a Message to the Governor of
Stafford, signifying, that he would capitulate with him, if he pleased on
conditions for himself and those that were with him, the Governor of Stafford
(a wise and valiant Gentleman) returns answer, that if himself and those with
him would lay down and submit to mercy they might, otherways they must take
what followed: The Duke stayed still at Uxcester, having left about 2000.
horse, (one thousand being cut off by the Country before they got thither) and
there enclosed on all sides, must be content with lower conditions, whereof
more shortly.

In the mean time Sir Marmaduke Langdale and eight other eminent Commanders
are taken in a mean house near Nottingham disguised, by 12. Troopers which
knew them not within an hour after they were taken, but afterward carried
them to Nottingham Castle to accompany Colonel Poyer, Colonel Powell, and the
rest taken by Lieutenant General Cromwell in Wales.

The Intelligence is, that Major General Monro, with the forces he brought out
of Ireland, and those Scots horsemen which escaped to him after the late rout
in Lancashire, are matching forward (and were then in Westmerland) to meet
Lieutenant General Cromwell, upon which the Lieutenant General has sent a
Trumpet to Monro, to give him notice, that in case he advances further
Southward, he must be forced to put four thousand and od prisoners he has of
theirs to the sword.

What answer was returned we yet hear not, but it is reported that the Lord
Calendar and Monro are joined, and therefore the less probability that they
will desist their further approach.

The Scots Colors before mentioned are carried down to the Leaguer before
Colchester, and will be set up in the view of the Town as so many signalls of
that admirable victory, and if the sight of them will not move the Defendents,
doubtless if Sir Marmeduke Langdale were there it would do it.

When the Besiegers had first notice of this great Victory against the Scots,
they gave the Defendents notice thereof by discharging the great Guns six times
over against the Town.

The next day the Earl of Norwich, Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the
Officers in the town sent out one of the Committeemen (which they keep
prisoners there) to the Lord General Fairfax, with a Letter, wherein they
signified, that if his Excellency would give way that the Officers should march
away to their own homes, or beyond the Seas, and the common Soldiers a mile
from the town, with Drums beating, and Colors flying, and there to lay down
arms, they would surrender the town, which the Committee-man begged as for his
life.

His Excellency returned answer, That when their condition was far better then
now it is, he should have refused to grant these Propositions, and therefore
had less cause to harken to them now; His Excellency doubts not to preserve
the rest of the Committee, and get the town within four days; the Cannon
began to make battery against the walls on Thursday last, and if they do not
suddenly surrender, they must take what follows.

The Castle of Deal in Kent was surrended to Colonel Rich and Colonel Hewson
on Friday last, Sandown is all that holds out now in that County.

FINIS.

