Comfort and Counsel FOR DEJECTED SOULS. OR A Treatise concerning Spiritual
DEJECTION.

In which is HANDLED, 1 The Nature Of Spiritual Dejection. 2 The Working Of
Spiritual Dejection. 3 The Grounds Of Spiritual Dejection. 4 The Remedies Of
Spiritual Dejection.


And in which is held forth, Satisfaction to some particular Cases, and
general advice for any Soul who is cast down.

Being the Heads and Sum of diverse Sermons Preached to a particular
Congregation, From Psalm 42. last.

By John Durans, Preacher of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Church of Christ in
Canterbury.

(...)

Isa. 35.3 Strengthen the hands which are sick, and confirm the dejected
knees. Psalm 94.19. (...)

In the multitude of my tempestuous thoughts within me, thy consolations shall
abundantly delight my soul.

Printed at London by R.I. for Hannah Allen, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley.
1651.



This shade's the Authors outside: but this book
his inside opens. prithee do not look
Admiringly one either; Pass them over
as emptye shadows, for they are noe more.
Both books, and writers ( y'ea, and all things else
at best are shadows: but the bodye's Christ
Soul art dejected Christ alone can ease thee
and give both comfort, and council to raise thee.
A.P. THis Author has two Books already extant; the one is Entitled Sips of
Sweetness, or, Consolation for weak Believers.

The other is Entitled A Discovery of the Glorious Love of Christ to Believers.

A Dedicatory PREFACE, TO His Beloved-Ones, The Flock of CHRIST, over which the
Holy Ghost has made him OVER-SEER.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
THE heart of Christ (who is the chief Shepherd) is much set upon the feeding
of Believers (who are his chosen Flock: Ezekiel. 34.^ 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
) Before he came into the World, he did Prophecy, that he would feed his
Flock himself: And when he went out of the World: he charged his Servants
to do the like. When he had asked of Peter again and again, Ioh. 20.16, 17,
18.
whether he loved him: He required nothing as a seal thereof, but this, that
he should feed his sheep. Indeed, then do we declare our love unto our
Lord, when we feed his Flock which is amongst us, (as it is 1 Pet. 5.2.) And
if we do not this, we make void the end that he aimed at, in giving us (as
Pastors) to his people, which himself expresses in the promise to be this,
Ier. 3.15.
viz. The feeding of his People with knowledge and understanding. But while any
endeavor to do this, they are Pastors according to his own heart, id est,
such as himself is, and delights in.

This consideration (I humbly hope, I may truly say) has made an impression
upon my heart, both to desire, and endeavor to feed you, who are the Lambs,
the Sheep of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 1.7.
For thus it is meet for me to think of you all: and thus I have you in my
heart.

I must confess I have still thought and found that there is a great
difficulty, in this Divine work: And a great deal of holy VVisdome, and
Strength is requisite (which I hope you pray for, in my behalf) to feed the
Household of Christ with not only Meat, but with that which properly is their
Portion, and that in season. I remember our blessed Lord speaks of him as of a
rare Bird, and hard to be found; Who as a wise and faithful Steward, Luke
12.42 It Is (...). Demensum cibum; each soul has its measure, see Ephesians. 4.7
gives the Household their Portion of meat in due season. WHO THEN (says
Christ) IS THAT FAITHFUL AND WISE STEWARD? To be able to give meat (not
poison, nor Husks) and the portion of meat (that which is proper and fit for
each) and this in due season i. e. when it is peculiarly needful, and requisite)
I say to be able to do thus; requires not only faithfulness but wisdom
too, and that in a large measure.

And if you say you have not found me such a Steward, so Wise, and so
Faithful; I must sigh, and seal to the truth thereof: For alas! Who is
sufficient for this.

But albeit this be above my attainement, yet it is in my endeavor, a true
(though a weak) witness whereof, I hope the ensuing Treatise will be.

When it was delivered to your ear (which Job says, tryes words, as the mouth
does meat: Job 12.13.
) You were pleased to testify to this truth, that it was your portion of meat
in due season. And diverse of your professed, that your souls were fed and
refreshed by it, as by meat suitable, and seasonable for you.

This has made your entreaty prevalent with me, to represent it to your eye
in Print, to try it again.

And the most precious God grant that you may be led by his spirit in it, as
in a green Pasture, by the still Rivers, and that your souls may lie down
and feed therein [SO] as that those that see you, may justly speak of you, as
of a Flock and field whom the Lord himself has blessed. This is all that I
shall say to you about this Treatise.

But I shall take the advantage of this Press, to leave the Print of Three
Words, of advice upon your hearts. The words are these.

1 Keep to your Fold. 2 Eye your Shepherd. 3 Walk as Sheep.
1 Keep to your Fold: Beware of wandering, from Mountain to Hill, Jer. 50.6.
(which I may safely allegorize thus) of going from one high notion to another)
forgetting your resting place.

Certainly, the Churches of the New Testament, which are built upon the faith,
and walk in the order of the Gospel, Sion is the place. Christ the rest of
souls. It is he that gives. It is there that he gives rest.
are the places where Christ feeds, and where he makes his flocks to rest
at noone, In them are the footsteps of his flock, and these are the tents
where he feeds his Kiddes, as it is Cant. 1.7, 8. O never be as those weak
and wanton spirits, who wander from these Folds.

Dinah by wandering got nothing but a rape: And I wish some of late could not
say the like. It Is true, some are gone out from us, of whom I am not so
Apostolical as to say; but I must be so charitable as to pray, it may never
appear they were not of us.

But its your mercy, that as yet you stand: O be not high minded but fear,
least you fall. For certainly, it is so far from being an ascent to
spiritual height, Heb. 10.25, 26.
that it is a degree of falling away, to forsake the Assemblies of Saints,
which are the Folds of Christ.

II, Eye your Shepherd, i.e. The Lord Jesus. It Is true, Men have a name of
being Shepherds, but it is but as ciphers have of being figures, which all know
are nothing, except one stand by them, Even Paul himself was not a
substantial Shepherd. It was not he, but Christ that did all. And certainly,
except Jesus Christ be with us, we neither be nor can do any thing.

I beseech you therefore always to eye him, for it is he who is the Shepherd,
and Bishop of your souls, as it is, 1 Pet. 2. last.

Now in your eying Christ, take these seasonable directions, viz.

Eye him as 1 Substantial. 2 Sweet. 3 Sacred.


1 Eye Jesus Christ as substantial; let never that blackness, and Blasphemy
over-cloud your heads, and hearts, which has made some to think and speak of
Christ as of a form and shadow. How sad an estate were our souls in, if Jesus
Christ were but a shadow, and yet the Socinians make him no more, while they
deny his making any substantial satisfaction for us; for they rather make him
a mere Pattern of what we should do, then a mediatory Patient of what we
should suffer; and so deny him to be a substantial Savior. And thus likewise
the Seekers overthrow the substantiality of Christ, who speak, and think of
him only as a form of God, putting forth it self for a time, and annihilated
afterward; And who professedly maintain, That Christ was but a shadow of what
God would do in our Flesh, and that themselves are as substantially God as he.
But alas! how are they deceived? I hope you have not so learned; Psalm. 39.6.
for you know, that every man walks in a vain show, and Christ is the
substantial, and express Image of the Fathers glory; Heb. 1.3. Col. 2.9.
and that the Godhead it self substantially dwells in him. Indeed, all things
besides Christ are but mere shadows, Col. 2.17
he is the Body, he is the Substance, eye him, and honor him so.

2 Eye your Shepherd as sweet; entertain no hard thoughts of the Lord Jesus:
Persuade your souls he has both done, and suffered all things for your sakes.
He has suffered for all your wanderings, though you were as sheep going
astray, as it is, 1 Pet. 2.24.25. He works all for you, and in you; and there
remains nothing more for you to do, but to make sure to your selves by faith,
that which he has made sure in its self by love. It is true, if you wander,
his Crook shall gather you; and it may be his Dog worry you; but still he is
sweet, for it is because he will not loose you. It is true, you must not be idle,
he will have you pray, read, hear, believe, do, etc. but these things shall
rather be, as your pleasant walks in his ways, then any painful works. In
all his Dispensations toward you he is, and you shall find him sweet,
therefore eye, and love him so.

3 Eye your Shepherd as sacred; Remember though he love Sinners, he loathes
sin. Though he did bear the guilt of sin upon his bache, yet he will not
bear with the filth of sin in your bosom. O! let the words, and tenets of
those, that slight sin as nothing, and speak of prophannesse as high as of
Piety, and fancy themselves as holy, and happy in acts of sin, as in good
duties: Let these and the like, be as the first begotten of Monsters, and
abominations to your hearts. It is the duty of Saints to beware, not only of
filthy, but of foolish talking; to avoid not only acts, but appearances of
evil; 1 These. 5.22.
to hate not only Works, but Garments defiled with the flesh. And fornication,
and all uncleanness is so far to be avoided, Ephesians. 5.2, 3 Jud. 23.
that it is not once to be named by Saints. Remember, your Shepherd when he was
but a Child was holy, Act. 4.27
and when he was perfect, and at the right hand on high, he sent his holy
Spirit to Peter, to proclaim this to all the Flock scattered up and down,
that he was holy, and that they should be holy too, 1 Pet. 1.16. this Peter
writ as he was moved by the Holy Ghost.

Eye therefore your Shepherd as he is, i. e. sacred, and do you labor to be
like him in all your conversation. Thus shall you do that which is my last
advice, viz.

3 Live as Sheep; Be innocent and harmless, be meek and patient, take heed of
being Wolves in Sheeps clothing, or of being Sheep in Wolvish clothing;
Neither be, nor do as Wolves: Bite not, nor devour one another, live in love,
as Lambs in one Fold. Show your discerning ear, in not following Strangers;
and your obedient ear in following of Jesus Christ. His Sheep love him, so
do you; and by this also, Let all men know that you are his Sheep, that you
love one another.

But affection has carried my Pen beyond my intention, suffer me only to
acquaint you with my desire for you, and my desire to you, and I have done at
present.

My desire for you is, That of those whom Christ has committed to me, I may
loose none; but that at the Great day I may say; Here am I, and the Sheep thou
have committed to me.

My desire to you is; That you would pray for me, that utterance (I say again,
Ephesians. 4.19
utterance) may be given to me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known
the Mystery of the Gospel; and that I may feed you, not of constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy Lucre, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4.
but of a ready mind: Neither as being a Lord over Gods heritage, but as a
faithful, loving, Wise, and diligent Shepherd: That when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, I may receive a Crown of glory, which Christ shall give to me
in that 2 Timothy 8.4
day; and not only to me, but to all that love his appearing.

But this thing I hope ye daily do, and that I have no need to put you further
in remembrance of it; I shall therefore break off, when my heart has
subscribed that I am beloved,

Your loving Pastor under Christ, and laborious Servant for Christ: John Durant.

To the READER.
Friend:
I Have always thought, (and still do) that there are two sorts of People
whom we ought to eye in all our Preaching, viz. desperate sinners, and
despairing Saints; the former need Corasives, the latter Cordials. It is, and
should be our work, and wisdom, to endeavor the humbling of the one, and the
heightening of the other: The first are to be made to know their
transgressions, the second are to be told of their pardon. And with reference
to both these, Christ has furnished us with convicting, and comforting gifts
and grounds.

It is the second sort which I eyed in the Preaching, and printing of these
ensuing Notes, and if thou be of this sort, I shall not need to invite thee to
read, but rather beseech thee to believe, that all the comforts which are in
Christ are for thee; for to this end he was anointed, that he might proclaim
the glad tidings of peace, pardon, liberty, acceptance, etc. to such as thou
art.

If thou be of the first sort, viz. A desperate presumptuous sinner, I say to
thee, Hands off, as yet thou have no part in the comforts of God. Christ will
certainly make thee (in a measure) know what sorrow means, if he intend thee
joy. Thou will be dejected before thou art exalted, and surely could thou
but see thy state (whilst a presumptuous sinner) thou would cry out, What
shall I do to be saved? But hoping better things of thee, and such as
accompany salvation, I shall acquaint thee only with four things about this
ensuing tract.

1 That it is the substance of many Sermons, and that when it was preached, it
was by much, more then now it is. Yet,

2 That the abatement in the printing, from what it was in preaching, is not
material. Things are here in brief, which then were more largely opened; and
I presume, thy eye will reap as much by a little, which is still before thee to
look upon; as thine Ear can by a great deal more, which (though it be
longer, and larger in the receiving of, yet) is quickly passed by and forgotten.

3 The subject treates with dejected souls, to whom the sweetest words of
freest Grace are little enough; And therefore if thou think some passages tend
to a presumption (though none I know of are so) remember dejected souls are
far enough from that, being more ready to despair then to hope,
notwithstanding the clearest discoveries of Christ's love and sweetness.

4 The whole was at first intended for, and delivered to a particular
Congregation in a private way; And had not they sealed to it, as to the truth
of Christ, it had been buried in the dark, and never come to this public
light.

I have only two Requests to make to thee, and I have done with thee.

My First Request is this, That thou be not hasty in reading; But that thou
meditate on what is tendered. The Be which only lights upon a flower, gathers
no honey: Its her abiding a while, that suckes out the sweet. Such Readers get
but a little, who rather run over, then read a Book. And that person will
find but little sweetness in a cordial, who only holds it a little while in
his mouth. Its meditation which renders truths sweet. I have endeavored to
write much in a little; and I dare humbly promise, that if thou will but weigh
and consider seriously; what I say to any Head, thou will find a great deal
more matter then words. Its true, I have not, handled things so largely as I
might; but yet I have suggested what might be sufficient to my purpose, which
is, not so much to convince the disputeing Heads, as to comfort the dejected
Hearts of Christians.

This therefore is my first Request that thou meditate on what thou read.

My next Request is this, That if in any part (or in the whole) thy attainment
be above what is here offered, that thou do not slight it altogether upon that
account.

Even David himself was sometimes aloft, and never thought of those
dejections, under which he afterward groaned.

And peradventure, though now thou keep holy day, and feast with Christ, in
full assurance: A day or hour of temptation may come, in which thou may be
glad of a crumme of comfort; And then this poor tracte may be of some use to
thy soul.

In the interim pity and pray for those who either are in, or liable to a
dejected state, needing both comfort and counsel too.

And in so doing, thou shall further the design (and indeed particularly and
singularly oblige the Author) of this tract, who is,

Reader, Thy faiths friend, and Souls-Servant. JOHN DVRANT.

SECT. I.
PSALM. 42, 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of
my countenance, and my God.


CHAP. I.
The preamble unto the Text, in a brief view of the whole Psalm, holding
forth the occasion and the division thereof.
THese words are a spiritual Soliloquie of holy David; who now as in private
speaks to, and argues with his own soul, in regard of some sadnesses, and
disquietings which at present did oppress his spirit. And there is a great
deal of precious matter in these words, deserving our Observation, Meditation,
and Imitation.

I shall in a word touch upon the occasion, and the scope of the whole Psalm:
So shall we the clearer see the intention of this verse.

It is thought (and that very probable) that the occasion of this Psalm was
either the flight unto which he was exposed by Saul; or the flight unto which
he was exposed by Absolon. Clear it is, at the penning hereof, David was
absent from Jerusalem and the Tabernacle; the consideration of which, fills him
with sorrow, and that sorrow sets him upon the composing of this Psalm: So
that whatsoever was the remote, sorrow was the proximate occasion of the
penning hereof. Now this sorrow appears in the whole Psalm generally: And
more particularly it discovers in self in these branches.

1 In the vent thereof. 2 In the cause thereof. 3 In the depth thereof. 4 In
the effect thereof.
First, David's sorrow vents it self in the 1, 2, and 3, verses of the Psalm;
as the Heart pants after the water Brooks, so pants my soul after God,
verse. 1. Never was poor Heart pursued more by a company of Dogs, then he was by
his enemies: And never did Heart so pursued, bray after the Brooks; as he did
after Jerusalem and the Tabernacle (the place and types of Gods presence) My
tears (so he vents himself) have been my meat day and night, ver. 2. Sad
soul, his grief fed upon its self, and besides mourning, his soul had no
meat. His soul also was poured out as water (for so the word signifies) verse.
4. (...)
Thus his sorrow vents it self.

Secondly, He opens the cause thereof, which was mixed and mighty. One while
his present absence from Jerusalem, minds him of his former enjoyments. He had
gone up with a multitude, making bo^y mirth, but now he was deprived thereof,
verse. 4. Another while he considered the sad speeches of his insulting
adversaries, who continually said, where is thy God, verse 10.

Thirdly, he describes the depth of his sorrow, setting it forth to have
overwhelmed him. He professes it had cast him down, (verse. 6.) And that he was
in the deeps, (verse. 7.)

Lastly, He declares the effect of all this; now, that is held forth as double.

1 Supplication. 2 Expostulation.
The first effect of his soul grief was Supplication: His prayer was to the
God of his life as it is verse. 8. Oh when shall I come before thee O God, (ver.
2.) To this he adds,

Secondly, Expostulation (as another effect of his grief) and this
expostulation is hinted to be.

1 With God. 2 With himself.
1 He expostulates the matter with his God: I will say unto God my rock: why
have thou forsaken me, ver. 9.

2 He expostulates also with himself: Why go I mourning, etc. as in that
verse: But especially in the words of the Text. Why art thou cast down O my
soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.

CHAP. 2.
The explication, with the division, and doctrines of the Text.
I Shall explicate the words of the Text a little, so shall we be the better
able to understand the meaning of them; and to draw forth Observations from
them.

Why art thou cast down O my soul? and Why. The word or particle translated
Why, (...)
is and may be otherwise translated. As now to instance.

1 It may be translated What. Job 11.8.
And so it is as an inquiry into the truth of this trouble: David does as it were
cunningly work upon himself; and say, What art thou cast down Oh my soul? is
it so indeed? Tell me (oh my soul) art real in thy grief? art thou as much
troubled as thou seem to be? What, is it so?

2 It may be translated How. And so it is a word of admiration: Psalm. 36.8.
as if David did admire to see his soul thus cast down, and it is as much as if
David should say, How (Oh!) how art thou cast down, O my soul? how low do
thou lie? how sadly do thou sit? how exceedingly art thou troubled? Oh! how
is it with thee?

3 It may be translated, after what manner, Job 25.4.
And so it is, as if David should ask his soul, What kind of sorrow this was
which had possessed him? and in what manner it was that he was troubled. In
what way art thou cast down O my soul?

4 It may be translated Wherefore, And thus it may look two ways.

1 To the end, (...) aliquando ponitur pro (...) sicut Mal. 2.15.
and it is as much as if David should say; Wherefore art thou cast down? for what
end? Tell me O my soul, what is the end that thou do aim at, in this
sorrow? what is thy design in being cast down? Thus it may be an inquiry into
the end. And 2 It may look to the cause, and so it is as much as for what cause,
Job 19.28.
or reason art thou cast down? Can tell why it is thus? Say O my soul! what
is indeed the reason of thy being thus cast down?
Cast down, (...)
The word signifies properly to bow down, or to lie flat, or along upon the
ground: thus the word is applied to worship or to mourning, In the Psalm. 38.6.
you have the word in its native signification translated, and applied to
mourning. I am troubled (says David) and I am bowed down. Its the same word:
As joy in the power thereof lifts up, so sorrow in the power thereof casts down:
Joshua full of trouble and sorrow casts himself down, prostrate o^ the earth,
Josh. 7.6. David's trouble lays him prostrate (as the word signifies) yea he
does prostrate or cast down himself: Co^jugatio Heth-pahel est significationis
recip^o^ae.
His sorrow makes him his own over-thrower; his soul casts down it self, for
so the word in its conjugation signifies, as the learned know.

O my soul, (...)
The word is put for the whole soul, I conceive in this place (as it is in
some other) David's whole soul was grieved: sorrow had seized not upon a part
only, but upon the whole.

And why art thou disquieted: the word signifies properly to be tumultuous,
(...) from (...) tumultuari, etc.
either as the Sea is in a storm, or as a people are in a tumult. In Psalm. 46.
ver. 3. its applied to the Seas: and Psalm. 65.7. its applied to people. Indeed
sorrow in the strength of it, causes a storm, and a tumult in the soul: It
makes every thing to be out of order, as things are in a tumult.

Within me: Psalm. 3.1. (...)
It may be, (and sometimes is) translated against me. Sorrow is against the
soul: Grief is an enemy: yea, where it prevails, it makes the soul an enemy
to its self, David's soul was disquieted against him.

Hope thou in God; The word properly signifies to expect, or to wait for, with
expectation; yea, it includes a patient tarrying a while. Thus it is said Noah
stayed or tarried, (...) from (...) expectare.
Genesis 8.10. Sorrow renders us impatient. Usually every passion when it is
predominant overthrowes patience. David therefore bids his soul to be patient,
and in that patience to stay a little, and yet to expect God at last. (...) Its
as much as (...) in Greek, or, (...) in Hebrew.
For so he adds. For I shall yet praise him. Stay soul (says David) For the
particle sometimes has the force of a final cause; As in that Job 3.11. Why
the breasts that I should such, (...) i. e. For what end did I suck. Thus here
it may be used: and David may tacitly answer his soul; which might be ready
to say (as he said) what should I wait for the Lord any longer. 2 King. ult.
Why (says David) wait (O my soul) for this end, I shall praise him.

I shall Yet. The particle is sometimes rendered Still, or Always. (...) Psalm.
84.4.
David knew however he was cast down now, yet he should always praise. And
hereafter he should still praise God, notwithstanding any thing now.

Praise him: The word signifies in its first, and most genuine sense, to
confess (and is so translated sometimes. (...) from (...) Ezr. 9.2. Dan. 9.1.
) And happily there is this in it here. As if David did hint to his soul, that
however he might have hard unbeleeving thoughts of God at present, yet
notwithstanding hereafter he should [confesse] this as his weakness (as
sometimes he did, Psalm. 77.10. I said this was mine infirmity.) And he should
confess God was his God, and his salvation, and this he should do in a song of
praise* when he should worship toward the Temple (from whence he was now
banished) and praise his name for his loving kindness and truth: (as it is
Psalm. 138.2.) i: e: (...)
confessing (for its the same word) both his loving kindness; and his truth;
Who is the health of my countenance. In the Hebrew it is only thus, the healths
(in the plural number) of my countenance.

And in truth, this will stand very fit with the former: David tells his soul,
he should yet confessingly praise Gods salvations, which he showed to him. Yea,
and that he should confess him to be his God, (however now he might doubt it,)
for so it follows, and my God.

So that now put altogether, and it amounts to thus much; as if David should
say, What art thou cast down O my soul? How strangely is it? In what way is
it? For what end, or cause is it, that thou do thus bow down, and storm thy
self? Stay a little (O my soul) wait for God in expectation: For yet
notwithstanding, all thy present distempers, I shall confess my weakness, and
praise him for the salvations of my countenance, and for his being my God still.

Thus you see the words opened. I will give a Reason why I speak to David's
Expostulation. rather from this last verse, then from the fifth verse.

The Reason is, because it is here set out fuller then there, (though happily few
mind it) this last is (as it were) a second Edition with Additions, for there
are two additions in this verse unto that.

First, In that it is but said, I shall praise him for the help of [his]
countenance; But here it is, I shall praise him for the help of [my]
countenance. In that he acts faith, as we say in Thesi, in this, he does it
in Hypothesi. In that, he believes Gods salvation, or saving help imminent;
(as it is in himself) In this, he believes it eminent, or flowing out from
him. There David only says, he shall praise God as a Savior; here he
says, he shall praise him as his Savior. It Is one thing to believe the
healths of Gods countenance, another thing to believe the healths of our
countenance. Here David applies the healths of Gods countenance, to his own,
there he does not, this is one addition.

The second is more visible, for here he adds, that he shall praise him as his
God (which is not at all there;) There it is only, I shall praise him the health
of his countenance. Here it is, I shall praise him the health of my countenance,
and my God.

Now in this verse, which is the pattern of holy expostulation with ones
soul, with reference to sadness: we may note these particulars.

1 The object of this expostulation: and that is David's own soul. Its not
enough to expostulate with God, so he did, verse the 10. But we must
expostulate with our selves. So David does here. 2 The manner of the
Expostulation, it is rational, and it is serious: Here are two Whyes, [why] cast
down? and [why] disquieted. 3 The charge that he lays upon his soul: He
commands it to wait, to tarry, to expect God. 4 The ground of all this; both
why David did thus expostulate, and why he did charge his own soul: and that
was, because he knew, did believe, and was confident, he should yet (for all
this) praise God, etc.
CHAP. 3.
The Doctrines which arise from the Text.
HAving thus opened and divided the Text; it will not now be difficult to draw
forth the Doctrines. The kernel is visible, when the shell is cracked: And the
grain is clear, when the buske is threshed.

There are four Doctrines which I shall gather (as the principal grain in this
floare:) And (if Christ will help me in the managing of them) they will be
bread to eat.

I. Even the choicest Saints, and such as are according to Gods heart, are
liable to spiritual dejections, and disquiets. II. Its the wisdom, and should
be the care of Saints when they are cast down, not to give way thereunto; but
to argue the case with their own souls. III. Saints in their deepest
dejections, when they are most disquieted, should be content to tarry and wait
for Gods cure, and comfort. IV. Its the duty, and the glory of Saints, to act
faith, and to believe, even then, when they are cast down lowest, and see God
least.
These four Doctrines, I conceive lie clear in these words of David. And
albeit I dare not say, but there are others, yet I conceive these the chief
truths, which the spirit would teach us from this Text.

I shall show how each Doctrine is deduced from, and may be observed in the
words, as I handle them particularly, and by themselves.

CHAP. 4.
The first Doctrine spoken unto, and proved from the Text and Examples.
WHat was David's case, has been others, and may be ours: This therefore is
the first Doctrine which I shall speak unto (and indeed be largest in) viz. That

Even the choicest Saints, and such as are according to Gods own heart, are
liable to spiritual dejections, and disquiets.

Surely, though this be not simply expressed, yet it is so strongly included,
that he that runs may read it.

That David was a choice Saint none will deny; and that he was according to
Gods own heart, Act. 13.22
God himself does witness. Now 'twas he who here speaks, and says, Why art
thou cast down O my soul!

And David was not single: His case was but as others have been. Job was
dejected before him; his soul was cast down, (as we say) with a witness,
when he rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground,
(as it is, Job 1.20.) he was much disquieted: And as Job went before, so Hezekiah
came after David, in soul dejection. Surely his soul was cast down, when he
did chatter as a Crane, and mourn as a Dove: as it is Esaias 38.14.

I need not tell you of Asaph, or of Heman: Surely you have heard of their
dejections, and disquiets. If you have not heard, you may read their cases,
Psalm: 77. and Psalm: 88. Surely Asaph was much dejected, when his spirit was
overwhelmed: And I think you will grant Heman was much dejected, if you remember
that he was distracted; Surely he was low, when in the lowest pit, and surely
he was very much cast down when he cried, he was free among the dead.

But why do I speak to you of others, when I may appeal to your selves.
Saints, have you never been sad? were your hearts never cast down? have your
spirits never been disquieted? what have you always gone upon the Hills? have
you never been in the Valleys? In your way (at least to Syon, did you not
pass thorough the Valley of Baca? Though you now have beauty, had you never
ashes? Have your garments of praise, made you forget the spirit of heaviness.

But why do I renew grief by its remembrance? your sighings seal to this
truth, that even choice souls may be cast down.

CHAP. 5.
The amplification of the Point in some particulars.
I Shall handle this point (of spiritual dejections) something largely; and
the order which I shall walk by is this, viz. I shall endeavor to discover: 1
The nature of spiritual dejections, what it is, or what they are. 2 The
workings of them, what they are, and how they are. 3 The causes of them, whence
they flow, and how they arise.


The first thing which I shall speak unto is, the nature of soul dejections:
Now this, I shall be but breife in.

Spiritual dejection, or soul-casting down may easily be guessed at, if you
consider either,

On the one hand ( viz. the right) That the soul has some sweet, and
spiritual enjoyments; in the enjoyment of which it is much lifted up? Holy joy
puts the soul upon the Wing, and causes as it were a mounting upward. David
sometimes kept holy day (as it is verse. 4. of this Psalm) in that day he sang
no Psalm, but such as was sweet. Still he spoke with the voice of joy and
praise. But now consider again,

On the other hand (as I may say, the left) the soul is sometimes at a loss:
Sorrow sometimes plays its reakes (as we say) and turns joy out of doors. The
soul is deprived of wonted enjoyments, this now casts it down. Sorrow clips
the souls wings, it makes the spirit flag and faint, it turns festivalls into
mourning; It causes the souls Spring, to be as the Autumn; It brings on
Winter, and rain too; and affords the singing of no birds, but the Owl, and
the Pelican. And quite contrary to what the soul is when divinely elevated,
that it is while sadly dejected. So that as joy is the Springtime, and Summer
of the soul, sorrow is the Autumn and Winter. You know what is the nature of
Autumn and Winter: Flowers fade, leaves fall, cold nips, trees wither, sap
runs down, night grows long and dark too, ways grow dirty, air chilly,
all things look unlovely. Thus it is with dejected souls; their flowers fade,
their leaves fall, etc. By this you may guess at the nature of spiritual
dejections. Yet a little more.

In the Text are two words hinting the nature of spiritual dejections.

One is casting down, which (as I noted in the explication) is as much as
laying the soul level: the bending or the bowing down thereof. Its the soul
set on the dunghill, or lying prostrate on the ground. This is one word.

The other is disquieted: Now that word properly (as I opened it) notes a
storm, and tumult. This then holds forth the nature of spiritual dejections,
to be the souls storm, and tumult.

The soul cast down is afflicted and tossed with tempests, and not comforted
(as it is Esaias 54.11.) O thou afflicted, tossed with tempests, its spoken unto
dejected Syon.

The soul cast down is, as a tumult, things are in it, in a confused,
disorderly way. As when people in a rout or riot are out of all order, so is
the soul when dejected.

This shall suffice to hint at the nature of spiritual dejection. Its (you see
in brief) the souls low posture: Its a David on a dunghill, in a valley: Its
the souls throwing it self down: Its the soul in a tempest, tossing and
tumbling to and fro: or its the soul as in a tumult, quite out of the even,
and orderly frame, in which it sometimes was, and always should be.

CHAP. 6.
Showing the workings of a soul* cast down.
THe nature of spiritual dejection, being seen in the general, we shall now
take a view of the Workings thereof in particular.

Now the working of spiritual dejection, appears, in 1 Fears and Doubts. 2
Grief, and Sorrows.


First, the working of spiritual dejection, appears in fears and doubts: The
soul cast down is full of doubts. One while it doubts this thing, another
while that, Now this fear fills it, anon another.

For look as the soul lifted up, is full of hope, and assurances, (and carried
forth in expectations) so the soul cast down is full of fears, and
exceedingly perplexed with doubtings. Oh says the poor soul, (dejected and
disquieted) I fear this, and I doubt this: Can you resolve me in this doubt; or
help me in this fear, and the like.

I shall instance in several fears and doubts, which usually trouble the
soul, when, and while its cast down.

First, The soul when dejected, it fears the work of grace: It says, I
fear whether ever God wrought upon me: at least I doubt it. Sure I am (says
the dejected soul) God is a rock, and his work is perfect: But alas! there
are so many imperfections in my soul, that I question his work in me: I know
God works both to will and to do: But alas! though I will sometimes, I do
never. I fear God has not wrought in me; Paul was confident, that where God
began a good work, he would perfect it. And this makes me diffident, that he
has not begun at all in me; I see so many debillities, deceits, decays, that
surely I may say (as he) if the Lord be with me, why is all thu^ befallen me,
Judge. 6.13. The soul knows the work of God is glorious: And sure it is that
if he will work, none shall hinder: But Oh (says it) I find my soul so
in-glorious, and I feel so many hindrances, that I doubt I shall dishonor God
to think, sure I am a afftaid to say, he has wrought upon me. This is one
fear.

Secondly, The soul cast down, sometime discovers its fears in other terms,
its dejection works up in other doubtings: As now, whether its grace be true,
or counterfeit. Grace that is false, is frequent, but that which is true, is
scarce. Common workings are ordinary, but special ones are rare. Counterfeit
coin is in Beggars purses, but true coin is the portion of the rich. I am
sure says the soul (when it is dejected) there is a fained says, and a false
love. Christ eyes unfeigned faith, (and such Tymothies was) but I fear mine is
not. The Scripture calls for unfeigned love (let love be without dissimulation,
Romans 12.9.) and the Apostles love was such: Yea but I doubt mine. For my part
(says the poor cast down soul) I question not whether the faith of others in
the head [Christ] be sound: or whether the love of others to the members
(believers) be sincere: But I doub: my own. True (says the soul) I though
once I bad faith in Christ, and love to the brethren; and that my gold was not
counterfeit, etc. But now I fear and doubt all. Then

Thirdly, Other souls cast down, have other fears: sure says one, whatsoever
work is only in the letter, it is death, and not life: and for my part, I fear
whether mine have been by the spirit. I doubt (says the soul under
dejections) whether my calling were orely by the voice of man in the bare
letter, or of Christ in the spirit. It Is true, the word came to some, not in
word only, but also in power, and in the Holy ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. But alas! I
doubt whether it came so to me. There are convictions, and comforts, which are
but natural, legal, and false, And I doubt whether mine have not been such.
There are indeed convincings and comfortings, which are Evangelicall and
spiritual: Christ says, the Holy Ghost shall convince of sin, and of
righteousness: but I fear he never did convince me of either: thus works the
disquieted souls of some. Again

Fourthly, The fears of some in spiritual dejection appear, about their holy
actions (as hearing, praying, repenting, etc.) And about these, the fears of
the Soul cast down, works thus: I do sometimes pray, (or rather endeavor to
pray) I do sometimes mourn for sin, or rather I do some thing like repentance,
But alas! whence does this proceed? I doubt the principles whence these acts do
arise, are but poor, and low, and carnal. It may be education, profession,
ingenuity, morality, or (at best) some common illumination, (...)
are the only things that act me in all. Peradventure I do not approve of God
according to my knowledge of him: And if so. I am no better then the Heathens,
Romans 1.28. It may be (and I fear it) that my observanced the Commandments is
no better then the young man's, Mark. 10.19, 20. I doubt my holy (a rather
seeming holy) actions, proceed mort from light (that I dare not do otherwise,)
th^^ from love, that I delight to do it. To do (...) is one thing, and to do
well is another. Bonum and been valde differunt.
I fear what ever my actings be, that my principles, and aims are not as they
should be. Some have bad ends, in good works; others do spiritual actions,
from carnal principles: and I fear whether this be not my case. Thus likewise
some souls (when they are cast down) vent themselves.

Fifthly, There are some who when cast down, breath forth other fears; as now
touching their sincerity. I doubt (says the dejected soul) whether my heart be
sound. There are many painted Sepulchers, and am not I one of them? there be
many who at best are but seeming Saints, and I fear I am such. The Prophet
says, The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, and he
asks also, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. For my part I do not know it: Surely,
I fear, nay, I find my heart desperately wicked and deceitful. I fear I
look one way, (Water-man-like) even while I row another. I fear least I be a
child of darkness transformed into an Angel of light. Sometimes I doubt, if
Christ should now come to sever the lambs from the Goats, that I should have
no more of a sheep then the skin, and that it being plucked off, I shall
appear as I am, Job said indeed, his heart should not reproach him so long as
he lived, Job 27.6. But I am sure, mine flies in my face every hour. Without
doubt I am but as a gilded grave; brave without, bad within. I must speak my
heart, I fear I am but an hypocrite.

Sixthly, Others there are dejected and cast down, whose dejection discovers it
self in fear, least corruptions get the conquest over them. Oh says the poor
soul! I find the flesh fighting against the spirit, and I fear the flesh will
get the day; at lest I doubt the spirit will not. Corruption is strong, and
grace is very weak. I fear I shall one day fall by the hand of sin. If I lie
down, corruption is with me, if I arise, its awake as soon as I: If I be about
my calling, or employments in the world, I perceive corruption dogs me, and
if I go to duty, it will not let me alone; nay often it is then most busy: I
fear, I fear, that I shall fall. Certainly I doubt I shall not stand long. Ah
Lord! (cries the soul dejected) any spoke is enough to set me a fire. Passion
is quickly stirred, and I speak vainly, yea, and vilely too. A little thing
makes me waspish, I am borne down with rash anger presently, Pride too, that
appears upon the least occasion. I can hardly pray with any inlargements, or
do duty with any affections, but presently pride pirkes it self up. Lust too,
that is ready to discover its life upon the least occasion: I can hardly look,
but I lust. Thus cries one, thus cries another, and all agree in this, they
fear sin will get the day: At least they doubt, whether ever their Pigmy-graces
(so some speak) shall be able to get the victory over their
Gyant-like-corruptions.

Seventhly, Some when they are cast down have greater fears then these: there
are dejected souls who cry out: Oh! they fear they never did savingly close
with Christ. To close with Christ in the way of the Gospel say they, (and they
speak truth,) is a mystery: and alas! they doubt, whether they have attained
it. There is a mere legal closing with Christ: which is built only upon some
qualifications in ones self; and which carries not the soul beyond the
Covenant of works: and some souls under dejection fear theirs is such. Woe
is me (says the soul) if my closing with Christ be not aright (and I doubt
it is not. Mat. 7.22.
) Some souls at the last shall come, and speak to him, as if they had closed
aright with him, and as if they had in truth an interest in him: and yet he
will say he knows them not. Now I fear, I fear least I am such a soul, and
least he will speak to me so. Its damnable to be deceived in this (says the
soul) and I doubt it. Thus the wave of fear in the storm of dejection, mounts
thus high in some souls.

Eighthly, There are some who it may be will say, they do not doubt much their
closing with Christ, but they doubt their keeping close. I fear (says some
soul cast down) that I shall deny Christ, There have been many Apostates, and
I doubt I shall make the number one more. Peter denied Christ in part, and for a
time, and I fear I shall do it altogether. I think I should sin in denial
of, before I should suffer unto death for Christ. I fear I am nearer allied,
and shall be more like to Demas then to Paul. Its true, there are some, who if
they had a thousand lives, could give them all for Christ; But I fear I should
not willingly give one. Christ says, if we deny him, he will deny us: And
sure he knows what I would do if called to it, (I fear I should deny him)
and therefore that he will do so by me.

In these and the like fears do the workings of spiritual dejection appear.
The soul when elevated, is not freer from, then when dejected, it full of,
fears and doubts.

CHAP. 7.
An addition of some other fears which appear as the workings of spiritual
dejection in some souls.
IT being my purpose to treat of spiritual dejections at large, See the second
Section.
and also to satisfy the soul in those doubts and fears, which discover
themselves in the soul, when and while its cast down: I shall add some other
fears unto the former. As

First, Some there be who (being dejected and cast down) are much disquieted
with fears and doubts about Prayer. As now, whether ever they prayed in all
their lives. And if they did, whether ever God did hear or regard any of their
prayers. Oh! says some souls who are cast down: Prayer is a choice
employment, a precious privilege, but alas! we never enjoyed it, something we
have done, sometime like prayer; but we doubt whether it were prayer, For

We fear our own hearts and spirits were never in it: Prayer only in the lip
is without life: and prayer if it be no more then words, is of no worth: God
regards the prayer which comes from the spirit, and heart: But we doubt, though
we have sometimes drawn near him with our lips, our hearts have been far from
him. Our prayers have been rather the fruit of our heads, and babbling of our
lips, then the breath of our hearts and panting of our spirits. And yet (say
some souls) Suppose our spirits were in prayer: We fear Gods spirit was not.
The father seeks such to worship him, as do it in the spirit: and the Apostle
calls for praying in the Holy Ghost. Now though our own spirit was in our
prayers, we fear Christ's spirit was not. It may be we have prayed in the
gifts of the spirit: But what are they without the spirit himself? Again (say
the same dejected souls) although we should think, and hope, that we have
prayed both in the sincerity of our own spirit, and in the strength of Christ's
spirit: yet we fear whether ever God has regarded. Surely, he has been always
angry with (for as yet he never answered any of) our prayers. And to call and
not be heard: to pray and not be answered, Pro. 1.28.
is a threatened judgment. This, oh this! is our fear, that we are those at
whose calamity God will laugh, as it is, Pro. 1.26.

Secondly, There are others who in their dejection vent other fears. As now,
about the word: whether ever it came to them as the word of God: and as good
seed upon good ground. Alas! cries one poor dejected soul: I have heard the
word often preached, but I fear to no purpose, for I think I never heard God
in it. It was the praise of the Thessalonians, that they heard the word; not as
the word of men, but as the word of God. But its my shame and sorrow, I have
rather heard men, then God. I read (says the soul) the Parable of the Sower,
and I remember there was but one good ground, which received the seed aright;
and I fear I am none of that, I doubt I am the high-way-ground, or the stony,
or the thorny, but sure I am not the good ground, i. e. one who with an honest
and good heart, having heard the word, does keep it: for sure I bring not forth
the fruit with patience. Thus the fears of some dejected souls work about the
word. But

Thirdly, Other dejected souls breathe forth fears about the Promises: As
whether they have right to them, or did ever in the spirit close with them. Oh
say some souls! the Promises are indeed exceeding great and precious: But are
they ours? we doubt it, my soul doubts (says one) when I read the Promises,
I do rather read the riches of others then my own. Alas! I fear, they are
none of mine, and I dare not (indeed cannot) close with them. Sometimes I have
climbed the outside of the Promise, I have read the letter; but alas! I never
was in the inside, in the spirit of a Promise. Its likely many hung upon Noah's
Arc without: But none were saved but those within. And I fear I was never
within the Arc of any Promise.

Fourthly, Some souls when cast down, fear their very abstinence from sin.
As now, whether they did or do abstain from sin, in a slavish way, for
fear; or in a Sonne-like way, for love. I fear (says the soul) I have, and
I do abstain from sin, rather from rational then from pious principles. I
doubt, I dread the coal of corruption rather for the fire of it, which will
burn me, then the filib of it, which will black me. I doubt its the cudgel
of wrath that drives me back, rather then the coard of love which keeps me
in, from sin. Good souls abstain from sin from heavenly principles as love
of God, desire of holiness, and I fear my principles are hellish, as fear of
damnation; and, or at best, but earthly, as shame of men, and the like.

Fifthly, Some souls when cast down cry out, Oh the sin against the Holy
Ghost. I fear (says a dejected soul) I have sinned unto death. I have sinned
against such strong light, and such sweet love, that I fear my sin is now
the unpardonable sin, which shall not, cannot be forgiven. I may well be
cast down, if that be my case which was Judas his: and I fear it is. Christ
says, all sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven, but that which is against
the Holy Ghost. Alas here is my fear! that I am guilty of that sin.

Sixthly, The fears of some when cast down, do not work thus high, yet they
vent themselves thus: Oh we fear we shall fall away. Angels fell, Adam fell,
others fall, and are we surer then they? Surely we are not so strong, and
therefore not so sure. Many have gone beyond me in the spirit, and yet (says
the soul) have ended in the flesh: and I fear I shall do so too. I go but
softly, I fall often, I look back many times; and I doubt, I shall never
persevere unto the death: what is it to begin well, and end ill? what is it to
have Ephraims righteousness? A morning dew. Alas! mine is no better (if so
good.) This is my case; and I may well be cast down, for I fear I shall fall.
The promise of the Crown is to perseverance. He that is faithful to the
death, shall have the crown of life: But I fear, I doubt, I shall not hold
out near unto death, for my heart misgives me, and I fear I shall fall away
ere long, and loose all at last.

CHAP. 8.
The other branch of the workings of spiritual dejections, which is grief and
sorrow.
HAving now gone over sundry doubts, and fears, which are the workings of
spiritual dejections: I shall touch in a word only upon the other branch, viz.
That of grief and sorrow. For

As the soul when its cast down, is full of fear, so likewise its full of
grief. Disquieted David vents himself, not only in fears, but in sorrows.
His tears were his meat day and night, as it is, verse.. 3. He went in
mourning, ver. 9. Sighs, complaints, expostulations: those also are the
workings of spiritual dejection. Ah Lord! what palenesse of face? what
wringing of the hands? what watering of the cheeks, does dejection produce?
what beating of the breast with the Publican? what weeping and crying with
Rachell? what questioning and crying with Mary, does casting down, cause?

There are two appearances of these kind of workings.

1 Within, The soul tosseth it self up and down: the heart rowles and
beats, as if it would break its passage through the body. How does the soul
talk with its self, and aggravate its grief? How is the heart smitten, and
withered as grass, as it is, Psalm. 102.4. The bowels boil and rest not, as it is
Job 30.26. 2 Without, The lips quiver, as it is Hab. 3.16. The eyes run down all
the night, as Lam. 1. the voice, that speaks faintly: And is there any sorrow
as mine? was ever soul as I am? Did you ever meet with any in my case?
Thus grief vents it self, and thus does the disquieted soul (as it thinks)
ease it self.

But I need not go about to paint these sorrows: some souls are able too
well (it may be) to tell what these workings of dejection are. Let this suffice
for that second head, viz. the workings of spiritual dejection.

CHAP. 9.
The causes of spiritual casting down.
HAving seen both the nature, and the workings of spiritual dejection, I shall
now come to inquire after the causes.

Its clear enough, that even holy and precious souls may be, and sometimes
are cast down, and disquieted: and if you now would know whence it comes to
pass, I conceive the reasons may be such as these.

1 Remainders of corruption. 2 Falls into sin. 3 Ignorance of the Covenant of
grace. 4 Spiritual indisposition to duties. 5 Want of former incomes. 6
Insulting of Satan, and enemies. 7 Some corporal affliction. 8 Appearance of
Divine wrath.
These I find to be the maine (though sometimes there are other) causes why
the soul is cast down.

1 Remainders of corruption. Sin gave the soul its first fall: 'Twas that
which first cast down Adam; and it is that which still disquiets the children of
Abraham. Its true, grace is the souls recovery from sin; whom God converts, he
does cure: But yet corruption being never totally in this life mortified, the
remainders thereof trouble the soul (even of a Saint) many times. The
remainders of corruptions are like unto the remainders of some peccant humors,
which (even after a sure recovery) do sometimes groan, and cause aguish
shiverings.

2 Falls into sin: Every new act of sin, is a tripping up of the souls
heels. When David fell into sin, he was cast down. Beleivers are liable to
falling into sin, and this makes them liable to failing in soul. Its no wonder
to see a soul disquieted in point of comfort, if it have been defiled in
practice of corruption. Its no marvel if Israel fall before the men of Ai, if
Achan be in the Camp. A sinning Jonah will soon make a storming Sea. And if
the soul have sinned, no wonder if it be in a tempest. But

3 Ignorance of the Covenant of grace. Indeed it is by grace that we stand; and
if we be ignorant of that, we shall soon be cast down. I am persuaded that
this is the greatest (I had almost said the only) reason why souls are at any
time Cast down; viz. they know not the Covenant of grace, at least they are
ignorant of it.

In 1 Its fulness. 2 Its freeness. 3 Its firmness.


1 They are ignorant of it in its fulness. What could disquiet the soul, if
it knew the Covenant of grace extended it self unto every sin in its pardon,
and to every grace in its supply, The soul is apt to limit the holy one of
Israel. Its apt to think there are some sins unto which the Covenant does not
extend. It beleives it may be, the Covenant of grace reaches to the pardon of
many sins; but questions whether it reach to all. If it did not question that,
why is it cast down so, that it doubts the pardon of some sins? Or

Secondly, They are ignorant of its freeness. How would the soul live above
disquiets, and dejections, if it did but know and believe the Covenant were
free, wholly free, constantly free, every way, and in every part of it free?
Its our misery, we are apt to mix works with grace; and to cloud the Covenant
with Conditions. Whereas we are to know, that the Covenant is only grace, the
nature of which is to bar out works. For if by grace, then it is no more of
works. OTHERWISE GRACE IS NO MORE GRACE; and if it be of works, then is it no
more of grace, OTHERWISE WORKS IS NO MORE WORKS: as it is in that golden
place. Romans 11.6. The soul when cast down says, it wants this condition, and
it wants that qualification: But alas! it knows not, that the Covenant gives
all, and requires none. Its free, infinitely free, and did the soul know this,
it would be raised, but its the ignorance of this that casts it down. And
besides,

3 Souls know not the firmness of the Covenant of grace: they are apt to
think it mutable. Did the soul but know, that Gods foundation stands firm,
and is still the same, surely it could not easily be dejected. Why consider, ye
dejected hearts! Gods Covenant is not changeable. Though you fail on your
part, yet he will be faithful on his. God will not cast off Israel for all that
they had done, as it is Jer. 31.37. His Covenant was as firm as heaven, though
their carriage had been as foul as bell. The Covenant of grace is the Covenant
of an unalterable, and unaltering God: God knew what fickleness was in the
soul ere he entered into Covenant. I knew (says the Lord) and Oh! mark it, mind
it souls) that thou would deal very treacherously: as it is Esa. 48.8. Gods
bow is still in the cloud; though the imaginations of the heart of man is
evil. Dejected souls measure God by themselves, but they know not his
thoughts are above theirs, They know not the firmness of his Covenant,
therefore it is that they are so often cast down.

Thus the ignorance of the Covenant of grace, is a prime and principal cause
of soul dejection. Then

4 Another cause of dejection is, spiritual indisposition unto duties. The
soul is (it may be) as Sampson was, it rises and finds its strength gone.
The soul peradventure could sail as with a full gale in duty heretofore, but
now (alas) it can hardly (as they say) stern the tide, i.e. keep up against
indisposition. The living waters, which were wont to flow out of the soul in
power, and fulness, are, it may be stopped; the soul finds not that
alacrity and* freeness, that it was wont to find. Time was, it could more
Godward, and Christ-ward upon the least breathing: But alas! Now the spirit
breaths, and blows strongly, and the soul is sluggish. It rises to go it may
be, but with that unwilling, willingness, and it strives to act, but with that
dead liveliness, that surely it thinks all its strength is gone, and that it
is but in vain to do any thing, etc. and this casts it down. Or

5 Want of former incomes in duties do deject some. Alas cry dejected souls! we
do as much as ever, but we want much of our incomes. Time was, I could hardly
lisp but God heard; and now I pray often, and no return at all. Job he cries
out: Oh that it were as in the months passed: as in the days when God
preserved me: when his candle shined upon my head; and when by his light I
walked through darkness, Job: 29.2, 3. Oh says the soul! I pray, read,
hear, meditate, confer, communicate, etc. as much, if not more then formerly;
and yet I enjoy less. What shall, or can I say to this? what, to sow much, and
reap but little: To eat, and not to eat enough; to drink, and not to be
filled; to earne wages, and not to put it into the bag, (so the soul alludes
unto that Hag. 1.6.) is not this strange? Sure I may well be disquieted, who
fish all night and catch nothing, who act much, and have but little, or no
income. Time was, when the spirit blew, and my spices flowed. Time was, when
the King sat at his table, and my spiknard smelt: Time was, when the father*
smiled, the son embraced, and the spirit warmed in every duty, in every
Ordinance. But now; oh now! I want these enjoyed incomes, and may I not well
be disquieted, and cast down?

6 The insultation of Satan and Enemies, Sometimes causes castings down.
Satan is impudent, and he does sometimes insult: if he perceive the soul a
little more then ordinary sad, he takes advantage presently to say, Where is
now your God? David was much disquieted, and went in mourning, because of the
oppression of the enemy, Psalm. 42.9. I am apt to think, Satan may at lest be
included in that word, the Enemy, For he is, (...) i. e. the enemy in an
especial manner, Ah Lord says the poor soul! the lamb may well tremble, when
the lion does triumph. Satan triumphs very terribly; He calls all my hopes into
question; he asks me where is my God? my Christ? my Comforter? He bids me
show him my Promises, and he demands what is become of my confidence. And may
I not be cast down justly, over whom Satan thus insults? And besides, as Satan
insults sometimes, so his children, wicked men, insult often. Jam 3.6. (...)
from (...) to kill.
And as if their tongues were set on fire with hell, they speak as their
father does. They say daily unto me where is thy God, ver. 9. Now this is a
killing to us say some souls. And truly if the Lord be with us, why then is
all this befallen us? (as he said when they were under the oppression of the
Midianites, Judge. 6.13.) Thus while Satan, and wicked men are so impudent, as
to insult; some souls are so weak as to be cast down.

7 Even corporal affliction is sometimes a cause of spiritual casting down.
A sick-body many times causes a sad soul. Hezekiah was sick, and that made
him sad: the tidings of corporal death, begat spiritual disquiet. That
tragical relation of Hezekiahs casting down: is titled thus, the writing of
Hezekiah King of Judah when he had been sick, Esaias 38.9. Indeed it falls out
so; that the soul (following the temperament of the body) is much disquieted,
when the body is afflicted. Many souls cheerful enough when in health, are
over sad when sick. If God afflict the body, we are apt upon that our selves,
to cast down the soul. Its needless in this to expatiate, experience too too
frequent shows this, that external affliction, is often the principal, and
first cause of internal dejection.

8 Add to all these in the last place this, viz. sense of Divine wrath. This
indeed of all the other is the greatest, and most grounded cause of spiritual
dejection. A little wrath will make the soul to stoop. If God in anger do but
touch the hills they tremble. His fury is poured out like fire (faith the
Prophet) and the rocks are thrown down by him, as it is, Nahum 1.6. Surely
(say some souls) we cannot dwell with everlasting burnings; and such are all
appearances of divine wrath. Well might Job (upon this ground say) is my
strenght, the strength of stones, as it is chap. 6.12. Alas! if his strength had
been the strength of rocks, and mountains; it must needs fail, when the
arrows of the Almighty were within him, as it is there verse. 4. It was this
which cast down David here deeply; for so he cries (as out of the depth) verse.
7. Deep calls unto deep at the noice of thy water-spouts; all thy waves and
thy billows are gone over me. I shall have occasion (peradventure) more then
once in this Treatise, to touch on this, therefore I shall say no more here,
but only this, that nothing has in it more force to cast down, even the
stoutest souls, then the sense of Divine wrath.

CHAP. 10.
Some Uses of the Doctrine, by way of Application.
YOu have seen now the nature of spiritual dejection, together with the diverse
workings and causes thereof. It stands us upon to mind these things and to
improve them: Christians you see you have cause enough to be cast down, and
even the choicest Saints, are sometimes for those causes really cast down, and
dejected.

There be but three words of Application which I shall touch on, in this
Section and conclude it.

First, Let this inform us of our imperfect state while we are in the flesh.
Our highest enjoyments are not so sure, as to deliver us from fear of falling.
Saints you see of the richest sort, even such as are choicest, are apt to be,
and sometimes are, much cast down. Its the vanity of some, that they think and
speak of present enjoyments above what is meet. Some have said, Souls may
come up to such a height, as that they neither shall, nor [can] be disquieted.
Yea, some go so far, as to censure all kind of doubting; and to conclude souls
in a- damnable state, because in a disquieted. Surely such have not learned
this truth as it is in Jesus. You see a David cast down, and disquieted: And
you hear that even choicest Saints, upon many causes, are liable to the like
dejections. Be informed therefore to take heed, how you dream of a perfect,
and unalterable enjoyment of rest here: Your rest, though unspeakeably sweet,
is not unchangeably sure. It Is possibly you may think, because you sometimes
rejoice with joy unspeakable, that therefore your enjoyment is unalterable. But
be not deceived, even after high enjoyments, you may be dejected. Even a Paul
after a rapture (as high as the third heaven) was cast down low by a messenger
from hell. David said once, he should never be moved; (...) the word is as
much as (...) i.e. well, or good pleasure.
yea, and his bottom was free grace; Divine good pleasure had made his
mountain so firm, Psalm. 30.6, 7. And yet mark this, David is now moved very
much, even to a soul-tumult. Howl Fir-trees for the Cedar is fallen. Be not
high-minded ye babes in Christ, since father may, and do fall. Certainly if this
be a truth (as its clear it is) that Saints of the highest seize may be,
and sometimes are cast down, then surely, there is no perfect unalterable state
of peace, and unsettlednesse here. Its true, when we come home, we shall sit
down, and be disquieted no more: But our hope is not here, Whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6, Such as talk of
being at home in this life, forget that they are in the body. Christians beware
of it, for its a delusion, to think that here you are above dejection, you are
not at any time so settled, but you may be disquieted. And therefore

Secondly, Learn hence to be thankful for any freedom from disquietings. Be
thankful (O ye unshaken souls) to Christ! Its his sweetness which has kept
you from being in a storm. Its greater mercy to have a soul kept free from
disquietings then to have a body kept free from distempers; see thou another
soul cast down? be thankful to the Lord Jesus that thou art not sitting by it
in the same case. Take heed of thinking that your settlement is of your selves;
and consequently, of cersuring others, who are disquieted. Its certainly a
great fault in many, that they censure such as they see dejected: They find
fault with that in others, which they are not able to prevent in themselves;
Did not Christ bear up thy spirit (Oh soul!) thou would quickly sincke:
There are causes of spiritual dejection in thee, as well as in others. Its
Christ that keeps them under, otherwise they would soon cast thee down. Be
thankful therefore to Christ, and take heed of censuring others. Yea,

Thirdly, Prepare for dejections. Such as are subject to saintings, have their
cordialls in readiness: so should you have (O souls) who are liable to
spiritual faintings. There are cordials enough, did you know them. Its your
Saviors goodness, that he stored up remedies suitable to all your
distempers: acquaint your selves with them, before you need them, that they may
not be to seek, when they should be used.

Quest. You will say, what preparation shall we make?

Answ. For this I shall speak something more general, and something more
particular.

Generally, In order to spiritual preparation for soul dejection, mind these
things.

First, That such a thing there is as soul-dejection, and that you are liable
unto it. Be not strangers unto this truth, but know, as the most healthful
body may sometimes be distempered; so the most holy soul may sometimes be
disquieted. The not minding of this, makes many souls which are cast down,
sadder then otherwise they would be. Its an aggravation unto any sorrow; that
it comes unexpected. Be sure therefore to remember this, that it is possible
sadness may seize upon your souls, and cast you down: Its common to saints to
be dejected sometimes. This being often and seriously thought on, before
dejections come, will prepare you to bear them when they come.

Secondly, Be well acquainted with the Coverant of grace; The not aright, and
clear understanding of it (as has been showed) is the cause of much dejection.
Acquaint your souls therefore with this, in the freeness of it, do not mix
water with wine, 'twill abate the strength of it, and render it less able to
comfort; what God holds forth free, let not us look upon as conditional. The
pure wine of the Covenant (which is the best cordial for a fainting spirit)
loses its virtue, when it is mixed with the puddle waters of conditions. Be
built up therefore in the freeness of the Covenant; Know also the fullness of
it. It extends it self to the forgiving of all sins; and to the bestowing of
all grace: Remember also the firmness of the Covenant; its immutable,
unalterable, whatsoever fainting fit overtakes thee, the Covenant of grace thus
known, and believed, will revive thee.

Thirdly, Treasure up your own and others experiences. The remembrance of
experiences in times of lifting up, will exceedingly support in times of
casting down: when the spirit begins to be in a storm for divine absence;
Call to mind, that it sometime enjoyed the calm of a divine presence. Many
souls forget the time of their first love, and the effect of that is
sinfullnesse; And many forget the day of Christ's first l^ve, and the fruit of
that is sadness. In the day of your dejections, call to mind the time of your
espousalls. The premeditation of what the soul sometimes enjoyed, is a good
preparation for a time, when it may be dejected.

But these things are only in the general. I shall therefore proceed to
particulars. And my advise to souls is, that they endeavor to acquaint
themselves (as much as they can) with particular cases; And accordingly to
provide suitable cordialls. Its a piece of humain prudence in provision for
corporal distempers, that men do not only lay up some general, Catholic
medicines (as Physicians call them. (...)
) But they provide particular medicines for particular diseases: Surely we
should be (if not more yet at least) as much careful in provision for spiritual
distempers, as for corporal. And in order thereunto we should study to
understand what may be a suitable support unto us, under soul-castings down. An
essay unto which we shall hold forth in the following Section.

SECT. II.
CHAP. I.
Satisfaction to souls cast down, and discovering their fears about the
truth of the work of grace.
HAving in the former Section hinted at several fears, which appear in souls
cast down, I shall now apply my self to satisfy dejected souls, with
reference to those particular fears. And I shall proceed in that order which I
mentioned them in, and begin with the fear of a soul cast down, and
venting it self about the work of grace.

Oh say some souls! the work of grace is precious, but I fear in me its not
perfect. Case.
Satan has had his workings in me, Ephesians. 2.2. (...)
but I fear whether Christ has wrought the good work in me. I have found the
Devil powerfully working in me: But I fear Christ has not as yet begun to
work upon me, etc.

In order to the raising of a soul cast down, Satisfaction.
and fearing this, I shall offer briefly.

Some 1 Cautions, and 2 Considerations.


First, Some Cautions, we had need be wary in our conclusions which we make
about our souls state.

It Is easy, but it is dangerous, to conclude amiss here. Its as well (I will
not say as much) a fault to conclude against our souls, as having no work of
grace; as it is to cosen our souls, as if we had. Be cautious therefore O
soul! who say, thou fear Christ has not yet wrought upon thee. Take
heed how thou judge, even thy self, in this case, and for this end, take
with thee these 3 Cautions.

viz. 1 Of binding your selves to particular examples. 2 Of confining Christ to
any methods or ways. 3 Of concluding any thing from present sense.


First, Take heed of binding your selves to particular examples. Oh say some,
Christ has not wrought upon us,

Quest. Why, Oh souls, not upon you?

Ans. Why? He hoth not wrought upon us, as upon such and such.

Reply. But consider (O souls) Gods works are not always alike: Though the
work of grace be the same in all, in regard of the matter, yet it is not the
same always in regard of the manner. The manner of Christ's working is diverse,
Its bad eyeing (in order to the judgment of our work of grace) examples.
Christ comes to Matthew at the receipt of custom: and speaks to his heart so
home; that Matthew leaves all, and follows him, and of a Publican becomes a
Preacher. But he rides after Paul (as I may say) and overtakes him in the way
to Damascus, and throws him down, invirons him with a Pillar of light,
appears to him from heaven: speaks to him, reasons with him; directs him
whether to go, what to do, etc. These examples are not alike. Should you bind
the work of grace to Paul's example, you would condemn Matthew: or should you
make the example of Matthew the pattern of the work of grace, you would, or
might question Paul. Be cautious therefore O soul of what you say. Do not fear
that God has not wrought upon you, because not after the example of such an
one: examples are not here strictly to be eyed, this is the first caution.

The second is this, Take heed of confining Christ to methods. I wish some
Preachers were in this particular faultlesse: they confine Christ (as I may
say) to such and such ways, and methods, as if the spirit were not as free as
the wind, to blow where, and when, and how he lists. You have some so
punctual in their antecedents, concomitants, and consequents (words which many
poor souls scarce understand:) And so precise, and strict in pressing souls
with them, that many gracious souls fear, whether they have any work of
grace wrought, because not in such a way and method. Now I beseech you, beware
of this, Christ walks not always the same way to many souls; Some souls he
overtakes ere ever they are aware of him, as is hinted Cant. 6.12. and makes
them as the chariots of Aminidab; i. e. a willing people. Others indeed he
deals with all in a more violent way: and is feign to make it a day of power,
that they may be a willing people. In the same story Act. 1.6. you have Christ
as it were, (...)
Softly coming into Lydia's he art (as if he did but lift up the Hatch and
enter) and you have him loudly knocking at the Jaylers door, making (as I may
say) an earthquake in his soul, to make way for himself. So various are
Christ's ways in working: Some Christ makes sick of love, and winnes upon
their hearts by the mercies of the Gospel: Others he makes sore with wrath;
and frights them to himself by the terrors of the Law. Mind this, oh poor
soul; It may be thou fear Christ has not wrought on thee, because it was
not in such or such a way: your fear (if so) is groundless; and you must take
heed, lest you confine Christ unto methods. He will work, and who shall let
it, and to whom has he made known all his ways of working. This is the
second Caution. Now the

Third is this, Beware how you conclude any thing upon present sense. The work
of grace at first is but little, as a grain of mustard seed; And it is not at
first so visible: Its like leaven [hid] in meal, as it is Matthew. 13.33. Now that
which is little, and hidden too; that is not seen strait. Natural conceptions
are not at first perceived; no more are supernatural. The work of grace may
be begun in thy soul, although thou do not perceive it. Be therefore cautious
how thou concludes because of present visible ineffectualnesse. The leaven of
the Kingdom, may lie hid in the heart And if thou judge by present sense, thou
may condemn the generation of the righteous. Indeed Christ in the soul is
as Isaac in Abraham's loins (at first) that is, as dead: And look as there,
even of one, and him as good as dead, sprang as many as the stars of the sky:
So likewise here, viz. in the soul of one grain of grace, and that even as
dead to sense, See Lu. 13.19.
there springs up the great tree which reaches as high as heaven. Let this
therefore be minded as the third caution, that you conclude not positively any
thing upon present sense.

Now having hinted these Cautions, I shall offer three Considerations, unto
such as fear and doubt, the true work of grace in their hearts.

First, This fear may peradventure be a fruit of the work of grace. Sinners as
they never desire the work, so they trouble not themselves with doubts about
the work: Solomon tells us, Blessed is the man that fears always: yea, we know
he also said, the way of a fool is right in his own eyes. Thou poor soul,
who are dejected, and do much doubt whether ever as yet, God has wrought
upon thy heart: why, this fear of thine, may be a good sign that he has.
But

Secondly, This fear may argue a beginning of the work. Certain this fear is
of God: and how do thou know, but that now God is beginning, (at lest) to
work upon thee. Its a standing truth, (...)
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: Now the meaning hereof may
be, that the first thing (for so the word signifies) which is wrought in the
soul, in the work of wisdom, (i.e. of grace and bolinesse (for so wisdom
signifies) is fear. Thy fear therefore may hint, that the work is in sieri,
i. e. beginning, if it be not in factu, i. e. begun already. However God may
make use of it to that end. What can thou tell, but now that thy soul is
troubled with doubtings about the work of grace: God may make use of this
fear to drive thee out of thy state of nature, and to draw thee into the state
of grace. How many poor souls have cried out; I have no true grace: God has
not at all wrought upon my heart: woe is me what shall I do; I Will run after
him, I Will cry for him, etc. And while the soul has been in this fear, God has
begun (making use thereof) to work really upon their soul. Thus it has been
with some, consider it may be with thee so, And therefore,

Thirdly, Suppose it be as you fear; Suppose God has as yet never effectually
wrought the work of grace in your Soul. Consider, be may do it now. Why may
not free grace work the work now? I say (O soul) why not now?

Quest. Say (O sad soul) what reason can you given that Christ should not now
work upon you, if he has not heretofore?

Ans. Why, I Will give a reason (will the soul say) I am not fitted for such a
work. The work of preparation bath not passed on me.

Reply, Suppose I should grant it; yet this fear and doubt may be that work.
All the preparation that can be, it tends but to this, to make you willing, and
art not willing soul?

Qu: Yes, O yes, I am willing; but alas, what though I will, if God will not.

Reply, Why, God is willing (O soul) this is the will of God, even your
sanctification. He wills it: and if God will, and thou will too, what should
hinder?

Qu: Nay, but what should move God to work on me: Alas, I am a poor polluted
sinner, and will the Lord take pleasure in such a soul as I am, and bestow
pains to work on me?

Ans. In Answer to this, know (O soul) free grace shall move God, For of grace
we are saved, and not of our selves: its the gift of God, we are his
worke-man-ship, Ephesians. 2.8, 10. And know (O soul) as God does work in thee
the will, so also he will work in thee the deed, and that of his good pleasure
(as it is Phil. 2.13.) though he cannot take pleasure in thee, yet he can, and
will in his work.

Wherefore bear up, O thou dejected soul; Be not so cast down. Suppose the
work of grace be not yet wrought, the Lord can, (and do thou believe it) he
will work it now. Ere long thou shall see Christ formed in thee, and though
now thou art in pain, and fear (as a soul in travel) yet then thou shall
rejoice for joy, that grace is come into thy heart.

CHAP. 2.
Satisfaction to dejected souls, laboring under the fear of the truth of
grace.
BUt alas! say some, who are cast down, our doubts are not so much about a
work of grace; As about the truth of grace. I doubt (says a soul) whether my
grace be true; Case.
some work I have had, and something is brought forth, but I question whether
it be not counterfeit.

Albeit this fear be almost the same with the former, Satisfaction.
yet because I find some dejected souls making it a distinct doubt. I shall
therefore speak distinctly to it. And in order to the satisfaction of a soul
cast down, and discovering its self in this fear, I shall offer two things,
viz.

Something 1 More generally, 2 More particularly.


First, More generally, I desire such dejected souls, as are troubled about
this fear, to consider 3 things.

First, Consider, counterfeit grace does not use to suspect it self, neither
is it willing to be tried. He that does evil comes not to the light; nay, he
hates the light, as it is John 3.20. But he that does truth, comes to the
light, etc. Surely it may secretly hint that thy grace is current, since thou
desire its trial: were thy grace counterfeit (as thou suspectest) it would
desire concealment, at lest, it would not put thee on to suspect it.

Secondly, Consider, its a mercy to have a suspecting spirit. Many souls are
deceived, and damned for want of this. Satan lies secure under an imperfect,
and pretended work of grace. You read of a spirit of slumber in the Scripture.
God has given some up to the spirit of slumber, Romans 11.8. There are foolish
Virgins, who presume, and sleep, and sleeping perish. Christ's spirit where it
is, is a spirit of fire and burning: Now fire that tryes, Christ's spirit is
like a refiners fire: Its a mercy to have the spirit of refining, and trying;
whereas its a judgment to be selfe-confident, not at all suspicious, It argues
the spirit of slumber. But*

Thirdly, Consider, it is possible for one truly gracious to conceit that his
grace is but counterfeit. As children conceive brass is gold, so sometimes
they conceit gold to be brass, Its strange to observe the strength of conceit,
especially in depth of Melancholy. Peradventure oh soul thy fear is but
conceit! Surely we see sometimes Hypocrites, conceiting in their joyallity,
that their counterfeit grace, is true. And why may we not think? (nay, by
experience we find) sometimes, truly gracious hearts conceiting their grace is
counterfeit. But these considerations are only general* Therefore,

More particularly, that I may satifie such dejected fouls, as doubt the truth
of their grace, I shall lay down these conclusions.

First, Many souls doubt the truth of their grace because of their wrong way of
trial. There are false Touch-stones, which may make pure gold suspicious, as
well as make brass appear as gold. To instance, its a false and deceiving way
of trial, to try the truth of grace by conquest. My meaning is, to conclude
that my grace is not true, because I am sometimes conquered by corruption; its
a wrong way of conclusion, and a false touchstone of trial. Paul had truth of
grace, and yet sometimes he was conquered, and carried captive, and sold
(slave-like) by sin, Rom: 7.14. So likewise a constant equal undauntednesse,
in owning of Christ, (...), and ver. 23. (...). i. e. captivated or lead into
captivity, as by a C^nquerour; and sold in a market.
and cleaving to truth, is a false touchstone, or fallible way of trial. It Is
true the righteous is bold as a Lion; but this is not at all times alike. Peter
had truth of love to Christ; and yet he was not so undaunted always: His
deriall is known well enough. So that now (to apply this to our purpose) it
may be (Oh dejected soul) thou tryest thy grace the wrong way. Thou say
thou art conquered often; and led captive many times; Be it so, thy grace may be
sound for all this. Those that scome the Turkish power, may sometimes be
(slave-like) in his Galleys: And a loyal subject of Jesus Christ, may be
sometimes overtaken, and taken, and sold Paul-like under sin. But

2 In judging the truth of our grace, we should rather eye its quality, then
its quantity. As now faith, the truth of that is seen, rather in its quality,
then in its quantity. There may be a faith big enough to remove mountains, and
yet FALSE (as is deducible from, 1 Gor. 13.2.) And there may be a faith no
bigger then a grain of mustard seed, and yet TRVE. Little faith, and true
faith, may go together. Peradventure O soul thou art grieved to see thy grace
so little, and that makes thee fear it is false: but know this thy fear is
foolish. The least dust of gold, is gold; and the least grain of grace, is
grace. In judging thy grace (O dejected soul) know thou should eye its
quality, not its quantity. And in order to this,

Thirdly, know, That grace is true which is diffusive. I would ask thee O
soul! (that doubtest thy grace is counterfeit) whether it be diffusive yea, or
no: though it be little, does it spread it self? Is thy little in head, and
heart too? Hypocrites have much in the head, little in the heart. But see O
soul, does not thy little spread; Is it not leaven? does it not leaven thee
all over? Is it not in thy will? thou would: and does it not spread to thy
desire? thou desire: And because thou can not, does it not leaven thy
sorrow? Is not that sower (or rather sweet) do not grieve because thou carst
not do, as thou would and desire? Do not O soul murder thy self: I
mean kill thy comfort by not witnessing to the truth. Cannot you see, and say,
your little grace is diffusive. Surely if it be, you need not doubt its truth,
and you should not say it is counterfeit.

CHAP. 3.
Satisfaction to souls dejected, and fearing that the work which is wrought
in them, is not of the spirit.
THe next fear which I shall speak unto is, that which concerns the Author
of that work which is in the soul.

Some souls when they are cast down: Cafe.
cry out, they fear, that all that work which is passed upon them, is no more
then in the bare letter (as they call it) i. e. they doubt whether it be of the
spirit, yea, or no; as was opened in the former part etc.

Now for the removing of this fear, Satisfaction.
and to raise up a soul that is cast down, and lies doubting, whether its
calling, conviction and comfort be from the spirit, yea, or no: I shall speak
to each of these by themselves.

First, For thy calling (O soul) thou say thou fear) thou were only
called by men, i.e. wrought upon to leave thy sins and former course by the
mere wit, and oratory of men in persuading, etc.

There be three things which I would offer to scatter thy fear in this
particular.

1 Consider, that thy call may be by the spirit, though thou do think it was
by man only. Its certain that the spirit speaks to our hearts mostly by men.
Immediate calls are rare: It may be you fear your call was not by the spirit
because 'twas by men. It might be man's speech, and the spirits call. 'Twas
Christ that preached to the Ephesians, though it were Paul that spoke. Paul
tells them Christ came, and preached peace to them, Ephesians. 2.17. And yet we
know Christ was never at Ephesus; and Paul speaks this, of Christ after the
time of his suffering, as is deducible from verse. 16. Indeed 'twas Christ that
preached by Paul: And though man was the trumpet, yet the spirit was the
breath, that filled it, when thou were called from thy sin. Look as in Samuels
case, it was the Lord called him, and he thought 'twas Eli (as it is 1 Samuel 3.)
so it may be with you, and the reason may be, as it was in Samuels case: He was
a child, and so did not know yet (as the text says) the Lord: It may be thou
art a child as yet (O soul) and art not so well able to distinguish of the
Lord from men: Thou as yet may not be acquainted with the mysteries of the
spirit? and therefore thou may think it is only man, when it was the spirit
which called thee. Hereafter when thou shall grow up to a fuller age in Christ,
this childish thing, and fear may be done away: And thou shall no more speak
as a child, and say thou fear 'twas man only that called thee. But thou
shall be taught of God, and know thou were called by the spirit.

2 Call to mind, in what frame of soul thou were (if thou can call it to
mind) when thy first call was; and consider what it was, and is, which does
prevail with you. Happily thy soul was in a direct way of opposing God: and
thou did little think of him, when he called thee: The more unexpected it
was, the more of the spirit was in the call. Besides, say O soul: was it not
naked truth, plain, simple truth, that did, and does most take with thy heart.
Surely, the more plain truth was, which did work upon you, the more of the
spirit was in that work. Its a rule case; the less of man, the more of God:
Art not able to say (O soul) that thou were going on in a vain, vile way of
living without God; and that thou were so taken up with the world, and vanity,
etc. that God was not in all thy thoughts: And that at a time thou did either
read or hear such or such a naked truth: As to instance, that thou were a child
of wrath by nature, that out of Christ there is no hope of salvation, etc. And
that hereupon unexpectedly, thou did find thy heart moved to take another
course: Peradventure, thou had read or heard and did know the same truth
before; O but at such or such a time, thou did find thy heart more wrought
upon, by it, then ever. I beseech you seriously say, has it not been thus with
you? If it has, why doubt ye, that your call is not by the spirit? But

3 Call to mind, And in sincerity tell, and confess, what it was that thou
were ialled from; and what it is that thou were called to, Can not thou say,
thy call was not so much (at lest) not only from misery, but it was from sin.
It Is true, many a man by natural conscience, and fleshly principles is thus far
wrought upon in a call, that it is willing to come out of misery; I but thy
soul can say, it was willing to come from sin: and 'twas from that, which in
thy call, thy heart was taken off. Yea, and art not thou able to say, thou
did find thy heart in thy call, really going out after (as conceiving thou
were called, unto holiness, (as it is 1 These. 4.7.) Cannot you appeal to God,
that in your call, you did (at lest that now you do,) find your hearts, not
only called and made willing to leave a sorrowful estate, and come into a
happy one: But also to leave a sinful estate, and come into a holy estate.
Certainly, if your call were not only from misery, but from sin: And if it
were to be as well, and as much (nay more) unto holiness, then unto freedom
from misery: I say if you can clear this: (And do not your consciences, oh ye
dejected souls witness to this) then why do ye doubt? what reason have you to
fear, that your call was not of the spirit? To come therefore to the other
thing, viz.

Secondly, To your Conviction. You say you doubt whether that were of the
spirit, and evangelicall, or only by the letter, and legal.

Now to satisfy you in this, there are 3 questions which I would put unto you.
And in the sincerity of your hearts resolve them.

1 What was the great sin, of which you were, and are convicted: when thy heart
was convinced of sin, what was the greatest sin, which then thou were
convinced of. Search your hearts, and consider what answer to give? can you say
it was unbeleife: Certainly, if you were convinced of that, it was the spirit
which wrought that conviction. I desire not to be mistaken: I do not urge this,
as if I thought there either were not, or needed not any more conviction then
this: (for certainly, saving conviction extends it self to all sin, and in
particular, to our particular special sins.)

But my aim is, to hint something as a signal discovery of conviction by the
spirit (and in order to this it is, which I am now speaking.) Now then, were
thou ever convinced of unbeleefe? Have thou seen this to be a sin? yea, and to
be a great sin? Certainly, if thou have, thy conviction has been of the Holy
Ghost. Its the peculiar work of the spirit to convince of unbeleefe, as it is
John 16.9.11. Many a soul is convinced of these, or these sins: But the soul
convinced by the spirit, is convinced of this sin (as of the sin of sins)
viz. unbeleefe, Oh (says a soul) which is convinced by the spirit, I know
drunkenness is a sin, uncleanness is a sin, pride a sin, etc. But I know
unbeleef is a sin as great, ray, greater then them all. This is laid upon my
spirit, that Christ is come into the world sweetly discovering the love of God,
freely tendering reconcilement in his blood, But I (Oh I!) did little see, and
much slight him; I did not make it my work to go after him, nor have I been
willing when he has come after me, to accept him. And this (oh this!) has
been (nay, I fear it is still) my sin. Oh this base, vile, damnable unbeleefe,
is that which has, and does lie upon my spirit. Other sins put me in an
^^^solute necessity, of salvation; and this sealed me under damnation: HE THAT
BELIEVES NOT, HE IS CONDEMNED ALREADY, Oh that Scripture, took hold on me,
Christ came, and was willing to embrace, but I would not believe; He came
sweetly weeing, and I stood out sinfully rejecting. He tendered grace freely,
and I did put off that tender wretchedly; He said come unto me, and i will ease
you; and I did not, could not, would not believe, and therefore came not to
him. This (O this!) I am convinced of, as my sin; and this I doubt is my sin to
this day. The truth is, I can hardly believe yet, that Christ came to save
sinners. Why, say (Oh soul) does not thy heart answer to these things, as face
to face? is there not a copy of this complaint in the secret tables of thy
heart? If there be, pray who should, nay, who could write it, but the spirit?
Who could take these things of Christ, and reveal them unto thee, but the
spirit? Surely, if none can call Jesus Lord, but by the spirit (as it is 1 Cor.
12.3. Then none could be convinced so far of sin, for not receiving of, or
believing in (which is all one) this Lord Christ, but by the Holy Ghost. But

Secondly, What is the great principle upon which you are most convicted: Is it
SENSE, or HOPE of divine love. It may be thou have sometimes tasted how good
the Lord is: Peradventure you have had some sense of the love of God, Or, It
may be you have only sometimes attained some hopes of divine loves: Now is it
this, that does most affect thy heart, in thy conviction. Does not thy soul
say, Oh! what a vile wretch have I been, who have despised the riches of Gods
goodness! and who have not been led thereby unto repentance: Stand thou
convinced of the greatness of sins, by the consideration of the greatness of
his love. Because God has been, is, and (thou hopest) will be exceeding good;
Art not upon this convinced that thou art and have been exceeding bad? Surely
so much as love, and sweetness has had an influence upon thy conviction, so
much the spirit has been in it. The hand of wrath may convince a Pharaoh that
he has sinned; but an eye of love, will make a Peter weep bitterly. Therefore

Thirdly, In thy convictions for sin, what sight have thou had of Christ? The
spirit where he convinces of sin, he also convinces of righteousness, as it is
John 16.10. i.e. the spirit convinces the soul, that albeit it is
unrighteous; yet there is a righteousness in Christ, which it may have. The
spirit, where he is a messenger of sin (coming in and convincing the soul
thereof) he is also an Interpreter (taking the things of Christ, and so showing
thereof unto the soul) the spirit is, that one of a thousand, to show unto man
his uprightness. (as it is Job 33.23.) An hypocrite may be convinced by the Law,
but alas! in that conviction he sees only a Moses: But a Saint is convinced not
only by the Law but the Gospel; and therefore in his conviction he sees a
Messiah. Can not thou say (O soul) when thou were convinced, that thou were a
sinner, thou were also convinced that there was a Savior? Did not thou see a
remedy, as well as a disease? a healing plaster, as well as a killing wound. A
Savior, as well beseeching sinners to come unto him, that they might have
life; as blaming of them, for not believing in him, that they might be free
from death. Surely (soul) its the spirit who gives life, the letter kills.
Where the letter convinces only, it does leave a soul under the sentence of
death: But if together with the sentence of death for sin, thou did also see
the hopes of life, in a righteousness; then there was something more, and
higher then the letter in thy conviction; even the Holy Ghost.

If then when thou were convinced, thou did see unbeleife as the great sin,
and divine love as the great aggravation of that unbeleife; and yet withal, a
sight of free and full righteousness tendered as a cure of both: If (I say)
thou did see these things in thy conviction; why art thou cast down O soul?
and why do thou fear the spirit was not in thy conviction? To go on then to
the last branch of this fear and doubt.

Thou say (O soul) that do fear, thy comfort was not from the spirit: At
lest, thou say, thou do doubt it. Its true, after thy storm, thou did
hear a still voice, but (say thou) was the spirit in that voice? Sometimes
even after conviction, thou do say thou did feel comfort, but thou fear
whether it were from the spirit, or from the letter and fancy, etc.

Why now in order to the scattering of this fear, let me entreat you to
consider these three things.

First, Whence it was that thy comfort was fetched, which was brought to thee?
was it not such as one of a thousand could not bring? came it not from Jesus
Christ, who can only give man his righteousness? as it is Job 33, 23. He shall
take of mine, and shall show it unto you (says Christ of the spirit) Job.
16.15. Where the spirit brings in comfort, it is still showed to be fetched
from Christ. Alas! can not thou say, It was not from any creature (men or
Angel) that the hope of your comfort came (Alas! miserable Comforters were
they all.) But it was only from Christ: where the spirit comforts, he does it
still in a discovery of Christ. As he shows Christ pierced by the soul, and
uses that sight unto conviction: so he discovers Christ willing to embrace the
soul, and uses this sight unto consolation. The peace and comfort of some, is
rather from a cessation of the trouble of conscience, then from a sight, and
discovery of Christ. Now if thy comfort came only from an apprehension of
Christ, and from a sight of the things in him; why art thou disquieted as if
thy comfort were not from the spirit? Since, as no man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of man which is in him: 1 Cor. 2.11
Even so, the things of Christ knows no man, but the spirit of Christ. But

Secondly, How is thy comfort brought in? Is it from Christ, in a free word of
grace, offering himself to sinners: or is it (as I may say) from a Christ
fetched in by some performances of thine? Certainly, the less of self in the
manner of Christ's coming into the soul, the more of the spirit in the comfort
that arises thereupon. Some souls have their comfort fetched in rather by
self in Christ, (i.e. what they see of themselves, in the way of Christ's
coming in) then by Christ in himself: My meaning is, some souls cannot be
comforted in Christ, unless they see Christ (as it were fetched and) coming
in by their Humiliations, Repentings, Prayers, etc. Oh if they can upon them,
or in them, see a Christ coming in, they can be comforted: This comfort I
suspect is legal. But now if thou can say, thy comfort as it came from
Christ, so it came, and comes still from Christ, held forth purely in a word of
grace; and that, when thou could see nothing of seife, to fetch in Christ:
that then in a promise of free grace (as that he dyed for, and justifies the
ungodly) when (I say) then, thou were enabled to receive comfort from Christ,
so brought it, without any selfe-qualifications, or performances: Surely, thy
comfort is in, and by the spirit, for still the less of self, the more of him.

Thirdly, Whereunto does thy comfort tend? Confider this: Tends it to a
magnifying of Christ, to a love and labor unto holiness? or tends it to self
glorying, and a kind of wantonness? Pray mind it; If thy comfort have any
tendance to magnify self (as if it were something) or to lessen sin (as if it
were nothing:) thou have cause to suspect thy comfort is not of the spirit. For
the very hopes of comfort by him tends unto purifying ( Be that has this hope
purifies himself, etc.) But now if upon any last, or hope of comfort from
Christ; thy soul begin to admire him in his infinite love, for loving thee:
And to abhor sin for provoking him: If thy soul is much in adoring him, and
not a little in abhorring of solfe. If sense of comfort do make thee melt as it
were into a Christ-loving, and Sin-loathing frame: and make thee study what
manner of conversation thou should have for that comfort which thou have had.
Surely if this be the fruit of thy comfort, thou need not fear, but that thy
comfort is a fruit of the spirit.

Thus I have offered something in particular, in order to the raising of such
souls as are cast down, and fear that their call, conviction and comfort is
not, was not of, or by the Spirit. To this I will add some things by way of
consideration jointly, ith reference to the whole. As now,

First, Whatsoever thy call, conviction, and comfort be, its precious, and to
be prized. Suppose it be only in the letter, (as thou say) yet in case it be
at all it is precious. How many thousands are there, that no way had either call,
conviction, or comfort? But live and lie in sin without any calls, or
conviction; and never questioning truth, or ground of comfort, go in mirth (as
Jobs phrase is) in a moment down to Hell. Chap. 21.13.


Secondly, Though your call, conviction and comfort be as yet but common, it
may be ere long special. That which is first, is not always spiritual, but
that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual (as it is 1 Cor.
15.46.) Christ many times does ingraft (as some Divines say) grace upon nature.
Often times Christ, speciallizeth, (as I may say) and spirituallizeth common
workings, such as at first have only been wrought upon in the letter, have
afterward been wrought on by the spirit. Besides this;

Thirdly, Consider, if at present thy soul be brought up to close with Christ,
that now thou hangest as it were about his feet: mourning only for the want of
his smiles, waiting only for the discoveries of his loves: If now thy soul can
say: I see a need of Christ, I am convinced of the want of a Christ; I only
pant after, and look for the enjoyment of a Christ: and all the comfort that I
have, all the support of my spirit, lies upon this, that I hope, he that shall
come, will come and will not tarry, and that the Lord whom thou look for,
will suddenly come: If (I say) this be the [present frame] of thy spirit, (and
speak soul, is it not so?) why then art thou disquieted? why art thou cast
down? why do thou disturb thy self with this fear, that thy call,
conviction, and comfort is not of the spirit? Certainly, when, and where Christ
is so discovered to be all in all, and so pressed after, the soul need not cast
down it self with fear.

CHAP. 4.
Satisfaction unto such as fear, that all that which is in them, is rather from
education, then regeneration.
THis was the fourth fear which I touched upon; Case.
and the satisfaction hereof, is to be endeavored next: now for such souls as
are dejected, and do discover themselves in this fear, that which I shall speak
unto them shall be in three steps. As

1 Generally, Satisfaction.
I desire such dejected souls as cry out, Oh all that which is in them is but
civillity, and education, and the like, I say, I desire such to consider three
things, as,

First, What it is which in truth does act them, and carry them on in the
things of Christ? Is it only their head, or is it not principally their heart?
Education does seldom engage conscience: It may, and does bring into a
custom, and this it does merely upon head-principall, i.e. a knowledge that
such or such a duty is to be done, and that Parents or Tutors have done it etc.
But now to be brought into the ways of godliness upon heart principles (as I
may call them) i.e. to do such or such a duty upon conscience, as finding an
engagement there to them; this goes farther then education. Consider then, do
not thou find a heart-ingagement to the things of Christ: so that thou have
some love to, and in what thou do, and a hatred to, and grief in the
contrary: Surely, if it be so, here is something more, and higher then
education. Then

Secondly, Consider what if thy natural relations were dead, or (which is
worse) opposite to the things of Christ. Suppose this, and search, what
would thou be or do then? 2 Chro. 24.
Joash his goodness of education it dyed with his Tutour Jehoiadah: Its said
Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, all the days of
Jehoiadah the Priest. But after the death of Jehoiadah, we find that Joash
does not only leave off that which was right in the sight of the Lord; but he
served Groves and Idols; yea, and he slew Iehoiada's son, for testifying
against him. Now then suppose thy Parents and Tutor's dead: nay, suppose such a
sad thing, that all of thy relations were enemies to the ways of Christ, and
that they should and did hate, at lest slight, and scorn all that were godly.
Upon this ask thy heart what it would or does say to this; Is not the very
supposition of this sad to thy soul? And does not thy soul say: Oh that thou
could weep tears of blood over the souls of thy relations? Does not thy
heart say, however they are, or do, yet thou, and thy house will serve the
Lord. Does not the spirit (upon thy appeal) bear witness with thy spirit,
that let Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Master, etc. do what they will, yet
thou (by the help of Christ) will pray for them, and with full purpose of
heart will cleave to him. Now if it be so, why art thou cast down? why art thou
afraid, that thou have no more then education.

Surely a soul thus quallified (as I have hinted) goes far beyond education. If
thou had nothing but what thou had from thy relations in education, thou
could not act further or against them (as is supposed) in Religion. Therefore

Thirdly, Consider O soul (that say thou fear thou have no more then
education,) I say consider, can not thou say, that albeit education did first
set thee in the way of godliness: yet since that time, thy soul has met with
that which would have done it (if that had not?) and does exceedingly confirm
thee in it. Education is (or may be) likened to that report which the
Samaritan woman made to her neighbors of Christ. Joh. 4.
It Is true, her report brings them to Christ, but Christ's words confirmed them,
insomuch as that they told her, now we believe, not because of thy saying, for
we have heard him our selves; so can not thou say: It Is true, all that at
first thou had was but Education; that is, that which thou had from
Parents, Friends, etc. But now thou have something more; now thou can say
thou love Christ and his ways; not because thou were brought up in the
knowledge of him and his ways; but because thou have since tasted him to be
sweet, and found his ways pleasant. I doubt not but that many souls can say
this, and why then are they disquieted for fear they have no more then
education?

To come up therefore one step further in order to the quieting of souls cast
down; and disquieted with this fear, I shall offer some three Inquiries unto
them. As now

First, In case you should desist, and leave off from the ways of Christ in
which you have been educated: Inquire, what would your condition be, and how
your heart would take it* See, would, or could your heart be quiet: Should you
(think ye) be in a comfortable condition. Nay, does not the fear of apostasy
trouble you? Do not you tremble to think lest you should fall? Surely, had
you no more then education, you would not be perplexed with these thoughts.
Its all one to a Jacke wound up by a man's hand, whether it move, or stand
still; and its all one to one principled no higher then education, whether he
prays or no, hears or no etc. if the hand of educatiours wind him not up, he
can be quiet and still; But where life is, there motion must be, otherwise
the creature groans: And surely, if upon an inquiry this way, thou find
cessation, or apostasy would be as death to thee, thou needst not much fear,
but there is a life of regeneration, and something higher then education in
thee.

Secondly, Inquire what thy thoughts are upon doing of holy duties: are thy
thoughts then selfeswolne, i.e. art conceited of self, It Is (...).
as some great one: or rather do not see, thou art an unprofitable servant?
and have done but what (nay, not so much as) thou ought? Surely, though
education may, and do puff up, yet its regeneration that humbles and pulls
down. Add hereunto

Thirdly, Make inquiry after thy aim in holy actings. Is it to be, and do as
others? is it to comply with friends, relations, etc. or is it to have
communion with Christ? Is it to hold forth the praises of him who has called
you out of darkness to light? Is not this thy aim to approve thy self to
God? Its true, education may, and does make many do duties, to approve
themselves to Parents, Tutors, etc. But its regeneration, which makes this the
end of holy actings, to approve on's soul to God. Education, may cause a
minister to preach, and a Christian to practice, to be approved of by men: But
its regeneration which puts on Timothy to study to show himself approved unto
God. as it is 1 Timothy 3.15.

Wherefore O soul why art thou cast down? why say or fear thou, that all
which thou have is only education? Since if thou should leave off, thou
could not be quiet: And yet while thou actest, thou dare not boast^ and all
that thou aimest at, is above men: Surely, these things, are more then
education, But

To add one thing more: Suppose it be as thou fear: Suppose as yet
education is thy all, and that all thy principles are parentine: I say suppose
this,

Quest. What then, what if thy fear be more then a fear, a reallity, what
then Oh soul?

Answ. What then? why then I may well sit sadly, as I do, and be disquieted
more then I am, I may not only be cast down, but resolve never to rise; why,
if I have no more then education woe is me! for I am undone, etc.

Reply. Stay soul! not so sad! If it should be that as yet you have no more
then education, yet remember,

First, Good actings are laudable in themselves. Holy practices are commendable
from any principles: The young man that told Christ he had kept all the
commandments from his childhood; had no more then education: and yet it is said,
Christ looked upon him, and loved him, Mark. 10.21. I think it was but a
conceit of Origin, that said Christ kissed him: yet I think it may be truly
collected, Christ was pleased with his practice, though he pitied his
principles: your actings are laudable and lovely, though your principles be as
yet but very low: And besides this, remember.

Secondly, Christ can raise your principles up to your actings when he
pleases. Do you continue with open sails, though rowing and lugging with the
Oars of education: The spirit blows where, and when he lists. He may
principle thy actions, and fill thy sails (ere thou art aware) you know who
said, ere ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of my willing
people, Cant. 6.12. I will not say Timothy had grace, and was sanctified from
the womb, yet I know he was well educated, his unfeigned faith first dwelt in
his Grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice (as it is 2 Timothy 1.5.) Christ
sanctified his education, and why may be not sanctify thine.

Why then art thou disquieted (O soul) as fearing thou have no more then
education? It may be but a fear: or if it should be real, yet there is you
see, hope and comfort for this thing.

CHAP. 5.
Satisfaction for such as fear they are at best but Hypocrites,
THere are some souls who when they are sad, Case,
and cast down, they cry out against themselves for Hypocrisy. To these I must
now speak, and in order to the quieting of their disquieted minds: I shall
propose these particulars.

First, Its at lest a piece or part of sincerity, to question hypocrisy.
Satisfaction
Hypocrites do not use to question themselves: Its the very nature of
Hypocrisy, to be shye of, and to avoid (as much as possible) any trial: And
its of the nature of sincerity to be questioning. Thy very fear (O soul) of
hypocrisy, is a fruit of sincerity. The Pharisee did not suspect himself:
neither did the Publican purge himself: yet you know who went away justified.
Christ (O soul) will and (indeed delights to) justify such as condemn
themselves. Thine own suspicion is not an evidence of thy hypocrisy. Look as
wicked men are said to fear where no fear (i.e. no ground of fear) is: So
likewise Saints do sometimes. Cant. 1.6.
Its worth the noting though the Church cry out look not upon me because I am
black: (much like the Leper in the Law, Levit. 13.45.) yet Christ says of her
thou art all fair and have no spot. Christ (O soul) can discover sparkles of
gold under thy clods of dirt; and he can see pieces of sincerity, even in thy
fears of hypocrisy.

Secondly, An unknown iniquity, is not an argument of hypocrisy. Sin must be
known, and yet concealed, ere it brand one for an hypocrite. Many souls
question their sincerity because of secret sins. Peradventure some corruption
bubbles up that they were not aware of; they perceive some sin that had a long
time lain secret, and this makes them fear they are hypocrites, but it should
not. David is sensible of secret sins, and he cries out against them, cleanse
me from my secret sins, Psalm. 19. Yet he can and does stand to, and plead his
sincerity, Psalm. 26.1; 2. Look as in point of sincerity, its not enough to
serve God by doing his will: But we must know it, and be willing our selves. So
likewise in the point of hypocrisy, its not simple sinning, but knowing and
hiding thereof that makes it so, The Assyrian was Gods rod, and he did serve
him; Howbeit (says the Text) he means not so, neither does his heart think
so, Esa. 10.7. The Assyrian service was not sincere, for he nere meant to do
what he did; Proportionably, thy sins O soul are not hypocrisy, for as much
as thou knew them not, neither did mean to keep them if thou did know
them.

Quest. Consider this (O sad dejected soul) thy sins which are newly broke out,
are they not such as thou did never dream of: Is it not that which thy soul
loatheth; and thou did think thy self most free from?

Ans: Yes, They are so, and this makes me fear my heart, that it should so long
conceal these corruptions which now I see.

Reply, But know O soul, its a mistake from hence to conclude hypocrisy;
Certainly thy ignorance will excuse thee herein: Hypocrisy is properly a
feighning or counterfeiting either of virtue where it is not, or a concealing of
vice where it is. Did ever boast or feign thy self better, then conscience
told thee thou were? or did ever conceal, or extenuate sins thou knew in
thee? If not, why fear thou thy self an hypocrite? Its a painting of a
Sepulcher, that denotes hypocrisy, there may be unknown sins, where there is
sincerity. But

Thirdly, Some mixtures of this bitterness will be in the best, while in the
body. There is no grace so perfect in this life, as that its free from all
mixture: Our gold is never so refined, but that there will (at lest) cleave to
us some dross. As the strongest faith does not free any from all incredulity:
So the purest sincerity does not free from some hypocrisy. Even Peter and
Barnabas are taxed by Paul, and recorded by the spirit no have had (at lest) a
tange of this bitterness, they are downright charged with dissimulation, Gal.
2.13. Its a true assertion of an accute writer, that, Hyporisie is in all,
Torshall.
but with so great a difference, that all are not to be called hypocrises. You
will not call every doubting soul an Infidel: why should you, because of some
remainders of hypocrisy, conclude your selves hypocrites? Job is charged (even
by God himself) to darken counsel by words without knowledge. Job 38.2.
And yet God tells Satan, that he was a perfect and upright man. But suppose
the worst (O doubting soul) suppose not a little, but a great deal of
hypocrisy, be in thy heart. Consider,

Fourthly, Our happiness is built and bottomed more, and rather upon the
sincerity of Christ's heart to us, then upon the sincerity of our hearts to him.
Christ knew before he loved us, that we would deal treacherously (as it is
Esa. 48.8.) Its charged upon the Church that she was not as sincere. (As
Solomon describes a wife, Pro. 31.11
i.e. to be one in whom the heart of her husband might trust) the Lord said of
Iudab she was treacherous, and her heart was not turned wholly but [fainedly]
to him, Ier. 3.10. Yet he says unto her I am married unto thee, verse. 14. Its
our happiness Christ abides faithful (as it is 2 Timothy 2.13.) our welfare is
not founded upon our own hearts; but upon his: And as the whole body of sin,
and hypocrisy, did not keep him from loving us sincerely at first, so the
remainders of hypocrisy shall not make him to love us less now. Reader, if
thou be not a Spider, I may tell thee this, Christ can, and does love
hypocrites: His heart is sincere, though our hearts be hypocritical. i.e. one
that sucks poison out of wholesome things.
Suck the speech, and if thou be a Be, thou will find not only sweetness,
but sanctity, yea and sincerity in it too. Rouse up O cast down soul; Christ
has writ his love, and thy life upon his own heart, not on thine; There it
remains sound, notwithstanding thy rottenness. The fountain of free grace is
open even for adulterous Judah, and treacherous Israel.

Object. Yea, but yet my hypocrisy is odious is it not? my double dealing with
Christ is dreadful in it self. I am sure it is so to me: I see it, and while
I see it, I cannot but be sad. If it be Christ's glory that his heart is
sincere toward me? the more its my sin, and shame, and sorrow, that my heart
is not so toward him.

Answ. True (O soul) thy hypocrisy is thy sin: but thy shame, and sorrow for
this, is thy grace (or rather Christ's) and thy glory. For

Fifthly, Its a mercy to have a sight and sense of hypocrisy: Christ certainly
intends a cure, in this opening the wound. Some Hypocrites have a seared
conscience. I fear they are incureable. But this discovery of thy disease is a
signal of health. Christ deals well with those whom he wounds: he has balm
for the bruised. Many a wretch plays the hypocrite all his life, and goes into
hell in the conceit, he lived in. Yea, (...): Signifies a Player: usually it is
rendered Actor by the Latins
some shall come conceited of sincerity, at last; saying Lord, Lord; But Christ
will then make them know what they are. Its mercy that he discovers thee to thy
self here: The Publican is better in his sackcloath confessing, then the
Pharisee in his vizzard praising. But.

Sixthly, Add to all this, the consideration of the promise of the spirit to them
that ask him, Lu. 11.13. Though thy spirit be hypocritical, yet Christ's
spirit is sincere. Christ has promised to send him; Its but ask and have:
David it seems was in your case and he prayed. Renew in me a right, or a
sincere spirit. And you know what encouragement he gives. This poor man (said
he) he speaks as if he were as poor as thou (oh soul) cried, and the Lord heard
him, Psalm. 34.6. Its the Covenant of promise, that he will give a new heart.

Object. It Is so indeed; but alas, I have prayed, and yet not received: and
therefore my joy is not full. I have groaned under this hypocrisy many years:
And yet see not the promise of the coming of Christ's spirit, etc.

Answ. Surely, thou art mistaken (O soul) in saying the spirit is not come:
Those groans of thine, are his: That softness is an effect of him;
Peradventure all thy hypocrisy is not yet cured: I said in this life it would
not be. The spirit will be a refiners fire all your days. Its true, he could
burn up all at once; but thou could not bear it. Such a fire would break
thee: Goldsmiths proportionate their fire, else the refining pot would crack:
Certainly, the Lord Christ considers, we are but earthen vessels; therefore
the refining fire is heated accordingly, The spirit purges out hypocrisy by
degrees. In time he will have purged out all. Even this dejection of thine is a
degree of purging: And this fruit thou shall have of this fear: That thy fear
of hypocrisy, shall work for thy sincerity, why then art thou cast down (O
soul?) be not disquieted so with the fear of hypocrisy; trust in God, wait
on the spirit, for thou shall yet praise him as sincere to thee, and making
thee so to him.

CHAP. 6.
Satisfaction for souls who fear they shall never get the victory over
corruptions.
THe next sort of cast down souls, which I would endeavor to raise up, Case.
are such as are much disquieted; and cry out upon their corruptions, Oh (say
they) corruptions are strong, and we are weak: They fight, we oppose as well
as we can, but we doubt the conquest. We fear corruption will get the day;
well may we be cast down, while we lie under this fear, etc.

Now for the satisfaction of such souls, and in order to the lifting up of
their dejected spirits, I would offer, and have them to consider these things.

First, This combat may consist with, Satisfaction.
and indeed ever is with a state of grace. Its the weakness of some to think,
and say, that their conquest is complete, and that they are in perfect quiet.
Surely, (I say) these words are rather discoveries of weakness, then of
strength, and perfection. Israel was not at rest, when in Canaan: Neither are
those souls who are troubled with, and for sins, in Egypt. Its not an
Israelitish spirit, to say either others, or our selves are in Egypt, because
we have still combatings. Even in Canaan they had their combatings. God left
some there, to keep his people in action. Do not think, especially do not
conclude thou art still in Egypt, because thou art not freed from fightings,
and fears. Believe (O soul) thou may be in the land of promise, and yet be
troubled with the combats. For

Secondly, Even choice Saints have been as you are, i.e. pestered with
corruptions, and troubled with fear of conquest. Paul had been as high as any
(even in the third heavens) and yet he had his buffettings, yea, and he cries
out of them again, and again, You think your selves sometimes in a sadder
estate then any: And you say, were ever any so wretched as you are? Yes, O
soul! Paul, even Paul who came behind none; nay, who was before any in grace,
and gifts, he was as wretched as you are; And he cries out so, O wretched man
that I am! Mark, that I am (as if none other were as he.) Its a comfortable,
and raising thought, O ye cast down souls; Other choice Saints have been in
as wretched a condition as you are, by reason of the combatings of corruption.

Thirdly, Consider, its a rich mercy to have a heart to strive with, and to be
afraid of corruption. Many a wretch is at peace with sin; yea, many are in
Covenant with hell and death. Some there be who are so far from fighting with,
and fearing of corruption, that they pay tribute to it, and make provision for
it. Many a wretch is a voluntary conquered captive unto sin. And its mercy that
you have a heart to strive. Time was when you were free from righteousness
(i.e. had none at all) and then you served sin. Its grace that now you do
oppose it, and deny to yield service to it. Were you at peace with sin, you
might fear your enmity with God. But being at war with it, you may have
peace in him. But.

Fourthly, As long as your soul is kept up in a striving way, its a sign of
strength. Why should you say, you are weak, and fear etc. since you are so
strong as to fight. Weak ones are not fighters: had you not some divine
strength, you could not stand before corruption: But seeing you are (after long
fighting) able yet to stand, and strive, why are you cast down, as if you
should not get the day? Consider (O dejected soul) that it argues a tree to be
well rooted, that stands after much blowing; And its a sign of a strong and
valiant soldier, if he keep to his ground and flinch not, notwithstanding
great combating. And certainly, it may argue unto thee, that (through Christ)
thou art yet strong; In as much as still thou art able to strive.

Object. Oh but I fear for future (thou will say) because (as yet) sin stands
strong, notwithstanding all I do against it, I fear I shall never, after all
my striving, get the victory over it.

Reply, But why (O soul) should thou thus fear? Peradventure as yet, thou
have not resisted unto blood, in striving against sin. Bear up yet a little
longer, strive yet still, sin will bleed, and fall ere long. For

Fifthly, Consider, Its no argument that you shall not conquer; because as yet
you have not. Thy soul may be victorious, though not yet. That party that is
put hard to it at first, may come off with the conquest afterward. Its a
certain truth, that Jesus Christ shall get the full conquest over all things:
and that he shall bring every thing into subjection to himself. But now we see
not [yet] all things under him, Heb. 2.8. It were a saying fallacious at first
hearing, to say Christ shall not put all things under him, because as yet we do
not now see it. What if as yet thou have not got the victory over corruption?
May not thou be a conqueror hereafter, although not new. Some that have been
worsted in the morning, have yet been conquerers ere ^ight. Operis victoria
finis; Its the end that declares the conquest. Be not cast down O soul,
notwithstanding thy corruption does as yet hold up, thou may in the end
conquer for all that. But besides, pray consider.

Sixthly, That your soul gets many a victory that you mind not. You rout sin
many a time, if you did but mark it. Your soul is so eager after a full, and
final conquest, that you do not observe many particular successes, you give
pride, unbeleefe, uncleanness, etc. many a desperate gash, but though it be
desperate (in the heat and height of your spirits) you regard it not, because
it is not dead. Say (O dejected soul) has not Christ helped thee many a time,
to put a temptation to flight; yea, and to give thy corruptions a wound? And if
so, why art thou cast down with fear of being conquered. Christ will perfect
victory for thee in the end. However mind it.

Seventhly, Sin shall never get the victory ever you. Had you but faith, (at
lest) could you believe this, (...): so is it used and translated, Lu. 22.25.
you would not fear. Is it not expressly said, To. 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you: The word signifies to have Lordship. Peradventure it may
give you a foil, but it shall not finally give you a fall. It shall never Lord
it over you, by virtue of a full and final conquest. 'Twas said of the Romans,
that they were sometimes overcome in battle, Victi in praelio aliquando, in
bello nunquam. Caesar Com.
but never in the War the meaning is, they were sometimes routed in an onset,
but never conquered. Certainly, (O poor dejected spirits) you shall never be
totally conquered by your corruptions. Christ has said it, that the gates of
hell shall never prevail against his Church. So said D. Sibs upon the Cant.
page 5.
And there is the same regard of the whole Church, and of every particular
member, in regard of the chiefest privileges, (...) graces that accompany
salvation. Hell (neither without thee, in temptations, nor within thee in
corruptions) shall never prevail against thee (O soul) thy Lord has
delivered it, and why should thou doubt it. Add to all this,

Lastly, If you could but believe, you might see victory waiting on you, over
every corruption. Had you Paul's eyes (even in that combat) the sense of which
makes you (as it did him) groan) you could see the conquest. And be able to be
so far from being cast down, with a fear of being conquered: as that in the
faith of conquest you would (as he did) thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans 7.21. Christ dyed as well to free you from the conquest of sin here,
as the condemnation of it hereafter. In his death you dyed, and by the virtue
thereof sin in you shall be crucified. The Apostle bids you indeed reckon upon
this, as it is Romans 6.11.

Mind these things, O cast down soul, and in the consideration of them, rouse,
and raise up your spirits; and say, why are we cast down and disquieted, with
fears lest corruption should be too hard for us; or doubts, that we should
never conquer it? The Apostle has said it shall not have dominion over us;
yea, and that we are (in all things) more then conquerors through Christ.

CHAP. 7.
Satisfaction for souls doubting whether as yet they have closed with Christ.
THe seventh sort of fears which fill the soul when its cast down, are about
its closing with Christ, Case.
Some there are (as I noted) that (when they are cast down) cry out, Oh they
fear! they never did truly close with Christ in all their lives, at lest in a
saving way. They have so many fears, and so little faith; so much doubting,
and so little assurance, that they think and fear, they never did in a right
Gospel way close with Jesus Christ.

Now that I might satisfy such souls, and raise them; I shall propose these
particulars.

First, Satisfaction
Its possible, to have closed with Christ, and yet to doubt it. All experienced
Divines, and Christians know, that faith, and doubting may dwell together. Its
true, faith (as faith) does not doubt, but yet where faith is, there doubting
may be, Experience witnesses to this, that hypocrites may and do think, they
have closed with Christ, when they have not: And why should not we conceive as
well on the other hard; that Saints may have closed with Christ, and yet think
they have not? It may indeed be questioned, whether the soul does act faith,
and know it not: But I think it cannot be denied, but that the soul may have
faith, and not act it. Peradventure, its not possible in the act of closing, to
be ignorant thereof; But certainly after the act, it is possible to doubt.
Inasmuch, as the soul may question, whether that act were right. I do not fear
to lay down this as an undeniable truth, that souls may have closed with
Christ, and yet doubt it. This is the first thing I propose.

The second is, Its possible, that all the grounds upon which the soul
questions its closing with Christ, may be weak and false. As the grounds upon
which hypocrites conceit their faith to be good, may be, and are false, and
insufficient; So likewise the grounds upon which a sound believer may question
his faith as bad, may be fallible and false too. In this case a Saints fear,
and an hypocrites presumption, may be both alike groundless.

These grounds I find amongst others, as the main of this fear.

1 Want of assurance. 2 A not seeing of Christ sweetly. 3 An inabillity to
trust Christ for other things. 4 Some kind of blasphemous thoughts of Christ.
Now neither of these are grounds firm enough to build this upon, that ones
closing with Christ is false.

First, Want of assurance cannot make ^ut a not closing with Christ. Assurance
is rather a consequent, i.e. a thing that follows; then a concomitant, i.e. a
thing that goes with our closing with Christ. I know some that make assurance
and faith all one: But as yet I am unconvinced of any thing that might make
that good, that every soul that has closed with Christ is assured thereof. I
can persuade my self, that many have closed with Christ, who yet cannot say
they have assurance, nay, who cry out thus, they doubt they never closed with
Christ. Many souls say indeed, they fear they never closed with Christ because
they want assurance. O say they, could we doubt so much, if we did believe; had
we closed with Christ aright, we should have been assured of salvation, long
ere this etc.

But surely, the souls mistake, 1 themselves, and 2 assurance.

First, They mistake themselves, in that they think assurance is an act of
theirs. Its a part of the spirits sealing, not of their closing. Its true, he
that believes has the witness in himself as it is 1 John 5.10. But that
witness is, that God is true, in what he says of Christ (as is clear by the
context there) but its not this assurance, that really I have closed with, and
am one with Jesus Christ. Yea,

Secondly, They mistake assurance, in that they make it the formallity of
faith, which is rather a fruit. Faith is this, That the soul fully believing a
free tender of Christ to sinners, goes forth, to close with, and rely upon
Christ. Its not an assurance of an interest in Christ, that is the evidence,
not the act of closing. So that its not ground enough for thee (O soul) to
doubt thy aright closing with Christ, because thou want assurance. No nor

Secondly, Its not ground enough for thee to doubt thy closing with Christ,
because of his not smiling upon thee. Verily, (say some poor dejected souls)
we never as yet did in a right way close with Christ: for he never as yet
smiled on us. Ah! his smiles are our life: but alas! we see not them, and
therefore we cannot but question our closing with him.

But this is not a sufficient ground, for the one may be, without the other.
The child may truly hang about the mothers neck, and yet she not kiss it.
Yea, and the mother may sincerely love, though she do not smilingly look upon
the child. Christ called the woman of Canaan a dog; and yet he loved her as a
lamb: she believed, and closed with him (to such a height that he said, she had
great faith) and yet notwithstanding, Christ smiled not upon her (at lest) at
first. Thou may have closed with, though as yet thou see not a smile in the
face of Christ toward thee. Do not question thy closing with him, for want of
his smiling upon thee. No neither

Thirdly, Its not your inabillity to trust Christ for other things, that should
make you question your closing with him. I do not doubt but that David did
trust God for the life of his soul, when yet he did not for the life of his
body: Albeit he said he should one day fall (i.e. dye) by the hand of Saul. Yet
certainly, he had and did close with Christ for his soul. The promise holding
forth Christ, is absolute and full: the promise holding forth the creature, is
often conditional and short: The soul may close with the one, and not with the
other. A soul may not be able to close with a promise for life, health,
safety, wealth, etc. and yet he may close with a promise of Christ. He has
not the same ground for the one, that he has for the other Nay,

Lastly, Some kind of blasphemous thoughts of Christ, are not a sufficient
ground to question our closing with Christ. Satan may endeavor to represent
Christ ugly to the soul, that closes with him as beautiful. Why should a
soul think, that Satan may not as well make it question whether Christ be the
son of God: as he did endeavor to make Christ himself to doubt it. Many a
precious heart, Note this ye dejected hearts!
who has high thoughts of Christ as precious; may yet upon Satan's injections,
be tempted to question his deity. But why should they question their closing
with Christ, upon Satan's suggestions? Suppose a woman married to some man;
loving him as the handsomest, and del^ghting in him as her Head, and Husband:
Suppose that some person hating and maligning her Husband, should still haunt
her, and be bawling in her ear, that her Husband is deformed, unlively, (...),
etc should she for this, call her marriage in question. Mind it (O ye
spiritual Spouses of the Lord Jesus!) you are married unto Christ, your souls
may close with Christ, and yet Satan may dog you, and haunt you, and put in
hard and blasphemous thoughts into you: while yet notwithstanding you reject
them, mourn under them, and are troubled at them; and certainly 'twere
weakness in you, to question your closing with Christ, because of these
blasphemous thoughts.

Quest: But you will say, Does not closing with Christ deliver the soul from
blasphemous thoughts of Christ?

Answ. No, It only secures the soul from closing with them. Its one thing to
have, another thing to close with blasphemous thoughts. The soul that is
closed with Christ, will not close with blasphemous thoughts (no more do thou
O soul, do thou? are they not as a dagger unto thy heart.) What though Satan
speak ill of thy husband Christ to thee; shall his blasphemy (for its not
thine) make thee question thy faith? Why then art thou cast down upon that, as
if thou did not, have not closed with him? But to pass from this.

Thirdly, I would entreat souls cast down, and doubting their closing with
Christ, to consider, What right closing with Christ is. Summarily, its this:
For the soul upon the sight of a necessity of Christ, to go out to close with,
or to cast its self upon Christ, as freely tendered. Says the poor soul, I
see Christ tendered freely, and I am sensible I need him fully, hereupon I go
and lie down at his feet. This is summarily to close with him. You must
remember to distinguish between taking and tasting of Christ; Taking is
closing, tasting is comfort. The one is not the other. It may be (O soul) thou
have not as yet tasted Christ, yet thou may have taken Christ. The woman that
sat at Christ's feet weeping, had taken Christ (for Christ speaks of her
faith:) but she did not taste him, till he said thy sins are forgiven thee.
Weeping souls! you sit at Christ's feet, but it may be you have not as yet
tasted his favor.

Learn to know that your closing with him for forgiveness, is distinct from
his saying to you, your sins are forgiven. This consideration (weighed) would
much satisfy such, as being cast down, question their closing with Christ.
But to this I shall add more. Therefore.

Fourthly, Pray mind this, Our safety and welfare does more, and rather depend
upon Christ's closing with us, then upon our closing with him And Christ knows
that, when we do not know this. Here is the surest seal of our salvation, the
Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Christ (Oh soul) closes with thee, and
he does know it, though thou know not thy closing with him. The child is not
so safe in holding about the mothers neck, as it is in being in the mothers
arms. Jesus Christ (O ye cast down souls) holds you in his arms: and this is
your safety. Suppose thou cannot see thy closing with him, yet he knows his
own closing with you: And his arm is stronger and surer to hold us to him,
then ours are to hold him to us. Yea,

Fifthly, I propose this also unto thee O soul, who art dejected, and
questionest thy closing with Christ. Jesus Christ must, and does close with us,
ere we can or do close with him.

The shepherd must and does go after the sheep, and not the sheep after him.
Christ is our shepherd, and he leaves the Ninty and nine sheep, to seek thee
one; and having found he lays it upon his shoulders. Did you ever hear of a
lost sheep that sought the shepherd; and laid hold on the shepherd? you have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you (says Christ) Joh. 15.16. And the Apostle
tells us, that he loved us first. Christ (O soul) is first in the action of
closing: And he may be stretching forth his hand to close with thee, though
thou be not stretching forth to close with him. Therefore.

Sixthly, and lastly, Suppose (O soul dejected and cast down!) I say suppose
it be as thou fear, that as yet, thou have not closed with Christ: What
hinders but that thou may close with him now? To day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your heart. He begs now, do thou close now. Rouse up thy
soul, and close with Christ (even while thou read) he stands with open
arms, ready to embrace thee, yea, and with open mouth (as I may say) calling
after thee.

Quest. What is it then that hinders?

Answ. This hinders (will you say) I fear unworthiness, and I find
unablenesse: I am neither filling nor able.

Reply, Why know (O soul) unworthiness should not keep thee off, since he
calls thee. Because the man was blind when Christ called, should be not go?
This is that that makes Christ's grace so worthy, that it closes with such as
are unworthy.

And as to thy inability; know he will help thee. The mother will stoop to take
up the child in her arms, that cannot clime up to her neck. Christ (O soul)
will help thee to close with himself. Do but look up to him, and it is don.
David says he will make his prayer and look up. Do thou (O soul) Christ bids
thee (and let that encourage thee.) Look unto me, and be saved, Esa: 45.22.
What can thou do less? and behold! he requires no more. Wherefore then art
thou cast down? and why art thou disquieted, O soul? Suppose that as yet
(however considering that which has been hinted, thou may have no cause to
suppose it) but I say suppose it, that as yet thou have not closed with Christ,
the door of grace is yet open, and it is free for thee to do it now: Be not
therefore dejected, nor cast down, for as yet thou may close with, and
rejoice in Jesus Christ as thine.

CHAP. 8.
I mentioned in the former Section an Eighth fear, which discovers it self in
some dejected souls and that was, A fear of denying Christ.
Some poor cast down souls are much disquieted with this fear: Oh say they,
Case.
should we be brought up to the trial, we should deny Christ. Its true (say
they) peradventure we may never actually be brought unto it, yet its good to
try our hearts; whether the love of Christ in us be as strong as death: And
alas, upon the trial, we see ground to suspect it. Surely, we find we love our
life, more then Christ, and we fear we should sooner deny him, then dye for
him. Thus do many disquiet themselves.

Now for the quieting of souls in this fear; I shall offer these particulars
very briefly.

First, Consider, Satisfaction,
O ye dejected and fearful souls! This fear of yours may be a companion of
valor. Even such as have been fearful in the Town, have been valiant in the
Field. As there are some who boast much, and do little; so there have been
some, that have feared much and yet done mightily. Our Book of Martyrs tells us
of two, One of which, boasted how gallantly he would burn, and yet he cowardly
recanted: the other feared he should deny Christ, and yet he gloriously held
out, and suffered death. You may fear, and yet when it comes to it, may be able
to dye for Christ. But

Secondly, We are not able to tell what strength Christ will give in at the
very nicke of time. Christ makes good, promises, in their season. As wisdom to
dispute for, so courage to dye for Christ, has its hour in which it shall be
given. Christ forbids his disciples fearful trouble, and care beforehand: (for
so the word signifies, Luke 21.14. And he tells them Mal. 10.19. (...).
it shall be given in that hour. Do not cast down thy self (O poor soul)
but believe there is strength in Christ though there be weakness in thee: and
thou may experience that in the hou^ of trial, which thou doubtest now. If
Christ call thee to dye, he will keep thee from denial. Why should the Soldier
have his arms bef-re the time of War? Your arms i.e. your strength and
courage to die for Christ, is reserved for that hour, to be given forth then,
why should thou perplex thy self for want of it now. But

Thirdly, Suppose thou should flinch, and faint in a day of trial. Suppose
thou should indeed fall so sadly, (for it is a sad fall) as to deny Christ.
Yet know

First, This might consist with grace: I know none that will deny Peter's grace,
because of his denial of Christ. Yea,

Secondly, This may consist with love to Christ. There is a true love, which at
first is not so strong as death. Peter did not fall in the truth, but in the
strength of his love. Besides

Thirdly, Christ will not let thee fall for ever. He will restore thee again.
He can and will bring thee on with courage in a second trial, who did fall
away by cowardice in a first. Peter did afterward outface a Magistrate, that
at first was afraid of a Maid. To this add

Lastly, Christ may own you, though you deny him. Its certain, a denial of
Christ with fear and unwillingnesse (and this is thy case O soul) does not
expose us to a being denied by Christ; Its true, direct, voluntary, desperate
denying of Christ is dangerous: So, if we deny him he will deny us. But a denial
through jear, with reluctance: A denial feared before it be, bewailed after it
is (which is and would be thy case O soul) this I say does not, shall not make
Christ deny any.

Why then art thou cast down O soul; and why art thou troubled with a fear
of denying Christ: He knows how to strengthen thee, that thou shall not, and
to pity thee if thou do, yea, and to own thee; though for a time thou
should deny him.

CHAP. 9.
Satisfaction for souls cast down about Prayer.
BEsides those eight particular fears, which I spoke of in the sixth Chapter
of the foregoing Section; I added six other fears which do appear in some
dejected souls: Now its my desire to speak something to them, in order to
satisfy some souls that lie and labor under them.

Some there are that when they are cast down, do much disquiet themselves
about their prayers. Case.
Oh say some, we fear we never prayed in all our lives, or if we did, we
question whether God ever heard us, etc.

Now for the satisfaction of souls in this case, I shall speak unto it in
both its branches. And Satisfaction.


First, For such souls as are cast down and disquieted, and cry out, Oh they
never prayed in all their lives. Its true, they say, they have sometimes spoke
in prayer, but they doubt whether ever they prayed in prayer. They fear they
rather moved their lips, then breathed their spirits, etc.

There are these things which I would say unto such souls.

First, This very fear argues a choice frame: It proceeds from a very choice
spirit, thus to fear. Indeed a slight and common spirit does pray it cares not
how: So the work be done, its all they mind (and it were well some minded so
much) But with what frame of spirit they pray (alas!) that they look not
after. Some there are that we call Protestants, which in this are as bad as
Papists, that they rather give God a number of prayers, then any thing else:
but now it argues a spirit something heightened, to mind the manner of prayer;
to eye the spirit, and the soul, how that is in prayer. Look as it argues in
things human, an ordinary mind that can content it self with the bare doing
of things, how bunglingly so ever, whereas it proceeds from a raisednesse of
mind, to see that every thing be well done, as well as done: to see it be done
neatly, etc. So it argues in things divine, a common spirit (such an one as
Caine had) to be contented with a bare sacrifice, a bare empty prayer: But it
discovers a spirit heightened (such an one as Paul had) to eye the spirit, how
it is in prayer. Paul professes he would pray in his spirit, and with
understanding. While (it may be) many neither care for the spirit nor
understanding. So that this fear has some good in it, in as much as it
proceeds from a choicenesse of spirit. But

Secondly, Take heed you do not roshly, nor groundlesly condemn your self.
Peradventure, there was more of your spirit in prayer, then you saw, or say,
What dare you deny, that at such and such a time your spirit was in your
prayer? If it were not then what meant those sighs, and tears, and groans!
what meant that bearing of the bosom, and those liftings up, and wringing of
the bonds, if your spirit was not in your prayers. Surely? as in point of
smning, albeit wicked men should say their hearts were not in it: Yet their joy
and merriment in it, would witness against them. So in the manner of praying,
though Saints doubt their hearts was not in it, yet their sighs, and groans in
the spirit (though unutterable in themselves, yet) they could witness for them
in this. However

Thirdly, Can, and dare you appeal to God, that so far as you knew your heart,
it was at such and such a time in prayer. Can you say, Lord thou know that I
desired such a grace, etc. and oh how glad was I in the bare thoughts, and
smal^ hopes that I had of obtaining it: But on the contrary, how did the fear
and sense of not obtaining it grieve me! Surely, if you can thus seriously, and
consideringly appeal to God, you may conclude, that your heart and spirit was
in prayer. Besides

Fourthly, Consider thy soul might have been, and may be in a prayer
notwithstanding many dulnesses and wanderings. I find by experience, that the
ground of this fear, is that dullness, and those wanderings of our spirits in
prayer. Now clear it is, that notwithstanding these, yet our spirit may be
really, (and so accounted by God) in duty. You know in that duty of watching
with Christ in his agony: It Is recorded the disciples slept, yet mark it,
Christ saw, and said their spirit was in it. The spirit (says he) is willing,
but the flesh is weak. Christ saw their spirit, and acknowledged its
willingness, notwithstanding their drowsiness.

And for wanderings, you know it is possible for the eye to be fixed upon an
object, and yet not to be so fixed, as to be altogether free from rowlings. The
eye may be upon the sun, and yet it may twinckle. And certainly, if we should
say that the heart is not in prayer, because of some wanderings, we should
condemn the generation of the just. For to be so intense upon God, as to have
no wandering thoughts at all, is not attained unto by many, if by any at all. So
that now, why should thou say thy spirit was not in prayer, because of some
dullness; and wanderings. It Is possible that these things may be, and yet God may
see, yea, and acknowledge thy spirit to be in thy prayers.

Object. But alas! (says the soul cast down) Suppose my spirit be, or were in
prayer, what is that? I fear I never prayed in Christ's Spirit: It is one thing
to pray in our spirits, another thing to pray in Christ's spirit: Now I fear I
never prayed in the strength of Christ's spirit, however it might be in the
strength and sincerity of my own.

For answer and satisfaction to this,

First, This is a more choice fear then the former: Its a choice thing to eye
our own spirit; Its a choicer to eye Christ's spirit in prayer. Moral
sincerity may a little put on the former: But its divine sincerity, which looks
after, and unto this. Nadab and Abihu can content themselves with strange fire;
But Moses and Aaron will not offer but with holy fire. Its certainly an
evidence of a soul more then ordinarily heightened, not to be content to pray
in the sincerity of our spirit, but to labor for the strength of Gods spirit.

Secondly, It Is possible to pray in the holy Ghost and yet to doubt it. I find
some doubting they never prayed in the spirit, because they have been
straightened, and wanted those inlargements, which others have, etc.

Now mind it, it is possible to pray in, and that by the holy Ghost, and yet not
to be enlarged. The soul may be so full, as that it may not be able to vent it
self, Fullness of spirit does sometimes cause straitning. As now in David's
case, its said, then went King David in, and sat before the Lord, etc. (Then.
i. e. when as Nathan had been, and told him at large, the rich and sweet
intentions of God toward him) Certainly, now David's spirit could not choose but
be very full. And yet mark what he says, Who am I O Lord God? and what is my
house, that thou have brought me hither-unto? And this was yet a small thing in
thy sight O Lord God: but thou have spoken also of thy servants house, for a
great while to come: and is this the manner of men O Lord God? But now mark
it, what follows (upon this, as it were entry upon the duty) And what can
David say more unto thee? for thou O Lord, know thy servant. See how he is
straitened, so that he cannot say more: But he is fain to say (as sometimes it
may be you have done) Lord thou know thy servant. So that you see, there may
be the spirit, where, and while the soul is straightened, and certainly, as
Hypocrites may have inlargements, and yet not the Holy Ghost; so Saints may
have the Holy Ghost, and yet want inlargements.

Thirdly, Consider, How much of God as a Father did thou see in prayer. Its
the work of the spirit to help the soul to see God as a father, and to cry
Abba; and to fill the soul with (not words and expressions, but) with sighs
and groans unutterable.

So that then to satisfy thy self (O dejected soul) in this fear, consider
thy very fear is choice: And it may not be as thou fear.

But shall I suppose it: suppose it should be so, that as yet thou did never
pray. Suppose I admit it, that thou did not in the sincerity of thy spirit,
nor in the assistance of Christ's Spirit pray, yet for all that, consider these
things.

First, Free grace can, and does beseech souls to accept of peace and love,
who do not beg for it; God by us (says the Apostle) beseeches you. Though
thou did not, nor can pray to God, yet free Grace comes, and (as I may say)
prays to thee. Thou say, I shall never have peace, and reconciliation; for
I never by Prayer did beseech God for it. Why, remember God tenders, and in his
free grace comes, and beseeches you, to accept of it.

Secondly, God can give, though ye cannot, or do not beg; he is able to do
abundantly above all that we can ask, or think, Ephesians. 3.20 yea and he is
willing, for before they call I will answer, says the Lord; And he is found of
them that seek him not. Though God be pleased to come in in prayer, yet he is
not tied to it. Besides;

Thirdly, consider its Christ's work to offer up prayers for us; he lives for
ever to make intercession, Heb. 7.25. when thy heart is dead, he lives; and he
prays for those, that do not, cannot pray for themselves.

Fourthly, know the Spirit is promised for asking, Luke 11.13. you who cannot
pray, remember to ask, and to wait for the Spirit: And you have Christ's word
to encourage, and assure you, that you shall have the Spirit: so that now, why
are you cast down, as fearing you never did pray? consider your fear is good,
yet it may be groundless. However Gods heart first opens it self to us. Be
not cast down unto despair, know God can, and will give to such as neither
do, nor can ask; besides, in time he will prepare thy heart, and cause his ear
to hear (as it is, Psalm. 10.17.) why may not this raise thy soul, who art
cast down, and say, thou did never pray?

Ob. But will thou say; Suppose I have prayed, (indeed I hope I have, and daily
I desire to do it) but alas! What though I pray, if God does not hear; what
though I call, he does not answer. This, O this! does disquiet my soul: I have
prayed often, but I fear I have been heard never.

Ans. Indeed, this is the other branch of the fear, and according to what
Christ has given me, I shall endeavor to scatter it. I must acknowledge (O
soul) that its a misery scarce expressable, to pray and not to be heard. But
yet know, many conceive themselves in this misery without ground. In order
therefore to the satisfaction, and raising of thy soul under this dejection,
let me prevail with thee to consider with sincere, and serious spirit, these
particulars.

First, God may have heard thee, though thou do not think so. Its true,
peradventure God has not yet returned an answer in some particulars; but yet
he may have heard your prayers. God is a free Agent, and so he may take his
own time to send an answer. Suppose thou send a Letter to a friend, by a sure
Messenger; what though you have not an answer presently, will you say, your
Letter was lost, or that your friend did not receive it. Why the case is so,
your prayers are your letters to God, and Christ is a sure messenger; though as
yet God has not sent his answer, yet your Letters are read, your prayers are
accepted: and in time ( viz. Gods time) they shall be punctually answered; God
will answer your prayers, that cry unto him night and day, though he hear
long, (as it is, Luk 18.7.) But,

Secondly, Its possible the answer may be sent, and you have not observed it.
There are Letters at the Post House sometimes for us, which only want fetching
home. The Spirit who brings returns from Heaven has an answer for us, but we
eye him not. Job speaks of Gods going by, and he saw him not; of his passing
on, and he perceived it not, Job 9.11. O how many times does God go by us, in
acts of providence, clearly, and directly answering our prayers; and yet we do
not see it, nor perceive it? Besides,

Thirdly, for any thing you know, your prayers will not be answered till you
are dead; your Children, or the Churches, may have answers of your prayers,
when you are gone; or it may be, God will reserve the answer till your death.
How many dying souls have said, now, O now we see, and hear, that God has
answered all our prayers? Why then art thou cast down (O soul!) about thy
prayers, as if they were not answered?

Obj. But I cannot believe that God will ever answer. Sure I am (its well if it
be so) that I have eyed Providence exactly, and could as yet never see any
answer; and what God will do for time to come, I know not, but I doubt. etc.

Ans. Be it as thou fear: what if God as yet have not answered thy prayers
in many, in any particulars, yet be not dejected O soul overmuch, for
consider:

First, unanswered prayers are not lost, thou have not prayed in vain, for God
never bid the house of Jacob do so; thy letters are filed up in Heaven, and
though they are not answered, yet they are remembered; God does not forget, your
labor of love, in your letters of love (for such are prayers) its our duty to
pray: it is Gods grace to answer; though as yet he reveals not that grace, yet
it makes not void our duty.

Secoundly, God may be pleased with thy prayers, though he do not answer: The
Mother is pleased with the Childs lisping, though she seem not to hearken.
Thou fear (O soul) that God is angry with thy prayers, (as it is, Psalm.
80.4.) but why should thou fear this? God was not angry with his peoples
prayer (of which the Psalmist there makes mention) though he did not at that
time answer it. Your earthly Parents sometime seem deaf, when yet they
delight to hear their Children tattle, etc. may it be thus with the Fathers of
your flesh? why may not, nay why should you not think so of the Father of your
spirits? However:

Thirdly, consider what it was you prayed for, and were denied, or not answered
in^ peradventure 'twas a temporal, and that it may be, not for your good
(though you foolishly thought so) why should ye take it ill, to be denied in
such a thing? God has heard thee for a Christ, when thou said as Abraham,
What will thou give me; so long as I go Christ-lesse? why what if God now has
not heard thee, saying as she; Give me children or I dye? is not Christ worth
many children? Say (O soul) did not God give thee many a spiritual good thing
upon, nay before thy prayers? why art thou cast down if he deny thee
temporalls?

Obj. Nay, but it is a spiritual good that I have prayed for, and am not
answered in.

Rep. It may be so, yet consider; peradventure, it is but a spiritual gift, as
memory, understanding, elocution in prayer; and now, why art troubled (soul)
so much to be denied in these? what are they in themselves, but such things as
reprobates may have? Gifts may go to Hell, yea many a gifted person is
graceless; why art cast down with the denial of gifts, when Christ has
given graces without asking? Nay, but they are graces that I beg, and pray
for: I have gone to beg faith, and love, and patience, etc. and yet I have no
answer to these prayers.

Ans. Stay yet (O soul) and consider, it may be thou beggest not so much the
grace, as the degree; Its not so much faith, as a strong faith; not so much
love, as a fervent love, etc. Now consider (O soul) though God deny thee the
strength, the degree of grace, its choice mercy thou have the grace it self. A
little faith, (though but as a grain of Mustard Seed) is precious. Be not cast
down (O poor heart!) if God deny thee great faith, etc. bless him for that
he has given thee any faith, etc.

Obj. But alas! I doubt I have not faith at all, etc. its not the degree of
grace, but the grace it self, that I pray for, and yet receive not.

Rep. Surely (O soul) thou art mistaken what ever grace thou prayest for
(especially) so as to be troubled for want of (which is thy case) I say, thou
have that grace already. Its a degree of wisdom to desire to be wise, and its
a measure of grace to pray for grace. The Disciples had faith, when yet they
prayed against unbeleefe: without doubt, O dejected soul! thy panting after,
thy praying for, and trouble at the sense of the want of grace, is grace: who
can breath except he have life?

Lastly, to clo^e up this case (of fear about Gods not hearing prayer) if God
as yet have not answered my prayers, the more is to come; in Heaven God will
answer all together. God sometimes deals with his Children as we do with
ours; the Child abroad sends home for many things, now for a Hat, anon for a
pair of Shoos, etc. the Father neither sends the thing, nor an answer, but
anon sends for the Child home, and gives him all: Mind ye Children of God
(for you are of that generation who seek his face) your Father will send for
you home one of these days: and by death he will fetch you hence, and answer all
your prayers at once.

Now then, bear up (O dejected souls) be not cast down about your prayers as
you are; O remember in all this case! Christ lives for ever, to make
intercession for us; why should we be so sad at the thoughts of our own
prayers, as to forget to rejoice in the faith of his? If we sin, he is our
Advocate; if we want any thing, he knows all our needs; and why should we
doubt, that he prays for us, since he lives for that very purpose.

CHAP. 10.
Satisfaction to Souls cast down about Hearing.
SOme there are, who in their dejection call to mind the Word, and their
hearing of it; Case.
but alas, they are so far from being raised by it, as that it dejects them the
more; Ah, say they, we have heard thee preached in our streets; Luke 13.26
but so shall some say, and be dis-owned at last by Christ; the Word has been
sown amongst us, but we fear, not as the good seed in the good ground, and
something now must be said to satisfy these souls; and there be but four
things, which I shall offer briefly to this purpose.

1 Call to mind what it was (O soul) which in the hearing of the Word did
most take with, Satisfaction
and affect thy heart; was it the Truth, or the terms that did most prevail
with you? Did thou find thine ears tickled with the entising words of man's
wisdom? Or, did thou feel thy heart touched with the power of the Spirit,
in the demonstration of truth? If upon this inquiry thou do find, that naked
truth, in the discovery of the Spirit, did most take with, and work upon thy
heart; thou need not be troubled about thy hearing the Word, for surely
thou have heard the word, not as the word of man, but of God.

2 Consider what was the effect of that Word, or that truth which thou did
close with. The real effect of the Word (heard as the Word of God) is the
casting down of those imaginations, which did lift up themselves in the soul
against Christ. The Apostle tells the Corinthians, that the weapons of his
warfare were mighty through God; But how did it appear? Mark, because says
he, they pull down strong holds, etc. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. a Cannon shot off with
Powder makes no battery, nor breach; but if it beat down strong holds, it
argues there was more then bare Powder. Certainly, if the Word has beaten
down thy towry imaginations, and made a breach, and so an entrance in thy
bosom for Christ; If it has battered open the everlasting gates for the King
of glory to enter in; thou may surely, and sweetly conclude, that thou did
hear more then man in the Word; yea that Christ was in, and with the Word of a
truth. It was a sign that the Thessalonians had received the Word (as it was
in truth) the Word of God, when it did effectually work in them, as it is, 2
These. 2.13. But besides this,

3 Know, that there may be the seed of the Word in thy heart, as in good
ground, See this fear stated Sect. 1. chap. 7.
notwithstanding thy fears; Oh, say many poor souls, there be so many
stones, and thorns in our hearts, that we fear, the good seed has met but
with bad ground in our hearts; but know, (O souls) that as no ground is so
good, but it has some stones, and thorns; so your hearts may be good ground,
notwithstanding some worldly cares, and deceitfulness. Beware least you
imagine that you should, or could make your hearts good, and your souls
fruitful of your selves; some have doubtless mistaken Christ's meaning in that
Parable, who think that their hearts must, or could be good ground, before the
seed of the Word make it so: Parables are not to be stretched beyond their
intention. Thy heart may be, was, is, and will be bad ground, ere the good seed
make it good, thou say, the seed was good, but thy ground, i. e. thy heart
was naught; therefore the Parable speaks sadly of thee, etc. but be not
dejected nor deceived. Its the glory of spiritual seed that it will make BAD
ground GOOD. Its true, other seeds (though good) yet if sown in bad ground are
lost; the bad ground spoiling the good seed: But it is otherwise here: The bad
ground, i.e. bad hearts, do not mar the good seed, but the good seed, mends
the bad hearts. Every heart since the fall, has, and does bring forth briars
and thorns: Now where good seed comes, it choakes the briars and thorns (i.e.
deceit and corruptions.)

Object. Nay, but says the soul: it is true, if this good seed did abide; but
alas! I fear it is lost all, or at best, there is but little remains of the
many handfulls that have been sown upon me: there are but a few grains
abide; etc.

Ans. Be it so O soul, yet if any seed remain 'twill grow, and be saving: any
one seed taking root in thy heart is immortal, and it will remain.

Reply, But me thinks, I hear the soul reply with sighs, and saying, It Is true,
if I had but any seed abiding with me, I could rejoice, for I know the good
seed will not dye: But I alas! I see it not spring up, and therefore I doubt,
etc.

Duply, Tarry O soul, The Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the
earth, and has long patience for it; And should not thou wait for the most
precious fruit of the heart, Jam. 5.7.
and have longer patience. Even the Lord of the Vineyard waits some years
for his fruit. (as is deducible from Luke 13.7.) Albe it thou see not the seed
spring, yet it may be under the clods taking root: even under the clods of your
corruptions, there may be the seed of grace. And what if you see it not? Should
the husbandman, who in the Winter, looks upon his field newly, or lately
sown, and sees nothing but mire, and earth, and dirt, cry out and say, all my
seed is lost? would not every one count him weak? and tell him in the Spring
he shall see the contrary.

Thy Spring (O soul) is coming, its now thy Winter season (as before n="*"
Sect. i. chap. 5.
was hinted) and now thy seed is not seen, for thy corruptions (like dirty
clods) lie upon it. But bear up (O soul) and expect with patience, and thou
shall see thy seed springing up unto a Harvest of holiness, and of life.

But what if I should say (as thou do) that thy seed (i.e. the word which
thou have heard) is dead. I should not feed thy fear. For know you not, that
which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.36.
thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye: Its a piece
of folly, to expect a quickening of seed sown, ere it rot, and dye. Verily
(says Christ) except a corn of wheat, Joh. 12.24.
fall into the ground, and dye, it abides alone: i. e. it increases not. Even
Christ himself, sown in the heart, does at least seemingly dye ere he
springs up. Death passes upon all our mercies in the seed, and we find them
only, as by a resurrection. Even that good seed of grace (the holy word of the
Gospel) which has been sown in thy heart, and lies now as dead, and rotten,
will arise and spring up ere long; and thou shall see it: be not therefore (O
soul) so cast down, and dejected.

Lastly, To wind up this case, Admit as yet the Word of God never came like it
self, i, e. as good seed to thee, yet it may now. God has bid us in the
preaching of the Word, to be instant both in season, and out of season; And in
effect he has said to us, as it is Eccles. 1.6. To sow our seed in the morning,
and in the evening not to with hold our hand: And how do we, or you know which
shall prosper. Peradventure, the seed that is sown in the evening, may prosper
with thee, though that be lost which was sown on thee in the morning. Christ
(O soul) for ought that I, or thou know, may in this reading, or the next,
cause a blessing to be upon the seed: And it may (at last) bring forth in thy
heart, sixty, yea a hundred fold. O be not faithless, but believe: Thou who
now go up and down mourning for the want of a precious seed, See Isa.
55.10, 11. and 35.1, 2, 3, 4 See these places.
may ere long return rejoicing, bearing sheaves: Has not the Lord said; As
the rain comes down from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the
earth, and makes it bring forth and bud: Even so shall the word which goes
forth of his mouth, it shall not return empty. Thou who now fear thy self
to be a barren Wilderness, shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice. This Christ
has commanded me to tell you who are of a fearful heart, therefore be not
dejected, or cast down, but be strong.

CHAP. 11.
Satisfaction to the soul cast down, and troubled with fear about the
Promises.
THe Promises are appointed (and indeed were intended) for our comfort, but
many souls who are dejected, are so far from being comforted by them, that they
are troubled about them.

O say they, had we assurance that we were interested in the Promises, we could
rejoice, Case.
but we question our right to them, and we fear we have no part or lot in
them, etc.

Now to raise up the soul cast down, and laboring under this fear, I shall
present these particulars, to be seriously considered.

First, You have no just ground to say, you have no right to the Promises. God
does no where say, that thou shall have nothing to do with his Promises. Since
God does not exclude thee, why should thou exclude thy self? Its not enough
to say thou art a sinner, for the Promises are tendered unto sinners. Its
observable, there is one Promise or other made and tendered unto all sorts of
sinners. But.

Secondly, Its your duty to believe the Promises are yours, and this is the way
to come to know it. Its a strange, and ungospell-like expression to say, I
would believe the Promises did belong to me, if I knew it. Why, if you knew it,
what room were there for faith? You must believe so shall you know^. Suppose a
pardon (thrown to a company of condemned ones in a prison) should any say, is
my name in particular there? when it should be said, there is a pardon for any
that will take it. Oh how would all catch, and snatch at it. Certainly, (O
soul) you should believe the Promises to be yours, and not stand questioning
whether they are or no? After you believed (not before, pray mark it) you were
seded with the spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13.

Thirdly, It may be the Promise is yours, and your soul has closed with it,
although at present you doubt. The Promises coming to us, art as sealed
letters: and we many times have them in our hand, and read them not. No wonder
therefore, you say you find not the comfort of them. Many souls have the
Promises, as children have the nipple of the breast, in their mouths, but do
not suck: and no wonder if they cry out, they taste not the sweetness of them.

Object. Nay, but I fear, and tremble; I am full of doubts, and vexation: And
had I closed with the promise this would not be.

Answ. Say not so (O soul) the wom^^ that came behind Christ touched him,
though she trembled. Its possible for a soul to touch a Promise, even so far
as to draw virtue out of it (a^ it were indirectly) and by the hinder parts
when happily it durst not (as the woman in th^^ case) come before the Promise,
and close directly with it in the face thereof. But

Fourthly, thou must know (O soul) that some promises have their times of
fulfilling, and peradventure the time is not yet come; the promise of hidden
manna is to a time of conquest, Apoc. 2.17. It may be thy combat is not yet
over; why then do thou expect the Manna? some promises are sealed up (as
Commissions, not to be opened, till the Commander come to such a place) sure I
am, God keeps some promises till the life to come; and we do but in vain
trouble our selves to look for the fulfilling of them here.

Lastly, Suppose as yet thou have never (as thou say) closed with any
promise, what hinders O soul but that thou do it now? The promises of God lie
open before you, why do you not come and take? Surely you should not cast
down your souls, with fear that you have not closed with them yet, but you
should thus arise, and lay hold of them now.

Obj. So I would, if I were but thus, or had but this; I want the condition of
the promise, and till I have that, I dare not meddle with it.

Answ. Beware of this rock (O soul!) it has split many, let it not split
thee. To this end you are to know (and pray mind it.)

First, You are to fetch all from the Promises, not to bring any thing to the
Promises. The Promises are not as Pumps, that will give no water, except some
be poured in: But they are as Wells: and there is nothing for us to do but to
come and draw. Such as stand off from acting faith upon the Promises nakedly,
because they see not this, or that in themselves: Are guilty of making their
own qualifications, their faiths bottom.

Secondly, The greatest promises, as of pardon of sins, etc. are FREE: Its said
come and take freely, Isa. 43. ult.
buy wine, and milk without money, or monyes worth: God blots out sins for his
names sake, its only for us to declare it, and put him in remembrance, that we
may be justified, And

Thirdly, The Promises are to give the condition. Its considerable that
whatever condition may be urged as pre-requisite to any one promise: is freely
promised in another. A new heart: a new and right spirit: repentance of sin,
victory over corruptions, etc. These things are called out for as conditions:
and these things are held forth as promised. See to this purpose, these places,
Jer. 25.7. Eze. 36.25. Act. 5.31. To. 7. ult. etc. Wherefore then (O dejected
soul) art thou cast down? as if the Promises were not thine, or did not belong
to thee. Surely, thou have no ground justly so to say. Remember nothing is
freer then the grace of Christ, and that is held forth to thee: And in him all
the Promises shall be yea, and amen: Arise (O soul) and lay hold on him, and
all the Promises in him. So shall thou be able to say, of a truth, now I see
God is no respecter of persons, in the tender of his promises.

CHAP. 12.
Satisfaction to Souls cast down, and troubled about their abstinence from
sin, etc,
DEjected souls are very weak, and hence it is that they are ready to be
troubled about every thing; this Satan sees, and hence it is that creates
trouble in them; even from that, which otherwise might comfort them. Abstinence
from sin is expressly commanded, Psalm. 4.4.
and yet even about obedience to this command, the dejected soul is troubled.
Oh say some, poor hearts (that re cast down) we abstain from sin, Case.
it is true, but from what principles? Are they not rather selfish, and slavish,
then spiritual, and sincere? A Dog chained up is a Dog still; and the
reason why he does not this, or that mischief is his chain, not his change,
and we fear it is so with us* etc.

Now to answer souls saying thus, Satisfaction.
and (if it may be) to satisfy them under this fear, there be four things
which I desire may be minded.

First, Its mercy to be able to abstain from any principles; sin is such an
evil, as that its a great good to be kept from it by any means; the heart of
some is so fully bent upon sin, that nothing can restrain them; some wretches
rush into abomination as the Horse into the battle: Ah Lord! how many are
there who will not, are not, cannot be kept from sin by all means used? Its
a favor (oh poor soul) that thou art not as they are; its well for thee thou
art not as wild as they: I much fear their case who are not afraid of, nor
abstain from sin at all; I little fear thine, who art so afraid of sinning,
as that thou questionest not the reality of the act, but the royalty of the
principle. Its a kind of high, and royal hatred of sin, when the soul
cannot be contented only to abstain from it; but when its troubled (as thou
art O soul) that the principles of that abstinence were not high, and royal
enough.

Secondly, God trains up his children in holy things by degrees; as in point
of doing good, and fearing him; so in point of eschewing evil, God carries on
by degrees. God takes off his own people from running into sin, sometimes by
hedging up their way with thorns, as it is, Hos. 2.6. Mothers weane their
children from the breast by Wormwood at first: God first (at least often) takes
us off from sin rather by the bitterness of it, then the sweetness of
himself. Suppose (O soul) as yet thy abstinence from sin proceeds from
fear rather then love, yet know its Gods way thus to train up his children.
How many have first abstained from sin out of fear of Hell, who yet
afterward have been helped to abstain from it out of love to Christ? some who
at first could not be kept from sin, if they had not been told of Hell,
death, and damnation, have yet in time sincerely professed, they would abstain,
and avoid sin, if there were none of those things at all; so it has been
with others, so it shall be with you. Let thy principles be as low as thou
fear, oh soul! (and yet thy fear argues them higher then thou think)
yet (I say) suppose them low now, they may be high ere long; God by degrees
will heighten both thy practice, and thy principles. But,

Thirdly; Jesus Christ knows how to pass by low principles, as well as pardon
lewd practices. He that can, and does forgive acts of sin when very high, can
and will forgive abstinence from sin, when the principles are low. Indeed
Christ highly embraces souls who are yet principled but low; Nathaniels first
principle of faith in Christ, was it seems but low; Jesus hints, it was but
this, because he had told him that he saw him under the fig tree, as it is,
Joh. 1.50. Suppose thy abstinence from sin be as low principled as his faith in
Christ, yet Christ knows how to love thee, as him: therefore,

Lastly, Know you, that happiness depends not upon your acts, or principles of
abstaining from sin, but upon the blood of Christ, that takes away all sin.
The Apostle knew, that if he should have said, 1 John 1.7. and 2.1.
himself and other believers had no sin, he should have spoke amiss; but
sure he was of this, that the blood of Christ would cleanse from all; and that
if any sinned; they had an Advocate with the Father; and these things he writ
that they might not sin: wherefore then (O soul!) who abstainest from sin,
be not cast down for fear thy principles of abstinence are too low; but
rejoice in this, that the blood of Christ shall take away the guilt of all thy
lewd practices, and much more the guilt of low, and mean principles, But yet
(O soul) know, this gives no liberty to sin; O no (say thou) it does not,
and God forbid that I should sin, because of this grace; I desire for ever to
avoid sin, and oh that I could do it from holy and high principles.

Quest. I pray help me herein.

Answ. For thy help (O soul) in this kind there are three things, which I
offer to thy thoughts, as means to heighten thy principles in abstaining from
sin.

First, Eye Christ as dying for sin; its low to abstain from sin for fear
least it should spill our blood; but its high to adstaine from sin in faith,
that it has shed Christ's blood. Eye thy Savior on the Cross (O soul!) and
that will secretly, and spiritually beget these thoughts in thee: Shall I sin,
for whom Christ dyed? Did sin kill him, and shall not I therefore leave it?
Did he lay down his life for my sins, and shall ^ot I abstain from my lusts,
for his sake? The thoughts of this, that sin cost thy Saviors Blood, will
heighten thy principle in abstaining from it.

Secondly, Look upon your selves as dead to sin, in your Saviors death for
sin; if thou art dead to it, thou will abstain from it; and if thou abstain
from sin upon this principle, thy principle is high. The Apostle Paul
teaches this principle, Romans 6.11. Reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed
unto sin; this is a conclusion which Logically he would have Christians to
draw from Christ's death, The word is, (...) i.e. logically, and rationally to
conclude. (...)
viz. That they are dead to sin; and if they thus conclude, he hints, the
conclusion may be maintained, for it is so indeed. The soul is high in holiness
who avoyds sin, because it is dead to it. Why (O soul) thou art indeed dead to
sin, and if upon that reckoning, or if from that reasoning thou abstain from
sin, thy abstinence is preciously principled. Add to this:

Lastly, the remembrance of this, viz. That sin alone eclipseth love; and
this thought will beget hatred against sin to purpose. Hatred begotten, or
springing from love is great: Why, this thought (O soul) that sin only
cloudeth thy Saviors love, will make thee, out of love to his love, hate
sin, and so abstain from it indeed: And abstinence from sin upon this
account is high. I know (O soul) you love discoveries of your Saviors love,
now then remember this, Its sin, and sin only that can hide love; and if
thou remembrest that, thou will abstain from sin upon a principle of love to
love; and if thy principle be such, thou will not have any cause to be cast
down, or disquieted about it.

CHAP. 13.
Satisfaction to cast down souls troubled about the sin against the Holy
Ghost.
SAtan makes some souls dejected, Case.
fear they have sinned unto death, etc. the sin against the Holy Ghost; and
many souls cast down, Satisfaction.
are perplexed with this fear: Now I shall seek to remove this fear, and to
satisfy dejected souls in this case by the proposal of these particulars.

Definitio and descriptio differunt apud logicos.
First, Its very uncertain what this sin is, I think none can exactly define
it, and few can well describe it; now its strange that thou should fear
(more strange that any should conclude) themselves guilty of such a sin, the
knowledge of which is so uncertain.

Secondly, It Is very certain many souls (especially dejected ones) take that
for this sin which is not. Its true in a sense, every sin is a sin against
the Holy Ghost (for he is God even as the Father, and the Son;) but it is as
true, every sin (which is so accounted) is not the sin against the Holy
Ghost, of which the Scriptures speak, as unpardonable. Two sins I find
eminently urged by dejected souls against themselves, as the sin against the
Holy Ghost; that is to say:

1 Sinning against clear light, and Conscience. 2 Sinning against taste of
love, and experience.
But certainly, it is possible for a Saint to commit sin of both these kinds,
and yet not to sin the sin against the Holy Ghost. I do make no doubt, but
David's sin (in the bed-businesse of Bathsheba) had both these ingredients; It
cannot be doubted but his light was clear, (that Adultery was a sin) and not
to be committed; the express letter of the Commandments (which David was
well studied and skilled in) forbids it; and for sinning after sweet
experiences, who doubts it? David had sweet experiences of God, when he was
delivered from the Philistines, Psalm. 56. and from Soul, in the cave, Psalm. 57.
yea, and he composed a special choice Psalm upon each occasion, therefore he
styles them Michtams, i. e. golden Psalms, and yet it was after all this that
he fell in that foul business. I might instance in Peter's Case (which seemed,
and in a sense did exceed David's) and in the case of others, and yet none ever
charged them with the sin against the Holy Ghost; so that it is clear many are
mistaken in this sin, and why may not thou be mistaken (oh soul) who
fear it?

Thirdly, There are some souls who are not at present capable of that sin;
my meaning is, that cannot possibly (at present) be charged with it, as now;
such as are not very highly enlightened, such as have not had any great or high
income of joy and sweetness, such as have not been eminent; and long
professors. All Divines conclude, that a person sinning the sin against the
Holy Ghost, must be supposed to be; 1. One much enlightened 2. One who has
tasted of the heavenly gift, and the joys of the Holy Ghost; yea and 3. One
who has been some famous and forward Professor.
Now, alas poor soul! thou cryest out thou art but a babe, a novice; one who
knows little, and have tasted less; one who has small light, and weak life,
and no joy or comfort at all; one whose highest degree of knowledge, is, but as
yet a beam, whose greatest income of joy, is but a drop; who art a stranger to
tasting of the heavenly powers, and the world to come; and who yet art no
forwarder, then humbly to profess to desire to fear Jehovah, and to love
Jesus. Thou do often sigh these sayings, and seal to them as true; and this
may secure thee, from being guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost, since at
present thou art incapable of that sin. But,

Forthly, The soul guilty of this sin cannot be troubled for it, (at least)
so as to desire to repent of it, and to have Christ to pardon it. Thy fear,
thy trouble, thy disquiets (O soul) argue thou art free from this sin, for
were thou guilty of it, thy heart it would be hardred, and could not desire to
repent; thy Conscience, it would be seared, and no way disquieted for it; yea
and thy desires would be dead, so as that thou would not pant after Christ,
nor the Spirit; thy very fears, and disquiets, should answer in this case
themselves, they could not, would not be in thee, if this sin were committed
by thee; a senseless and troublelesse soul ever goes along with this sin,
and therefore know this.

Fifthly, None can be guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost, but such as

First, totally fall away from both Practice and Profession of all godliness,
and Religion, as it is, Heb. 6.6.

Secondly, Directly do despite unto the spirit of grace, as it is, Heb. 10.29,
and

Thirdly, Such as do directly and plainly, and professedly oppose, and speak
evil of the ways of Christ, which sometimes they professed.

Now tell me (O soul) and beware of false witness against thy self.

Quest. First, Art thou totally fallen away from both the practice, and
profession of godliness? Do hold no points of Faith? Do do no acts of
Religion? Do make no profession of Jesus Christ?

Answ. Surely I hear the say, I desire to believe, and the Lord help my
unbeleefe; I desire to walk exactly, to have a good Conscience to God and man;
and this profession I make, that if I know my heart, I desire to worship the
God of my Fathers, according to that order of the Gospel, which many count and
call Heresy; well then (O soul) thou art not totally fallen away, which yet
thou would be, if thou were guilty of the sin feared. But,

Quest. Secondly, Say soul (and do not eclipse the truth of Gods grace in
thee,) Dare thou do despite to the Holy Ghost?

Ans. Surely I hear thee answering, I tremble at the thought thereof, I would
not for ten thousand worlds, speak the least evil of that good Spirit; I am
so far from despiting him, that I do earnestly desire him, and wait for
him. Alas! this (O soul) would not, could not be, were thou guilty of this
sin. Then,

Thirdly, answer (O soul) Do thou oppose godliness?

Answ. Is not this thy reply to this; That thou rather pittyest thy self, for
not being so forward as others, then persecutest them for being before thee?
Yea, thou art so far from opposing those that are godly, that thou would
(if Christ would help thee) suffer any persecutions rather then leave off thy
endeavor to be godly.

Now certainly (O poor dejected soul) thou art not guilty of the sin thou
fear, for if thou were, thou would fall away wholly, and speak evil of
the Spirit directly, and oppose godliness professedly! since these things do
ever accompany that sin against the Holy Ghost. But,

Lastly, there have been precious souls, who sometime feared their sinning
against the Holy Ghost, and yet have afterward enjoyed the sealing of the Holy
Ghost; See the Books of them.
Mistress Drake, Mistress Wight, and others of late have brought forth this
experience fully to light; that souls who have sometimes questioned their
sinning unto death, have yet found the Spirit sealing them up to life; and
Mistress Drake breathed out (a little before her death) this comfortable
counsel, Never let any despair, how desperately miserable soever their case
be. Wherefore then, rouse up thy self (O dejected soul!) thou who now fear
the sin against the Spirit, may ere long boast of the seal of the Spirit.
Trust thou in Christ, for thou shall yet praise him, for joy and assurance
given in by that Holy Ghost, against whom at present thou fear that thou
have sinned.

CHAP. 14.
There remains yet one Case more, which being spoke unto, puts an end to this
Section.
NOw this Case is, the fear of falling away after all. Case.
Many a poor soul which is satisfied (it may be) for the present in its state,
yet questions it for the future; Oh! say some souls, we fear we shall never
hold out, many have gone farte, and yet have perished at last, for want of
perseverance; indeed this is usually the last trouble of dejected souls, and
in this, as in a last refuge they shelter their fears. Suppose, say they, our
case be now as good as the Angels at first, as good as Adams in Paradise, yet
Adam fell, and Angels fell, and we fear the like.

Now unto these souls I would offer these particulars, Satisfaction.
in order, to raise them from under this dejection.

First, Blessed is the soul that fears always; The soul stands surest
while it trembles, the Apostle advises him that stands, to take heed least
he fall. And the way to stand, is not to be high minded, but to fear; as it
is, Romans 11.20. Many had never fell had they ever feared; Peter's presumption
was his failing, and the cause of his falling; security exposes to falls, but
fear preserves. Christ may therefore suffer thee to fear,, that he may
sanctify that fear unto perseverance. But,

Secondly, Though you fall, yet you may rise again, (...) Straps. apud
Aristophan.
as it is, Micha 7.8. Its one thing to fall in part, another thing to fall in
whole; the Spouse, slept, yet her heart waked, Cant. 5.2. Peter fell, but he
was raised up again; many a man has stumbled, and yet not fell flat on all
four (as we say) and many a Saint has, and may fall a while, and yet not
wholly fa^^ away, Besides, consider

Thirdly, The promise is to restore you; Christ will heal our backslidings,
and love us freely. Hos. 14.4. and its his work, as well to raise us up after
conversion in case of d^^linings, as to raise us before conversion from the
grave of death. Its a command, that we should restore one another in case of
falls, Gal. 6.1. and surely that which Christ bids us to do, himself will do
much more. An obligation lies upon him, and its his Fathers will that he should
lose none, Joh. 6.39. And surely if Christ should not restore you, he should
lose you. Therefore,

Fourthly, Know your state in regeneration, is surer then that of the Angels,
and Adam in creation. They were their own Keepers, but Christ is yours; they
stood upon their own legs, but you are held in Christ's hand. Suppose them
great ships, and your selves but little barks; yet a bark fastened to a rock
in Harbor, is safer then a great ship at sea. Suppose two Children, the one
bigger going alone, the other lesser, but in the Fathers arms, that which is
in the Fathers arms is surer, then he which is upon his own legs: Why, the
case is yours (Believers) you are in the arms, the bosom of the Lord Jesus,
etc.

Lastly, There are sure grounds of your perseverance; mind them, draw comfort
from them, and be not cast down,

Obj. But alas! what grounds have I to build my perseverance on? I have little
knowledge, less faith, least assurance; I have many corruptions, more
temptations, most rubs, etc.

Ans. Your way is not to look upon your selves, but upon your Savior; he is
the Rock that is higher then you, and on him you are safe.

Five grounds there are (amongst others) upon which you may build your belief
of perseverance.

First, The unchangeable love of God; he loves you with an everlasting love
(therefore he called you, as it is, Jer. 31.3.) He is unchangable in his love
(therefore he will not consume you, Mal. 3.6.) Christ's love to you is (as
himself) Yesterday, to day, and for ever the same. Having loved his own, he
loves them to the end, as it is, Joh. 13.1.

Secondly, The everlasting decree of God; this foundation of the Lord abides
sure, and it has this seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Divine
decrees alter not, God will not cast off bis people whom he fore-knew, Romans
11.1. for whom he fore-knew, them he predestined, Romans 8.28. and his purpose
according to election shall stand, Romans 9.11.

Thirdly, You have in you an immortal seed; you are borne again of God, and
your seed remains, 1 John 3.9. Certainly that which is borne of the Spirit, is
Spirit; as that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; Fleshly births may dye,
but Spiritual births will live.

Fourthly, You have a sure promise, Jerem. 32.40. God promises to make an
everlasting Covenant. So likewise, Joh. 4.14. The promise is of a Well,
springing up to everlasting life. Yea, Gods promises in this particular are
surer then the Mountains, then the ordinances of heaven. These things shall
pass away, but not these promises; as it is, Isay 54.10. Jer. 31.36.

Lastly, You have an Almighty power to keep you; Suck that sweet place, 1 Pet.
1. Blessed be God the Father, who has begotten us again to a lively hope, to
an inheritance reserved for you in heaven, who are kept by the power of God
unto salvation, verse. 5. There is a power, and that power is the power of a
God, and this is put forth in keeping of you.

So that now, you having so many grounds of perseverance, why should you doubt,
and be dejected? Your perseverance does not depend upon your own power (which
is mutable) but upon Christ's promise (which is immutable) He has promised to
give you eternal life, and that you shall never perish, neither shall any pull
you out of his hand, and his Fathers, as it is, Joh. 10, 28, 29.) now faithful
is he that has promised.

Obj. Oh! but though none can pull me out of Corists hand, I may cast my self
out; and so Christ may leave me to Satan, and I fall away.

Ans. Thou art deceived (oh dejected soul!) if thou think, that Christ will
permit thee to do that which he will not permit Satan; albeit the Child would
fall out of the Mothers arms, yet she will not let it. Christ will uphold thee by
the right hand of his power, Isa. 41.10
so as that albeit thou of thy self (because of thy fickleness would fall)
yet he (because of his faithfulness) will not let thee.

Object. Nay, but yet I read of the falls of many a Saint, David, and Solomon,
and Peter, and others stronger by far then I, have fallen, etc.

Answ. True, but they were restored again; though they fell, yet they did not
fall away; Christ raised them, and he will also raise thee: For he has promised
to heal backslidings; ( i. e. falls after love and light) and to love
(notwithstanding) them freely.

Object. But the Apostle says, Its impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly gift, etc. if they fall away to renew
them by repentance, etc. Hebrews 6.4.5, 6.

Mind these things to clear this place (O sad soul!)

Answ. 1. The Apostle does not say positively, that such as were enlightened,
etc. might fall away; he only supposes it, If they do, says he, ver. 6.

Quest. But if it might not be, why does the Apostle urge it.

Rep. As a Caution to make them careful. It was impossible that Hered could
kill Christ in his Infancy; yet Joseph is forewarned upon such a fear to fly.
Matthew, 2.13. And albeit it be impossible for such as ere indeed enlightened,
and have savingly tasted, etc. to fall away; yet such a thing may be urged to
beget a holy fear, to make the soul diligent, and to keep it from being
secure. But,

Secondly, It Is common for Hypocrites (after such inlightenings and enjoyments,
which are but common and general) to fall away; but its impossible for Saints,
and such as are sincere, and truly gracious. Here is nothing spoken but what an
Hypocrite may have, and that such may fall away is not denied; but what is this
to a soul truly believing, and sincerely united to Jesus Christ? Though a
Shadow may perish, what is that to the perishing of a substance? Do not
dispute thy self (O soul) into doubts, rather receive satisfaction; Christ
will not lose any that are given to him: Its his Fathers will he should not (as
he says Jo^. 6.39.) And surely he will be faithful to his Father; Oh therefore,
be not thou fearful of falling, but if thou will fear, let it be with a fear
of diligence to keep thee from security; let it not be with a fear of
diffidence, to fill thee with sorrows. Christ, who in no wise would cast thee
off, when thou come, will in no wise lose thee, now thou art come. If thou
wander, he will seek thee; if thou fall, he will raise thee; yea and what ever may
be thy fears, he will uphold thee in his Grace, even to the Grave; and besides;
he will raise thee up again at the last day.

Thus have I passed through those particular Cases which I proposed to my self
to resolve. But alas, all that I have said, is but dead, unless Christ quicken
it.

READER; pray over these conceptions, that a spirit of life may come into them;
that they may so quicked dejected Souls, that they may arise, and say to
themselves; Why are we cast down, and why are we disquieted? Let us not give
way to our fears and sadness, but exercise our faith and patience; for we
shall yet see God as the health of our countenance, and as our God. But these
things are more fully to be spoken unto in the following Sections.

CHAP. 15.
Cure for Souls cast down by remainder of corruption.
HAving past through the particular cases of dejected souls, I thought it not
amiss to add by way of supplement unto them some other; I remember I touched
upon eight grounds of Spiritual dejection, and least upon the mention of them
any soul should be troubled, I shall offer somethings to satisfy such who is,
or may be cast down about them; so that as in the former Section I endeavored
to satisfy the particular fears of dejected souls; I shall in this,
endeavor to cure the general causes of all dejection.

Divines know there is a difference between a Cause, and a Case, the one is the
bitter seed, the other the sower fruit of dejection: Now as I have said
something to the one, so shall I likewise speak a little to the other.

To begin then in that order in which I prepared them.

The first cause of Spiritual dejection was the remainders of corruption,
Cause.
this indeed is the root, and ground of all dejections. And in order to the
Cure of a soul cast down, in the sight and sense of remaining corruption, I
shall lay down these considerations.

First, Cure.
Consider that the work of Christ upon the soul does not in this Life
altogether destroy Place these 2 Sheets [k] [l] next after Fol. 132.
sin; As long as the soul is in the body, there will be sin in the soul;
even Paul had a body of sin and death in him, and till death destroy the
body, thou must not look to have sin altogether dead in thee. This is
granted by all, and why should it be questioned by thee, O dejected soul!

Secondly, Consider remaining corruption will work one time or other; A Dog
though in a chain will bark, and sometimes bite too; a man cannot carry fire
in his bosom, but sometime or other it will heat him, if it do not burn him.
Thou cryest out (O dejected soul) that they remaining corruption does often
disturb thee; but why should, or how can thou expect the contrary? While
thou dwell in this house of Clay, that Dunghill will annoy thee. But,

Thirdly, Remember corruptions groaned under as a burden, are rather a ground
of rejoicing then of dejection; for, First, it argues a life of bolinesse, to
feel a weight in sin; Dead men feel no weight be it never so heavy: and,
Secondly, it argues an activity of life to groan; Many souls rather glory in,
then groan under a weight of sin, but it is a special mercy thou art not as
they are.

Fourthly, Believe it (O soul) Jesus Christ does simpathize with thee under
this thy burden: While thou groanest under, and art cast down at the sight of
remaining corruption, thou art the object of Christ's compassion. It is a good
plaster for any sore, to consider the pity of our Savior: Christ pitties
thee (O poor dejected soul) to see thee laboring, and groaning under the
remainder of sin, Heb. 4.2.

Fifthly, Consider remaining corruption shall never ruin thee: As the
remaining Canaanites did not, could not ruin Israel in the promised Land; so
neither shall remaining corruption ever ruin thy soul. Could corruption ruin
thy holiness, joy, salvation glory etc. thou might be much dejected indeed;
but that it cannot, shall not do. Thy holiness, thy joy, thy salvation, thy
glory, etc. are all safe in the impregnable bulwark Christ's hand, (which is the
infinite power of God) and though corruption remain in thee, it shall never
ruin these.

Sixthly, Consider Jesus Christ dyed to redeem thee from the remainders of
corruption: And do thou act thy faith on thy Saviors death, for thy sins
death; the virtue of his death remains, to keep under corruption from having
dominion. It is thy duty, and let it be thy care and endeavor, to go to Jesus
Christ for strength against, and victory over thy remaining corruption;
therefore up and be doing, that is, believing. Do not sit solitary (as one
cast down) to see some remainders of sin. Suppose (O soul) you had seen some
gallant Captain rescuing a person, or place from the power of some potent
enemy, by breaking the strength and power of the Enemy, and by taking up his
abode in some Castle near the place. Suppose after this, there should appear
some scattered Parties, should the person or place be dejected at the remainder
of a routed adversary, should not they rather go to their Conqueror and
Captain, and entreat him to suppress those remaining forces? Bear up (O
cast-downe soul) the case is thine, Christ the Captain of thy salvation has
routed the maine body of sin upon his cross, and spoiled corruption of his
chiefest strength; he has set up a garrison in thy soul, and put in a party
strong enough to repel, and keep under the remaining forces; O go to him,
stir up his Spirit to come forth, and to bring thy Conquerours sword to check
and suppress thy tumultuous enemies; I mean, to lift up thy Saviors cross
against thy corruptions. And believe it (soul) there is a virtue still in that
Cross, to keep the remainders of corruption under. Be not therefore cast
down, but believe; and if thou by the Spirit (whom Christ has put into the
garrison of thy soul) do go forth, and mortify sin, thou shall live, and
it shall dye at last.

CHAP. 16.
Cure for Souls cast down by falls into sin.
THe second cause of Spiritual dejection was (as I mentioned) falls into
sin: This casts down the soul, that the remainders of corruption do not
only work, but that sometimes they prevail; sometimes the soul is actually
overtaken with sin, and falls it may be, into some foul fact; now this
causes casting down: to cure which, Cause.
I shall speak something in particular, when I have premised this one thing in
general, viz.

It must be confessed it is sad to fall into sin; Sadness.
After the soul has been in Christ's arms, to fall into the pits of Satan
(for so sins are) must needs go to its heart; indeed it goes to Christ's: He is
offended really, and mightily, that any souls who have tasted his grace, in
pardoning past sins, and known that such a pardon cost his blood; I say, he is
offended, that such should afterward commit, or fall into any sin, but yet,
all things weighed, there may be much, yea and enough said to cure and comfort
a soul dejected, because of falls into sin after grace. As,

First, Such a thing (as this) is consistent with grace. This is that which
causes the dejection of such souls as fall into sin, Cure.
that they are thereby drawn to doubt the truth of their grace; for say they,
surely had we been ever really and strongly wrought upon, we could never have
failen into such and such sins.

But yet, these souls should do well to remember, that Sampson fell again,
and again into the same sin of wantounesse, See Judge. 14.3. and 15.20. and
16.1.
and yet he is in the Catalogue of the children of Abraham, and reckoned up
amongst the worthy believers ( Heb. 11.) Its the opinion of many holy, and wise
persons, that David fell more then once into the sin of lying; and that
therefore he prayed to be kept from the way of it, Psalm. 119.29. I mention not
this to countenance (much less to encourage) presumptuous desperate sinners,
but only to cure perplexed and dejected Saints; ye are deceived (O ye dejected
souls!) if you think your falls into sin be inconsistent with grace.

Secondly, Consider, falls into sin are not falls from salvation; The
Covenant of Grace is not made null by thy fall (O cast-downe soul!) though
Israel have played the Harlot, yet Christ remains a Husband. Jer. 3.1.1.14.
God did expressly say, though thy children sin, and though I visit their
sins with a rod, yet my Covenant will I not break, Psalm. 89. Peradventure (O
soul) thou art cast down, as thinking thy fall into sin has cut off the
band of the Covenant, but thou art mistaken. Yea,

Thirdly, There is a special salve prepared for this sore, a particular cure
for this cause of dejection, viz. Promises of pardon after falls into sin;
I WILL HEAL BACKSLIDINGS, Hos. 14.3. Surely that supposes falls into sin
after grace (for what else is backsliding?) and that directly proposes pardon,
and healing to such souls. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings, Jer. 3.22. Mark (O dejected soul) Christ calls thee to
return, and he speaks to thee as to a Child still (notwithstanding thy falls
into sin) therefore be thou advised to arise, and to go to him, urge him
with his promise, and he will make it good: Neither is this my advice, but the
advice of the Lord. Hear him in Hos. 14. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy
God (mark it, thy God still) for thou have fallen (see soul how he points at
thy state) by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and
say unto him; Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously.

Rise up therefore and obey this command, and counsel, and certainly in this
case thou will find cure and comfort.

CHAP. 17.
Cure for souls dejected about the Covenant of Grace.
I Said, that ignorance of the Covenant of Grace, was likewise a cause (and a
chief cause) of Spiritual dejection; and therefore I hinted in the use of the
first Section advice to study it; I shall briefly offer something to this here,
for many times dejected souls cry out, They are, and may be well cast down,
for alas they are not in that Covenant. Cause.
Were I in the Covenant of Grace (cries the dejected soul) I could rejoice,
but alas, I doubt it, and therefore I am dejected. Alas, I find many things in
that Covenant promised, which indeed I could wish; but alas! I want, and how
can I think I am in the Covenant, when I have not the things promised in it in
my own soul, etc. But let me entreat thee a little to consider these
particulars in order, Cure.
to cure this cause of thy dejection.

First, The things of the ^ovenant are not wrought all together; there are many
particulars promised, as fear, new spirit, tender heart, etc. each of which is
wrought in its time and order. It is true, the general root of all these is
given to the soul, viz. The Divine nature; but yet the particular branches
spring up in their season. Thou would see all (O soul) but thou must stay
the time, and thou shall.

Secondly, Neither is any one particular perfectly wrought at once; a soft
heart is a thing wrought by degrees, and to have the Law written in our hearts
is business of time; it is a long Copy, which Christ's Spirit is writing a long
time: As we are always learning, so that is always writing. Thou (O poor soul)
would have all together, and at once, and in truth who would not be glad (if
it might be) to have it so; but we must wait, for this work is not the
business of a day, but of our whole life.

Thirdly, Christ knows who are in Covenant though we do not; He is the
Mediator of it, and he may see, and know that thou art in that Covenant, though
thou do not. The Father, who has made a Purchase in his own name, and his
Childs, may, and does know the Child to be in the writing, though the Child
do not: Christ your Father made the Covenant (in the purchase of his Blood) on
your behalf, and so knows thy name to be in it, though thou cannot see, nor
read it there, by reason of thy infant age, and condition of Childe-hood. But,

Lastly, Suppose it as thou fear, take hold of the Covenant now.

1 It is a free Covenant, reached out to poor sinners upon terms of grace,
Free Grace, rich grace, and not upon works, or qualifications: It promises
all things, but it requires nothing but acceptance. 2 It is a full Covenant; it
extends to all sins, original, actual, great, little; to sins of ignorance
and infirmity; to sins of presumption and obstinacy.
I say therefore, Arise (O cast-down soul) God in the Covenant of Grace calls
to rebels, and says, Let them take hold of my strength, that they may make
peace with me, and they shall, Esa. 27.5. He calls every one to come, to incline
his ear, and says, He Will make an everlasting Covenant with them, even the
sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.1, 2. It may be thou think that thou have
stood out too long. (It is true, a day is too long to be out of Covenant with
God) but yet it is not now too late. To day if you will hear his voice; O
therefore close with the Covenant now, and do not lie cast down, and dejected
with fears, that thou art out: But arise, and come in, for now (in these
Gospel times) even the Strangers, and Eunuch (debard in the times of the Law
from the Congregation) are invited to take hold of the Covenant, and there are
promises to this purpose made unto them in Esa. 56. to which place I refer
thee for a further cure in this case.

CHAP. 18.
Cure for Souls cast down upon indisposition to duties.
INdisposition unto good duties is oftentimes a cause of dejection; Cause.
and by reason of it some are cast down, as conceiving it inconsistent with a
life of grace, and acceptance with God.

Now to cure this, I shall apply these particular Plasters.

First, Life and indisposition may consist together; Cure.
Every living man is not lively always: Even the Spouse of Christ was sometimes
asleep, Cant. 5.2. Even David himself cries out of straitness of heart. It is
possible thy soul may sometimes be as a Ship at Sea, without a full and fresh
gale; I may speak it I think, as an universal truth; Never was any Saint
disposed to duties at all times alike; and why should thou be cast down at
the common Lot, and condition of all Christians?

Secondly, It is a mercy thou art not quite dead to duty. Many a soul is
stark dead to prayer, stark dead to the Word, etc. and it is Free Grace, thou
art at worst but indisposed, better is the crawling Snaile then the dead
Elephant; And it is a more blessed state to be a creeping worm (though with
much indisposition) in the way of duty and life; then a skipping heart (though
with much agility) in the way of sin and death.

Thirdly, Though thy indisposednesse be sad, yet thy trouble for this is sweet.
Note.
Blessed is the soul that mournes for disposition to evil, and indisposition
to good. Time was, when thou could live, and not be troubled at a total
neglect of duty; it is a mercy that now thou love it so well, as that thou
art grieved that thou can do it no better. But,

Fourthly, Consider thy acceptance with God does not depend upon thy doing of
duty, nor upon thy liveliness and disposition in doing; no, it depends solely
upon his grace. You are accepted in the beloved, as it is in that precious
place, Ephesians. 1.6. Both thy person (notwithstanding its faults) and thy
performances (notwithstanding their failings) are always accepted in Christ,
he has made us accepted in the beloved; mark it, it is not thou, but God that
makes thee (I say, MAKES thee) not thy self that make thy self accepted;
yea, and this is in the Beloved (not in our duties, or dispositions) but in the
BELOVED, i. e. in Christ Jesus. I tell thee, poor soul, could thou do
well, and with never so much life and disposition out of Christ, it were
nothing. And contrary, though thy doings be poor, thy disposition poor, all
poor, yet thou and all thine are accepted IN THE BELOVED.

Fifthly, It is the office of Christ to present all thy performances to God,
and to procure acceptance in his blood. He takes away all thy failings, and
indispositions, and he presents all to the Father well. Mind this.
Duties go never from Saints to God as they come out of their own hands, but
as they go through Christ's.

Lastly, Christ (O dejected soul) will cure thy indisposednesse; He Will enlarge
thy heart, and inliven thy spirit, and then shall thou not only walk, but run
the way of his Commandments, when he shall enlarge thy heart, as it is, Psalm.
119, 32. The Spirit is a Spirit of life, power, sweetness, enlargement, and
this Spirit he has promised.

So that these things sucked by meditation may afford cure, and comfort to thee
(O dejected soul) who art cast down under the sense of indisposition to
duties.

CHAP. 19.
Cure for Souls cast down upon want of incomes.
BUt alas, says some other soul! I do, but in vain; I do not complain of
indisposition to (though I might urge that) but of want of income in duty.
Cause.
See the thing as it is stated, Sect. 1. cap. 9. I confess, it is sad to be as
the parched ground, always gaping, and never to have drops from above. Cure.
But yet (O soul) let me entreat thee to mind a few things in this case.

First, Divine income is not always the same; Peradventure thou have not so much
now as formerly, it may be so; for,

First, God gave thee much at first to encourage thee, as a beginner; which he
does not always to all. Usually, it is in Gods House as it is in ours, at first
coming of a Servant, the Master is a little more familiar then afterward. At
first coming God might give much to welcome thee, and to engage thee, but now
thou have been long in his house, he minds thee as much as formerly, though he
hint it not so often. Besides,

Secondly, God may withold incomes to try thee, whether thou servest him for
LOVE, or for the LOAVES: Many serve Christ not for himself, but for
themselves; rather for the penny of income, then for respect to him. Now Christ
may withold incomes to try thee, and therefore be not cast down for want of
them, lest thou give him ground to suspect thee; but consider,

Secondly, It is Christ's Prerogative (if he will use it) to make us serve for
nothing. The Psalmist speaks it to the Kings Daughter, of Christ, He is thy
Lord, and worship thou him, Psalm. 45.11. He must be worshipped as a Lord,
because of his greatness, though he should not give any income, or wages. Yet,

Thirdly, He does wait to give income in its season. There are times when
incomes will be most sweet, and Christ does wait for those times: Christ said
to his Mother, Woman, what have I to do with thee, Joh. 2. He knew there would
by and by be a fitter season to do that which she desired, then at that time;
your time (said Christ) is always, my time is not yet come, as it is, Job. 7,
6. O remember (dejected soul) Christ waits to be gracious; his income shall
be when fittest for thee.

Fourthly, It will argue a choice frame of spirit in thee (and therefore I
mention it, to press it on thee) to do duty, notwithstanding thou want
income. To work without wages, argues a love to the Master we work for; a
mercinary spirit will do for pay, but a gracious childe-like spirit will pay
its self in its doing, and continue praying, hearing, receiving, etc. even
without any income. But,

Lastly, To cure thy dejected soul, who art troubled for want of income; Know,
that in Heaven thou shall have income for all. The Master called the Servants
at the evening, and gave then, to each his penny. O consider thou shall ere
long have income to the full, when thou shall enter into thy Masters joy; when
thou shall rest from thy labors, thy income shall follow thee; when thou shall
come to Abraham's bosom ( and there thou shall come, dejected soul, as poor a
Lazarus, as thou art) then thou shall have every prayer, every sigh, every
groan come to remembrance, and say, now thou have all that which we went out
for.

Rouse up therefore, O cast-downe soul, God is a good Master, you shall not
labor in vain: Be not dejected, but be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know your labor is not in vain
in the Lord, as it is, 1 Cor. 15. last. why then should you be cast down for
lack of income.

CHAP. 20.
Cure for Souls cast down upon insultation of Satan and enemies.
I Remember another cause I mentioned of dejections, was the insultation of
Satan and enemies; many souls are dejected at this, that Satan (and his
instruments triumph over, as it is at large showed before.

Now to cure and comfort those, Cure.
let me entreat dejected souls to mind, and remember these ensuing things.

First, Satan will insult without ground: He Will say to David, Where is his God,
and he will but if to Christ, concerning his being the son of God. Satan is an
impudent enemy, who will brag, and triumph against a soul for nothing. It is
the nature of a Dog to bark, a Lion to roar, Woolfe.
a Wolf to howl; and it is the nature of Satan to insult: Be not therefore
cast down at it.

Secondly, Though Satan insults, Christ is a friend, and loves us still; even
at that time that Satan insulted, and buffeted Paul, Christ's grace was
sufficient. Should the Child be cast down for the insulting of the Groom, or
the Scullion, when he is beloved of his Father, as his Heir? What, though
Satan say, Where is thy God, thy hope, etc. may not thou (O soul) say, My
God, and hope is in Heaven still. All the Devils in Hell, and men on earth,
shall never, can never separate between thee and thy God; neither
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Life, nor Death, nor any thing can separate,
etc. Triumph (O soul) in that, Romans 8.35.37. though Satan insult, be not thou
cast down.

Thirdly, The time shall come, when thou shall tread upon thy insulting enemy,
and when he shall be ashamed for all his insultations. Remember (O cast down
soul! ( the God of peace will (though thou can not) and that shortly, tread
down Satan under your (even thy) feet, Romans 16.20. Christ will take thee by
the hand, and own thee in the presence of God, Angels and men, yea and Devils
too; And then thy enemy (Satan) shall see, who said where is thy God, even
then he shall see thy God as thine, and be confounded for all his insultation
over thee.

Lastly, (for wicked men,) who now it may be deride and scoff at thee, be not
dejected for them. Because the day will come when they will wish they were as
thou art. When they shall as much admire at thy happiness, and wisdom, as now
they slight thy state, and thoughts; when God shall bring thee forth to light,
and thou shall behold his righteousness. Then shall all thy enemies see it,
and be ashamed, which said where is the Lord thy God; Then shall they lick the
dust like a Serpent, and shall fear, not only because of the Lord our God, but
also because of thee, as it is in that Excellent Scripture. Mich. 7.9.10.17.
which scripture if thou read seriously and act faith upon. I dare assure thee
of cure for this cause of dejection: viz. insultation of Satan and enemies.

CHAP. 21.
Cure for Souls, cast down upon corporal Afflictions.
Spiritual dejection is sometimes caused by corporal affliction: A sick body
does in some persons make a sad soul. Cause.
When Hezekiah was sick, and had received the sentence and message of death, he
turned to the wall and wept; And the thoughts of the dying of his body,
produced dejection in his soul. Thus indeed it is often with others. Now to cure
this cause of dejection, I shall not need to be large. Only take a few
ingredients, which mixed together, and applied, may serve in this case to raise
the dejected Spirit.

First, Consider the great ground of this dejection is a deceit. Cure.
Afflicted souls interpret affliction amiss, and therefore are cast down.
They take every whipping to be an effect of anger, whereas its a sign of love.
Your Father (O dejected soul) in your sickness is sweet. He makes thee sick in
thy body, to cure some disease in thy soul. He does not afflict thee willingly.
It Is only that thy spirit may be well, that he makes thy body ill. You have had
fathers of your flesh who corrected you, and ye gave them reverence: should
you not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live? Heb.
12.9. This is spoke in reference to affliction. By this chastisement, God
seals up child-ship. Do not despise therefore the chastenings of the Lord, nor
be not dejected (for the word will bear this translation) when thou art (by
sickness) rebuked of the Lord, (...). i.e. they ^eject their own spirits.
Philo.
Heb, 12.5. Its a fault in the chastised child to be dogged; and its a failing
in thee (O soul) by reason of corporal affliction, (which is but a fatherly
chastisement) to be dejected. Besides,

Secondly, Your father knows your frame: He knows what you can bear, and
he will lay no more upon you, then your strength can master; The Lord will not
always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever ('it is spoken of
affliction, by diseases as seems to be hinted verse. 3.) But as a father
pittyeth His children, so the Lord pittieth them who fear him: for he knows
our frame, he remembers we are but dust. As for man his days are but as
grass, as a flower in the field so he flourishes, Psalm. 103.9, 13, 14, 15.

Mind this (O thou sick and sad soul!) thy father knows thy frame, he minds
thou art but dust, and he pittyes thee in all thy affliction, which he lays
upon thee: Yea, he sits by, and makes all thy bed in thy sickness, as it is Psa.
41. And he makes sore, and binds up; be wounds; and his hand makes whole,
as it is in Job 4 18. that is spoken of sickness too. Christ (if he will) can
make thee whole: And certainly, if thou could believe, thou should see
his glory, as it is Joh. 11.40. Has he not said enough to make thee say (as
David said) I shall not dye, but live, to declare the works of God, The Lord
has chastened me sore, but has not given me over unto death, see that place,
Psalm: 118.17, 18. O bear up dejected heart, though thou be sick, yet thou
may recover; and go up to the house of God, where thou may praise him for
health restored to thee; and say, Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy name, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals
all thy diseases.

Quest: Prithee mind this, and say, does it not speak to thy dejection?

Answ. No will thou say, I would bear sickness, but that I fear death. This
thought, I shall dye, is that which casts me down.

Reply, It Is true, I think (and I know) here is the bottom of the doubt, and
dejection, to speak therefore to it directly.

I Will grant it, thou shall dye (though it may be not now) but suppose I say now,
Case.
even now, thou shall die, yet consider these things, and thou need not be
dejected.

First, Christ came to deliver thee from this fear. Cure.
Its the fear of death, that does more deject, then death it self. Now
remember, Christ came to free thee from this fear: For as much as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil, And (mark it) deliver them, who through the fear of death,
were all their life time subject unto bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. Consider, Christ
has destroyed him that had the power of death, the Devil, and has delivered
thee, Could thou believe this (and why should thou not?) thou might
triumph. But

Secondly, Christ has took away the sting of death. Death is a Be (having
the honey of deliverance from this vile body, etc.) but it has no sting. For
what says the Scripture: The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the
law, but thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, go thou to that glorious chapter 1 Corinthians. 15. and read it. O thou!
that art dejected with fears of death.

Thirdly, Christ will be with thee in that hour thou fear. Thou shall not
dye alone, for though all thy friends shall leave thee, yet will not Christ.
This David knew, for speaking of his shepherd (and who is the shepherd but our
Lord Jesus, as it is Hell: 13.20.) He says, although I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil (he needed not) for observe what
he says, THOU ART WITH ME, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me, Psalm. 23.4
Albeit thy relations bid thee farewell, and shake hands, as not being willing,
nor able to keep thee longer company, yet Christ will not leave thee, nor
forsake thee. In truth, in life, nor death, he will never do that, as it is Heb.
13.5.

Fourthly, Death shall be no death to thee. A change it will be, and that from
worse to the better, but its not a death. Did not Christ say it? Whosoever
lives and believes in me, shall never dye, yea though he were dead, yet shall
he live, John 11.26. Thou must not call that death, which the Scripture calls
but sleep. The Scripture speaks of the dead in Christ, that they sleep in
Jesus, 1 Thessalonians: 4.14. And she is not dead but sleeps; and our friend Lazarus
sleeps. Now why should thou (O soul) who art weary, be cast down with the
thoughts of sleep.

Fifthly, Christ has sweetened death for thee. He has layne in the grave, and
so honored, and softened that bed unto believers. Would any child be afraid to
lie in its mothers bed? Is it not an Honor, to lie down in the same bed in
which the King of glory lay? Art dejected (O soul) to go into thy Saviors
Sepulcher? what art thou cast down with the fears of gain? to dye is gain,
said Paul: Philip. 1.21.

Sixthly, Christ will raise you up again: He has said so, and if he should
not, he would not only break his own word, but disobey his fathers will;
neither of which he will do. This is the fathers will, who has sent me, that of
all which he has given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up at
the last day. This Christ spoke once, yea twice (and pray mark it well) John 6
39, 41. Christ (O soul) will raise thee up again. Should the child be afraid to
go to sleep at night, when his Father promises to raise him up in the
morning? Christ has promised to raise up your bodies again: yea, and he has
promised to give you a new spirit into the bargain, for it is sown a Natural,
but raised a Spiritual body.

Put all this together (O thou dejected soul) and tell me now, What cause have
thou to be cast down with the thoughts of death? May not these considerations
cure that cause of thy dejection? Thou art now troubled with sickness,
weakness, pains, etc. but let death come (do not fear it) and thou shall be
cured of all Diseases, yea and which is better, freed from all defilements.
Methinkes therefore you should rather desire to be desolved, then fear death,
and imitate those who groaned to be uncloathed of this earthly house, as
knowing they have a better, even a building with God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Go (O cast down soul!) to that
Scripture, and thou will in it find a Cordial to cheer, and cure thy spirit
in this fear.

CHAP. 22.
Cure for souls cast down and dejected by the sense of Divine wrath.
A Little wrath of the Almighty casts the soul very low, Cause.
even as low as Hell (for what else is Hell but Divine wrath felt?) How many
dejected hearts are there that cry out, that the Almighty is angry, that he
frowns upon them, and that every wrinckle in his forehead is a grave burying
all their comforts. When men smite, God can cure; and when God gives
quietness, who then can make trouble; but when be hides his face, who then
can behold him? Job 34.29.

Indeed, this is a sad cause of dejection, and it puts the soul into a very
dejected case indeed, yet it is not incurable; a soul that is cast down by the
sense of Gods wrath, may be raised, if Christ will help it to mind, and
believe these particulars.

First, This case is not singular; even many holy men, and women in all Ages of
the world have been in this condition: Cure.
Company is a comfort even in misery. Thou need not cry out, O soul and
say, Was there ever sorrow like unto mine? Yes, there was, thou feel thine
own pain; but David, Job, Heman, Hezekiah, etc. felt as much (peradventure
more) wrath then thou do; but why do I speak of particulars? When as I
remember the Lord had not mercy, but INDIGNATION upon Judah, and Jerusalem (i.
e. the whole body of Israel) threescore and ten years, Zach. 1.12. yea as the
body, so the head of all the godly was made sensible of Gods wrath, for Christ
drunk the cup of his Fathers wrath; it is more then a bad and unsound way of
arguing, I am under Gods wrath, and therefore I am not Gods Child? This way of
arguing condemns all Gods children, even Christ himself.

Secondly, Gods wrath is rather in appearance then in truth; It is a Vizzard,
not thy Fathers face that looks so terrible; thy Fathers face is love, all
love, only love (fury is not in him) only now he has put on a Vizzard to scare
thee a little, and he will lay it aside again; he does but hide his face under
that Mask, he will open it again. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee,
Isa. 54.2. Mark it, wrath is but a veil that hides Gods face in, it is not
his real face, it is but as we say, A copy of his countenance. There is never
a black letter in all Gods face (especially as to his children) no, God is
love, it is his Name, in love there is no unlovely letter. Thou say, God is
angry; it is true he appears so, Note this.
but he is not so: As he is never truly pleased with sinners (but is angry
against them every day) notwithstanding their conceit; so he is never indeed
displeased with Saints whatever they feel, or fear. But,

Thirdly, All the anger and wrath of God is not against thy person, but against
thy sin. Suppose thy Child be sick, and wounded deeply, wounded with some
bloody gash, or cut, desperately sick of some ugly Disease; thou art
displeased, but with what? with his Person? with thy child? No, but with his
wound, with his disease: So it is with God, he is only angry and displeased
with thy sin, thy corruption, and his rough hand which thou feel, is but
to take away, and purge out that; he is well pleased with thee. Ephraim is a
dear still, though God speak against him, his bowels are troubled for him, as
it is, Jerem. 31.18. Again,

Fourthly, It is a mercy to be sensible, and sorrowful for Divine displeasure.
There is many a hard-hearted wretch in the world, that slights God, that makes
a mock of sin, and wrath too. Blessed be God that thou (as David) can say, My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm.
119.120. And,

Fifthly, God will not contend, nor be wroth for ever; Your Fathers anger (O
sad soul) will over, as we say, i. e. will go away, this cloud and storm will
not last always. Read (O dejected soul) Isa. 57. hear God himself saying, I
will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit
would fail before me, and the souls which I have made. For the iniquity of
his covetousness I was wroth, and smote him, and he went on frowordly in the
way of his heart. I have seen his ways, and I will heal him; I will lead him
also, and restore comfort unto him. I create the fruit of the lips; peace,
peace to him that is afar off, and I will heal him, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
Pray mind these healing words; Christ will heal, and restore comfort; he will
not retain his wrath, he will create peace out of that Chaos of confusion in
which thou now art: Though there be nothing but darkness upon the face of thy
deep (so David called his dejection) yet God, who at first caused light to
shine out of darkness, will shine into thy heart, to give thee the knowledge
of himself in the face of Christ, as it is, 2 Cor. 4.6. Believe this and
rejoice (O dejected soul!) creating power is engaged by promise, to fill thee
with peace, who now cryest out of wrath.

Lastly, The time is coming that thou shall be for ever freed from so much as
the very appearances of wrath. In heaven you shall always behold your Fathers
face, thy sun shall no more go down by day, there are no clouds in the
heaven of heavens. Mindest thou not what David said (and he was sometimes
dejected as thou art) As for me. I shall behold thy face in righteousness, I
shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. last.

Take in these crumbs of comfort (O thou cast down soul!) though I be but
brief, and give only drops, yet sip them, and thou will find them spirits. O
why art thou cast down? why art thou dejected? Trust thou in God, and expect
him; O tarry thou a little thy Lords leisure, and thou shall see him ere long,
come leaping over the mountains, appearing in his own glory, and then shall
thou appear with him inglory; then shall he wipe away all tears from thine
eyes, and scatter all fears in thine heart; yea, then will he satisfy thee in
all thy cases, and cure thee of all these causes of dejection; and then shall
thou praise him (indeed) as thy God.

Object. Peradventure you will say, he tarries long.

Reas. It is true, yet he will come, though he do tarry. He said, Yet a little
while, and ye shall see me; it is but a little while indeed, though it be long
in thought.

Dejection and casting down is not the posture you should be in; no, you ought
to arise, and WALK, to look up, and to wait; to expect, and look out; to
lift up your heads, and hearts, and not to be cast down. O that Christ may
find more standing! bearing up against all difficulties, and under all
dejections; doing his work, and suffering his will, with all faithfulness,
faith, and patience. Blessed will our souls be, if Christ at his coming find
us thus doing, and saying; work (O soul) and wait for your Savior, who is
now coming, and whom you shall praise in that day, saying, Lo, this is our
God, we have waited for him, and he will save us. This is the Lord, we have
waited for him, we will rejoice, and be glad in his Salvation, Isa. 25.9.

SECT. III.
PSALM: 42. ult. Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me?


CHAP. 1.
Another Doctrine raised, and beld forth from the words.
I Have dispatched the fust Doctrine, raised from the words: And shall now
proceed to the second, which is.

It is the wisdom, and should be the care of souls, when they are cast down,
not to give way thereunto, but to argue the case with themselves.

Thus does David, and his thus doing, is the foundation of this Doctrine. His
practice has in it the force of precept to command us: without doubt we should
imitate this pattern. And it will be our wisdom so to do.

Two things there are which I posite, and would press in this point.

The first is, That Christians dejected, should not give way to dejection.

The second is, That they should argue the case with their own souls.

Both these branches of the Doctrine, are in David's Expostulation, The first
Virtually, the second formally. David does not say weep on (O soul) thou do
well: He does not say, as Job (in another case) O turn away from me, and
suffer me to weep a little: He does not say as the Prophet, Look away from me,
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me: No, this were to give way to
his sadness, this were to nourish his heaviness. But mark it, he expostulates
the matter with his own soul, he summons it to a reasoning: He asks his
soul, why art thou cast down? and he pursues the question again, and says, why
art thou disquieted within me?

CHAP. 2.
Something premised in order to the first branch of the Point.
ERe I do proceed to the proof of the first branch, I shall premise this,
viz. That the soul is apt to give way to dejections. Dejected persons are very
free to give way, and to yield unto dejection. Peradventure, this may be
hinted here in this word cast down, and which may be rendered: why do thou
cast down thy self? some read it quare conturbas me. i.e. why do thou (O my
soul) trouble me? The soul is apt to trouble it self. Rachell wept, and would
not be comforted: She gave so much way to weeping, that she would not give way
to comfort. Are not my days a few (says Job) cease then that I may mourn a
little, so some render that, Ut plangum paululum. Dolorem ^^^um.
Job 10.20.

Sure Job did give way to his sorrow, when he set himself, as it were, to
weep. And the Psalmist holds forth as much, when he says, my soul refuses to
be comforted, Psa. 77.3. Certainly, he that refuses comfort, gives way to
sorrow.

You dejected souls! speak the truth, is it not thus. Do not you give way to
sadness (at least) sometimes? How often do you dispute against your selves? How
often do you maintain your sorrows? How often do you argue against your
comforts, and fly from your comforters? Surely, you do often give way to
sadness.

Now the reasons, whence it comes to pass, that dejected souls are proane to
give way to sadness, and dejection may be these.

First, A strong conceit that they have reason so to do. Oh-say many, we may
well weep, and mourn; we may well be dejected and castdown, we have reason for
it, so they conceit. And albeit when the reason is told, it appears light, yet
they are apt to conceit it weighty. Its with dejected souls, as it was with
Micah, when his carved Image, his Ephod, his Teraphim, his graven Image, and
his Priest were taken away. Hereupon, he gathers together his servants and
neighbors to pursue them that had stole them: And being asked the reason, he
says, ye have taken away my gods, etc. and do you ask me what aileth me? He
conceited he had great reason to be troubled. Even so many poor souls, who
have lost, it may be, but their Idols; Relations, Parts, Inlargements, etc.
(which they idolized) they are cast down, and they give way to it, as
conceiting they had ground so to be.

Secondly, Dejected souls are prone to give way to dejections, From a strange
kind of perverseness, which does often times seize them, especially in their
sadness. Even good Jonah was overtaken with this evil. God sees him cast
down, and comes to him and says, Do thou well to be angry? and he said, I
do well to be angry, even to the death: Jonah 4.9. Ah Lord! what a perverse
speech is here. How sweetly does God reason with him. God might have reprooved
him, have chid him, but he does not; he only asks him if it were well done,
as a loving father asks the sad child; child, do well to be sad? And yet
observe, Jonah's perverseness, I do well, says he, yea, I do well, to be
troubled unto death. What a sullen speechis this! Dejected souls, is it not so
with you sometimes? Are not you perverse. Does not your soul say, its well to
be sad? This is another reason of your giving way thereunto.

Thirdly, An over-high esteem of some things which the dejected soul has
lost, makes it give way to sadness. Souls do overvalue many things, this
makes them over sad many times. Rachell did prize her children too high, and
that made her give way to sorrow so far, as that she would not be comforted,
because her children were not. It Is possible to prize even spiritual things too
high; as Parts, Performances, Ordinances, etc. And if we prize them too high,
we will soon give way to sorrow (for want of them) too far.

Fourthly, An opinion (though groundless) that it must be so, makes many give
way to sorrow and dejection. Some conceit, because it is said, that blessed are
they that mourn; and woe to them that laugh, etc. Therefore the soul must be
sad, and heavy, and dejected. These Scriptures are mistaken, and the mistake of
them, is the reason why many give way to dejection. Its true, Christ pronounced
the mourners blessed, but it was rather to stop their mourning then to increase
it: It was rather to give them joy, then to give them ground to sorrow. Its
true also, Christ did denounce woe to them that were merry and did laugh: But
it was such, whose mirth was carnal, and so madness. Not to such as rejoice
in the Lord, (for that we are commanded to do always.) But yet from the
misunderstanding of these and the like Scriptures, dejected souls conceit a
recessity of sadness, that it must be, and therefore they give way unto it.

Fifthly, Some conceive that the truth of humiliation, lies in its depth, and
therefore they give way to dejection, as conceiving that to be deep, and true
humiliation. It was observed by an experienced Divine, Dr. Sibs.
that men are deceived, when they think a dejected spirit, an humbled spirit.
Many a poor heart thinks, its weeping, its sorrow, its going heavy, etc. to be
true, and deep humiliation (and I wish some Preachers had not gone too far this
way) now upon this account, its no wonder, if they give way to it.

Lastly, Its the innate nature of melancholy to give way thereunto. There is
certainly a religious melancholy, and some delight in it. They conceive a kind
of Divinity in dejection, Sorrow has a kind of sweetness in it. And a soul
cast down, is prone to feed upon its dejection. There is an innate propensity
in all sadness and melancholy (as indeed there is in all the passions) to
feed, and nourish it self. And hence it is, that souls cast down are prone to
give way thereunto.

CHAP. 3.
The first Branch proved that Christians should not give way to sadness.
HAving premised that we are prone to give way to sadness, and dejection: I
shall now prove the contrary.

Its true, de facto (O dejected souls) that you art prone to give way to your
dejections: But its not true de jure.

I know by experience you are liable to it, but I know that it should not be.
It is your wisdom, and it should be your care, not to give way to your
dejections, and castings down.

The Text witnesses it self clearly to this truth. This question has in it
the force of a negation: why art thou cast down, virtually, is as much as thou
should not be cast down? As Ier. 2.36. Why gaddest thou about? etc. Its as
much as there is no cause for it, and it should not be. So here, Why art thou
cast down? is as much as there is no cause, or reason for this casting down of
my self, and giving way unto it, for it should not be.

When our Lord perceived the dejection of his Disciples (upon the thought of
his departure) he bids them not give way unto it. Let not your hearts be
troubled, John. 14.1. He saw a storm, like that of waters, arising in their
spirits, but he bids them not to give way unto it. The word that is translated
disquieted in this text, The Greek word, (...) used here Job 14 1. and the Heb.
word (...) do
is (as I opened) a word used sometimes for the disquiet of waters: Our Lord
seems to allude to it, for the word translated troubled, signifies so, as
Waters are troubled. Now mind it (O poor dejected ones) Christ says you should
not be dejected so, nor give way unto it. His word is imperative, he says, let
it not be. both signify a trouble as of waters.


I need not stand to prove it further. This one Demonstration will clear it; We
should not give way to that which we have no reason for: But we have no reason
to be dejected, so as to be disquieted: Therefore, etc.

David indeed sought for a reason, but he found none. He asked his soul, why
it was disquieted (implying, his judgment saw no reason for it:) But his soul
does not, (indeed could not) make any rational answer. This question silenceth
his soul: As that in the Parable, why did not give my money into the bank,
that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury? Luke 19.23. This
question struck the idle servant dumb: So here, Why art cast down? It strikes
the soul dumb, and it cannot answer, nor give a reason for this dejection.

Christians, Why should you be irrational? why should you give way to that,
which you cannot give a reason for? You cannot at any time give any reason for
your dejection, unto that disquietnesse, which we opened. Your case is not,
cannot be miserable. The Heathen could say: The Diety being reconciled to him,
he could not be miserable.

Numine placato non miser esse queo. Why, Saints! God is reconciled to you in
Christ; you cannot be miserable, being reconciled: Ah! Why should you that are
blessed (so as that you cannot be miserable) I say, why should you be dejected?
without doubt you can give no sollid reason for dejection, therefore it should
not be, neither should you give way to it.

But as there is no reason for dejection, so there are many reasons against it.
I shall insist only upon two Reasons, why dejected Saints should not give way,
etc.

The Reasons are, because dejection is; 1 A Passion, 2 Perilous.


First, Dejection and disquiet is a Passion, Now passions should be curbed, not
given way unto. Passion is an unruly beast, and we should not let its reins
loose. Reason should moderate, but Religion should mortify all passions, Col.
3.5. Amongst the rest of the things to be mortified, passion is one: Indeed we
read it inordinate affection, as if it were two words, But its in the original
only one word, which may be translated passion. (...).
The word which is used by the Syriack translators, signifies sickness. Indeed
passion signifies a kind of suffering. Passio derivator a patior.
We are commanded to mortify our passions. Not that Religion destroys all
passions, but that regulates all. Were sorrow, and disquietnesse given way
unto, it were not regulated. Certainly, that sorrow which is irregular (and
has no reason, as we said formerly) must be mortified. Casting down,
disquietnesse, troubles, etc. are passion, and therefore not to be given way
unto. But

Secondly, It Is perilous to give way unto disquietings; There is danger in
disquiet, and to give way unto it, is to give way to dangers; This danger is
threefold, viz.

In regard of 1 It self. 2 Satan. 3 The Soul.


First, There is danger in giving way to disquiet, in regard of it self; It
will get ground, and strength, and the more its given way unto, the harder it
will be to rule. Passion is an unruly beast, which must be curbed, and which if
it have the reins loose will grow master-lesse. Disquiet is a disease, and a
disease of that nature which increases by degrees, and every increase thereof
is dangerous; sorrow will quickly overflow in case it be given way unto; its as
a flood, which if not stopped will arise, and overflow all banks. Spiritual
dejection is the souls Consumption, now Consumptions increase if given way
unto. But,

Secondly, It Is dangerous to give way to dejection, in regard of Satan: he will
get ground by dejection. Satan knows how to make use of disquiets; he would
have sorrowful souls to give way unto sorrow, that so sorrow might swallow up
the soul; (as it is, 2 Cor. 2.7.) The Apostle exhorts the Church to be tender of
the dejected person (who as some think had been excommunicated, and filled
with sorrow, and dejection thereupon) now the Apostle would have the Church to
forgive, -- (...). i. e. ingulphed as one sucked up and drowned in a gulf.
and comfort him, least he should be swallowed up, etc. and least Satan should
get an advantage, (as it is, verse. 11.) Satan has his devices, and one of them
is to make the soul give way to dejection; then in the depth of dejection, he
comes with temptations to despair, and Self-murder, etc. And in truth
experience tells us, Satan has a mighty advantage over us, especially when we
are dejected, and give way unto it.

Thirdly, Its dangerous to give way to dejection in regard of the soul; it
loses ground thereby. The soul is a great loser by dejection.

1 The more its given way unto, the weaker the soul is. The soul much
dejected is unfit for any service; 'twas this that unfitted the Disciples to
watch; its said, Christ found them sleeping for sorrow, Luke 22.45. sorrow
brings one asleep both Natural, and Spiritual; dejection causes drowsinesse.
The soul when it gives way to dejection is thereby drowsy, and the drowsy
soul is unfit for duty. Yea,

2 The soul dejected is weakened unto warfare. Sad souls are not fit for
soldiers; the cheerful soul is a Giant refreshed with Wine; it can fight the
Lords Battles with courage: The sad soul is liable unto cowardice. As the joy
of the Lord is our strength, so the sorrow of our spirits, is our weakness.

3 The soul cast down is unfit for comfort; Sorrow given way unto shuts out
joy, and the more room the one has, the less is left for the other. Some
souls when cast down are so full of sorrow, that there is scarce a hole for
comfort to enter; sorrow where it rules, has so many Sentinels, and Guards;
that its hard for comfort to get in, unless it be by violence. A sorrowful
soul forgets to eat his bread, as the Psalmist shows, Psalm. 102.4. or if the
sad soul comes to meat, it has no stomach; we find it by experience in
natural sorrow, that it takes away our stomach. A sad man sits down, and he
is so full of sorrow that he cannot eat. Even so sometimes the sad soul sits
down at the Lords Table, and albeit the meat be choice, (Manna from Heaven,
and the fruit of the spiritual Vine Christ) yet the soul cannot eat a crumb,
nor drink a drop. O souls! mind it; the reason why you receive so often, and
yet find so little, is because you give way to castings down, your sorrow
takes away your souls stomach. As it sometimes stops your mouths, that you
cannot open them ( i. e. you cannot pray sometimes, nor speak a word to God,
you are so cast down) so likewise at other times, it over-comes your appetite,
it renders you unfit for comfort. Here is the reason (by the way) why you
complain so often, you find little refreshing at breaking of Bread; you are so
cast down, and give such way unto it, that you have no stomach to eat, albeit
Christ bid you welcome, and bids you eat abundantly.

So that now then (to wind up this) you see both Scripture and reason; you
have both to confirm this first branch of our point, that dejected souls
should not give way unto dejection.

CHAP. 4.
Some Applications of the first branch.
YOu see now this proved, that when you are dejected, you should not give way
unto it; its too true, you are apt to do it, but you see you ought not to do
it. Ere I pass on to the next branch, I will make use of this for two ends, viz.

1 For chiding. 2 For cautioning.
First, let me as a friend (and in a friendly way) chide such as being
dejected, and cast down, do give way thereunto. And there are five sorts of
souls to be chid for this.

First, Such as are cast down, and conceal as much (as in them lies) their
trouble, and the cause of it; hearken unto me you close souls! who keep
sorrows, yea and Satan's secrets; Why do you give way to your grief, and will
not make it known? Is there any comfort in your concealment? Is it not rather
an adding affliction, to affliction? You sad the hearts of your friends, while
they see you disquieted, and not willing to open your soul to theirs. Its the
Apostles command (and I think 'twas in reference to this case) to confess our
faults one to another, James 5.16. what, is there none faithful? will not any
be friendly? why do you conceal your sorrow, and so feed it? Certainly, Satan
and grief get much by privacy; and you who conceal your dejection are to be
reproved for giving way unto it.

Secondly, Such souls are also to be chid, who being cast down, never look
after, nor labor for comfort. He that is sick and looks not for a remedy, is
guilty of giving way to the disease: And the soul that is sad, and minds not,
nor seeks not for comfort, is guilty of giving way to dejection. Now how many
are there who care not to hear, or read that which is comfortable; its true,
they love to hear, and read sad things; Judgments, wrath, threatenings: But as
for sweet things, promises, experiences, or the like, alas! they look not
after them. Its observed of melancholy persons, that they love to be in dark,
and melancholy places, to hear sad and doleful Notes; the Owl, and Birds of
the night are most delighted in by them: Even so, many sad souls delight in
the valley of death; they love not to hear the sweet music of mercy, the
delightful notes of the Gospel, the ravishing raptures of joy, and peaceby
believing; nothing pleases them, but the thundering of Sina^, the terrors of
the Law, the judgments of sinners etc. Surely you who do this, are to be
reproved, for hereby you give way unto your sorrow and dejection, which thing
you ought not to do.

Thirdly, Such souls as in their dejection argue, and dispute against their
comfort, are guilty of giving way unto sorrow. Sometimes we come to dejected
souls, and tell them, we have a commission to comfort them. To this end, we
endeavor to open the Promise, and the Oath, that by those two immutable
things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, they might have strong
consolation (as it is, Heb. 6.18.) but alas! when we have said much, we receive
this short and sad answer, Comfort is not mine.

To this we reply; Why not yours? has God any where excluded you?

Yes, they say, we are shut up under unbeleefe, and there is no comfort for us.

We answer; God has shut up all under unbeleefe, that he might have mercy upon
all, as it is, Romans 11.33.

Nay but say they, God will not have mercy upon us; for alas! we are a people
to whom mercy does not belong.

But we tell them again, its said; That they which in times past were not a
people, are now the people of God, and they had not obtained mercy, now have
obtained mercy, as it is, 1 Pet. 2.10. yea, and we tell them, It shall come to
pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people,
there shall they be called, the children of the living God, Romans 9.26.

But yet, when we have said this, still we are put off with denials, and
contradictions; and still we find some saying, their soul refuses comfort:
But mind it, who ever you are, you who thus dispute against your comfort, you
are to be chid; for he, or she that disputes against comfort, gives way
(contrary to this point) unto sorrow. But,

Fourthly, Dejected souls who love solitariness, and avoid society, are to be
chid also, for they give way to sorrow. Satan gets by thy solitariness, thou
shall be sure of his company, if thou will avoid others company; thou may go
from others but not from him, he will follow thee into all the corners of thy
retiredness; could thou be alone, and without him, it were not so ill; but
yet thy very being alone is not well. Solomon said, Vae Toh. i. e. Woe to the
soul alone, Eccl. 4.10. were thou in company, thy sadness might be sweetened
with their comfort, but being alone thy sorrow will easily overmaster thee; and
when thou art down, thou will want another to take thee up, as it is there in
Eccles. Its a truth, that sorrow seeks solitariness, the sad soul would be by
it self: But God saw (even at first) it was not good for man to be alone; Its
bad for the best, but most bad for the dejected soul to be by it self. Sorrow
runs away (as I may say) apace with the soul if it be without company; but
thus the soul should not be, because it must not give way to sorrow.

Fifthly, Such souls as in their dejections cast off duties, to buy that
give-way to sorrow, and are therefore by this point to be chid. Disquieted
Jeremiah will preach no more, chap. 20.9. and discontended Jonah, leaves
Ninivey, and retires into the field; he will not preach to men, but rather fret
against God. Oh! how many dejected souls are there who cast off duties!
hearing, praying, receiving, etc. and instead of waiting upon God in them for
satisfaction, do rather sit and murmr impatiently against their God; bid
them pray, indeed they say they cannot; but the truth is, will not (for could
not they as well speak the same sad complaints to God, that they do to us?)
exhort them to hear, etc. Alas! say they. Its in vain, etc. but this casting
off of duties, is a giving way to dejection, for to be cured of it we are to be
up, and doing, as God tells Joshua; Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon
thy face, Judge 7.10. O ye cast-downe souls, why lie you thus upon your faces?
up and be doing, wait upon God in duties, so shall you be freed from your
dejection. Therefore,

Secondly, having thus friendly chid you, let me now faithfully counsel you:
Take heed, and beware, O ye dejected hearts, how you give way unto your
dejections; be not disquieted, be not cast down, stop your sorrows in season;
let not the floods arise: you are indeed apt to let open the floud-gates of
grief, but take heed least it over-slow your souls. David's practice bids you
to be wise, and Christ's precept commands you, not to let your hearts be
troubled.

Obj. But may not I give way to sorrow, who have given way to sin? May I not
be dejected much, who am defiled mightily? Suppose, (but why do I make it a
supposition? it is more, etc.) that my heart smites me for sin, and I be
dejected thereupon, should not, ought not I to give way to sorrow, etc?

Ans. By way of answer, suffer me, O soul, to say three things, and I beseech
you mind them.

First, It Is possible for Satan to have a hand (Joab- like) in this matter; See
chap. 3 of this Section.
Satan knows as well how to gain by sorrow as by sin: and therefore he that
put thee upon the one, may press forward the other; even under the Straw-berry
of godly sorrow, may lie the Serpent, to sting unto despair.

Secondly, Its true, you may, nay you must give way to sorrow* it is sin to
stifle Conscience. Many a wretch makes a sport of sin, and ends his
wickedness as he began it, viz. with mirth: but this is madness. Certainly,
the faith of pardon calls for, and works (if saving) the sorrow of repentance,
which is not to be repented of, nor spoken against; But yet,

Thirdly, As you must give sorrow way, so must you give faith way too. Its your
wisdom to know both when, and where to stop, you may give sorrow too much way,
even tears for sin may drown the soul; beware therefore of this, and learn
to moderate your griefs.

Quest. You will say, How shall we know when sorrow goes beyond its bounds;
what Land mark is there by which we may know the duly full tide of godly sorrow?
when must we stop the floodgates of grief, and cease to give way unto our
sorrows?

Ans. This is a mystery, and you will never learn it of me, except the Spirit
teach you; yet the letter of this mystery lies in three heads, or rules.

First, Then must sorrow be stopped, and not given way unto, when it begins to
work despair. Its time to wipe our eyes, and to leave off weeping, when we
begin to be dimme-sighted as to mercy; when sorrow is gathered into clouds, to
the darkening of grace; its time to stop.

Secondly, When God begins to appear altogether in blackness and darkness,
then its a time to rouse up our spirits from under dejections, whereas the
soul sees nothing but terror and wrath, and is hereby dis-heartened from
duty, its high time to stop grief; if your souls begin to be so sad, as to be
afraid to go to God, to speak to him, to argue (boldly through the Gospel)
with him, then its time to doubt, and fear that your sorrow is gone too far,
and that you have given way to it too much.

Thirdly, when sadness makes you stand off from Christ; when it begets so much
fear, as to keep under faith, then certainly it is too much, and it must be
stopped. Tell me, O soul, that mournest for sin, that art dejected and cast
down, for thy defilement and corruption. Art afraid to believe? Art loath to
go to Christ? Do begin to question his willingness to receive, and pardon
thee? Hereupon do begin to think now thou art cast down to arise no more?
to lie in thy sorrows till thou dye? And do think it in vain to go to
Christ, and impossible to be accepted by Christ? Know, that now certainly thy
sorrow is gone too far, and that now thou not only may, but that thou
ought, and must stop it; now its thy wisdom, and should be thy care to let
it go no further.

Quest. But me thinks I hear thee say; Alas! I would stop grief if I could;
I would cease to be sorrowful, had I a skill; How shall I bridle my passion?
How shall I keep down my disquiet?

Ans. To do this I confess is difficult; sorrow is a stubborn passion, and
its not an easy thing to bridle it; waters are not easily mastered: But yet,
take two or three helps.

First, begin to stop inordinate grief quickly; Its easier to stop the Horse
at his first setting out then afterward: Grief gets strength by any
sufferance, give it not place therefore, no not for an hour. It has been
noted, that such as have craved, and had leave to weep, and be sad a little,
have taken more liberty then was allowed, and have wept a great deal more then
was fit; lay a restraint therefore upon sorrow in its first swelling, so shall
it not overflow the banks of thy soul.

Secondly, (as a help to this) Consider how your inordinate dejection goes to
the heart of Christ; sometimes the wife is prevailed withal not to be too sad,
because it grieves the husband; Pray wife, says the husband, be not so sad and
melancholy, it troubles me to see it, etc. This stops sorrow many times;
Consider it (ye spiritual Spouses) your husband (Christ) is troubled to see
you so sad, it goes to his heart to see you so dejected. Christ speaks of
Ephraim, that his soul was disquieted (for it is the same word in the original
with that in the text) for him; surely did you but seriously consider this, it
would stop your grief, and cause, and keep you from giving way unto it, in as
much as Christ is cast down, and disquieted (as it were) to see you so.

Thirdly, Call your soul to an account; this will prevent it for going further.
The way to prevent exorbitant expenses in Stewards, is to call them to an
account: O poor souls learn, and practice the Art of self expostulation,
say to your selves as David did, Why art thou cast down (O my soul) and why
art thou so disquieted within me? This will be a good way to keep down sorrow
from rising too high, yea and a good way to raise up your soul from sitting
too low. Indeed this is the other branch of the point, and I shall now come
unto it.

CHAP. 5.
I Have dispatched the first branch of the Doctrine, viz. That its the wisdom,
and should be the care of dejected souls, not to give way unto dejection, and
casting down.

I shall now proceed to the second branch, which is to show; That it is their
wisdom, and should be their care to argue the case with themselves.

You see David does so, he calls upon his soul, and expostulates the business
with it. Here is not a word in his expostulation but is very considerable. As,

1 Why, that is, as I opened in the explication.

What (as if he should say) What, is it so indeed, art cast down in earnest, O
my soul? I thought it but fained, or at least not so real; But what, is it so
indeed? he cunningly insinuates into his soul. Or,

How? i. e. O how art thou cast down. O my soul? I wonder at it, and its an
astonishment to me to consider it; how sad, how exceeding sad art thou, O my
poor dejected soul? Or else:

After what manner, i. e. what kind of sorrow is this that fills thee? Is it
the sorrow of faith, or of despair? Is it the grief of a godly soul, or is
it a worldly sorrow? What manner of sorrow is it? Or else, wherefore? i.e. What
end do aim at in this sorrow? What is it that thou drivest at by this
dejection? Or else, why, i. e. For what cause is it? As if he should say; Tell
me the reason (for I see it not) of this thy trouble and dejection. Mark how
home he argues in that first word; but then mark again the next word, which
is,

Soul; Its as if he should say, Why am I thus troubled in all my inward man,
in my soul? Why do the waters come in unto my soul? i. e. to my best and
chiefest part, or to my all? as if he had said; Why is it not a little trouble
in my mind, but a great one in my soul?

Yet further, mark him in the particle my; O (my) soul; Its as if he should
have said; Why is my soul, even mine, which has so many Promises, and which
had some experiences? why is my soul that has a God to go unto? why is my
soul cast down? If Saul, or Doeg were cast down it were not strange; but
that thou, O my soul art cast down, this is indeed strange.

See him yet again, cast down and troubled; as if he should say, What,
troubled unto casting down? what, so much disquieted as to be in a storm? (as I
opened the word) yea, and to be in such a tempest: O my soul, why is it thus?
If thou will be troubled, why so? What, troubled to a lying upon the ground? O
arise, arise soul! for what is the matter that thou art thus cast down?

You see how full it lies in David's practice, that dejected souls should argue
the case with themselves; it is needless to add the candle of any other
example* seeing we see the truth so clearly in the Sunshine of this.

CHAP. 6.
The sum of the expostulation, and the reasons of it.
I Will a little touch upon these two heads for the clearly understanding of
this branch.

1 Wherein does this expostulation, or arguing with our souls consist? 2 Why
Christians cast down should use it.
For the first, you will say (If it be our wisdom, and should be our care when
cast down, to argue the case with our selves) wherein does this arguing
consist?

Now for this, know, that this expostulation does principally consist in three
particulars.

First, In a solemn summoning of the soul to give an account of its
dejection. We should, (Judge-like) call our souls before us, and demand what
is the reason that it breaks the royal law of love, which commands us to
rejoice always; And it sleights Christ's command of not being troubled. I know
the sad heart is backward unto this, but we must summon it solemnly in the name
of Christ to give an account, and that a faithful one, why its so sad and cast
down? we should say, Come forth (O my soul) out of thy sad and solitary
retirements, and tell me plainly the reason why thou art cast down, and also
the end that thou aymest at, etc. This is the first part, or introduction to
this arguing. The

Second is, A due consideration of the cause, or reason which the soul gives
for its dejection. Peradventure the cause may not be a cause, the reason may
not be rational; or if it be a cause it may not be so great; therefore we
should weigh what, and how weighty it is. As to instance, sometimes the soul
says its dejected, for this cross, or for that affliction; for this fear,
and that fall; for this corruption, and that temptation, etc. now then, the
maine part of this expostulation lies in our weighing and right stating of the
cause, which the soul either has, or thinks it has, for its dejection. Then,

Thirdly, this arguing lies in doing of what we are able to do, to satisfy
our selves. Its said of David, that he comforted himself in his God, 1 Samuel
30.6. That is, he strengthened himself as well as he could. Its certain, that
in a natural way we may do something, and in a supernatural way we may do
more; now we should stir up our gifts both natural, and supernatural.
Encourage your selves (as I read it) and he shall strengthen your hearts, Psalm.
31. last, (...)
certainly we should frame what answers we can draw from reasons, and promises
and experiences, (Durate and ^osmet rebus servate secundis) (...)
to satisfy our selves in the pretended causes of our dejections. Besides, we
should charge our souls to be patient, and stir up our selves to believe; we
should do what we can Logically to resolve doubts, Significat obourare fortem
esse.
( i. e. fully to satisfy troubles) and Rhetorically to persuade (as it were)
our selves to rejoice. There is enough in the Scriptures to silence all
sorrows, and to satisfy all cases; and we should argue from the Scriptures
for this purpose, as much, and as well as we can. We should not plead for, but
against our dejections; we should strengthen the hands of our faith against
unbeleefe, and the grounds of joy against sorrow. Its true, its Christ alone
that can raise us, but yet we must strive in our expostulation to raise our
selves; Shake thy self from the dust, O Jerusalem, as it is, Isay 52.2. The
children of Sion must shake themselves, i. e. do themselves (what in them
lies) toward their own satisfaction, and raising from dejections.

This is the first thing, you may now guess wherein this expostulation lies.

The second thing follows, i. e. Why should dejected souls thus expostulate
the matter with themselves.

For this I might give many reasons, I shall instance briefly in these five.

First, Because God has given to men as men, much more to Saints as Saints, a
power and principle to expostulate with themselves. Men have a judgment, and
conscience, and surely these things should be made use of, and improved, as in
other particulars, so likewise in this. Its the privilege of men above beasts,
that they have a natural faculty, to argue, and reason businesses within
themselves; and its the privilege of Saints above men, that they can cast a
restraint upon themselves (as Doctor Sibs observed upon this text) now its
reason that we should reason the case with our souls, fith God has given us a
faculty so to do. But,

Secondly, Dejected souls should argue the case with themselves, because many
times they shall find they are dejected caus-lesse; As wicked men are
sometimes in fear where no fear is, i. e. where there is no just cause of
fear. So Saints are sometimes dejected, when they have no just cause for it.
Its certain, that take dejection in the sense formerly opened, a Saint has
never a just ground for it. David said, Wherefore should be fear in the days
of evil, when the iniquity of his heels compass him about, Psalm. 49.5. his
meaning is, even then when all his sins did compass him, he had no cause to be
afraid, or cast down; But certainly many times even Saints are dejected for no
just reason, now we should therefore expostulate with our selves: Its but a
homely comparison (yet since it comes home to the matter i will use it) Sometimes
we are as fearful Horses, who flight and startle at every bush and shadow; we
fear even the shadows of fear, and we are cast down, when there is no
substantial ground. Its but meet therefore that when we are cast down we
should argue the case with our selves, and see what reason there is for it, and
what weight is in that reason.

Thirdly, By reasoning or arguing with our seules, we lay a stop in sorrows
way; look as it is in the point of finning, so is it in the business of
sorrow. If sinners would but a little expostulate with themselves, they would
not run on in sin, (...)
therefore the Psalmist says, Stand in awe and sin not, commune (or
expostulate) with your selves, (...)
Psalm. 4.4. In like manner, Saints would not give way unto sadness, i. e.
speak in your. hearts.
if they did but commune, and reason the case with themselves. Did Saints but
reason with sorrow thus; Why art thou? whither tendest thou? what sweet is in
thee, etc? surely such a reasoning as this, it would at least restrain sorrow,
and keep it under. And to this,

Fourthly, Christians or Saints cast down should thus reason with themselves,
because this will be some excuse for them if they cannot prevail. That soul
that gives way to sadness, and in no kind strives against, and expostulates
with it, has no excuse to plead; as sinners that rush into sin violently,
and willingly (as the horse into the battle) they have no excuse. Its some
(though but a small) excuse, that a soul can say, I strived against
temptation, I opposed corruption, I expostulated with my soul against it; so a
soul that is carried down the stream of sorrow, may plead a little for its
self, if it has done its best against it; whereas if it gives way, and
expostulates not the matter at all, its inexcusable. The soul may with some
boldness call for, and with some confidence expect help from Christ, to raise
it being cast down, in case it can plead, That it has strived, and
expostulated with it self as well as it could. Then,

Lastly, A soul dejected should argue the case with its self, because hereby
he is fitter for cure. This selfe-expostulation renders the mind willing to be
convinced, and it does also make the soul fitter to open its case and
condition. Like as the person that has examined, and found out his disease, is
fitter for to make it known, and so to be cured: So is the soul that has
expostulated the business of his dejection with himself. Many poor souls
are not able to open their cases, and one maine reason is, they never did argue
it with themselves, but still let it run on, till they are cast down into a
pit where they cannot see; in as much therefore that selfe-expostulation does
so advantage dejected souls as to cure, and satisfaction, its but reason that
they should use it.

CHAP. 7.
Some Uses of this Branch.
THis truth that dejected souls should argue the case with themselves, serves
both To 1 Reprove, and 2 Direct.


First, This truth reproves such as being cast down, never do thus. Its the
fault, and folly of many dejected hearts, that they take it for granted and
sure, that they may, and ought to be cast down, and therefore they never
enquire into the matter, nor expostulate, or argue the thing at all; they cry
out, oh! they are cast down; but they never say, Why, or wherefore? This they
take for granted, they have cause. Surely you are to be reproved who go sad,
and heavy all the day long, and never argue with your selves, Why is it?

Secondly and chiefly, Be directed, oh ye dejected souls, what to do in your
dejection, viz. argue, or expostulate the business with your selves; now for
your direction herein take these rules.

1 Be serious and solemn, charge your souls again, and again, so does David
here; observe, here is not one why, but two whyes; First, Why cast down?
Secondly, Why troubled? why and why; O be you very serious, and keep your
hearts to it. Do not let thy heart be quiet, till it indeed discover unto
thee, the true reason of its sadness. 2 Be very cautious and sober, do not
dispute too much, nor inquire too far; Satan will dispute too long, and bring
you into Labyrinths which you cannot get out off. Do not dive into the Divine
decrees; If thy soul say, Its sad by thinking on them; tell thy soul, that
those things are above thy reach, and therefore are not to cause thy sorrow. If
thy soul urge particulars, and positions about Predestination, etc. be not too
curious to pry into those particulars, nor to dispute those cases; tell thy
soul, The Word is night thee. even in thy heart; and that this is the word of
the Gospel* viz. That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. 3
Beware how you conclude against your soul, because you cannot satisfy your
self. It Is possible thy case may be satisfiable, and yet thou art not able to
do it. Do not say, I may, and I must be cast down, for I cannot say any
thing to the contrary, I cannot satisfy my doubts, and fears, etc. Why though
thou can not, others may; The Psalmist tells you of a case that was too hard
for him to resolve himself in, and yet when he went to the Sanctuary he had
satisfaction, Psalm. 73.16, 17. O poor souls! you may not be able after all
your expostulation to satisfy your selves, yet do not conclude against your
selves, but go to the Sanctuary, and you shall have satisfaction there. 4
Beware of partiality; Hear as well what may be said for, as what is said
against your souls; You have a willing spirit, though a weak flesh; you have
a waking heart, though a sleepy head; you are comely though black. Hear as well
pro, as con; receive as well arguments for your selves, as insinuations against
your selves: Surely its not only your wisdom, but your duty. You must as well
argue for liftings up for what there is in you of Christ, as for castings
down, for what there is in you of corruption. You are not just Arbitrators,
not righteous in expostulation, if you argue not both parts; therefore in your
arguing beware of partiality, its a needful caution. O how many cry out, O
they sleep, they are black; they have this corruption, and they wrestle with
that temptation; but never mind what watchfulness, what comeliness, what
grace, what help, etc. they have from Christ; and its no wonder that they are
cast down.: But beware of this partiality in your expostulation with your
selves. 5 Make the Gospel the Judge of your case; let not the Law, but let
Grace moderate your dispute. While you argue the case with your soul, take
heed of Moses, he will cast you down lower; if he moderate. But appeal to
Christ, by him comes grace and truth; he will decide the controversy truly (and
if sin have the truth, Note this.
he will acknowledge it unto repentance) but he will decide it also graciously (and
where sin abounds, he will say, grace superabounds unto faith) therefore in
your self-soule-expostulation bring your heart into the presence of Christ, and
let him alone be Judge. 6 Resolve never to conclude finally against thy soul,
whatever at present may be proved against it, When thy soul has said all that
it can against thy state, and when after all that thou have answered, thy soul
is unsatisfied; nay, suppose thou find every thing punctually proved as a
reason for dejection, yet resolve to conclude nothing against thy self, for
God can help at last, though Satan should be righteous in his accusation, and
thy conscience join with him, in witnessing against thee, yet know, Christ is
righteous in thy absolution, and his blood can cleanse thy conscience, yea and
it shall, Heb. 10. But you will say, What if in my expostulation I find my
own conscience condemning me, must I resolve not to conclude of my estate by
that?
Ans. No not finally; thy conscience may condemn thee now, and yet acquit thee
anon: Nay, Christ may permit first thy own conscience to condemn thee, that
afterward thou may see, and prize his grace in acquitting thee.

Well, these be the rules to manage your selfe-argumentation, I will give a few
words more to direct you in the argumentation it self, and then i will conclude
this Section.

But you will say, How shall we do to argue the case with our own souls? why
for this, take these directions following.

1 Question Your own souls. 2 Chide Your own souls. 3 Inform Your own
souls.
First, Question your own souls; put some questions to your spirits about
your sadness, and see what answers are returned. As, 1 Quest. What indeed is
the ground of this dejection. Is it sin? why there is grace; Is it Satan an
enemy? there is Christ a friend: Say what, O what my soul is the ground of
this dejection? 2 Quest. What do aim at in thy trouble, O soul? Is it to
please God? to satisfy for sin? Alas! he is not pleased with our sorrows,
neither is there satisfaction in our dejection. 3 Quest. What it means thus to
be disquieted; Does it mean thus to ease its self? Alas, this is rather to
increase trouble, then to find comfort.


Secondly, Chide your souls for your dejection; reprove your selves for your
sorrows, say, O what weakness is this to sit sobbing, to lie tumbling, to
toss in a tempestuous manner, when God and Christ bids you to rejoice: Chide
your selves for disparaging the Gospel, for dishonouring Christ, for
disheartening others, for all this you are guilty of by your dejected carriage;
rebuke your souls for their inordinate sorrows.

Thirdly, Inform them; Preach to your selves these and the like points: 1 All
this sorrow does no good; It has no profit in it. What profit is there either
for thy self, or others in these thy dejections? 2 This sorrow does hurt, its
as leannes to thy soul, its as a damp to, and the deadness on duty; tell your
souls this sadness is mischievous, it furthers despair, and it stifles joy:
Say, it weakens as to work, and unfits as to comfort. 3 Tell your souls, Many
have been as you are; Do you decay in grace, so did others: Do you fall into
sin, so do many: Are you deserted of Christ, so was the Spouse: O press
this point home, there is no temptation befallen you but what is common to
others. Again, 4 Inform your souls, that Christ would not have you to be
cast down? Say to them, Christ bids you be of good cheer; he will raise you up,
therefore why should you be cast down? Further, 5 Tell your souls, Satan
laughs to see you sad, and Saints mourn, and say thus: I am not to rejoice
Satan, and to sadden Saints, no, I must not; yet, O how does he rejoice at your
dejections. He says, Aha, Aha; so would I have it: whereas Saints cry, Alas!
alas: for what Saint is sad, and disconsolate, and all mourn not?


Lastly, Inform your souls, that it shall not be always thus; tell them, you
shall not always sit disconsolate ( as a woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit,
as it is, Isay 54.6.) No, say unto your soul, that you shall yet once again see
your God, and Christ, and that you shall yet praise him, and sing upon your
stringed Instrument to the chief Musician, i. e. the Lord Jesus.

Thus be directed in your dejections to argue, or expostulate with your own
souls as David does, but withal remember to argue with God also; so does
David likewise, I will speak unto God my rock (says he) so do thou, go to
God, and humbly expostulate with him; if thou art dejected by reason of a
desertion; go and say, Why have thou forgotten me? Ask God why he eclipseth
his face; If thou art dejected by reason of temptation, say, Why go I mourning
by reason of the oppression of the enemy? Thou may be bold with God in
Christ's blood, therefore arise (O cast down soul) and go to God, and argue
out thy cause with him; entreat him to take off his hand if it keep thee down,
and beseech him, to stretch forth his hand to raise thee up. Peradventure you
will say, you have done this often, and yet you are still dejected.

Why it may be so, yet you must wait with patience, you must tarry the Lords
leisure: he will not let you always to lie, and labor in your dejections; but
he will come and raise you up. This you must believe, and expect, and in this
faith and expectation wait; but of this in the next Section.

SECT. IV.
PSALM: 42. ult. -- Hope thou in God:


CHAP. 1.
A third Doctrine raised, and spoken unto from the words.
IT was a sweet and sacred expression of the Church in her sad and low
condition, Lament. 3.26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly
wait for the salvation of the Lord. The Church was now in a lamentable estate,
when she spoke thus: Jerusalem now lay as a heap, and the Lord had now caused
the solemn Feasts, and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Sion, as it is, chap. 2.6.
yet now she sees a goodness in hope, and quiet waiting; and certainly so there
is, Saints at lowest are not left of God; their heaviest condition is not
hope-lesse: Though they may be in the dark, yet they shall see light, for it is
sown for them; and upon this account it is, that they should hope, and wait
for Gods Salvation, even in their deepest dejection.

Indeed, this is the third thing which I observed in, and am to speak unto,
from these words, viz. Doctrine.

Saints in their deepest dejections, when they are most cast down, and
disquieted, should be content to tarry, and wait for Gods cure and comfort.

David's practice is a precept in this, what he bids his soul do, we must bid
ours: Now mark, he bids his soul hope: So he says, Hope thou in God. The
word as I opened, signifies most properly to expect with patience, and hope.

David speaks the same in other places which he does in this, Psalm. 40.1. I
waited patiently for the Lord. ver. 6.-11.
And so, Psalm. 62.5. My soul, wait thou only (or do thou only wait) upon
God, for my expectation is from him, and he did so, for there; verse 1. says
he, Truly my soul waits still upon God.

Its certain (O ye sad and cast down souls) that God will come in his time,
with sweet raising, and ravishing mercy: Its your duty in the interim to wait,
and hope.

The Prophet says, The Vision is for an appointed time, but at the end it
shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry, wait, (mark it) wait, Habba. 2.3.
The Psalmist knew he should yet praise God, therefore he bids himself to
wait. Yea and the Prophet tells us, he would wait upon the Lord who hides
his face from the house of Jacob, Esa: 8.17. Cure will come, but you must
tarry: Comfort will appear, but you must wait. You are cast down, but you shall
be raised up. Therefore you must wait in this hope patiently.

CHAP. 2.
An Explication of the work of waiting.
DEjected souls! I am speaking to you. I have told you already, you must not
give way to your dejections. I now tell you more, You must be content to wait.
If you ask what this is?

I answer briefly, that this work consists in four things.

First, In a patient bearing of that sadness, and dejection under which you
are. Every passion, is impatient, Souls cast down are impatient in the pit;
but this should not be. David tells you, of his sinking into a deep pit; and
that in it he cried, till he was weary, yet he did patiently wait. I am weary
(says he) of my crying; my throat is dried, mine eyes fail (yet mark what
follows) I wait for my God, Psalm. 69.3. He was not so impatient, as not to
wait, And the Church says, she will bear the indignation of the Lord, as it is
Mich. 7.9. Dejected souls! you must wait in patience.

Secondly, You must be content to tarry. As you must patiently bear, so you
must contentedly forbear. The word signifies as much, and is so used, and
translated, Genesis 8.10. Noah is said to have staid yet other ten days. He had
sent forth one Dove before, and that returns quickly, because she found no rest
for the sole of her foot. He did not presently send forth another, no, he stayed
ten days (says the text.) After the second returned, with an olive branch,
and so gave some hope, yet he was not over forward to send forth a third. No,
he staid ten days for that likewise.

Dejected hearts, you must do as Noah did, i.e. be content to stay a while.
Indeed the captive exile makes have, he fears to dye in the pit, and that his
bread will fail, as it is Esa. 51.14. But we should not make have. We ought to be
content to tarry the Lords leisure, we must as well wait and forbear God (as
I may say) till he come with cure, and comfort, as bear our own casting down.
But

Thirdly, This duty lies also, In a diligent observation of God, as he comes in
with cure, and comfort. Unto me (says Job) men gave ere, and waited (its the
same word with this in the text) i.e. they observed what I spoke, And again
(says he) they waited for me as for the rain chap. 29.21, 23. His meaning is,
as men who look out for rain, observe and eye every cloud: So did they wait:
i. e. observe and eye every word of mine. This lies in the word, which is to
wait so, as to look out for. The Prophet stands upon his watchtower, and
looks out for the vision of which he speaks, and for which he would have us
wait. As the eyes of servants look unto their Masters: So our eyes wait upon
the Lord our God, Psalm. 123.2. My soul waits for the Lord, and in his word do I
hope; But how? mark it, more then they that do watch for the morning, Ps.
130.5, 6. You know such as do watch for the morning, eye, and look out for any
dawning, any glimering. Souls cast down should see how the Lord appears toward
their raising, they should eye diligently how he comes forth for their cure.
His going forth is prepared as the morning, as it is Hos. 6.3. Therefore in our
waiting for him, or on him, we should do as those that do watch for day, i.e.
observe exactly, every glimering of light and love.

Lastly, There is one thing more in the word, and work, and that is hope.
Dejected souls should thus bear, and forbear, and look out, but all in, and
with hope. Thus the word is translated here: [hope] thou in God. So its
translated and used, Psalm. 119.81. My soul faints for thy salvation, but [I
hope] in thy word. Certainly (you cast down Christians!) you ought to hope in
your lowest estate, you must hope for that which yet you have not, i.e. cure,
and comfort, you must say, I am cast down, but I hope to rise again, I am
disquieted, but I hope I shall be settled. You must not cast away your
confidence, in your most troubled condition.

These things put together, you will know your work, which is in your deepest
dejections, to be patient; and not to murmur: To be content to tarry Gods time,
and not to hasten releife: To look out, and eye how God appears toward you,
and for you. And to do all this with hope that yet you shall be raised, and
settled.

CHAP. 3.
Some grounds of the point.
WE may peradventure think this strange but yet it is true: And albeit we may
conceive it a rigorous thing, yet it is rational* And there are many reasons why
a soul cast down, should be content thus to bear, tarry, and expect, etc.

I shall not name all that I could, these may suffice.

First, Its Gods will: He wills that i^ all (and in this case) we should
wait: And his will is the highest reason. The people of God were much dejected
when in Babylon: yet then (and with reference to that it was that) God
commanded them to wait, Habba. 2.3. He that commands conversion, commands
also waiting. Turn to thy God (says he) I, but it may be (might the soul say)
God will not turn to me, yet mark it, wait on thy God continually, Hosea 12.6.
Its true, God will cure, and raise dejected souls, but he will take his own
time. Therefore we ought, and we must, be content to tarry and wait in hope.
But

Secondly, Its but equal that we should wait and expect because we cast our
selves down. For the most part our dejections are our own (as I formerly
noted,) we throw our selves down, and its but meet we should expect, and wait
patiently til God will raise us up. Besides

Thirdly, We are not always fit for comfort. We are not always prepared for a
raised estate, and therefore we may be content with a cast down one. The Lord
waits to be gracious: as it is Esa. 30.18. God is fain to tarry till we are fit
for to be raised: and surely, if he tarry with, we should be content to tarry
for, a cure. Thou dejected heart consider; thou art not fit to be out of the
pit: thy sadness at present suits best with thy state. Thou art not able to
manage joy: Nor as yet art thou skillful how to carry thy self in a sublime
and raised condition. Now God waits on thee for this end, that he may fit thee
for joy, and fill thee with joy: why then should not thou upon this account
be content to wait, and expect in hope and patience?

Fourthly, Souls in their deepest dejections, should be content to wait and
expect, etc. because they cannot raise nor help themselves. The child that is
down, and cannot raise it self, must be content to lie: should it cry and
struggle never so much, yet it could not help its self. Christians dejected
in spirit, you are as children, you cannot raise your selves. Its true you can
fall of your selves (even without Satan) you can create troubles and fears
without him (and its your fault and folly that too often you do so) But yet
though you can deject your selves, without the help of Satan; you cannot raise
your selves without the power of God: why strive you and cry you in vain. Till
God create peace, you cannot enjoy it, you should therefore be content to tarry
and wait his leisure.

Fifthly, It argues humility to be thus content, Proud Benhadad will not wait:
what (said he) shall I wait for the Lord any longer, 2 King. 6. ^lt. Its the
same word with this in the Text. His meaning is; he will not be patient, nor
tarry, nor expect and hope any longer. But though proud Benhadad will not, yet
humble David would, and did. A soul that is humble, will be content to tarry
days, weeks, years for the Lord. If God will not raise him now, he will wait in
hope, that he may hereafter. It argues a soul too much lifted up, that cannot
be content to lie, till God will take it up. Habbakkuk, after he had said, we
must wait for the vision: adds, His soul which is lifted up is not right, chapter
2.4. He bids us behold this, i.e. consider it, that it argues a proud and a
rotten heart, that cannot, will not wait. A lowly mind, becomes a low estate.
If your condition be low, and you cast down, you must be so lowly, as to be
content, to wait and tarry in hope, with patience.

Lastly, God tarryed at first a long time for our rising from sin, and its but
just, that we should tarry a while, for our raising from sorrow. How long (O
cast down soul) did God wait and expect thy conversion? why should not
thou be content to wait for his consolation? Christ expected the fruits of the
Spirit unto holiness a great while; and should not thou expect, and wait
for the fruit of the Spirit unto joy a little? Surely its but reason we should
wait with patience, till God raise us out of the pits of sadness and
dejection; since he waited long for our rising out of the pits of sinfulness
and defilement.

CHAP. 4.
Some uses of this point.
YOu see both what it is to wait, and you see also great reason why it should
be so: Dejected souls! this point calls on you to make use of it; you hear
what you should do, as well as what you should not; you heard before, you were
not to give way unto your sadness: But you hear now, you must bear it in
patience, with hope.

Two extremes you are prone unto, but you should avoid, and strive against
both.

The first is this; You are apt to give way too much to your sadness and
dejection. The second is quite contrary; You are apt to throw off all, and
content to bear none.
Either you would deject your selves too low, and be more sorrowful then
Christ would have you.

Or else, you would struggle too much, and not lie in patience till he raise
you.

On the one hand, your mourning is as those that have no hope; and on the
other, you murmr, as those who have no patience.

But both these extremes should be avoided, for as the former point tells you,
you should reason with your selves, and not give way to mourning; so this tells
you, that you should in patience possess your souls, and at no hand give way
to murmuring.

I wish you would, and could make the right use of this point; I shall touch at
three uses which you ought to make, and Christ help you that you may.

The uses are, For 1 Humiliation, 2 Caution, and 3 Exhortation.


First, This point might serve to humble those who do not as they should; I
mean, such as are dejected, and yet will not wait in patience with hope. How
often is it that they cry out, Their case is insufferable, and they will not bear
it; and their condition is desperate, and its in vain for them to hope?

But be humbled (O ye sad souls) for these speeches; you hear what David
did, and you should do: you hear what others have done in your case, and what
you should do too, and let this humble you for your failing.

Why say thou, O Jacob; and speak thou, O Israel, My way is bid from the
Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God, (as it is, Isai. 40.27.)
Have you not heard that your Father faints not, and that he gives power to
the faint? Have you not heard that the youths faint; and that yet they that
wait upon the Lord renew their strength?

Have you not heard that David was dejected (as you are) and that yet he did
bear, and forbear, in patience and hope (as you should) O be you humbled for
not doing as he did.

Obj. But David's case was not as mine my dejection is sorer then his; he had
not so great grounds to be cast down as I have, etc?

Ans. Why say thou so (O sad soul!) thou considerest thine own, but not
his; do but consider his seriously, and then compare.

First, He was now banished from his house, yea and from Gods too; he was now
in the Wilderness (where no waters were) and he was now deprived of Sion, in
which were all his springs. Yea,

Secondly, as he wanted means, so he wanted more, i. e. he wanted God, he saw
not that face which his soul sought; he was at present in the dark. A
Wilderness is sad in the day time, but more sad in the night; David now wanted
Divine discoveries, say now, is thy dejection more grounded than his? nay,

Thirdly, God was not only wanting, but wrathful; David was not only far
from the springs of love, but he was under the spouts of warth; and all Gods
billows or waves went over him. Add to this,

Fourthly, David's enemies took notice of this, and scoffed at him all the
while; and this as a sword did pierce him, as it is, verse. 9.

Consider now (O soul) was not David's case as bad as yours? Or can you say
your grounds of dejection are as great as his? what say you O souls for your
selves?

Repl. Though his case were as bad as ours, yet our strength is not so great as
his; as his burden was so heavy as ours, so our shoulders are not so strong as
his: Do you expect children should bear as much as men, and not sink, and
cry, etc?

Ans. But stay (O soul) and consider, that albeit I should say, David was
stronger then you; yet,

First, David's strength was not his own; it was Gods hand that supported him;
and his hand is under thee: It may be thou see the one hand (which is over,
or upon thee) but thou should also consider, the other hand (that is under
thee.) Besides,

Secondly, God knows your strength, and beyond that he will not suffer you to be
tried. 1 Cor. 10.13. yea, the eternal God is thy strength, and underneath are
thy everlasting arms, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Christ who is strong (O soul) will bear
thee up, and his strength is to be perfected in thy weakness; and in time thou
should find it, could thou but in patience wait with hope.

Reply. Nay, but I cannot do that, I cannot hope for help, since I see no
door for hope to enter, I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of
my soul.

Ans. It Is true, Hezekiah said so in his dejection, but he was deceived, and so
art thou: when thy strength is gone, and thou shut up, so as that thou see no
hope, Christ may, and will come; therefore put not the use off, but take it to
thy self (O impatient, despairing, dejected one!) thou art to be humbled, since
thou do not carry thy self as David did, in his dejection.

Secondly, this point is a caution to all; either in, or expecting dejection,
to take heed they do not mis-behave themselves under Gods hand.

Thy duty of waiting (I told you) consisted in four things, take heed of
failing in either

First, it lay in a patient bearing* O take heed of impatience in your
dejections: Beware of passionate words, and actions, in your dejected
condition; do not say in thy haste, that thou art cast down, and shall be cut
off, as it is, Psalm. 31.22. Do not say, I thought indeed Ministers and friends
had been faithful in their comforts, and counsels; but I see now that all men
are liars, as it is, Psalm. 116.11. Thou have heard of the patience of Job, how
that in all this (i. e. this sad condition) he did not charge God foolishly,
Job 1.22. O take heed, that thou be not wise in thine own eye, and say, Why am
I thus, if the Lord be with me? Surely this is impatience, and in this you
charge God with folly; beware of it.

Secondly, in your dejection take heed of haste, you should wait, and tarry;
be wary of a hasty spirit: Remember, he that believes makes not haste, Isa.
28.16. David often complains of his haste. Take heed of Saul's madness, that
would not tarry till Samuel came; beware thou be not as Benhadad, who said, Why
should I wait any longer?

Thirdly, take heed also of neglect in eying incomes, do not say, its in vain
to look up to the Hills, from whence comes help; what though thine eyes have
looked long, and fail, yet look longer. Indeed, Hezekiah said, his eyes did
fail with looking, etc. Isa. 38.14. yet salvation did not fail at last. O
take heed of leaving off to look, and expect in every duty, in every
ordinance, etc.

Lastly, beware of despair; do not say my hope is perished from the Lord:
Indeed the Church in her lamentable estate said so, Lament. 3.18. But it was
because she remembered her affiction, and misery, her wormwood, and gall, These
things she had still in remembrance, (as it is there, verse. 19, 20.) But thou
ought to turn to thy soul, for so I translate, verse. 21. i. e. to do as
David here, return and reason with thy soul, and then thou will have hope.
Beware of that heavy word despair, say not thy case is hopeless; what, is
there no Balm in Gilead? Cast not, oh cast not away your confidence. But hear
a little, forbear, hunger, look out, and hope: for thou shall yet praise God,
And therefore.

Lastly, Be ye exhorted (all ye cast down souls) to this duty, which is in
hope and patience, to wait upon Christ in all your dejections. Learn to tarry
the Lords leisure. Do not only wait with patience, but with contentment, Say
I will bear the hand of the Lord: and be contented (since its his pleasure) to
be in a dejected condition, till he raise me up. Its true, that the captive
exile HASTENETH that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit,
as it is Esaias 51.14. But mark what is there said, to such a soul, hastening
for to be taken out of the pit. I am the Lord thy God, who divided the Sea,
whose waves roared, the Lord of Hosts is his name. Jehovah is thy God, though
thou art a captive exile in the pit. And thou ought to wait, to stand
still, and be quiet, till God let thee see his salvation (as in the red Sea
(for to that does the Lord allude there,) Therefore, know your work, and be
wise to do it (O ye dejected souls!) you must wait and be contented in your
waiting.

Quest. But must I be contented with my condition, in which I want God. 'Twere
something to be contented with a comfortless condition; but to be contented
with a God-lesse and Christ-lesse condition, this is harsh, and I question
whither it should be.

Answer, You must distinguish both of.

1 A state without God, and 2 Content in that state,
First, you must distinguish, of a state without God. There is a being without
God so as men are by nature, i. e. Atheistical: And so I think that place
should be translated most clearly, (...)
Ephesians. 2.12. proportionate unto that place of Ephesians. 4.18. Now I do not, dare
not say (O dejected) Soul, thou should be contented in such a condition. But
there is a being without God, or Christ, so as souls are, who are in the dark,
that want the visibility of his presence: That indeed have his life, but are
alienated from his light, that see not God or Christ at all; who are not wholly
strangers to God, but to whom God seems estranged, and from whom Christ seems
to be gone. And such an estate thou must be contented in. But yet

Secondly, You must distinguish of content. There is a carnal, hellish content
(arising from a sinful frame of heart) such as was in those of whom Job
speaks, that say to God, depart from us, that see no profit in his presence,
and that therefore can be well pleased with his absence (as it is Job 21.) Thus
'twere hellish to be contented. But there is a spiritual, holy contentment
(arising from a submissive frame of heart to Gods will,) such as was in Christ,
who submitted to divine absence. And in the Church, who said, I will wait
(that is, with content and patience) upon the Lord that hides his face, Esa.
8.17. And in this way thou ought to be content to want God and Christ, i. e.
in a sweet submission to his will, That since he will not shine, thou must be
contented to be in the dark.

Further, It is one thing to be content to want God and Christ for a time; it
is another thing, to be contented to eternity. I will not say (as some do
think) that we ought to be contented to want God to eternity, This is
disputable.
But its clear for a time we must be contented.

Indeed I think we must, and we must not be contented in our condition, when,
and while we are dejected, for the want of God and Christ.

Quest. But alas! (thou will say) How shall I be thus. Its a mystery to be
contented, and to be not contented, and that at the same time, with reference
to one and the same thing.

Answ. Indeed, it is true. This is a mystery, but yet you must study it; And
amongst other helps, I shall mention three Considerations; which (if the spirit
assist) will in a measure learn you this mystery, of not being contented to
want Christ; and yet of being contented to want him in your dejected condition,
etc.

1 Consider, Christ is thy happiness, but at his own disposal. Because he is
thy happiness, thou must not content thy self without him: And yet because he
is at his own disposal, thou must be content a while to want him, and to wait
for him. Mind it, O dejected soul; the Lord Jesus is thy life, (thou must
perish without him) and therefore never be contented to want him. But withal
remember he is thy Lord, therefore if he will tarry, thou must be content to
want, and to wait for him.

2 Consider, Christ waited long for thee, but thou can not want him always.
Because thou can not always want Christ; therefore beware of being content
to be without him; and yet because he waited long for you, be not discontented,
if he make you tarry a while for him.

3 Consider, If Christ never come to thee, thou art utterly undone: but if he
come at any time, thou art made for ever. Who can be contented to think of
being utterly undone, and miserable to all eternity? yet such (O soul) thou will be, if Christ come not to thee at all. But if Christ come (though never so
late) its not (too late) to make thee really, royally, everlastingly happy.

Well mind this soul, and minding be serious in these thoughts, then may
thou come to be acquainted with this mystery of being contented to want God,
Christ, comfort, etc. and to wait even in thy saddest dejection with abundance
of patience.

Quest. But What shall I say to silence Satan, and to still my unquiet heart in
Christ's absence, in during the time of my dejection.

Answ. For that (O soul) take these directions to support thy spirit, and
silence Satan in thy dejections.

First, Say to Satan and thy self, that Christ knows his own time. Why
should thou either prescribe, or confine him to time, what Christ said to
his disciples, that say you, to your dejected souls. His time is not yet come,
though your time be always, Job. 7.6. Tell thy soul, indeed Its time is
always, but Christ's may not be yet. Say Christ is at his own disposal, and
he knows his own time. The wife that longs after her absent Husband,
silenceth her self with this. My Husband knows his own time. Yea, and she
can with this also quiet the children too, who cry, oh that our Father were
come! Children, you Father knows his own time. So O soul do thou silence thy
self, and do thou likewise answer thine enemy, who says, where is now thy God?
Say, my God, my Christ is in Heaven; and does what pleases him. It pleases
him that I should want, and wait, and I am contented for he knows his own
time.

Secondly, Christ's time, is the best time. His time is always seasonable. Tell
thy soul, and Satan, thy time may not be fit, and seasonable. Had a diseased
person, who lay by the Poole of Bethesda stepped in to the water when he would,
it had not been well: And yet always it was time for the diseased. But it was
not always the spirits season. The Text says, An Angel went down at a certain
season, Joh. 5.4. O remember it dejected soul! Thy time is always, but it is
not seasonable. Now Christ's time is ever seasonable, though not always
present. His time is the best time, the seasonable time, the healing time.

Th^rdly, Say to thy soul, Though this time seem long, yet it is certain.
Though it be not now yet it will be. The vision is for an appointed time i.e.
for a season) and though it tarry yet it will [SURELY] come, and not tarry.
Christ will come in his own time. Say to thy soul, though now thou want him.
notwithstanding thou shall [YET] praise him.

Fourthly, Tell thy soul, That Christ's time is, when all hope is gone; and all
means seemingly fail. When the soul is shut up, and there is nothing left;
when hope, and means are gone, then is his time to come.

Fifthly, Tell your souls and Satan, That Christ is coming, while you are
waiting. His Ship is under sail, while thou stand looking upon the shore.
He is coming leaping and skipping over the Mountains, while thou lie
sighing in the valleys.

Lastly, Tell thy soul, and Satan, Christ comes secretly. When his Brethren
were gone, then went he up also to the Feast; not OPENLY, but as it were in
SECRET, Joh. 7.10. He had told them, his time was not yet come. And now it is
come, he goes up in secret. Say, (O dejected soul!) I must want, and wait,
and I am contented; for Christ's time is not yet come in sight, and yet he is,
and may be coming in secret.

So that now (to wind up this) know, your work is to wait, and learn to be
content with your work. Though thou art cast down, Yet be not discontented.
But be patient, and still wait in hope.

Only remember, that I do not by all this exclude either prayer, or endeavor.
No, you must wait patiently, and want contentedly: and yet you may pray and
use means.

First, You may pray, Patience may well enough consist with prayer. Its a
temptation to cast off prayer in any dejection. Habbakkuk knew the time of the
vision was appointed, and therefore he would tarry and wait: But yet chap: 3:
he prays: So may you, you may pray, and call (as the souls under the Altar)
how long! You may expostulate with God, and entreat him to make have.

Only remember Two Cautions in your prayer.

First, Remember, though you be importunate, yet be not impudent. When thou
have prayed for have, lie at Gods feet if he tarry. Though thou tell God thou
can not; yet do not say, thou will not bear his hand.

Secondly, Be submissive, Say if it be possible come sooner; But yet Lord not
my will, but thy will be done. Husband (writes the wife) if it be possible
come quickly, and before such a time; yet you are wise, I leave it to you. I
rest yours expecting, etc. So write to Christ: O Lord if it be possible come
quickly; if it may become before I dye: However Lord, thou art wise, though I
be weak; not my time, but thy season: I rest, I remain, thy patient,
panting, waiting, Spouse.

Secondly, As you may pray, so you may endeavor in the use of means, to raise
your selves, at least to quiet your souls. Its desperate folly and
faultiness, to cast off the use of means, in any dejection. Joshua must up
and be doing: And thou may work, and yet wait.

Only here take Two Cautions likewise.

First, Use no unlawful unappointed means. Though Soul may use David's Harp,
yet he must not go to the Witch of End^r to quiet his spirit. Though thou may
(and should) Pray, Read, Hear, Confer, Communicate; yea, and Fast (if with
prudence:) Yet thou must not Drink, Drab, Conjure, etc. to quiet thy self.
When Christ will not, thou should not go to Satan to comfort thee.

Secondly, In thy use of means, thou must not rest in them. Thou must use all
things as means, not as medicines. Its not the Word, Sacraments, etc. but
Christ in them which thou must look out for, as to cure. Though thou offer
sacrifice, yet thou must trust in the Lord. Albeit, you may endeavor by
works, yet you must expect by faith. Beware of relying upon means for cure,
or comfort. But in all, through all, look out, and act faith upon Christ.

Object. But thou will say, This I would if I might. I would believe, if I had
ground.

Why, Knew (O soul) in thy lowest condition, there is ground for faith. When
thou sinkest deepest into the ^hine, and have no ground for thy feet, yet thou
have ground for thy faith. David did, and thou may, and must act thy faith,
and believe, even then, when thou art most cast down, and disquieted. But of
this I shall treat in the following Section.

SECT. V.
PSALM: 42. ult. -- For I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God


CHAP. 1.
The fourth Doctrine drawn out of the words, and spoken to.
Spiritual disquiets are sooner made then cured; its easier to cast down, then
raise up ones soul: A weak heart may disturb its self, but even a strong
heart cannot settle its self; indeed its a hard thing to keep up the spirit in
a right religious frame: Either upon the one hand, we are apt to be puffed up
too high (and under pretense of high enjoyments, to forget our selves,) or on
the other hand, we are apt to be cast down too low (and under pretense of deep
dejections to forget our Savior,) now its our wisdom to avoid both extremes;
if the Lord lift us up, we should not presume, and if he cast us down, we must
not despair; if Christ smile, we should not grow wanton, and if he frown, we
should not wax weak. Its an argument of much flesh, to abuse comforts unto
looseness; and its an argument of little faith, to sink under dejections into
despair.

Holy David was now low (much disquieted, and mightily cast down) yet even in
his dejection he raises up his spirit, and believes, though God were
with-drawne, and David was faint in panting after him, yet he believes he would
come again, and that he should rejoice in praising him. The last point which I
raised from this place was this, viz.

Its the duty, and the glory of Saints to act faith, and to believe, even then
when they are cast down lowest, and see God least.

I suppose you see it clear in the words, holy David was very much disquieted,
his soul did cast down its self, he went mourning because of the oppression
of the enemy. His God was in the dark, and his heart hereupon was down, yet
notwithstanding this, he acts his faith, and believes he should yet praise God,
as his health, and as HIS; I shall yet praise him, as the health of my
countenance, and as MY God.

CHAP. 2.
The point opened, and proved.
THe point is precious as you will see when its plain, and it will be powerful
(I hope) if proved, viz. explain, and confirm it.

First, for the explication, there are two things to be touched upon.

Viz. 1 The Subject, and 2 The predicate
of the proposition.

For the Subject, Its a soul cast down lowest, and seeing God least; of such I
have been speaking all this Treatise, and of such I especially speak here; now
such are so,

Either 1 Certainly, or 2 Conceitedly.


First, there are some really, i. e. rationally dejected; some souls are
deeply dejected, and their grounds are weighty. Now this real and certain
case of dejections is chiefly at four times, or upon four occasions; as
namely,

First, When a soul is deprived of all means of enjoyment of God as formerly.
Time was, it may be, that the soul lay in Jerusalem (the place where the Lord
delights to dwell) and that hard by the Poole of Bethesda (wherein the Lord
was wont to come down.) Time was, when it sat by the rivers head (even that
fair river that does make glad the City of God) and where it could drink, when
ere it was dry. Time was, when the soul sat at the Lords Table (even the
mount where the feast of sai things is) and it could eat, when ere it was
hungry, but now, it may be, it is otherwise with it; now happily its in the
Wilderness, in the barren land, where no water is; now its in the Desert,
where it has neither Fountain, nor Table; and a soul in such a case is (and
indeed cannot choose but be) sad indeed.

Secondly, Suppose the soul have its Wonted means, yet in case it wants his
usual income in that means, in this case it is (and will be) much cast down.
Happily the soul lies by the Poole, but the Angel moves not; it sits at the
Table, but it eats nothing; it has the Pipe, but though it suck hard it
cannot draw a drop; its in the Galleries, but sees not Christ there. The soul
finds the breasts dry, which were wont to suckle it; and though it have its
former means, yet it misseth its former meals; it does not see the glory as
it was wont of old in the Temple: Now in this case it cannot but be cast down.
But,

Thirdly, The soul is sometimes in the dark, and sees no light; it has
something, but it is not satisfied, it has lost all its peace and evidence.
Sometimes the soul is (as Paul was) in a tempest of temptation, and sees no
light; neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars, and that for many days together.
Time was, it may be, when Christ's candle shined upon his head, and when by his
light it walked through darkness; but alas now! now it may be, Christ is gone,
and candle too. Now assurance is lost, and evidence too; and the soul walks in
the valley of darkness, and doubtings: And in this case, its no wonder if it
be dejected, and much cast down.

Fourthly, When the soul not only wants evidence of love, but lies under the
appearance of wrath; then it must needs be cast down. Peradventure, there was
a time in which the soul was familiar with God, as a man is with his friend;
and could see God smiling as its Father; but alas! now its not so, the soul
cries out, God hides his face, and holds it as his enemy. Surely now the soul
will be, and may be cast down.

These are souls certainly dejected, who have certain ground for their cries
in their castings down. But now there are others:

Secondly, Who are but conceited in their dejections; that pretend, and say,
they have ground, but indeed have none. Sion said, God has forsaken me; she
said so, but God said the contrary. Mere melancholy does deject some, conceit
is all the cause of their casting down; they deem, or imagine causes, and
thereupon are dejected.

But now (Reader) if thy dejection be real, or appearing; if thy casting down
be certain, or in conceit; Be thy case what it will be, or what thou think
it is; let it be as thou say, that thou art cast down deeply, yet this I
say of thee, or of any in thy case, that thou and they, ought to act faith, and
believe. For this is the predicate of this subject.

Now for this predicate or the thing that I do affirm of a soul thus cast
down, take it in particulars thus.

First, Its their duty to believe. Dejected souls in case of failing to act
faith, you sin. Some things in dejection, are rather well if don, then faults
if not done. Its rather good if done, then bad if not done. As joy, I cannot as
yet see sin, in case of not rejoicing in dejections (for no affliction is
joyous for the present, (as it is Heb 12.11.) nay, it is grievous: Besides, it
contradicts dejection to rejoice) But yet its sin if we do not believe. I am
not called to rejoicing in all cases (for I must be sensible of, and so cannot
but be sorrowful under the mighty hand of God) But I am called upon to believe
at all times, Faith is a standing work, and its duty to believe when I am
dejected. Though I am not bound to rejoice for the present, yet I am bound to
believe (as David) that yet I shall hereafter.

Secondly, Its a Christians glory to believe, when its cast down, i.e.

1 It Is a glory of theirs they may, All have not this privilege, but some.
Christians its your glory, that you have a good ground for faith always: you
may believe in every case, of affliction, desertion, dejection, casting down,
etc. Yea and

2 It Is your glory if you can, and do. To believe when all things fail, this
is praise worthy. Its not so much glory to swim with Bladders in a Calm
Pond: But to swim without Bladders in a Rough Sea: this is glory. And to act
faith, when God lifts up, is not much (a child swimmes* when held up by the
chinne.) But to believe when God casts down: This is a David-like faith, this
argues a soul of the house of David, i. e. strong (as is hinted Zach: 12.8.)

So that now you see the point explained. I shall now add the second thing, viz.

The Proof. And I think (as I said) if you weigh David's case here, you will
see Demonstration.

David's case was certain, and real. He was now deprived of the means. He
was now a stranger to his former holy days.

He now wants his income, he could not see that glory that he was wont.

He now wants his peace and evidence, Alas! his God was gone, and he cries out,
God had forgotten him, ver. 9.

Yea, he now seems to lie under wrath: he speaks of the noise of the
Almighties waterspouts, and cries out all his waves, and billows went over
him, ver. 7.

Now he is dejected, and cast down for this. And yet now, even now, he acts
his faith, and believes, he shall praise God for all this.

Obj: You will say, what is this to us?

Answ: It Is much, his case was bad as thine, O soul. And his example ought to
be thy rule.

Quest: Nay, but who can do thus, as David did, can others imitate him?

Answ: Job went before him: He protested in his deep dejection, that if God
added killing to all, yet he would trust. Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him, Job 13.15.

Add to this of Job, that of the Church, Our bones are scattered at the graves
mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaves wood upon the earth.

Sure soul, now they are low; their bones fly about as chips; they lie by the
mouth of the grave, want nothing but tumbling in. And yet now (mark it) now
mine eyes are unto thee O God my Lord, In thee do I trust, Psalm: 141.7, 8.

Will you have a command for all this: See then that known Scripture, Esa. 50.
ult. Who is there among you (mark it whoever thou be that fears God) who
sit in the dark and sees no light, (here is the lowest case) let him trust
in the Lord.

So that now you see both precept and example holding out this, that even in
the deepest dejection that we are or can think to be, we must act our faith
and believe.

CHAP. 3.
A further amplification of the work of faith, in the case of dejection, and
casting down.
PEradventure, you will ask me, what you must act your faith for, and believe
in, in the deepest dejections.

If you do, I will satisfy you Two ways.

1 By a description of the thing, or of that faith that must be acted: 2 By a
deciphering of the particulars, that must be believed.
For the first, viz. the faith which must be acted: I describe that thus.

It is a resolute, and noble exercise, of the grace of faith, in which the
soul quiets it self in, and rests it self upon God, and Christ; expecting,
and looking for an accomplishment of all the promises, as to joy, or holiness;
notwithstanding all the fears, and all the doubts which may arise to the
contrary.

This faith supposes doubts and fears, but it over-comes them, It sees
hindrances, but it triumphs over them. It feels disquietings but it
suppresseth them: And whatever the promise be, whether for life, joy, peace,
comforts, deliverance* etc. it expects a fulfilling of it from God, and Christ.

But Secondly, To see this clearer, I shall instance in the particulars of this
faith, and this I shall do 1 Generally. 2 Particularly, and 3 Specially.


Generally, In our deepest dejections we are to hold fast cur former faith in
any particular. We must believe all that which ever we did believe and know,
concerning God, Christ, Scripture, etc. Some are apt in dejection, to bring all
things into question: To question God, Christ, and all: But now remember,
whatever thou did know and believe of God and Christ, or his ways, out of
the Scripture before, thou must believe the same still. Let not Satan draw thee
into a doubt, much less a denial of former received, and professed truths.
They are all as true now, as ever. A man who sees houses and trees in the day
time: does believe that the same houses, and trees, etc. are even in the night,
when he is in the dark, and cannot see them. And Saints must believe all that
in the night of dejection, which they saw, and believed, in the day of
conversion. But

Particularly, Souls in their deepest dejections, ought (even in order to
their releife and raising) to believe these three things,

First, The power of God, i.e. They ought to believe that the Lords hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save; but he is Almighty, and all-sufficient still. It
was the sin of unbeleeving Israel; that they questioned the Almighties power:
CAN GOD (say they) prepare a table in the Wilderness? Behold, he smote the
rock, that waters gushed out, and the streams over-flowed: CAN he give bread
also? CAN he provide flesh for his people? Psalm. 78.20. Souls under
dejection; you are apt to despair even of divine power; you are ready to
question Gods Can. But you should not, you should always believe and say as he
did, Lord if thou Will, thou Can, etc. Its a choice passage to this purpose,
which you have, Joh: 11.22. Where Martha, even when her Brother was dead,
believes Christ's power, I know that EVEN NOW, whatsoever thou will ask of God,
God will give it. Mark, she believed, even then, when her Brother was dead.
Mind it, O ye dejected souls, in your lowest state, you must believe Christ
can help and raise. Yea

Secondly, You must believe this possibility with reference to your selves. Do
not say, Christ can cure this in another; but believe he can do it to thee. The
Leper said, thou can make ME whole, Matthew: 8.2. As in the point of
resurrection of the body, its not enough to believe the resurrection of a body,
but of this body, and of thine. (So Job believed with his flesh, and his eyes,
and not another should arise, chap: 19.27.) In like manner, here in the point,
of raising from dejection, the soul must act faith in, or for himself. He
must believe that Christ can raise him, (even) him, how low, or deep soever he
be cast down. Add to this

Thirdly, When the soul is gone thus far, as to believe a possibility; it
must go farther in believing, an inclinablenesse at least in God, or Christ to
do as they can. As the soul is to act faith for a possibility, that Christ can;
so it is to act faith for a probability that he will. The soul must not say,
that Christ has forgotten to be kind; or that his mercies are clean gone: No,
it must believe, that there are some thoughts of it still: and that yet there
is a mercy in store. Mind David in Psalm. 40 ult. I am poor and needy; what
then? see what follows; yet the Lord thinks on me. Surely, (O sad soul)
thou must not say (as Zion did) my God has forgotten me, i.e. altogether cast
thee off: No, thou must believe, that yet he thinks (at least) of thee. His
heart retains some love, and yet there is some inclination in him, to raise
and help thee.

But now to come higher, if the soul be come up here, to believe these
particulars, it must go further, to believe some Specialls. As

First, It is not enough to retain faith in fundamentalls, and to believe a
power in Christ, (though as to our selves) and an inclinablenesse to raise: But
in our dejections, we must act faith, that yet Christ certainly will help, and
raise us. David says, he shall yet praise God as health, i. e. as his healer.
After two days he [WILL] revive us, and the third day he [WILL] raise us up,
and we [SHALL] live in his sight, Hos. 6.2. Mind it, the Church believes it
certain (though she leave God to his time) he will, and we shall. Dejected
hearts, you must believe Christ will raise you: Though you be down, yet you
shall arise (as it is Mich. 7.8.) here then is the first special step you must
ascend, in the acting of faith, you must believe you shall be helped.

Breath O soul upon this stair, for you must go higher.

Secondly, You must believe, That even in your dejections you are not deserted.
It was Paul's faith, though Israel were low, yet God had not cast them off, Romans
11.1. Dejected heart, Christ is with thee in thy dejections, he has not left
thee, though thou be low? Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God,
etc. Jer. 51.5. you must believe Christ is with you though you are not aware of
it: David did thus, nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden
me by my right hand, Psalm. 73.23. Though David's foot did slip, yet God was
with him, So Christ is with thee, though under the disguise of thy dejection,
(O cast down soul) and thou must believe this, even in thy deepest
dejections. Further,

Thirdly, You must believe that you shall confess all your doubtings to the
contrary, as your failing. Thou art apt to question Power, and to doubt Will;
Thou art ready to say, I am cut off, and cast out, and I shall go all my days
in bitterness, etc. well, when thy sorrow has thus vented it self, thou must
believe its thy sin, and that one day thou shall with shame confess it. I
said in mine have I am cut off from before thine eyes. David said so, but he
confesses it was in his have, Psalm. 31.22. H^man did the like, after he had
vented himself sadly; will the Lord cast off for ever? has he forgotten to be
gracious? etc. And I said (pray mind it) this is my infirmity. Ps. 77.10. He
said this and that, but he confessed what he said, was in his weakness.

I told you in the opening of the Text, the word translated I shall praise, (...)
might be translated I shall confess (as Dan. 9.1. Ezra 9, 2. etc.) And
certainly, whatever your sadness be now in your dejection; Significat tam
confiteri culpam qui celebrare laudem.
you must believe that one day you shall confess much of it (at least) to be
your weakness.

It may be (O soul) thou say this is high: True, Yet your faith must ascend
higher. For

Fourthly, You should act your faith, and believe you shall yet see God, as
your God. The precept is in Isai. 51. to trust upon God as ours; let him trust
upon [his] God: This is more, its more to believe an interest in God, then
help from God, yet this thou must believe (O sad soul!) David says here,
that he shall yet praise him (mark his phrase, and says) I my God; not only,
as the health of my countenance i. e. as my healer, and raiser, etc. but, as my
God. You must believe in your lowest dejection God is still yours, though thy
condition be low, yet thy interest is not lost.

Fifthly, You must believe that a singing time is coming, notwithstanding
present casting down: You must remember your Songs of old, and believe you
shall yet sing them again. I shall yet praise him (says our text) though now
thou sigh, yet thou shall sing; your sorrow shall be turned into joy; you now
sit disconsolate, and your Harp is now hung by the Willowes; your strings are
now broke, and your spirit is now heavy, but yet you must believe joy shall
return, and that one day you shall take your Harp, and tune it again, and
sing your old (yea and a new) song upon your chiefest Instruments.

Lastly, You must believe that this shall be so eminent, that Satan shall see
it, and be ashamed; now Satan triumphs in thy sadness, and says, Where is
thy God? You must believe that your God is still present, and that ere long he
will so appear, as that Satan shall be ashamed of what he has said against
thy God, and thee; thus the Church says, Micha 7.10. Then she that is mine
enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the
Lord thy God? There is a day a coming in which thou shall say, Lo, this is my
God, I have waited for him.

Put all these things together, and they make up such a creed as this, which
thou (O soul) may say in thy deepest dejections.

I believe still all that I did of my God, and Christ, of the Scriptures, and
holiness; and I yet believe that there is a power in God that he can help, and
that not only in others cases, but in my own; yea, and I believe that he is
inclinable and willing: Nay, I believe certainly the resurrection of my
dejected heart, and Christ's presence even in this dejection; yea, I believe I
shall one day confess my present fears to be my failings, when I shall see
God, and Christ again as mine, and when I shall sing a new song of praise, and
salvation, even in the sight of, and to the shame of Satan.

Thus, O soul, thou must believe even in thy deepest dejection, when thou art
cast down lowest, and see God least.

CHAP. 4.
The grounds and reasons of this Doctrine, and duty of thus believing in
dejections.
YOu have now seen the explication of the duty wherein it lies, you shall now
see the reasons thereof, viz. why a dejected soul should act his faith even at
the lowest, etc.

First, Because its the nature of faith thus to* do; Faith does suppose
straights, and difficulties, and yet over-comes them all. The Apostle tells us,
that hope that is seen is not hope, Romans 8, 24. i. e. Its in the very nature
of hope to suppose an invisibility of its object, for what a man sees why does
he yet hope for, as it is there: In like manner, faith, in that which is visible
is not faith. You find in Scripture this definition of faith, That it is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1.
observe it, faith (as hope) supposes its object not seen, or not in sight;
and yet when the thing is not seen, then it substantiates, and realizeth the
things as if they were. Dejected souls! you say you are cast low, your pit is
very dark, and you see nothing; now you must believe, for its the nature of
faith to evidence, and clear up, and cleave to things in the dark: Now thou
see nothing, now thou should believe, and in thy faith see all things, and
conclude of them as certain. Though thou be cast down, yet thou must see
raising up, and believe it.

Secondly, To believe in your deep dejections cleares the strength of faith;
Thomas his faith was weak, when he would not believe except he saw: Except I
shall see in his hands the print of the nails, etc. I will not believe, Joh
20.25. Soul! thy faith is weak, if thou say, I Will not believe because I see
nothing. Blessed are they which have not seen (says Christ) and yet have
believed. It were a blessed sign that thy faith is strong, could thou
believe now thou art lowest, and see God least; it is an easy thing to swim
with Bladders, but it argues skill and strength to swim without. It argued the
Disciples faith to be but small, that in the great storm they could not
believe; and now thou art dejected it will argue but weak faith, if now thou will not believe. As he who faints in the day of adversity, gives notice his
strength is but weak; so he who doubts in the day of dejection, declares his
faith is not strong: Now it should be your wisdom to witness the strength of
your faith, by your believing when you are lowest.

Thirdly, Christ is pleased to take this way of bringing the soul low, when he
intends to lift it high. Your dejection is Christ's way to bring you to
exaltation. Why should not I believe a thing when I am in the way to it? If I
am in the way to glory, and life; and immortality, and peace, and joy, and
healing, etc. I say, if I am in the way to these things, why should I not
believe them? Why (soul) the way of lifting up is casting down, and now you
are in the way you ought to believe; Joseph's Dungeon was Gods way to his
setting him second in Egypt; David's flight, and fear before Saul, was Gods
way to bring him to the Throne: When David was in his greatest fear (that he
said he should dye by the hands of Saul) then was he within few steps of the
Throne; and when thou art most cast down, ready to dye in the pit, then is
Christ nearest to pull thee out; and surely (O soul) the nearer Christ is to
deliver thee out of, the stronger should thy faith be in dejections. You now
see reasons for the point, its not so irrational as unbeleef makes it, to act
faith when we are most dejected.

CHAP. 5.
One improvement of this Doctrine to inform the judgment.
YOu hear now, that times of dejection are to be times of faith, when the
soul is lowest it is to believe. Pray be informed hereby, to know when faith
is seasonable; you may mistake much, if you think that dejection is, or may be
a time for doubting: No, it is the season of faith.

Some souls think, that if the promise be clear, if experience be rich, if
hints are many, and taste is sweet, O now surely they are to believe; now is a
time of faith. It is true, now is a time for faith to lay in, and store up. But
suppose the Promise is dark, experience poor, hints none, taste dry, etc.
suppose all is dark, and there appears nothing; know that this is a time for
faith to come, and lay forth it self, for the souls settlement; you mistake
the matter (O soul) if you think times of dejection to be times only for
patience; no, they are times also for faith: Yea, and in case you believe not,
you will not (indeed cannot) be patient. Suppose thou art very low, and cryest
loud, and God answers not; suppose Conscience accuses, Satan triumphs, and
Christ appear not; suppose it dark, that the Sun shine not, and there be no
Star. Suppose thou look on the left hand, where Christ works (for casting
down is a left hand work) but thou can not behold him; yea, and suppose (O
soul) he hides himself on the right hand, that thou can not see him. Is
thy case thus, as Jobs was (chap. 23.9.) know now it is a time not only to
exercise Jobs patience (in bearing) but to act Jobs faith, in believing.

Every Grace (O soul) has its season, and Faith is in its season in a
dejected state; yea Christ expects it from us, that we believe in him then when
our hearts are most disquieted. The hearts of his Disciples were troubled,
(cast down) and dejected, and yet he bids them believe, Job. 14.1.

Whom having not seen ye love, though now you see him not, yet ye believe,
says Peter, (1 Epist. chap. 1. verse. 8.) It is Christ's time to be not only
loved by you, but trusted upon, and believed in when you see him not. And in
order unto the trial of this it is, that sometime Christ sees it needful (as
it is there, ver. 6.) to let you be in heaviness through manifold temptations;
I beseech you now improve this Doctrine, to inform your judgments in the time
of faith, Christ (O soul) will bring thee low ere he do raise thee up, and
while thou art low, he expects to see thee raising thy self by faith.

Quest. But why does Christ thus? why does he cast down his poor creature,
ere he lift it up? why takes he this course to exercise my faith?

Ans. I. Its thy duty (O soul) rather to do, then dispute; rather strive to
believe, then to question his dealing. But yet,

2 Know O soul, Christ has more ends then one in casting thee down, and
making that his way for his comfort, and thy faith; he has more then one
ground for this.

First, Hereby Christ cleares his grace to thy soul; he brings thee low, and
shuts thee up under unbeleefe, that he might make thee see his raising is mere
mercy, as it is, Romans 11.32. If Christ let thee be ready to doubt, and dye ere
he raise thee, thou will see it was free grace only which moved him to help
thee; now that thou may see this, he lets thee be most cast down ere he come
to exalt thee.

Secondly, By this Christ helps thy taste, to relish mercy in its full
sweetness. To be ready to starve with hunger, and dye of thirst, and then to
have bread and drink; this makes it relish the sweetness of both. That Christ
may cause thee to taste his love (in thy raising) the sweeter, he uses to let
thee lie low, and be much cast down, ere he come, etc.

Thirdly, Christ has a design upon his own glory, in thy deep dejection: He
not only looks to evidence the strength of thy faith, but the brightness of
his own glory, by making thee almost sink in dejections ere he raise thee; it
will argue glorious power, and deep wisdom, to raise a soul lost in its self:
So that now, O soul, if thou can but believe, thou shall see the glory of
Christ, as it is, Joh. 11.40. wherefore then do not stand questioning, why
does Christ bring thee low, and make that a time of faith. But up, and act;
say, Indeed I am cast down, and disquieted, I am in the dark, and see no
light, I am low, and know not how to raise my self, yet now I Will believe, for
this my dejection is to be a time of believing.

Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior,
Isa. 45.15. God was hid, yea he hid himself; yet mark it, now the Church
acts her faith, Israel shall be saved with an everlasting salvation, ver. 17.

See (O soul) God hid himself, Israel could not see his Savior, nor the way
of his salvation (for both were hid) yet even now faith says, Israel shall be
saved.

Well, here is the first improvement of this Doctrine, let it reform a
mistake, and inform the judgment in this truth, that times of low dejections
are not only times of patience, but they are times of faith.

CHAP. 6.
The maine use, persuading and directing souls to believe in their deepest
dejections.
DEjected hearts, you hear your work and duty, pray fall about it; you are
cast down, you lie low, and see little, well, believe; say, I shall yet praise
God, for all this; I shall see him as the health of my countenance, and my God.
I beseech you, know your duty in all its parts, as I formerly opened.

First, Hold fast your first faith, do not call all into question because of
dejection; whatever thou did believe before, believe it now.

Secondly, Do not question the power of Christ; say not thy case is incurable;
believe it, there is Balm yet in Gilead: Act thy faith upon a possibility in
the hand of Christ, yea, and upon a probability in his heart to help thee; but
rest not here, remember your faith must ascend higher, for you must more
especially believe.

1 That Christ will raise thee. See, chap. 3
2 That he is still with thee (though thou see him not.) 3 That you shall
confess all your doubtings to be failings. 4 That yet Christ will appear as
yours. 5 That the time shall come that you shall sing all this in a Song of
praise, yea, and 6 That Satan shall see this and be ashamed, yea, and thy own
heart too.
Here is your duty, now up, ascend this Ladder, remember to begin at the lowest
staff first; ascend thy soul by degrees; breath over every step, or staire,
and then strive to go higher. Do not make thy work harder then it would be.
Conquer thy unbeleefe by holy craft. First, believe one particular, then
another: Do not strive for the highest act first. Believe first a possibility,
then a probability, then a certainty.

Many souls cry out, they cannot believe certainly they shall be raised; I
would have these believe it probable first. Remember to believe, that Christ
thinks on thee, come up by degrees to the height of faith; so will thou come
by degrees to the fullness of assurance: I shall press this practical
Doctrine.

By 1 Motives. 2 Means.


First, Consider that this faith is that which Christ eminently pronounces
blessed; To believe then when the soul is dejected, and in the dark, and sees
not, is a blessed thing, and argues a very blessed frame of Spirit; Jesus (said
unto Thomas) Because thou have seen me, thou have believed, blessed are they
who have not seen, and YET believed, Joh. 20.29. I do not doubt, but that
Thomas was truly blessed, though he said, he would not (and as it seems, he did
not) believe before he saw; but yet Christ declares him, or she, to be
eminently blessed, that believe and see not. Mind it ye (sad souls) who cry
out, you are dejected low, and see nothing; if now you can believe, you are in
a blessed state, yea you are eminently blessed, how ever deeply dejected, if
you can but now act your faith. Thy low state is not sad, but blessed (O
believing soul) He that believes has a witness in himself (and by the
authority of Christ, enabled to conclude) that he is blessed. Would thou (O
soul) be blessed? yea even in thy dejected state, would have a ground (of
Christ's allowance, and declaration) to say thou art not miserable though cast
down: why then believe.

Secondly, Believing in a state of darkness, and dejection, gives glory to
God. God is not glorified by the faith of any, so much as by the faith of the
dejected: When Abraham was (as it were) dead (and so past children) then his
believing was a glorious faith; He was strong in faith, giving glory to God,
Romans 4.20. Thou say (O dejected soul) let God have glory what ere become of
thee; Why here is the way to give God glory, act thy faith upon his glorious
power, his gracious promise, his good performance, etc. even now in thy low
state, so shall thou glorify him indeed. Though thou be weak, yet believe his
strength; though thou be unworthy, yet believe his grace; though thou art very
low, and see very little, yet now believe, and account him faithful, able,
ready, willing to raise, help, releeve, and comfort; thus thou shall give him
glory indeed.

Thirdly, Believing now will engage God to help; God, and Christ account it an
engagement to help, in case the soul believe; and rely when at lowest. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee, Isa. 26.3. Mark it, because the Lord trusts, therefore
Christ will keep. Its true, there is no merit in faith, but yet the Divine mercy
counts it an engagement to help: Some have urged this, why they must go, and
needs do such or such a thing, because a poor man relyes upon them, and
trusts to them, and must and will be undone if they fail him: Why, will a man
upon that account help, and will not Christ much more? O! will Christ say of a
soul that is ready to sink, and yet relyes on him, and trusts to him. Here is
a poor soul that depends on me, and I see must perish if I fail him; O
surely i will not suffer him to fail. They that trust in the Lord shall never be
confounded, the Lord will not be as waters that do fail, as it is, Jerem.
15.18. My flesh fails (says David) but God is the rock of my health, Psalm.
73. Dejected souls! would you engage Christ to raise you? then believe, though
you are cast down never so low.

Lastly, Even very believing is our rising when we are cast down; The soul
that believes does rise, and when Christ draws up our faith, he does raise us
up from our dejected state. It is with the believing soul in his pit of
dejection, as with Peter in his Prison; it is said, the Angel of the Lord smote
Peter on the side, saying, Arise; why you know Peter was bound with two
chains, and Peter might have said thus; I am bound, how can I rise and go
out? no, Peter does not object, but believes: He arises, and his chains fall
off from his hands; mark it, his believing does unbinde him: Come, says the
Angel, follow me; Peter might have said, The door is shut, there is a first
and second ward, besides that, there is an Iron Gate fast bard, and there are
Keepers that keep the door: No, Peter reasons not thus, But he believes, and
goes; and the doors open of themselves, the very Iron Gate of its own accord
gives way, and the Keepers are kept under sleep from opposing. See, Peter's
faith does all, it opens the doors, and brings him forth, Acts 12. So (O
soul) do thou believe, Arise (O dejected soul) do not say, I am bound with
chains of difficulties, and bolted up under doors of doubtings; but up,
believe, thy very believing is (at least) thy rising posture, and thy
doore-opening hand. O do not stand objecting, reasoning, or questioning, but
believe, as has been opened.

Peradventure by this thy soul is made willing to stir, and now thou only
desire advice to help thee, and for that take these directions.

1 Beware of that which will hinder thy faith, and rather keep thee down then
raise thee up. 2 Consider that which may strengthen thy soul in thy believing,
notwithstanding thy low condition.
First, Take heed of that which will rather hinder then help your faith.

Viz. Of concluding any thing from 1 Sense. 2 Self. 3 Satan. 4 Seeming
rejection.


These things eyed too much are dangerous, and conclusions drawn from them,
are destructive unto faith; therefore take heed of them all; As

First, Beware of concluding any thing from present sense; Sense is an opposite
to reason sometimes, but to faith it is an enemy always; hence it is that Paul
and Timothy did, and we should, walk not by sense, but by faith, 2 Cor. 5 At
present (O soul) thou say, Thou see nothing but wrath, thou feel
nothing but sorrow, thou hear nothing but threatening, etc. take heed thou
conclude not thy state by thy sense: A state sensibly bad, may be really good,
as a state seemingly good, may be substantially bad. As the seared Consciences
of Reprobates, so the scrupulous Consciences of Saints are not fit, nor able to
make right conclusions. What though (at present) Sense present nothing so much
as in order to a cure, yet cured thou shall be; God creates light out of
darkness, and shines into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of
himself in the face of Christ, as it is, 2 Cor. 4.6. Though at present thou
art sensible of nothing but darkness, yet God may create a light out of that.
Beware of concluding any thing from present sense or feeling.

Yea, Beware of eying it tso much; look off from what thou see, and art
sensible of, unto that thou see not; We faint not (said the Apostle) Why?
mark it: We look not at the things Which we see, but at the things which we
see not, 2 Cor. 4.16.18.

Secondly, Consider not self; Self is always insufficient as to holy work,
or joy; If thou conclude from the consideration of self, thy conclusion will be
false. Thou art cast down, and Childe-like art nor able to rise again, Self
cannot raise thy soul; what then, will thou conclude thy soul cannot be
raised? O take heed of this, Where self is insufficient, Christ is sufficient;
and when we are weak, his power is magnified in our weakness. Abraham
considered not his own body now dead, Romans 4.19. had Abraham considered
himself, he had never believed for a Son; it was Sarahs fault (and the ground
of her laughing unbeleefe) she considered her self as old, etc. you must not
therefore consider self as weak; no, let me add this; you must not consider
self as sinful: This may hinder faith. As weakness to help our selves, so
unworthiness to be helped by Christ, is generally the cause of doubting and
unbeleefe; but take heed of both, Abraham believed though himself was old, yea
and though Sarah laughed, neither his weakness, nor her sin could hinder his
faith. Take heed therefore of eying self, either as unable, or unworthy:
Christ is able to raise the weak, yea and willing to lift up the worthless
souls of cast-down ones.

3. Conclude nothing by Satan, He Will tell you of difficulties, and
impossibilities, but consider him not. As Satan makes the proud heart of
exalted Babylon think it shall never fall, so he would make the grieved heart of
dejected Sion think it shall never rise, but know, Satan is a Liar, and who
would believe an old constant Liar* He Will say, despair, when Christ says,
hope: But believe thou the Lord Jesus, and slight Satan, be sure to conclude
nothing from his suggestions.

Obj. But what if Conscience join with Satan? what if that witness to Satan's
words, etc?

Answ. Believe not, nor conclude from thy own Conscience, it is possible that
may err; and look as the seared Conscience of the wicked err, and speak
peace when there is no ground; so the seduced Conscience of the godly may
create trouble when there is no cause.

Besides, Christ sometimes does permit Conscience to condemn, to heighten his
own grace in acquitting. It is sometimes in Spirituals, as it is in Temporals,
we receive the sentence of death in our selves, that we may not trust in our
selves. Do not therefore (O dejected soul) conclude of thy cast-down
condition from Satan's suggestions, no not when backed with thy own Conscience;
care not for Satan's condemnation, nay, judge not thine own self, as it is, 1
Cor. 4.3.

Lastly, Beware of concluding any thing form present seeming rejections of
Christ, Many a cast down soul cries; O Christ seems to reject me, and
therefore I am lost, and there is no hope, etc.

But mind it (O soul) as a Caution, Though Christ at present seem to reject
thee, yet conclude nothing. Thou know (and oh that thou would for this
purpose consider well the woman of Canaan.) Christ at first did seem to reject
her. I am not sent (said he) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Nay,
he calls her dog, and upon that account denies her childrens bread: yet you
know the issue, Beware therefore of concluding from the present dealings of
Christ: though he seem to reject thee (and let thee lie.) Though he speak as if
he meant not to cure thee, and call thee dog (as if he would not have to do
with thee) yet believe, for all this may be but a show to try thee, and thy
faith. Its said in the story of the journey of Christ's Disciples from Jerusalem
to Emaus; that Christ made as though he would have gone further, yet upon
entreaty, he went in to tarry with them, Luke 24.28, 29. Christ (O soul) may
seem to go away, when he intends to tarry; Only he looks for entreaty. O
therefore do not conclude any thing from the present visible seeming rejections
of Christ. He may frown, and smite, cast off, and reject, call thee dog, and
deny thee a crum: and yet he may intend (and if thou believe and wait, will)
to embrace thee, and raise thee up, and to fill thy soul with healing and
rejoicing.

Having premised these things by way of caution to be taken heed of. I shall
now add one or two positive considerations, for the inabling of the soul, to
act his faith even then when it lies lowest, and sees least.

First, Consider there can be no just ground why thou should not believe. As
formerly I said, there can be no just ground for our great dispairing casting
down: so now I say, there can be no just ground why we should not believe that
yet we shall praise God. It Is true, the soul is apt to conceive grounds of
despair; at least to conclude there are grounds why it should not believe. But
mind it well, and you shall see, there is no reason can be given, why the soul
though never so low, and cast down, should not believe its raising up by
Christ, and its rejoicing in Christ. For

First, There is no command or inhibition to the contrary. It Is true, Satan
says there is an inhibition, but he is a false Prophet, and God never sent
him. The dejected soul cries out, O I may not, I must not, I dare not believe.

Why (O soul) why must not you believe? who said so? when did Christ forbid
thee? where is the word that faith, you may not believe. Nay, is not the
Scripture express in commanding you to believe at all times. Is not this his
commandment that we should believe on the name of Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23.
See, the Text is positive, why should thou say then, that thou may not
believe.

Secondly, The depth of your dejection, neither is, (nor ought to be) a ground
why you should not believe. Others have been as low as you, and yet God has
raised them. Joh, Asaph, Heman, Hezekiah, etc. were much cast down, yet they
were raised. One of them cries out, I am afflicted, and ready to dye, Psalm.
88.15. Another cries out, his spirit was overwhelmed, Psalm. 77.3. A third cries
out, I shall never more see the Lord in the land of the living,, Esai. 38.11.
Thus these souls cried out of their depths: and yet were raised, Be as low as
thou do, or can imagine, yet thy deepest dejection can be no ground, why
thou should not believe. Nay, has not the Lord said that he regards the low
estate of his servants. And did not David say, out of the deep I cried, and he
heard me; And he brought me up also out of the horrible pit, as it is, Psalm.
40.2. Suppose thy pit be very horrible, yet out of that thou may be brought
up:

Thirdly, Thy defilement can be no ground why thou should not believe, Its
not thy dirtinesse (O dejected soul) that should increase thy doubt, or hinder
thy faith. Christ raises the soul from the dunghill. Yea, he takes it up when
it lies in the Kennel. Israel has not been forsaken, not Judah of his God
[THOUGH] their land were [FILLED] with sin against the Holy one of Israel. Jer:
51: 5. Mark it, though they were filled with sin, yet they were not really
(whatever they thought) forsaken of their God. That Jesus, who dyed for you,
when you were dead in sin; will raise thee, though thou be defiled with sin.
Suppose your soul, as vile a sinner (as Satan represents you) yet remember,
Christ dyed for sinners, for ungodly, for enemies, Romans 5.6, 8, 10. So that thy
defilement is no just ground why thou should not believe.

Lastly, Thy former and present doubtings, and unbeleefe, can be no just
ground, why you may not believe. Admit thou have doubted long yet thou may
believe at last,

Quest. But What will not, does not my unbeleefe cut me off from the Promise?

Answ. No, past unbeleefe is no just hinderance to faith now, David's former
doubting did not hinder his enjoyment of the Promise; It is true, he said in
his have (as you do) He was quite cast out. And, that all men were Liars; he
meant the Prophets, who told him of the promises, and yet God settled him,
notwithstanding his unbeleefe. Thy unbeleefe shall not make void Gods
faithfulness; do not say, I have doubted so long, that it is in vain to
believe now: But remember, O soul, former doubtings shall be remembered no
more, if thou believe now.

So that you see, there is no ground to hinder faith, there is neither
inhibition by God, nor is there any warrant in thee why thou should not
believe; neither the depth of thy dejection, nor the degree of thy defilement,
nor all thy former doubtings shall hinder Christ from helping; why should they
then hinder thee from believing?

Secondly, Consider the Promises are made to the lowest state; souls in the
deepest dejection are directly under the Promise: now if the Promises are
thine, made to thee, and to such as thee, why should thou not believe? Is
thy power quite gone, and is there none left to help thee? Why, that Promise is
thine. Deuteronomy. 33.36. Art poor and needy, and do seek water, and there is
none found; yea, does thy tongue fail for thirst? Then that Promise is thine,
Esa. 41.17. Art in the dark, and see no light? why to thee is that word,
Trust on thy God, Isa. 50. last. And though thou sit in the dark, yet thou
shall see light (as Micha, 7.9.) yea and light is sown for thee, Psalm. 96. It
may be thou see it not, yet it lies sown as seed, and will spring up again.
The Lord will create peace for thee that art far off from it, Esa 57.17.
Search the rich storehouse of the Promises, and thou will see most of them
pointing out their finger to thee. Why say thou, God has forgotten thee?
Can a Mother forget her children? yea though she can, God will not forget thee,
Esa. 49.15. Say not, Thy way is hid from thy God, for he gives power to the
FAINT, and to them that have NO MIGHT he increases strength, Isa. 40.29:

Thus all the Promises speak to thee; O believe, believe says every Promise,
for my sake, and for my sake, etc.

Had thou but a peradventure, it were ground to hang upon, and it were enough
to keep thee from sinking; There is a peradventure for the vilest, 2 Timothy 2.25.
But thou have more then a peradventure of healing; for it is expressly said, I
will heal backslidings (mark it BACKSLIDINGS, and I will love freely, Hos.
14.4. up therefore (O cast down soul) act thy faith, believe; Christ can, yea
and will help thee, raise thee, and thou shall praise him, as the health of thy
countenance, and as thy God.

Obj. But I am afraid to believe; what, I that am thus low, and so vile, that
have no might, and see no means. It is mere presumption in me to believe, I
should presume if I believed, etc.

Answ. Say not so, O soul! Presumption is not simply in case of Salvation, but
in case of sinning; Indeed, if thou should say, I shall be saved, and
therefore I may sin, this were presumption; but to say, I have sinned, yet I
shall be saved, this is FAITH: Thou art wrath though we have sinned, in them is
continuance, and we shall be saved, as it is, Isa. 64.5. This Scripture is a
very precious place, in which comfort is held forth, and laid hold upon by
faith, notwithstanding the Sinners wickedness, or Gods wrath. De Dieu
translates the whole verse thus, Thou meetest him that rejoices, and does
(i.e. who with joy does) righteousness, by thy ways they remember thee; If
thou were angry when we sinned, or (by way of question) Behold, thou were angry
when we sinned, yet in them (i. e. in thy ways) is eternity, that we might be
saved. The whole place indeed is a sweet, and strong support to faith
notwithstanding sins; the meaning of which (according to that Commentator) is
The ways of God are not changed, but are fo ever the same, and therefore what
grace and bounty he has used to show, the same he still will use to miserable
sinners, that we might be saved. Indeed this is a good and sweet interpretation
of this place, but I think there is another interpretation as clear, if not
more comfortable, that is, if by (in them) we understand our sins. Thus, we
have sinned, and in them (i. e. our sins is) continuance (for alas, we continue
still sinful after Gods wrath for them) and (yet notwithstanding this) we
shall be saved; and thus Calvin sweetly glosseth it, Although we have been
obstinate in our sins (for sin after wrath or chastisement is obstinacy) and so
deserved to be destroyed a hundred times, yet through thy mercy we are still
saved. See Soul! here is mercy for obstinate sinners, and consider, did not
Christ come into the world to save sinners; and did not Paul say, of which I am
chief? This (O soul) is Gospel, Christ came indeed to save sinners, and for
thee to say, I am chief (or principal) sinner, yet i will go too, and rely upon
Christ for salvation, it is not presumption but faith. O therefore, do not
think, and say, it is presumption for thee to believe.

Further, It is presumption to expect cure or comfort in the use of unlawful
means, or in the neglect of appointed means; But faith is so far from being
an unlawful means, that it is the only appointed means. Thou read, and
prayest, and hear, etc. And now thou art called upon to believe, and call
thou this presumption? Thou art very much mistaken (O soul) Besides, it cannot
be presumption to obey a command; Christ commands us to believe (as was showed)
he forbids our disquieting, and castings down, and he requires us to believe in
his Father, and in him. Now call thou obedience presumption, beware of that:
O soul!

Does the child that is sad, and heavy, and abstaines from meat, and lies upon
the ground, does this child presume, when upon his fathers command he
arises, and eats, and is merry? Did the Prodigal presume, when his father
said, let us eat and be merry? Admit thy self to be the Prodigal (O soul!)
yet since Christ bids thee arise, and eat, and be merry, why should thou
think this presumption;

Obj. But Christ commands not me: he speaks not so to me.

Answ. Why, not to thee O soul? I say why not to thee? Is thy soul excluded,
when none is. Does not Christ call any, every thirsting soul? says he not, if
ANY thirst let him come? Called he not Publicans, Harlots, Sinners,
Persecutours; yea, did he not ascend to receive gifts for Rebels, Psalm. 68.18.
why therefore (O soul!) do say Christ calls not thee?

I witness in Christ's name (and let this stand in Print as a proof) that I as
an Ambassador of Christ speak to you, and in his name I beseech you, to accept
of grace, and reconciliation freely. Thou even thou (O dejected soul!) art the
man and woman, that Christ calls upon to believe: Thou who art dejected and in
the dark, and see no light. Christ says to thee believe; so shall thou be
established. Now do not say that this is presumption.

Once again (because I find souls harping upon this string) Thou say I
shall presume if I believe, let me grant it, yet it is but perishing by
presumption; and so thou must certainly except thou believe. I remember how the
leprous men spoke one to another. Why sit we here until we dye, if we say we
will enter into the City, we shall dye there, and if we sit still here, we dye
also. Come let us go to the Host, if they save us alive, we shall live; and if
they kill us, we shall but dye, 2 Kings 7.3* 4.

Reason thou so (O soul!) If I sit still in my dejected state, and despair, I
shall dye; and if I do act faith, and believe, I can but dye. Therefore I Will up
and believe; yea, though Christ should kill me, I Will believe: If I must perish,
I Will perish in a way of believing. Say therefore to thy soul (as David did) why
art cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted? Wait on God; believe in
Christ. If I must perish, I Will perish trusting in him, that I shall praise him.

But know O soul! If thou do believe thou shall see Christ's glory; Thou shall
see the glory of his power, in helping the weakest; and the glory of his grace
in doing for the worst. And when thou see this, thou shall praise him as thy
God. Wherefore then to wind up all, remember though thou be low, and see
little, yet do not despair. Although thy eyes have failed with looking, and
thy heart with longing; Although thy strength be gone, and thou be now ready
to dye, yet do not despair: But in thy lowest ebb of dejection, when thou art
disquieted, and cast down most, act thy faith, and say, Though I be low, I may
rise; Yea, though I be cast down, I shall be raised; When I am in the
deepest dejection, and cannot mount up my self: Then shall Christ's power be
manifested, and magnified in my weakness. And I shall after all my sighs, and
groans, yet sing praise unto God, as the health of my countenance and my God.
Surely, this is thy duty to endeavor, and 'twill be thy glory to perform.

Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name.
The Printer to the Reader.
BY reason of the Authors absence from the Press some faults have escaped,
which might have been otherwise avoided, but I hope they are such as a little
care of thine (Reader) will correct, and a little charity pardon; In hope of
which I have omitted the ordinary observation of Errata's, and corrections.

FINIS.
A TABLE. Showing the Principal things in this Treatise.
SECT. I. THe Text is spoken unto. 1 In its context where is set forth. 1 The
occasion the Psalm. page 1, 2, 3 2 The division of the Psalm. page 1, 2, 3
2 In its self, and here is 1 The explication of the words. p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 2
The devision of them into parts. p. 9 3 The Doctrines deduced from them. p. 10
3 In its first and principal doctrine, which is 1 Proposed. p. 11 2 Proved.
p. 12 3 Amplified. 1 Showing the nature of spiritual dejections. p. 13, 14 2
Showing the workings which are 1 Fears and doubts as p. 15 1 Whether God ever
wrought upon the soul. p. 16 2 Whether grace be true. p. 17 3 Whether Call,
Conviction, Comfort be of the spirit. p. 18 4 Whether actings be from love or
light. ibid. 5 Whether the heart be sincere p. 19 6 Whether it shall conquer
corruption. p. 20 7 Whither the soul have closed with Christ savingly. p. 21 8
Whether the soul shall persevere or fall off from Christ. ib. 9 Whither or no
the soul ever prayed as it ought, or God ever heard it. p. 22 10 Whether the
soul heard the word, as it ought. p. 23 11 Whether the soul have a right
unto, or ever closed with the promises. p. 24 12 Whether abstinence from sin
have been upon religious, or moral principles. p. 25 13 Whether one has not
sinned against the Holy Ghost. ibid. 14 Whether the soul shall not fall from
grace. p. 26
2 Griefs and Sorrows p. 27 3 Showing the causes of dejection, as 1
Remainders of corruption. p. 28 2 Falls into sin. p. 29 3 Ignorance of the
Covenant of grace ibid. 4 Spiritual indisposition to dutys. p. 31 5 Want of
former incomes. p. 32 6 Insultation of Satan and enemies. p. 33 7 Corporal
affliction, as sickness, etc. p. 34 8 Sense of divine wrath, p. 35


4 Applied. 1 To inform us of our imperfect state (as to rest and peace) while
we are here, p. 36 2 To be thankful in case of freedom from these
dejections. p. 37 3 To prepare for dejections. p. 38 1 By remembering there is
such a state, and we are liable to it. ibid. 2 By acquaintance with the
Covenant of grace, in its freeness, fulness, and firmness. p. 39 3 By
treasuring up experience. ib.



SECT. II. I. HEre is Satisfaction held forth unto the particular fears and
doubts of dejected souls. viz. 1 To souls fearing that God never wrought upon
them. p 42 to p. 48 2 To souls fearing their grace is not true. p, 48 to 52 3
To souls questioning whether their calling, conviction, and comfort be of the
holy ghost. p. 50 to 64 4 To souls doubting whether their holy actings be from
light or love. p. 64 to 70 5 To souls fearing their hypocrisy. p. 70 to 76 6
To souls doubting they shall never conquer corruption. p. 76 to 82 7 To souls
fearing they never savingly closed with Christ. p. 82 to 91 8 To souls fearing
their fall from Christ and doubting they shall deny him, p. 91, 92, 93 9 To
souls questioning whether ever they prayed as they ought, or whether ever God
heard, p. 93. to 105 10 To souls dejected about their hearing of the Word, p.
105. to 111 11 To souls questioning their interest in, and their closing with
the Promises, p. 111. to 115 12 To souls troubled about abstinence from sin,
p. 115. to 120 13 To souls fearing their sin against the Holy Ghost, p. 120.
to 125 14 To souls fearing their fall from grace, and not believing their
perseverance, p. 125. to 132
II. Here is held forth particular cure for the particular causes of
soule-dejection, and the eight general grounds of souls being cast down are
stated, and spoken to; as, 1 Satisfaction is given to souls cast down by
reason of the remainders of corruption. 2 Satisfaction is given to souls cast
down by relapses into sin. 3 Satisfaction is tendered to souls dejected about
the Covenant of Grace. 4 Satisfaction is held forth to souls cast down, by
reason of indisposition to duties. 5 Satisfaction for souls dejected for want
of former incomes. 6 Satisfaection to souls troubled by reason of Satan's, and
enemies insultation. 7 Satisfaction to souls cast down by reason of sickness,
and fear of death. 8 Satisfaction to souls dejected, under the sense of
Divine wrath.

These are spoken unto in the Pages between 132. and 133 SECT. III. ANother
Doctrine raised from the Text, which is, 1 Delivered in its general body, p.
133 2 Divided into two branches, viz. 1 That Christians dejected should not
give way to dejection, p. 133 2 That they should argue the case with their own
souls.
3 Pursued and followed in I. Branch, under three heads, viz. 1 A premise that
dejected souls are apt to give way unto dejections, showing six grounds of it,
p. 133 to 138 2 Aproofe of the first branch. 1 From Scripture. 2 From Reason
which, 1 There is no reason to give way, p. 139, 140 2 There is much reason
against it. 1 Because it is a passion, p. 141 2 Because it is perillons. 1 In its
self, ib. 2 By reason of Satan. p. 142 3 Unto the soul. 1 Taking away our
strength to work. p. 143 2 Taking away our stomach to eat. p. 144



3 An application. 1 To chide such as give way to dejection, as, 1 Who conceal
their trouble, p. 145 2 Who look not after comfort, p. 146 3 Who dispute
against comfort, p. 147 4 Who avoid company, p. 148 5 Who cast of duty, p. 149
2 Two cautions, against giving way, by, 1 Answering the objection of sorrow
for sin, and showing when that is too much, p. 149. to 151 2 Advising how to
stop sorrow that it go not too far. p. 153



II. Branch is, 1 Propounded p. 154, 155 2 Proved. p. 154, 155 3 Amplified,
showing 1 Wherein the expostulation of the soul with its self consists; as, 1
In a solemn summoning of the soul to give an account of its dejection, p. 156
2 In a serious consideration of what the soul says for its dejection, p. 157 3
In an endeavor what the soul can to satisfy its self, ib.
2 Why this soul expostulation should be, as, 1 Because the soul has a
faculty thus to expostulate, p. 158 2 Because hereby the soul often sees its
cast down causlesse, p. 159 3 Because hereby sorrow is stopped, ib. 4 Because
this will plead some excuse for dejection p. 160 5 Because hereby the soul is
fitted for a cure. p. 161

4 Applied. 1 To reprove those that argue not the case with themselves, p. 161
2 To direct souls how to argue by giving the soul. 1 Some rules, p. 161. to
165 2 Some questions, p. 165. to 166 3 Some informations, p. 166. to. 169




SECT. IV. THE Doctrine of waiting in dejections, is 1 Raised and proved from
the text, p. 169. 170 2 Explicated by showing what is waiting upon God in
dejection, is in four particulars, p. 171, to 174 3 Confirmed by six grounds, p
175, to 177 4 Applied for 1 Humiliation, p. 178, 179, 180 2 Caution, p. 181,
182 3 Exhortation, in this use some cases of conscience are satisfied, as 1 The
case of being contented to want Christ resolved. 1 That it must be p. 184 2 How
it may be p. 185
2 The case of answering to, or dealing with Satan in the time of our
dejection. p. 186, 187, 188

5 Concluded. 1 By granting that though the soul must be content to wait, yet
it may pray, but showing how p. 189 2 By granting though the soul should be
content to wait, yet it may endeavor to be cured, but showing also how. p. 190

SECT. V. THe Doctrine of believing in the deepest dejections is, 1 Raised out
of the words. p. 193 2 Opened in showing 1 When the soul is deepest dejected,
p. 194, 195, 196 2 That then its duty and glory is to believe, p. 198
3 Confirmed from the example of David, etc. p. 199 4 Amplified. 1 By showing
what it is to believe in dejections. Set forth. 1 In a general description. p.
200 2 In particular points to be believed then, as 1 Gods Power, 2 Possibility
of the souls cure, 3 inclinablenesse in God to do is. p. 201, 202 3 In six
special things to be believed by the soul when it is in lowest, p. 203, 206
2 By showing three Reasons for all this p. 207, 208
5 Amplified. 1 For information, that times of dejection ought to be times of
beleiving, yea that they are the proper season of faith, here are three reasons
given why in a special manner Christ looks for faith now. p. 210 to 214 2 For
persuasion of the soul to act its faith when its cast down lowest, and here 1
The duty is opend p. 214 2 Motives are binted to stir up, as, 1 That now faith
is blessed. p. 215 2 That now faith glorifies God p. 216 3 That now believing
ingages God, p. 217 4 That now believing raises. p. 218
3 Means to help are propounded, as, 1 Cautions, in which the soul is advised
to take heed, and beware, 1 Of concluding any thing by sense, p, 219 2 Of
considering self. ib. 3 Of believing Satan although backed with ones own
conscience. p. 220 4 Of concluding any thing upon the present visible rejection
of Christ. p. 221
2 Considerations, as, 1 There is no ground why the soul should not believe.
for, p. 222 1 There is no command to the contrary p. 223 2 The death of
dejection is not, etc. ib. 3 The souls defilement is not, p. 224 4 Former
unbeleif, or present, doubtings are not. p. 225
2 The promises are made to the lowest estate, as is instanced. p. 225, 226 3
The soul shall not need to fear its presumption to believe, which being the
last object that is put in against believing it is answered and cleared. p. 227,
228, 229





FINIS.

