THE Parliaments Commission: Delivered in a SERMON, UPON
NEHEMIAH Chap. 2. Verse. 19, 20. Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobias the servant
an Ammonite, and Gesem the Arabian heard it, and they mocked us, and said: what
is this thing that ye do? do ye fall away from the King?

And I answered them, and said unto them: the God of heaven is he that has
granted us prosperity, and we his servants will rise up and build: and as for
you, there is no portion and right, nor remembrance in Jerusalem.


By J. DURHAM.
THese men, as they were sad at Nehemiahs first coming, when they see that any
man found such favor with the King to do good to Jerusalem, so now were they
almost mad for anger, when they heard that they went about to build the walls of
Jerusalem. Openly to withstand them, or forbid them to work, they durst not,
because they had the Kings Commission to do so: but so much as they durst, they
discourage them, they mock them, they threaten to accuse them, and, of that
which would make any man afraid, they lay rebellion to their charge, and say,
They would build that City for no other cause, but that they would make
themselves strong against the King, fall away from him, set up a King amongst
themselves, obey none, but use their old liberty, and rule all about them, as
they did before. These men bear some authority in the country, and like proud
beggars, and dissembling malicious enemies to God and his Word, they would
hinder so much as they could this building. The world is too full at this day
of such like dissembling hypocrites. The one sort if they come up of naught,
and get a badge pricked on their sleeve, though they have little, yet they look
so big, and speak so stoutly, that they keep the poor under their feet, that
they dare not route. All must be as they say, though it be neither true nor
honest, none dare say the contrary. But the dungeon dissembling Papist is more
like unto them, for he cares not ^y what means to get it, by fear, or by
flattery, so that he can obtain his purpose. These men first mock the Jews,
and scornefully despise them for enterprising this building, thinking by this
means to discourage poor souls that they should not go forward in this work:
After that they charge them with Rebellion. These two be the old practices of
Satan in his members to hinder the building of Gods house in all ages. Judas
in his Epistle says, that in the last days there shall come mockers, which
shall walk after their own wicked lusts. Peter and Paul foretold the same, 2
Pet. 3. 2 Timothy 3. Our Savior Christ, though he was most spitefully misused
many ways, yet never worse, then when they mocked him, both Herod, Pilate, the
Priests and the Jews. It is thought but a small matter to mock simple souls
and so withdraw them from God: but Solomon says, Prove. 3. He that mocketh
shall be mocked: and David, Psalm. 2. He that dwells in the heavens shall mock
them, and the Lord will laugh them to scorn. This shall be the just reward of
such scorners. It is justly to be feared, that as the Jews were given up to
Nebuchadnezzar, for mocking the Prophets and Preachers of their time, as it is
written 2 Chro. 36. so we, for our bitter taunting, scoffing, reviling,
disdaining and despising Gods true Ministers in these days, shall be given into
our mortal enemies hands. What is more common in these days then when such
hick-scorners will be merry at their drunken bankets, to fall into talk of some
one Minister or other: nay they spare none, but go from one to another, and can
spy a mote in other men, but cannot spy their own abominations. Christ was
never more spitefully and disdainly scoft at, then when these lusty ruffians
open their mouths against his Preachers: but the same Lord Christ says of his
disciples, that he which despises them, despises him. What reward the mockers
of Christ shall have, every man knows. Good men with heavy hearts commit
themselves and their cause unto the Lord, and pray with David, Lord deliver my
soul from wicked lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Solomon says, God will
laugh when such shall perish. Michol wife to David was barren all her life for
mocking her husband when he played on his harp, and danced before the ark of
God, 2 Samuel 6. The children that mocked Elizeus, and said, Come up thou bald
pate, come up, were all devoured suddenly of wild bears, that came out of the
wood hard by, 2 King. 2. David, amongst other miseries that he complains of,
says, That the scorners made their songs of him when they were at their
drunken feasts, Psalm. 69. and when he sees no remedy how to escape their
poysonfull tongues, he patiently turns him unto the Lord, commits all to
him; and in the latter end of the Psalm: God comfort him, and tells him,
what sundry mischiefs shall fall on them, for their despitefull dealing. When
Baltshazzar King of Babylon made his drunken feast to his great men, and called
for the vessels and jewels which Nebuchadnezzar brought from Jerusalem, that he
and his harlots might eat and drink in them in despite of the living God of
Israel, Dan. 5. A hand appeared writing on the wall, which Daniel expounded,
when none of his Southsayers could do it, and said, His Kingdom should be
taken from him, and so it came to pass: for the same night Balteshazzar was
slain, and Darius King of the Medes possessed his Kingdom: A just reward for
all such drunken mockers of God, his people, Religion, and Ministers, and yet
our merry tossepots will take no heed. Sarah saw Ismael playing with Isaac her
son, and said to Abraham, Cast out the handmaid and her son, for he shall
not be heir with my son: Genesis 21. but S. Paul alleging the same text
calls this playing persecution, Gal. 4. and says: As he that was borne after
the flesh did persecute him that was borne after the spirit, so it is now, but
the Scripture says, Cast out the handmaid and her son, for he shall not be
heir with the son of the freewoman: so shall all scornful mockers, jesters
and railers on God, his Word, Religion, and People be cast into utter
darkness, and not be heirs of Gods Kingdom with his children. This playing
and mocking is bitter persecution, and therefore not to be used of good men,
nor against good men and lovers of religion, yet at this day he is counted a
merry companion, and welcome to great men's tables, that can rail bitterly, or
jest merrily on the Ministers: such is our love toward God, his Word, and
Ministers: but surely he that loves God and the Word indeed, cannot abide to
hear the Preachers ill spoken of undeservedly: I cannot tell whether is worse,
the scoffer, or the glad hearer: if the one had no pleasure in hearing such
lewd talk, the other would not tell it. The other thing they charge the Jews
withal is Rebellion, falling from the King, and setting up a Kingdom amongst
themselves. When Elias exhorted Achab and the people to return unto the Lord,
Achab says unto him, Art thou he that troubles Israel? nay, said the Prophet,
It is thou and thy fathers house: rebuking him, and teaching truth, was counted
troubling of the commonwealth and the King. What was the cause that King Saul
and his flatterers hated poor David so much, and so cruelly sought his death,
but that the people sung after that Goliath was slain, that Saul had killed a
thousand, and David his ten thousand: which was as much to say as they thought
that David was a mightier man than Saul, and meeter to be King. Daniel set open
his windows, and contrary to the Kings commandment, prayed thrice a day unto
the living Lord, Dan. 6. and therefore was accused of disobedience to the King,
and cast to the lions den to be devoured of them. The Israelites in Egypt Exodus
1. when God blessed them, and increased them to a great people, were accused
that they waxed so many and wealthy, that they would rebel against the King:
and therefore to keep them under, were oppressed by the taskmasters, and set
to make brick for their buildings. When our Lord and Master Christ Jesus was
born, the wisemen asked where the King of the Jews was: Herod was mad, and
killed all the children of two years old and under, Mat. 2. lest any of them
should come to be King, and put him down. When our Savior Christ said, His
Kingdom was not of this world, then said Pilate, Thou art a King then:
whereupon the Jews took occasion to accuse him of treason, and said, Every one
that makes himself a King speaks against the Emperor, for we have no King
but the Emperor. The Apostles were accused that they had troubled the
commonwealth by preaching Christ, and filled Jerusalem with their doctrine,
contrary to the commandment of the Priests and Elders. Jason was drawn out of
his house for lodging Paul, being accused that he had troubled the world, and
disobeyed the Emperor. When S. Paul had preached Christ in Athens, He was
accused for troubling the state by teaching his new doctrine: thus ever the
building of Gods house by preaching of the Gospel has been charged with
rebellion, disobedience to Princes, and troubling of the commonwealth and
peace. But good men have not been dismayed at such big words, but with good
courage have proceeded in their work, having the testimony of a good
conscience, that they be not guilty of any such thing.

20 And I answered. This was the first push, but not the worst that they had to
discourage them from proceeding in this building, and not unlike but it made
some afraid, to hear such big words, and so great matters laid to their charge,
by men of such authority as they were. But as they were not ashamed so unjustly
to accuse Gods people, so Nehemiah steppeth forth, as boldly answers for them
all, and defends their doings: A worthy example for all those that be in
authority to follow: they have not the sword committed to them in vain, they
ought to defend both by word and deed, in their weldoings, those that be
committed unto them. Their duty is not to suffer Gods enemies to invade or
hurt, slander or blaspheme those, that they have charge over, but draw the
sword, if need be, to drive away such wolves and punish such wicked tongues. It
is not as we commonly say, when any danger or persecution arises for the
doctrine, or that the Ministers are untruly reported of, let the Preachers
defend it, it is their duty and vocation, we are not learned, it belongs not
to us, our care is for the commonwealth only. Religious Magistrates will
neither do so, nor say so: they will not suffer, as much as in them lies, the
Church, Religion, doctrine, nor the Ministers to be evil spoken of, reviled,
defaced, nor overrun. They be mouths, to speak for Gods people, as Moses was
unto Pharaoh they be hands to fight for them, they be Rulers to defend the
good, and punish the evil. Iephthe when the Ammunites fought against Israel,
Judge. 11. defended the cause in disputation by words, and after in battle with
the sword. The good King Ezechias, 2 King. 18. when he received the blasphemous
message and letters from Rabshakeh against God, his Temple, people and
Religion, he seeks by all means to defend them all, and encourage the people
not to fall away from their God in that great danger. When Holophernes railed
on God and his people, Achior and Iudeth defend them, and she cutteth off his
head. When the great Giant Golias (1 Samuel 14.) reviled the people of God, and
provoked them to sight with him hand to hand, if they durst, for the victory,
none was found that durst do it but poor David, who with no weapons but his
sling and a few stones, killed that lusty champion, and delivered his people.
When Dathan, Chorah and Abiram, with their fellows, railed against Moses and
Aaron, Gods true Ministers, Numb. 16. Moses committing the revenge of it to the
Lord, warned the people to depart from their company, lest they perished with
them by that strange death: and straight ways the earth opened, and swallowed
up them, and their goods, and tents, where they dwelt, quick into hell* nay
women were not spared: for Miriam, Moses sister, was smitten with a leprosy
for railing on Moses her brother, Gods lieutenant over them. As the Magistrate
therefore both with word and sword must defend Gods cause, his Religion,
Temple, People, Ministers and Doctrine, so must the Preacher, and those that be
learned, with their pains, prayer, preaching, and all other means that they
can: yea if our goods or lives were required for the defense of it, no state of
men ought to refuse it. For this end are we born and live, to glorify our God,
and set forth his praise: for this purpose are all things given us, and
therefore must not be spared, but spent and bestowed, when his glory requires.
I or this cause Esaias the Prophet gave his body to be sawen in sunder with a
saw of iron: for this cause Jeremiah was cast into a dungeon of mire and filth,
Ier. 38. Daniel into the Lions den; Saint Paul pleads his cause often in
chains at Jerusalem, and at Rome, before Festus, Felix and Agrippa: and our
Lord and Master Christ Jesus before Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate and Herod: John
Baptist lost his head for this quarrel and no good men will think any thing
too dear to spend in Christ's cause. For this cause Tertullian, Irenaeus,
Justinius, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Nazianzen, writ great books against the
heathens, which railed on our Religion. What infinite numbers of Martyrs have
stood stoutly and given their lives in the same quarrel? he that has seen any
learning, can bttter tell where to begin, then where to make an end of
reckoning, the number is so infinite, and our late days have given sufficient
proof thereof under that bloody butcher Bonner, that the most ignorant, if he
will open his ears and eyes, might hear and see great plenty. But alas the
fiery fagots of those days were not so grievous then, as the slandrous tongues
be now in our days. Nebuchadnezzar made a Law, that if any did blaspheme the
God of Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, he should be slain, and his house made a
dunghill. Moses made a law, that every blasphemer should be stoned to death.
Seeing God and Princes have made such straight Laws against such lewd railers,
good Rulers should see some correction done, and not with silence to suffer ill
men to talk their pleasure on Gods City, Religion and ministry: while others
possibly made courtesy to speak and answer these busy braggers and
quarrelers, Nehemiah steppeth forth boldly, defends this cause stoutly;
answers their false accusation truly, incourageth the people manfully to go
forward with their work, despises their brags and tells them plainly, that
they have no part, nor right, nor are worthy to be remembered in Jerusalem. The
effect of Nehemiahs answer was, that the God of heaven had given them good
success hitherto in moving the hearts of King Cirus and Darius first to the
building of the Temple, and now of Artaxerxes to restore the City: they were
his servants, and worshipped him, and he stirred them up to this work, for of
themselves they were not able to do such things. They served no Idols nor false
Gods, they needed not to be ashamed of their master, the God of heaven was
their Lord, and they his people, he was their Master and they his servants, he
their King, and they his subjects, they would go forward with their work, they
must have a City to dwell in to serve their God, who would defend them in this
their well doing: these men had no authority to stop or forbid them to work,
they had nothing to do in Jerusalem, nor any authority, they would not obey
them, but with all diligence apply this work until it be finished. The Apostles
when they were forbidden, preached, and would not obey, but said, they must
obey God that bad them, thus must all they, that take Gods work in hand,
confess it to come from God, and that he blesses their doings, that all the
praise may be his, and that they of themselves be weak and unable to do such
things, without his special grace and assistance. All good men in such
enterprises will say with David; not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
name give all ^he glory, Psalm. 125. If these wicked men had had any worldly
shame or fear of God in them, they would have quaked and trembled, as the good
men rejoiced to hear God on their side to further them, so they, when they
heard the God of heaven named to be against them, and that it was his doing,
they would have forsaken their Idols, and have furthered thi^ building, or at
least have sitten still, and not hindered it. For who is able to withstand his
will, or hinder that he will have forward? The devils in hell quake and tremble
at the naming and considering of Gods Majesty, but these wicked Imps not only
now, but sundry times as appears hereafter in this book, most cruelly,
spitefully and craftily go forward in their old malice, and by all means seek
the overthrow of this building, so far worse is a devil incarnate in an ill
man, then by himself in his own nature. When the Devil will work any great
mischief, he takes commonly one man or other, Angel or creature to do it by,
knowing that he shall do it more easily that way, then if he should attempt
it by him- himself. How is every murder, false witness, whoredom, robbery,
etc. committed, but when the Devil stirs up one man against another; Let
every good man therefore take heed unto himself, how he yields unto sin. For
in so doing, he makes himself a slave to the Devil, and his instrument to
work by. One Devil will not offer that villainy to another Devil, to make him
his slave, but if he can bring men unto it, there is his rejoicing. Take heed
therefore, O man. In that they confess themselves to be the servants of the
God of Heaven: it is as much to say, as they wrought not for themselves, nor at
their own appointment, nor for their own profit, they wrought for their
masters cause, and for his glory. Gods servants in all their doings will seek
their masters profit and praise, not their own: they live not for themselves,
but all the profit of their doings returns to their Masters. If they take any
thing to themselves more then their master gives them, they be thieves unto
him, they do him no true service. Let all the builders of Gods house therefore,
whether they be rulers in the Commonwealth, as Nehemiah was now, or of the
learned sort in the Ministry, or elsewhere, not only confess in words that
they be servants to the God of heaven, but most humbly, simply, and boldly show
it in their deeds, that they seek their masters praise and glory, the common
profit of their Country and not their own, that they work for him and not for
themselves, and that they serve him not for any worldly respect, or gain, or
honor, but uprightly for conscience sake serve and obey him, yield all praise
to his glorious name, taking nothing to themselves, and being not afraid to go
forward in his building for any braggers, knowing that all the pride of man's
heart, which sets up himself against the God of Heaven, is vile and vain,
and that their God will defend his servants and confound his foes. It is no
rebellion against Princes to do that which God commands: for Princes
themselves are bonnd as well as other meaner degrees to serve the Lord God of
Heaven with all their might and maine, and unto the same God they must make
account of their doings as all other must. For this building they had the Kings
Commission, and therefore it was no Treason to do it: It is more glorious to be
called Gods servants, then to have all the titles of honor and dignity that
the world can give. He that serves the Lord truly is master of sin, hell,
death and the devil, and by the assistance of Gods holy spirit shall not be
overcome of them, but shall overcome and conquer them: which is a greater
honor then any worldly Prince can give. The woman that had an evil spirit in
her, confessed Paul and his fellows to be the servants of the mighty God, and
that they taught them the way of salvation, Acts 16. See then how devils are
afraid of Gods servants. Paul in all his Epistles rejoices in nothing more
then terming himself an Apostle and servant of Christ Jesus. The holy Ghost
told Paul, Acts 20. that in every City where he should come, there were chayns
and troubles ready for him: but he said he cared not for them for his life was
not dear to him, so that he might run his race, and testify the glorious
Gospel of God. Be not ashamed of thy master: for our Savior Christ says, that
whosoever denies him before men, he will deny him before his father in Heaven.
Worldly masters will not cast a way their faithful servants, but maintain
them as they may, and think thou that God will forsake his servants?
Think thou a mortal wretched man to be more loving to thee then the
eternal God and merciful father that made thee, feeds thee, and defends
thee, when man cannot help thee? yea loves the better then thou love thy
self, and stays thee from running from him, when thou would willingly
seek thine own destruction wilfully. Stand to him boldly, forsake him not
cowardly. Polycarpus, an old man, when he should suffer martyrdom, was advised
by some to have pity on his old age, and not so stiffely to stand out. Nay,
says he, I have served my Master Christ these 86. years, and he did me never
harm, I will not forsake him now in my last days. Thus Nehemiah stoutly
answering them, and boldly encouraging his fellows, goes forward with the
work, contemns their mocking and false accusations, and falls to his
building again; so must all good builders of Gods house neither be afraid nor
weary of scornful mockers, threatenings, accusations or violence, but manfully
go forwards to the end, knowing that their God is stronger, wiser, and more
willing to defend his people, then his enemies shall be to hurt them. He that
puts his hand to the plough, and looks backward, is not meet for the
Kingdom of God, says Christ our Lord, Luke 9. And he that continues to the
end shall be safe, Mat. 25. 20. Our Savior Christ, when he preached; that
whatsoever went in at the mouth did not defile a man, was told by his
disciples, that that doctrine offended the Pharisees: but he answered them and
said, Every plant that my father has not planted shall be plucked up, etc. As
though he should say, their doctrine is not from my Father, and therefore
cannot stand: let those blind guides alone, seeing they will be wilful and
obstinate, and will not learn: go ye forward with preaching of the Gospel, care
not for them. So every good man must continue that he may say with S. Paul, I
have kept my faith, I have run my race, the crown of righteousness is laid up
in store for me, etc. After that Nehemiah had thus boldly answered them, and
encouraged his contrymen to their work, he now turns him to Sanballat and
his fellows, and shows himself to make as little account of them, as they
made of him, and says: As for you, ye have no right, part, nor remembrance in
Jerusalem: as though he should say, what have you to do with us in this
building? ye are not Jews borne, as we be, ye belong not to Israel, nor are
partakers of his blessing. Ye be Samaritans, strangers to his City and
commonwealth, ye be none of Gods household: if ye will be doing, meddle where
ye have to do. This City God himself did choose for his people to dwell in, and
serve him. Ye be idolaters, and worship not the true God of heaven: if ye will
be building, build ye Samaria your own head City: ye are no Citizens here, nor
have any freedom, liberty or privilege granted unto us, ye be none of our
corporation, nor denizons, ye shall have nothing to do here. All that build
here, have their portion of land and living in this city and country appointed
for them: they shall have justice, right and law ministered unto them, and for a
perpetual remembrance of their faithful service unto the living God, their
names shall be registered, that all posterity may know their doings, and praise
the Lord that strengthened them to this building: but ye have none of all
these: for when the land was divided by lot and measure by Joshua, ye had no
part appointed for you: under the Law ye do not live, but have lived after your
own device; nay, ye bear such hatred unto us, that ye will not willingly eat,
drink, nor keep company with us friendly: let us alone, trouble us not, get you
hence, and let us fall to our building again. It is no small blessing of God
when he calls any to be a builder of his house, for both in this world his
name shall be had in perpetual remembrance, and he is written in the book of
life, where no death can prevail. David says, The righteous man shall be had in
perpetual remembrance, Psalm. 112. and S. John says, that He that is not found
written in the book of life, shall be cast into the fiery lake, Rev. 20. The
builders of this city now have their names written in the next Chapter
following for their perpetual praise in this world, to teach us that as the
builders of this worldly Jerusalem have their names registered here, much more
the builders of the heavenly Jerusalem have their names written in the Book of
life for their salvation. Ill men and troublers of Gods building have their
names written in this book too. What more blessed then is he that hinders?
Solomon teaches and says: The remembrance of the righteous is to his praise,
but the name of the wicked stinketh. This is then the difference, and thou
may choose whether thou will be remembered to thy praise, or to thy shame, and
with the good will of the living, or hatred. But by this answer of Nehemiah
when he says, that they have no part, right, nor remembrance in Jerusalem, it
is partly given us to understand, that when they could not hinder this work by
big brags and threatenings, they offered themselves to join with them in this
building, to take their part, and bear the charges fellow-like: for why should
he deny them these, except they required it. But Nehemiah a wise man would
neither be afraid of them, as open enemies nor receive them into his
fellowship, as feigned friends: wherein he teaches all true Christians how to
behave themselves in building of Gods house: that is, neither to fear the one,
nor to receive the other. S. Paul says, Be not yoked with infidels: what has
righteousness to do with unrighteousness, light with darkness, or Christ
with Belial? Gods people are knit together with two bonds, the one is Christ
their head, who gives life to all members of the body, the other is brotherly
love among themselves: but neither of these can be found in Idolaters; for they
neither take Christ for their head and live by him, nor they love not
Christians as their brethren, but dissemble with God and man. All Christians
have one God, one faith, one baptism, one Religion, one law to live under, and
one heavenly Kingdom to look for: but infidels and hypocrites have many gods,
all religions be alike unto them, they live as they list, and that is their law
and will, to go to heaven after their own device, if they can get it. Yet they
have a delight to thrust themselves in among Gods people, pretending a love
unto them, where indeed it is for no good will, but to learn their secret
counsels and purposes, that by such means they may betray them when occasion
serves. But wise builders will admit them into no fellowship nor friendship, as
Nehemiah here utterly refuses them, and will have nothing to do with them. But
this case is more plainly propounded to Ezra, and there I have spoken more
largely of it, and Ezra plainly determines the matter there, who so list to
read and consider. God be praised.

FINIS.
Printed by R. AUSTIN, and A. COE. 1643.


