Concordia rara sonorum, OR A POEM UPON The late Fight at Sea, between the two
great Fleets of ENGLAND AND HOLLAND.

By I. D. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for J. Ridley, at the Castle in Fleet Street, near Ram Alley,
1653.

A POEM, Upon the late Fight at Sea, between the two great Fleets of ENGLAND
AND HOLLAND.
WARS, worse then Pitch-feilds, on a moving plain,
We sing, and for it; where two States retain
In their own bowels their victorious shot,
Vast Wounds, and horrid Death, yet feel them not.
And, as Romes pair with this point dig'd their grave,
Caesar no first, Pompey no Peer would have:
Just so it is here with us; Van-trump allows
No State to his Superior; and Blake vows,
Ours has no equal: neither thus will veil,
^ut loose a Fleet, rather then strike a Sail.
Thus both march on, cutting deep Neptunes Brow,
(Prodigious sight, to cal't I know not how!)
Whether two running Towns, or waving Woods
Or rather Islands tumbling on the Floods.
At whose approach the curled Billows roar,
And, as they come, fearfully roll before.
The oppressed towr-like whales lie bellowing under
That Neptune seemed to usurp his Brothers Thunder.
The silent Fish, presaging future blood,
Against their kind run frighted into the mud:
And, had they wings, would from the Sea have broaken
And but for churlish nature would have spoken,
To manifest their fear; yet, what they might,
They fled apace, to shun the dreadful sight.
The Oceans king, feeling such weight on's back,
With leaning on his Trident made it crack.
Had it not been immovable, they say,
The Earth this time would feign have fled away;
And the amas'd shore, as each Fleet near sounds
Almost forgot to keep's ordained bounds.
One might have thought the Battle was begun,
To see how Neptune first was thorough run;
How the Stern brass his curled forehead toare,
And trembling waves were struck by cruel oar.
Each Fleet the Captains had divided soon,
Into the form of an halfe-circled Moon:
But as their furious horns together met,
These two half Moons a full Moon did beget;
Which like to that in Heaven, as it did go,
Made the fleet waters strangly ebb and flow.
Now as with proud advance they nearer came;
Those Beasts which gave the saile-rul'd vessels name,
With an aspect more grim then is their life,
As breathing naught but war, and balefull strife,
Came feircely forward all; as if from thence
They meant to move their painted residence.
The Lion, Elephant, and savage Hog,
The Lybard, Tygre, Wolf, and cruel Dog
Sternly affront each other; one might guess
In midst of Sea a savage Wilderness:
Wherein with admiration one might see
So many a feirce wild Beast, so many a Tree.
But now our valiant General traversing
About the Fleet, encouraged them, rehersing
This speech; wherein he bravely did exhort
To the fight: which ready, cut the Oration short,
Courage, brave English; that is all I pray,
Strength cannot want, where courage leads the way.
But what need I the undanted hearts excite
Of them, whose eyes, methinks, already fight.
Look as ye do, and you shall never need
Weapons, or hands, to make your foes to bleed:
Your looks will strike them dead, and warlike sight
Shall put your fearful Enemies to flight.
What ere you aim at, here before you lie,
Honor, Revenge, Spoil, Riches, Victory:
Which if they move not, see your native Land,
Your Nurse, your Mother, see how she does stand
Afar, to mark which of you best shall render
Thanks for her nurture, who shall best defend her.
Them will she honor: bravely then drive back
This Dutch Sea Monster; which is come to rack
Your Nurses entrails: come't but once to Land,
The very Earth will be afraid to stand
Its cruel brunt; whether if reach it can,
The blood and tears will make an Ocean,
Deeper then this. I see'em now repair,
(O let my Omen vanish into Air-)
Unto your Land: see how the Hogens rage
About your Coasts, sparing nor Sex, nor Age.
See how they pull strong walls of Cities down,
Leaving the men as naked as the Town.
They raze your sacred Temples, and not leave
A hallowed place, where after ye may heave
Your hands for aid to Heaven; your Altars frames
These wicked wretches with profaned flames
Sacrifice to their anger; yea they dare
To open ghostly Tombs, and thence lay bare
Your Ancestors sad Coffins; whose dead ashes,
Instead of tears, their Childrens blood be-dashes.
See how in few hours they act over again
Each horrid passage, every bloody scene
Of your late sev'n years Tragedy; and do out do
What ere was left done, or undone by you.
These things, which Heaven be thankt, I but suppose,
Unless you help, will once advance your foes.
Say that your Navy be far less then theirs;
Have not great Ships amidst their swift carreers
Been stayed by little Remoraes? Then on;
And let not this cold Element, whereon
We are to fight, quench those courageous flames,
Which burn in every manly breast, which aims
At immortality: but strike so stern,
That the dumb Fishes may hereafter learn
To speak your praises, and each wave report
Unto its Neighbor, in how valiant sort
Ye fought; till that the Oceans utmost bound,
And farthest Thule, with your fame shall sound:
Yea that the Sun, When he at night shall press
This way, may go and tell the Antipedes,
What acts he saw. Nor yet of aid despair;
The Sea it self, if need shall ask, will spare
A thousand of his streaming arms for you;
All Fish prove Sword-fish, to fight for our due.
Think for no refuge here to fly; your hand,
Not feet, must bring you back again to Land.
No longer will the time with us dispense;
What my speech wants, my Sword shall recompense.
Now 'twixt a thousand lives, a thousand deaths,
Of time one little winged minute breaths.
The loud mouthed Gun only expects the fire,
At touch of which, as burnt, it should expire
Its skreiking voice, groaning that so much death
Should be accomplished by the infectious breath
Of its dire mouth: Darts ready are to part,
And hide their heads in some ill fortuned heart.
Arrows and Muskets leveld, seem to kill,
Before they can in act, in fiery will.
One might have thought, viewing this fearful fight,
'T had been the picture of a navall fight.
But hark, the amazing signs of battle sound,
Making the land remote, and rocks rebound.
The shril voic't Trumpet, and courageous Drum
In barbarous language bid the Dutch to come.
Deaths horrid vizard now begins to appear,
In their pale faces; terror, and ghastly fear
In their amazed hearts do panting rise;
And future blood-baths in their fiery eyes;
Stern cruelty advances on their lids,
With headlong fury stalking in the mids:
Apelles present here, or one so skilld,
Might have made pictures hence that would have killed.
The thundering Ordnance now began to rent
The amazed air; the flames before it sent,
Seem lightning; and as deadly bullets fly,
Prodigious hail seemd to pour down the Sky;
Smoke made a Cloudy mist; and all together
Seem on the Sea to raise tempestuous weather.
To call for aid here, stands as much in stead,
As in that place, where from a doubtful head
The seven-mouthd Nilus with a desperate shock,
Headlong does tumble from the amazed rock;
Making the people on the neighboring shelves,
That hearing him, they cannot hear themselves.
Thus the fights noise made many a man to fall,
An inconsider'd, silent funeral.
Alas these Elements, which use to uphold
Our crazy lives with their just heat and cold,
Making compact our bodies constitution,
Strive now to cause its utter dissolution.
The quick and peircing fire, as it does burn
Their woeful carcasses, does freezing turn
Their minds to quaking fear, and Chill despair.
The liquid, flitting, and all-searching air,
Admits remorselesse shot, and murthring darts,
Denying breath at last to cool their hearts.
The theevish water, though it ran away
With subtle shifts, did notwithstanding slay,
And swallow most with a devouring flood:
Only poor Earth, stark, still, astonishd stood.
Who viewing this, would not have thought a wonder,
That without rain, wind, lightning, hail, or thunder,
Or hidden shelves, or Rocks sea-ambusht back,
Or any tempests, Ships should suffer wrack?
That one might here have termed it, choose you whether,
A stormy-calme, or calme-tempestuous weather.
But now each Fleet, each Ship, with hopeful pride,
Clash altogether furious side to side.
Men now, with men contend, and Ships with Ships,
One body against another: here one skips
Into his enemies Deck; but beaten back,
He leaps to's own; of which if so he lack,
He falls in the Sea: much like a wave, whose head,
By urging winds unto the shore is lead,
And thence by breast of the oft-drowned shore,
Taking a blunt repulse, for spite does roar;
And staggering runs back; and is this all
Ambition aims at, in the way to fall?
Their tired senses labored in such wise,
As they grew dull with too much exercise.
Their troubled eyes, viewing such ghastly sights,
Wished that sad darkness canceld all their lights.
That horrid noise, the battle made, was such,
Hearing heard nothing, 'cause it heard so much.
Taste is of death; rank blood pollutes the smell:
What feeling felt, they all did feel too well.
Such a confusion racks their senses here,
The had reason now to wish, they senseless were.
Grim death in purple stalks upon the hatches,
With pale and greisly looks see how he snatches
Hundreds at once unto him; till the dreary,
Lean-fac'd, ill-favourd death, of death grew weary.
See on the Sea how thousand bodies float,
From their great Ships, hasting to Charons Boat;
Which crabbed Skuller now does think it meet,
His old torn Boat should be new changd a Fleet.
The tumults noise pierced the blew arched Sky,
The Crystal air, stild with a deadly cry,
Only in this was blessed; as blows abounded,
It could be ever cut, yet never wounded.
The silent earth, glad that she was debard
From this sad sight, yet inwardly was heard
The dreadful strokes, rebounding loud, to moan,
And Echo made her yield a hollow groan.
But this cause chiefly made her most to rave,
That to her due the Sea should prove a grave.
Never did strong-breath'd Aeolus disturb
The Sea so much; when he can hardly curb
His madding Pages, when they raging muster
To quarrel with the waves, or whistling bluster
Among the well-set trees, and branched boughs,
Singing through chinks of some decayed house.
Nor stern Orion, with his stormy light
Appalling Shipmen, does so much afright
The soon-mov'd Sea, as did this battles noise,
Which Neptune answered with his bellowing voice;
Who, as the Fleet urged nearer to the strand;
With tumbling pace ran frighted up the sand:
That had not bounds restrained his element,
His watery veil had clothed the Continent.
The fearful winds on the Ocean durst not rome;
But, lest they should be smothered, kept at home,
And there sat sighing: Clouds their rain do keep,
(Though ready at the battles sight to weep)
Lest their pure drops with gore-blood should be stained
So that no winds blew, nor from Heaven it rained.
Marvel not yet at tempests on the flood,
So many tears streamed, and such streams of blood;
Nor without winds are waves to be admired,
So many groans, and dying breaths expired.
The Oceans skaly, silent, wandering nation,
Seeing pale armed troops invade the station
Of their vast Kingdom, down the sanguine flood
Fearfully glide, fearing their future food.
The tender Nymphs, who with their silver feet
Use on the plains of crisped Thetis meet;
Where tripping prettily, they are wont to dance
Themselves into a heavenly slumbring trance
Of sweet repose, at these inhumane shocks,
With hair all torn, creep into the hollow rocks:
Where shrouded, they to meditate began,
No rock so flinty as the heart of man.
Yea Thetis self, whose womb enriched bare
That fearful thunder of the Trojan war,
Stubborn Achilles, who in fight did win
Such glory, wishd that wars had never bin:
So she, with all her trembling watery peers,
Augment the brinish sea with brinish tears.
Ships now begin to burn; that one might see
Neptunes and Vulcans consanguinity.
Yea now those ships, which free from water stood,
Strangely begin to sink with humane blood;
Which, as from thence with fearful gush it ran,
Filld up the wrinkles of the Ocean;
Which Sea so full of dead, it hence might come
Well to be called Mar e mortu^m.
The quaking Ships with murmuring Guns are rent,
Whose wounded sides the goared streams do vent
Of dead, and wounded men; who lay therein,
As if they had their Beers, or Coffins bin:
They lay therein; and as the Ships did go,
Seemed bloody, bloodlesse, dead, and moving too.
The furious flames with firedoth undermine
The towering Mast, made of the lofty Pine;
So that same tree, which often lights Nuptials,
Now Cypres-like does burn at funerals.
Thus eaten by the galling flames, at last
Falls down the huge, high-mounted, weighty Mast;
And, as great things are wont, fell not alone,
Killing a troup, not of its foes, but's own.
The tacklings, sails, and cables, now do burn;
And fire casts Anchors never to return.
About their ears the whistling bullets sung;
And wandering wildfire made the affrighted throng
Crowd into corners speedily, and they,
That durst stand men, to senseless fire give way.
As when within the fat Trinacrian soil
Inflamed Aetna does begin to boil;
When naked Pyracmon, with his round-eyd fellows,
Sweating, heave up their huge, strong-breathed bellows;
Thundering upon their steely Anvils top,
To furnish Armor for their smoaky shop;
Their ponderous hammers, and redoubling, makes
Enceladus belch out his sulph'ry flakes
Of vengefull wrath; then may you see black Smoke
Vomiting out, wrapped in a pitchy Cloak;
And the hard bowels of the mountain, torn
By fettered fire, with a strange bounding borne
Up to the clouds; whose fearful fall to shun,
The Neighboring people with amazement run
To shrouding dens; hiding them closely under,
Fearing from high, and from below a Thunder.
Thus did the inhumane Battles fury rage;
Nor could the Sea the increasing flames assuage.
He, that would now have traveled to Hell,
Might have seen weary, sweating Charon swell
In fervent labor, with his mossy oars,
Tugging pale shadows to the o're-swarm'd shoares;
Which on the Banks as they lamenting crept,
VVailing Cocytus in compassion wept:
Acheron flowed with grief; and, as they say,
Lethe her self will never forget this day.
The furies whin'd, by Plutoes judgment cast,
Who swear their rage was far by men surpast.
One coming here, might tired Clotho spy,
How she could scarce her weary arms apply
To turn the wheel; and Lachesis repine,
Who swear she could not threads of mortals twine
So fast, as they were cut; you might have seen
Atropos raging with remorcelesse teen;
And seeking each where for some greety Stone
To whether Sheers; whose edge was dulled grown.
With too much cutting of their fatal thread,
Whose hapless lives this gastfull Battle shed:
Fire now, and water did not each contend;
But seem their power so mutually to lend,
That at this time there many a one became
Burnt in the Sea, and drowned in the flame.
This one good hap to carcasses did fall,
The had fire to burn 'em at their funeral.
The mangled Ships, not fearing to be drenched,
Gladly take breaches, thereby to be quenched.
The industrious Pilot, sitting at the stern,
Where in a little Card he can discern
The vast uncertainty of Neptunes haunt,
Ruling swift Ships by powerful Adamant;
Here as he sits retired, and watchful minds,
The frequent change of two and thirty winds,
Comes an unruly shot, and him does force
To certain death, change his uncertain course:
So he, that wont stern blasts in truce to bind,
Could not foresee when he should loose his wind;
From storms and mists of death he could not free
Himself, who wont the tempests curb; but he,
Who bearding Neptune, used on the Ocean float,
Is now controld in Charons little Boat.
The Master ranging up and down the Deck,
And wounded mortally, to him does beck
His Mate; who hasting to his aid in vain,
Is there together with the Master slain;
And at once ended with him his lives date,
Proving himself truly the Masters Mate.
The Trumpeter, with brave reviving sound
Quickening their dying hearts, is feld to the ground;
And as in's mouth he still the brass did weild,
His dying breath made it a dead march yield;
And having lent his Trumpet so much breath
In's life, it turned him some again at's death.
The Drummer with his nimble hand repeating
His doubled blows, without compassion beating
His harmeles Drum, which seemd with groaning cry
To murmr at his Masters cruelty,
Oth' sudden two rash bullets rudely come,
Tearing both skin of drummer, and of Drum;
Drummer of life, of sound the Drum's bereft;
So Drum and drummer both are speechless left.
The Gunner, as with nimble have he runs
To fire his seldom vaine-reporting Gunns;
His head a leaden winged bullet hits,
And his hard brain pan into pieces splits.
He of a thousand this alone might vaunt,
That of his death he was not ignorant:
And this true Riddle might of him abide,
He lived once by's death, by's life now died.
Here comes a Captain, with undaunted face,
Encouraging his Soldiers to the Chase;
And being about to say, he brave and bold,
An untaught bullet rudely bids him hold:
And as deaths mist in his dull eyes did wander,
Beseeching aid, he left to be Commander.
And he whose voice from fainting thought to call them
By's dying groan does fearfully appall them.
This Leader faithful to his utmost breath,
Can only now lead them the way to Death.
See how to steal the waving Flag, one climbes
Up by the Cords; but being espied betimes
Tangled in the ropes, he is of life bereft,
And so is hanged for his intended theft:
But the cords burnt, wherein his legs were bound,
He gets a Pirates death, both hanged and drowned.
Some, under hatches closed in despair,
Moun^ up their foes with powder into the air:
Which done, it seemed a strange prodigious sight,
A troup of armed men to mask the light:
It seemed yet that they no damage meant them,
Who the next way up into Heaven sent them;
Making them fly, beyond Daedalian skill,
In the vast air without a winged quill;
Giving to them a strange unwonted death,
Who, having air too much, yet wanted breath.
See, see, the lot of sad mortality;
Our chiefest helps help often to misery.
Some men, who came secure from future harms,
Enrolled in well-prov'd steely-cloathed arms,
Fall by mischance into the Seas dire hand,
Whence being unarmed they might have swom to land.
Their arms do sinck, and without mercy end them,
So killed by that which chiefly should defend them.
One, with his Musket ready to give fire,
Aims at another adverse Musketteere;
But his Match missing flire, he is forced to dye
By the others Matches true fidelity:
By which he died can scarcely well be known,
Whether by the others Musket, or his own.
See there a Coward, wanting heart to abide
The daunting face of the feirce adverse side;
Slinketh behind the netx; not caring whether,
Comes a mad shot and kills them both together.
One, seeing now his side begin to fail,
Shows them their Colors, while himself looks pale.
Sure by this man some Omen ill was shown,
To keep their Colors, who could loose his own.
Those men who chanced in the Ship to fall,
The cruel Sea was made their Burial;
And into the Waves without remorse were thrown:
Poor men! slain by their foes, drowned by their own.
A Fisherman, who nigh them cut the maine,
Sitting in's Boat, was with a Bullet slain:
And the Barque fired, wherein he dead did fall,
Which gratis, burnt, gave him his Funeral.
True to thy Master, kind boat; who with him
Did often in life, and now in death do swim;
With him alive in water that did tire
Thy wave-beat sides, dy'st now with him in fire:
Yet sail with him to Elysium, sail the faster;
In Charons stead that thou may waft thy Master.
Strange boat! which thus we not amiss may call
His life, death, Charon, and his Funeral.
One, fearing death, does feign to dye, and bleed;
And while he is in feigning, dies indeed.
Another, fearing Swords, to the Sea does fly,
And so, for fear of death, fears not to dye.
Some fall into the Ocean stained with goare,
Which from their former wounds had gushed before:
Which killed not them, as it from them was spil'd,
But entering into them again, they are killed.
Here Is one, about to strike his foe, does fall
Into the Sea; before he can recall
His erring stroke, striking the Sea to stay him,
The Ocean in revenge oth' blow does slay him.
Another, being about to strike his foe,
Loses at once his arm, and threatening blow;
His left arm shivering, reaches at the other,
But cut in twain, lies with its equal brother:
Both joined, though both divided, as in spite
Of death they meant to part their last good night,
By shaking hands: the miserable trunk,
As loath to part, fainting, upon them sunk.
One, seeing them together thus, might say,
There a whole body all in pieces lay.
See, two with sturdy grapple striving, whether
Should overcome, both fall in the sea together;
Embracing both, till they have lost their breath,
And seem, though foes in life, yet friends in death.
Two brothers slain, as they together stood,
One then might swear, they were allied in blood.
Other two, who, so nigh resembling, were
A loved mistake unto the Parents dear,
Cruel death severed them; and that one left
Poor Parents knew, of Error now bereft.
He left, eternal cause of grief renewes,
Who still alive, still his dead brother shows:
And yet to them this comfort still he gives,
The one cannot dye, so long as the other lives.
The wounded Soldiers, now that all else fails,
To stop their wounds, do tear their woeful sails.
Poor men! who, after they were overthrown,
Had torn those wings, whereby they might have flowne
One, with his bleeding, ready to expire,
Thinks with his blood to quench the Ship on fire;
And so in midst of flames he bleeding stands,
Tearing new wounds with his kind-cruell hands:
And grieved to see his blood so little profit,
He often adds tears to help the quenching of it;
Till at last fainting he is feign to fall
Into the Sea, which made his Funeral.
And bleeding in it from each mangled limb,
He quenched it, and it extinguished him.
See a poor Mar'ner, both arms cut asunder,
Distracted leaps into the water, (under
Meaning to swim:) but see the woeful wretch,
With how much toil he labors to stretch
His raw-vein'd stumps; which for his arms before
Gush nothing now but streams of deadly goare.
Feign would he catch, to uphold his wavering life,
Some kind remain of the Ship; but all his strife
Does make him sooner to be out of breath,
And wanting arms he yet embraces death.
One gets this, by having lost his eyes,
In that he cannot see his miseries.
Another legs are gone, that who him sees,
Might think he did beg pardon on his knees.
What refuge now is left? when, if they shun
The approaching sword, into the fire they run:
Shunning the fire, they into water fall;
So no way wants a certain Funeral.
Thus after strange unheard of sort they lie,
And death by many deaths makes one man dye.
The mangled Ships no longer can withstand
The intruding Sea, and Mars his fiery brand;
But sinking downward, one might then have thought
Them gone to help Charon to waft ore his fraught.
Thus seven full hours the Sun endured to see
(Nor longer would) such inhumanitie.
Therefore his Horses, bathing in their foame,
With posting speed have to their watery home;
Where yet a while they all amazed stood,
Finding, instead of Sea, a Sea of blood.
Hor. 2. od. 13. -- Sed magis
Pugnas, and exactos tyrannos
Densum humeris bibit aure vulgus.
Quid mirum? uhi illis carminibus stupens
Demittit atras bellua centiceps
Aures, and intorti capillis
Eumenidum recreantur angues.

FINIS.

