SEVERAL PROPOSITIONS OF PVBLICK CONCERNMENT Presented to his Excelency the
Lord General CROMWELL. 1. The Ordering, and settling of Particular Churches, 2.
Concerning the paying of Tithes, and engaging the People to hear Sermons every
Lords day. 3. An additionall Act against Adultery, and such as shall speak
uncivilly. And further relief for maimed Soldiers, Widows etc. 4. The settling
of Peacemakers in every City, and County of this Nation, with the form of a
new oath to be taken by them.
ALSO A Letter of great Concernment, directed to Mr. Hugh Peter's, one of the
Regulators of the Law.

By SAMUEL DVNCON, A wellwisher of Trutd, Liberty, and Perme to this Nation.

London Printed by I. C. Anno Dom. 1652.

A Letter with some Proposals humbly presented to his Excellency the Lord
General Crumwell. As also a Letter to Mr. Hugh Peter's.
May it please your Excellency,
I Understand that the Parliament is making way for a new Representative, I am
confident that your Honor does apprehend, it to be a business of very great
consernment, and that the people are at present very unfit to make a good
choice. The Lord has begun a very great work by this Parliament and Army: And
there is now an opportunity put into their hands to go on, and surely the Lord
does expect that this Parliament should make good (both to him self and his
the people) that which have been Fought for, Paid for, and Prayed for, that
his true worship may be Countenanced, and Encouraged, by an Act, of Parliament,
and that the Just Rights and Liberties of the people may be ratified, and
Confirmed, so that all Tyrannical and Antichristian powers may be distroyed;
to this end give me leave, to propound a few things to your Honors
Consideration, which I do humbly beg of God, that by your means this
Parliament may be sturred up to inact some more Laws tending to his glory, and
the peoples good, that it may not be said (as some do mutter) that this
Parliament, and Army, have done great things for them selves, but little or
nothing for others; I shall not trouble your Honor with a long preface, or
much entreaty, because I do know your Honors wisdom, and good affections,
therefore I come to the particulers, but leave all to the blessing and
direction of our good God, in whom I am.

Your Honors most affectionat, and very humble servant Samuel Duncon.
September the 21. 1651.
1. AN Act for the establishing of all Churches of Believers, that are gathered
to gether in the Faith, Fellowship and Order of Gospel, upon a spiritual
account, declaring their faith and Conversion, and showing it in lives and
Conversations by yielding evangelicall obedience to the will and ways of God,
as they are revealed, in the Gospel, af our Lord Jesus, and by obeying the
eivill Magistrate, in all civil things tending to the peace and well being of
the Nation, and that such Churches may have liberty to meet in any convenient
place or places.

2. That the maintenance of a Gospel Minister may not be by paying of Tithes,
that none may be forced to pay Tithes.

3. An Act to injoyne, all people, to hear Sermons at least every Lords day in
one place or other, except Just cause to the contrary, and in default hereof to
pay so much to the poor, and and so much to the informer.

4. An Adition made to that Act against adultery, that those that do speak
uncivilly that way be punished, or that do frequent such houses, or such
company, that such may be indicted and not cleared without the oath of two men
known to be of good life and conversation, swearing that they in their
Consciences do not think, or believe any such matter in the party indicted,
otherwise, to be punished according to the fact without respect of persons, the
one half to the poor, the other the informer.

5. An addition made to those Acts for the releiving of maimed soldiers and
widows, that lost their husbands lives in the service of the Parliament.

6. An addition made to those acts for the setting the poor one work, and
relieving of those that are Blind, Lame, or Jmpotent not able to work, and
that none may be suffered to beg, but that the Town, Parish, or place in which
they are found to beg in, may be punished, and not the party, except for not
working, and if not able to work, then to be relieved by the Inhabitants of
the place of their abode, and if they do neglect or do refuse to do their
duties herein, then they to be punished.

7. An Act for peace making, to allow and enable the people of every City, and
Town Corporate in their several wards or prescints, as also every hundred in
every County, etc.

Annually to choose 5. 7. 0111. of the most understanding plain honest hearted
men to be their peace makers; That no suit in Law may be Commenced against any,
but that the Complaynant do first make known the difference to the Peace maker
of that City, Town hundred etc. where the defendant does live or most commonly
abide, and that both plaintiff, and defendant be Enjoined by that act, to the
award or Arbitrament of those chosen, and sworn men, (and in case that either
Plaintiff or Defendant can except against those Actually chosen, then they may
agree of 3 or 5 or more to be sworn etc.

8. That (as Parliament men) so all Justices of the Peace, Jurymen, all chief
Constables, and all other civil Officers whatsoever may be annually chosen by
the free people of the Nation, a accompetent number in each city, Town
corporate, Counties, Hundreds, etc.

By writs issued our from the Parliament such a month annually and due
returns made by the chief Officers or Sheriff of all such elections, the
returns to be made in so many days and of their being sworn sollemnly as
aforesaid, the oath according to their place and offices.

The Oath of the peacemakers may be to this effect. viz.
I. A. B. In the presence of God, do swear that as I do hope for mercy at the
hand of Almighty God through Christ, I will not judge or determinate any cause
or difference between party and party, (That shall be brought before me)
neither for favor or affection, or wiht by respects to any man's person, but
according to the honesty, truth and equity, of the Cause, to the utmost of my
knowledge and ability, and that I will do my utmost to end the controversy or
differences between party and party.

So help me God according to the Contents of this Book, laying his hand upon
the New Testament.

I do conceive that an Oath is part of the worship of God, and therefore that
it may be with convenience, it ought to be Administered by the Pastor of a
Congregation in a solemn manner on the Lords day, in the face of the
Congregation met together, for the worship and service of God; And the Pastor,
and two more of the Congregation, to certify the taking of the Oath, and the
manner.

That (as Parliament men) so all Justices of the Peace, all Jury men, all Chief
Constables, and all other civil Officers whatsoever: may be Annually chosen,
by the free people of the Nation, a competent number in each City, Town,
Corporate, County, Hundred, etc.

By Writ issued out from the Parliament such a month, annually and due returns
made by the chief Officer, or Sheriff of all such elections. The returns to be
made in so many days, and of their being sworn solemnly as aforesaid, the Oath,
according to their place and offices.

One thing more would abundantly satisfy the people, and bring much honor,
and love to the Parliament, and army, (if the Lord be pleased to give them
hearts so far to deny themselves, as to agree and make an Act, that the Army
that is necessitated to be continued in arms in this Commonwealth, may be
maintained and duly paid; That one half of the late Kings Lands, Bishops
Lands, Dean and Chapters Lands, Delinquents Lands, and Recusants Land, may be
for, and toward the maintenance of the said Army, the said Lands being got but
into a few men's hands, at an under rate, and that some other addition may be
made that if it be possible, neither the weekly Assessements, nor the excise
upon beer or coals may be continued.

A Letter to Mr. Hugh Peter's.
SIR, I do find that you are chosen to be one of the seven or more, to consider
how he Laws of this Nation may be regulated. You cannot but know that the
people are in great expectation of much good to be done, I hope you shall want
no asistance, I am not able to give much in that work, yet do think it my duty
to do something toward it, and yet all may be too little without an
extraordinary hand of God, (which I shall desire) the most that I should do
should be to stir you up to improve this opportunity, in putting life to that
which you cited in your little book intitueld. Good work for good
Magistrates, which was to have an act for peace makers, Sr. I have here
enclosed, sent you a rough draught of a simple one of mine own devising, I do
know that the Lawyers, and all the enemies of the Gospel will with all their
might oppose it, and although there be never so true a conception made by your
Committee; yet it will be in danger to prove abortive, but I beseech you let
not your utmost endeavors be wanting. There are some other things with it, all
which were sent by my self according to the date, unto the Lord General: I
shall in due time, take the boldness to made an addition, although as yet I
have had but little encouragement. The Act for peace makers is the 7.
particular.

I desire you, and some others to complete it, and I do conceive that such an
act may bring much glory to God, much comfort, peace and profit to the people:
God is pleased to pronounce Blessedness upon the peace makers, and truly I am
afraid least a curse should fall upon, or follow those that have power to do
any thing tending thereunto, and do not improve it, Sir I do hope better
things of you, and desire you to stir up others to their duties, shurely there
in great neglect in some, otherwise those things that have been fought for,
prayed for, and paid for might have been enjoyed by the people of this Nation
before this time. I desire you to communicate these to Colonel Disbrough, Maj.
Parker, and some others, Sir

Your very Affectionate friend Samuel Duncn.
February the 10. 1651. Directed and sent to Mr. Hugh Peter's.

A hearty well wisher out of his good affections, was bold to offer these
things to Consideration, with earnest desires that some what in answer
thereunto, might be acted. But being Conscious of his own inability, and of
the ltitlenes in them. saving a true zeal for Gods glory, and a desire of the
freedom, peace, and well being of this Nation, thought it his duty to publish
them. to the view of all that Wish well to Zion, and to all the people of this
Nation, entreating others to make some addition with a mendment; offering their
humble desires, and adresses, to the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, for an establishment of what shall
be for the glory of God, and the good of the people, and doubt not but the
Parliament will be very ready to act according to former Declarations, and
Promises.

I conceive that an Act for Peace makers may save the people of the Nation, as
much money as may maintain asufficent Army, and free the people from a bundance
of Tyrany, and Opression.

FINIS.

