ANGELS REJOICING FOR SINNERS REPENTING. DELIVERED In a SERMON by the Right
Reverend Father in God, BRIAN DUPPA, now Bishop of Salisbury.

LONDON, Printed for RICH: ROYSTON at the Angel in Ivy-lane. M.DC.XLVIII.

Angels rejoicing for Sinners repenting.
LUKE 15.10. Likewise I say unto you, There is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God over one Sinner that repents.


MAn never yet invented more ways to damn himself, then God has done to save
him; nor was he ever varied into more shapes of sin, then his Savior has
been of mercy: For as before his incarnation the Israelites had a cloud to
usher them, and God was in that could; Moses had a flame to becken to him, and
God was in that flame; Elias had a voice to call to him, and God was in that
voice: so after he was incarnate, when he became one of us (sin alone
excepted, which makes us not of him) as if to have been man alone, was not
enough, he ransacks the whole Inventory of his Creatures, puts on all shapes to
gain a Soul: To the Traveller, he calls, I am the way; To the benighted, he
shows, he is the light; To the Stranger, he opens himself, I am the door: Look
for him among the Plants, you shall find him a vine; Search for him in the
flock, the Baptist points him to you, Behold the Lamb! or if Metaphors be but
verbal transfigurings, track him his Parables, which are more real; if you
meet there with a Sower, Christ is that Sower; if you hear of a Bridegroom,
he is that Bridegroom; if you see the man that brings back his lost sheep in
triumph, he is that man: or if you find a woman, that calls her friends to joy
with her, Rejoice, for I have found the piece which I had lost; know that that
piece is thy Soul, those friends are the Angels, he is that woman too; For of
that Parable, this Text is the moral, the meaning of the Parable, Likewise I
say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner
that repents.

That Parables are pictures, Athanasius tells us, but withal, such pictures as
have their velamina, their shadows, their curtains diaphanous enough for the
eye of faith to look through; but not for the eye of unbelief or ignorance. For
as Saint Hierome counseled a Roman Matron, to keep her young Daughter from
reading of the Canticles, ne anima non intelligens vulneraretur, lest the Soul
that understood not the spiritual sense, should perish in the literal; or as
those Images, which the Papists call, Idiotarum libros, the Laymens books,
being misunderstood do prove the Fools Idolatry: so these Images, (for
Parables are but the Images of things) did not so much instruct, as abuse the
eyes of them that saw them, until our Savior drew the curtain; They had
heard of a sheep that had gone astray, of a piece of silver that was lost: that
both again were found, that friends were called to rejoice for both. But what
this was to them, what share they had either in this joy or that recovery, they
had not heard till he that made their ears applied it to their hearts with an
(...), Likewise I say unto you, I that came to heal that which was wounded, to
bind up that which was broken, to save that which was lost; I, that have left
the ninety nine in the Desert, all the Angels in heaven (for so the Fathers
interpret it) to find out one wanderer; I say unto you, to you Sinners, that
come near to hear me; to you Pharisees, that murmr, because these Sinners
come so near me; to you that know not what the value of a Soul is, what
music is in the groans, or what beauty is in the tears of a sad convert, I
say to you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner
that repents.

The authority of the Speaker must win some credit to this Argument, for so far
distant is Heaven from Earth, so rare the commerce between them, that unless
God bring the intelligence himself from thence, man will not believe; Let the
Separatist boast of his private spirit that has revealed it, or the Bishop of
Rome cite his infallible Chair; every one is not wax enough to take impression
at this: But if our Savior set his divine seal on; if we once find his (...),
his ipse dico, I say unto you, then let him that has ears, hear; no Oracle
ever spoke like this, truth, to the truth incarnate: Be not therefore troubled
either with the contrariety of passions in these words, that sorrow should
beget joy, or the disparity of the persons, that Angels should rejoice for
Sinners, or the inequality of the extent, many Angels for one Sinner: for
Christ has spoke it, and we are to believe it.

First, that there is joy, though we know not what it is.

Next, there is a ubi, a place where, of this joy, though it be not here.

Last of all, there is a quare too, a why, a reason, a cause of this joy, for
one Sinner that repents.

But first of that joy it self; for velut solatium erit, says Tertullian,
disserere de illo, quo frui non datur, Sick men may talk of health, and why not
I of joy? As in sorrow the heart is contracted and straightened, so in joy the
passages are enlarged, the cordial spirits scattered, the heart it self runs
out, it is so dilated, which makes Aristotle say, that joy is, as it were, the
letting of the heart out: But if they that feel no joy cannot define it, nor
they that feel it, keep it in their hearts; nor he that wants a heart judge of
it, who shall then resolve us what joy is? or where we shall find a thing to
this name? For, examine first the joy of a proud man, lies it not in the breath
of others, a thin cabinet of air which every man has a key to, but himself?
Let but them above him agree not to think him great, or wise, or noble; Let but
his fellow worms forbear to honor him; he that holds the plough shall not
change joies with him. Or look on the joy of the voluptuous: does not sorrow
often wait so close as to tread upon the heels of it? Have you not heard the
Epicure cry, o his gowt! even at that time, when he has been feeding his
disease with riot? Were not the Israelites struck with meat between their
teeth? and was not Zimri slain in the embraces of his Cosby? Besides, to share
in all the good that is under the Sun is at the best but indolence, a privation
of grief; it is not joy; or if we will needs strain higher for a word for it, it
is but an acquiescence, says Scaliger, a kind of resting of the mind, it is
not joy: he were a strange Chemist you would think, that when a drop of Wine
were cast into the Sea; durst undertake out of that vast Element to extract the
spirits of that one drop of Wine, and say, here they are: Nor shall I conceive
him an easier Artisan, that can out of the Sea of his ordinary hourly
discontents, extract this drop of joy, and show it to me. The truth is, we know
not what it is, because we seek not for it where we should: Copernicus that
thought the Earth moved, and the Heavens stood still, was not yet so mad as
either to look for Trees in Heaven, or for Stars upon the ground; yet we, in
our search for joy, do as mad things as this comes to: for what would you
imagine if you should see a man knock at a Gravestone for a Companion, or go
down into a Charnel-house to make merry: if you did not pronounce him directly
frantic, you would guess surely that he had mistook the place: and the like
do I of you, says Saint Austin, Qui quaeritis gaudium in loco non suo, who
look for joy either in the honors or pleasures of this life, or what ever else
is not the proper sphere of it.

But suppose there were such a thing on earth as joy, that the Philosophers
stone, the Northwest passage, and that, were found out together; yet there
remains another disquisition: for, where shall we have a lodging for it? where a
breast capable to entertain it? in the heart of the sinful man? no, God
himself has barred that door against it: for, gaudere non est impiis, as we
find it denounced in the Prophecy of Esaias, there is no peace, no joy to the
wicked; they cannot rejoice, they may perchance drown their grief in wine, or
drive away their discontents with company, they may reprieve their souls for a
time from melancholy, but the fits of a constant Ague, or the flowings of the
Tide come not more duly, then it returns again; Shifting of the place will
not serve the turn, unless we can shift our selves; for, post equitem s^det
atra cura, like the Rats that followed the German Bishop, thy sad thoughts will
after thee: Draw the curtains of thy bed, yet they will lie with thee; shut the
door of thy closet, yet they will come in unto thee: For the truth is, says S.
Bernard, Intus est quem fugis, Every ill man has his enemy within him, his
own heart calls to him; as his did in the vision, ego tibi horum sum causa, I
am the cause of all this trouble unto thee: Thou have made me ill, I will not
leave thee quiet.

No joy then to the wicked: but shall we knock at more innocent doors to see if
there it harbors? were the Prophets in the Old Testament acquainted with it?
the Apostles in the New? or shall we inquire of innocence it self, the Savior
of us all? But he will inquire of us again, as he did in the 1. of the Lam. O
all ye that pass by, not was there ever joy, but was there ever sorrow like my
sorrow? But you will say perhaps, though he himself were the son of sorrow,
yet he bid his followers joy in the 5. of Mat. (...) rejoice; or as if that had
been too little, (...), be exceeding glad: True, but it was in their
reproaches: So Saint Paul had his joy, but it was in his afflictions: the
Martyrs had their joy, but it was in their bitter sufferings. The few notes
they heard of joy were but like the breakings of an Echo, a word or two they
heard, but not a sentence; or like a Ring of Bells in a high wind, they heard
some imperfect sounds of it, but they could not hear the Lesson.

Yet mistake me not, I would not have you hang down your heads at this, or
because the Earth is not your Heaven, therefore to make it your Hell: For as
gold keeps the name in the lease as well as in the wedge, in the coin as in
the bullion; or as he that sees a beam or two shine through the crevice of a
wall, may say he sees the Sunshine, as well as he that walks abroad; so neither
are we so destitute of all comfort, but we may say, there is a leaf of joy,
the Tinfoile of it here, there are some few glimpses that shine in upon us: but
for the full, the solid, the jubilating joy, look for it no longer in this
valley of tears: There is joy, but not here; true joy, but not yet: You that
sow in tears, be certain you shall reap in joy: But be as certain to tarry
till the harvest, you must stay, no remedy, till Heaven be your dwelling, till
the Angels be your Partners, incorruption your change, immortality your
garment: for the earth is not the place, dull flesh is not the subject of it.
Find it we shall, yet not in the presence of Men, but of the Angels. Thus
having shown you the negative, where joy is not: My next venture (if it prove
not a desperate one) shall be to show you where ^is, (...), in the presence of
Angels.

He that comes out of a dark Room into the Sunshine, shall be sure to find his
eyes dazeled: What then will become of us, whose eyes ( Aristotle could say)
were tanquam Noctuae ad solemn? how shall we look on this joy of Angels? shall
we think of the place they live in, or the Company they enjoy, or the Anthems
which they sing, when one Seraphin eccho's to another, or when in a full Quire
they sound together their everlasting Hallelujahs? or if we can lift up our
thoughts so high, shall we think again, how they see the divine face of God?
how they joy in that Mirror? how they exult in that beatifick vision? what
fullness? what torrents of pleasure in such a sight? such a sight, says Saint
Austin, S. Aust. de Spir. and Lit. c. 55.
that if the damned Spirits could but see a glimps of it, that very glimps for
that time would infuse such joy into them as to take away the sense of all
their pain: such a sight that the reflected rays of it, even in this life,
gives us that (...), that Saint John speaks of, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
that communion with God himself. What then can we conceive of those glorious
Creatures, that see not God, either by glimps, or by reflection, but stand under
the direct beams, that have a full and eternal fight of him that see him
(...), face to face, that hear him even with ear to mouth, that are
acquainted with the very whispers of the Trinity. But whither am I carried?
sooner shall a Sparrow drink up the Sea, or a Moale heave the whole Earth out
of the Center, then the heart of man swell to that bigness, as to be able to
comprehend his joy.

Yet as Fathers use to acquaint their Heirs with their estates, before they
mean they shall possess them; so, be not angry, o my God, that we have looked
a far off into those joies which with thy Angels we one day shall inherit: For
though they be of the elder Family, and we like younger Brothers, wear about us
a body of flesh, for a note of difference, yet this heraldry is not to last
always; for thou have told us, o my Savior, that even that difference shall
be took away, that we shall be (...), equal to the Angels, aequalitate
gratiae, though not naturae, says Aquinas, in an equality of grace, though not
of nature.

Nor shall we offend to enlarge this meditation further, to conceive as some of
the Fathers did, that as the Angels fell from several Hierarchies, some from
being Seraphins, some Cherubins, some Thrones, some out of higher Seats, some
out of lower: so on that great Day, when God shall distribute his glory among
us, we may opine at least, that into those several Hierarchies we shall be
assumed: for, among the rest, Origin was confidently persuaded, Quod si earum
virium esset ut vinceret Luciferum, Luciferi solium in coelo obtineret, that
had he been of strength enough to have overcome Lucifer in temptation that was
once the chief of Angels, God would have given him Lucifers seat in Heaven: I
confess were this heavenly Court, like the Court of earthly Princes, (where he
that is beneath bites at the heel of him that is above him; and he that is
above treads on the mouth that bites him) this might breed rather envy, or
hate, or any thing, but joy: But so far are those blessed Spirits from
envying us for this, that there shall be a time when, some Men shall be higher
then some Angels, yet even for this there is joy in the presence of Angels.

But the School has well distinguished a double joy in Angels, either
essential, or accidental; their essential joy consists in the vision of the
Deity, their accidental, in the conversion of us Sinners; the one is always at
full Sea, it neither ebbs nor flows, but the other occasionally receives
either increase, or diminution: For as S. Hierome is of the mind, that Angelus
Nomen est officii, non naturae, to be an Angel is a name of office, not of
nature, (in essence they are Spirits, but in office only Angels) so in that
office they accumulate their joy accordingly, as in our protection their
success is answerable to their care: It was well thought on therefore by the
Church of England to design a Collect in the Liturgy, wherein we pray, In
festum Mich:
that the Angels which always do God service in Heaven, may by his
appointment defend us on Earth: not that we are to belie their presence, as
that Jesuit did, who has blushed to print unto the world, that at the
Bohemian overthrow, there was visibly seen a troop of Angels to fight on the
Emperors part against them; but what Angel joy'd, think you, when that lie was
made? yet on the other side, we are not to deny them to be our Guardians,
whether one to one, or more to one, since their accidental joy does ordinarily
arise from thence, even from that employment.

Well, but do the Angels joy at the conversion of a Sinner? therefore they
know it, must needs follow (for the will moves not till the understanding sets
it going) ult: actus intellectus primus est voluntatis. But that therefore by
their evening knowledge; or their morning, as the School distinguishes, or
that therefore in Verbo tanquam speculo, in the face of God as in a glass, all
Angels necessarily know the thoughts of all; this will not follow, though all
the Jesuits drive it. No? say they, But suppose there were a glass of
crystal made so large that whatsoever were done in all the corners of the
world might be reflected by it; should not he that saw that glass discern as
well all that passed under the Sun? just such a glass is God unto his Angels;
but I doubt the metal of this argument, for a touch or two will break it. Pius
a Ponte m. 1. p. q. 12. r. 8. dub. 15.
First, some of their own men deny, that the Deity can either properly, or by
way of Metaphor, be termed a Glass, or next, suppose it may, yet not a
natural Glass, that represents all that is before it: but a voluntary, such a
one as shows, non quantum relucet, says S. Austin, but quantum voluerit, not
all that shines within it: but more or less, when, or how, or to whom he
pleases. God is infinite, whom the Angels see, but the manner is finite, by
which they see: Besides, God knows the inward thoughts, the secret glances of
the Soul, but the Angels do not know them: God knows as well what shall be, as
what is, but the Angels do not so: God knows the determinate day, resolved on
in his Councels, when the Heavens shall be gathered together as a scrole, the
Sun shall lose his light, the Graves open, and the dead rise up to judgment,
but of that day or hour knows no man else, no, not the Angels: What then is
become of the Jesuits Crystal? if it reflect all, why not this? or if not all,
why do they urge it? But to leave them to their vitrea fracta: The Angels know
the conversion of a Sinner; true, but not always, nor all Angels: They know
it, not only by outward signs, but sometimes by discovery of our hearts too.
But how? by way of leave, by way of dispensation? For none ever denied, but God
imparts to them, when he pleases, the conversion of whom he pleases: There is
knowledge, or else there were no joy in the presence of the Angels.

To conclude this, when God therefore by repentance shall call thee to him,
when he shall perform that wonder in thee, which Saint Chrysostom says, is
greater then to create a world, to justify thee a sinner; when he shall seal
thy pardon to thee, with the blood of his son Christ Jesus, doubt not but on
that day, God has revealed this to his Angels, that there is a new joy among
them, a full confort in Heaven, that the Holy Ghost is busy to set new
Anthems, the holy Angels as busy in the singing of them.

And thus we descend to the last part of the Text, the [why] of the joy. There
is joy over one sinner that repents. In the which words, we must make a new
discovery: First, of the object in general, a Sinner. Next of the quality of
the Sinner, the Sinner that repents. Last of all, of the indefinite
fingularity, for one Sinner, implying as much as for any one Sinner that
repents.

It was a strange error in Lactantius, so learned a Father, being deceived by
the Translation of the Septuagint, in the second of the sixth of Genesis, to
think that those sons of God, that fell in love with the daughters of men,
because they were fair, were the Angels: For besides other absurdities, were
all the beauty of the Heavens transferred into the face of a vicious sinful
Woman, certainly no Angel could have joy in her; and S. Austine gives the
reason of it: For their joy extends no further (says he) then the works of
God: but Peccator non est inter opera Dei, a Sinner is no work of God. Look in
the first Chapter of Genesis, you shall not find him in the whole Catalogue of
his Creatures; as he is Man, he is Gods work, true; but as he is sinful man,
he is his own work: see him in the pure Robe of original Righteousness, he is
Gods work; but look on him in the dressings of his own vanity, he is his own
work, or if not his own, I am sure the Devils: no argument then of joy here,
no Ditty for such an Antheme.

For do but consider with thy self o sinner, think of it seriously, the Angels
that were by, when God stamped his Image on thee, when he washed thee in
Baptism as clean as the untouched snow, when he married thee to his son Christ
Jesus, made thee a temple of his holy Spirit, how can they either know or joy
in thee, when that image is rased out that innocence polluted, that contract
violated, that temple turned into a sink of filth, into a den of Serpents: How
will they look, think you, when God the Father turns away his face, God the Son
cries out, thou have crucified him again, thou have pierced him with thy oaths,
spit on him with thy lust, wounded him with thy malice, when God the Holy Ghost
shall leave thee, either to a fluctuating, unquiet, or (which is worse) to a
seared, a stupefied conscience? which of those blessed Spirits can then take
joy in thee? shall not the ill Angels rather give thee their Plaudite?

Come, say those damned Spirits, let us see this Creature, that was made to
fill up our seats in Heaven; this Creature that was the Angels joy, and his
Gods delight, see where he is fallen, how deep, how dangerously fallen, how
still he lies in his foul sins, without any motion left, any sense of grace:
Ecce (say they) factus est tanquam unus e nobis, behold he is become like one
of us. But Mentimini mali Daemones, (a devout Father answers them) ye were
liers all from the beginning; so are ye now: For, though a Sinner be fallen,
though fallen into the depth of sin, he is not become like one of you: For,
you fell, nullo tentante, without a Tempter, damned are you therefore, nullo
reparante, without a Savior. But this fallen sinner you thus tread upon,
alterius militia cecidit, alterius meritis resurget, he fell by another
malice, and shall rise by another merit. They were some of the black crew that
helped to throw him down; the Son of God, shall help him up again: For though
sin has been his poison, yet repentance may be his antidote; though his sins
have made the Devil sport, yet his repentance may breed his Angels joy: A
sinner is no good prospect, but at the sight of a repentant sinner Heaven opens
all her windows; the Text is warrant enough for such a Doctrine, for there is
joy in heaven over one sinner that repents.

Not for a sinner then, but for a repentant sinner; not for him that hardens
himself in sin, but for the sensible, melting, bleeding sinner; but he that
would draw repentance to the life, that would make such a resemblance of her,
as the Angels might delight in; let him look that he fit her with two faces, on
the one side a mourning dejected countenance, looking sadly back on the sins
she has committed, on the other side a more cheerful lively aspect, looking
forwards on new resolutions; for there is beauty in both, in the sad as in the
cheerful: God too will look on both, or not at all.

As for the sadder look, though Andreas Vega, a Spanish Writer, doted so much
upon it, that he is censured by his own friend Bellarmine for maintaining that
the sorrow of the heart for sin was of so high a value, that he that
conceived that sorrow as he ought, needed no formal explicit purpose of
amendment; though I confess this melancholy Friar went too far, yet let not
any therefore deceive himself or incline so far to the other side, as to think
the way to Heaven is strewn with Roses, that he can leap out of the state of
sin into the favor of his God without so much as a single tear or sigh: No,
as it cost thy Savior more to redeem thy soul, so it must cost thee more to
apply that redemption to thee. Saint Ambrose therefore calls Repentance,
Laboriosum Baptismum, a laborious, a painful Baptism, a Baptism in Marah, in
the waters of Bitterness: For we must as well Flere commissa, as Flenda non
committere, as well deplore the ill we have done, as not do again the ill we
have deplored. It is true indeed, what Saint Bernard says, non si te excories
potes satisfacere, should we weep our selves blind, kneel our selves cripples,
should we flea the skin from this wretched body of ours, all could not
satisfy for sin: But our joy is, that Christ has already done it; his blood
has fully satisfied for the whole world: yet withal, there lies a Condition
on every Sinner, vel hic flere, vel in futur^, a condition that cannot be
avoided, either to mourn here, or in the world to come; either to endure now a
sorrow that shall have end, or to endure then a sorrow that shall have none.
But mistake me not, I do not counsel you to a sullen, continued,
unintermitted melancholy: but yet pardon me if I would have you thoroughly
sensible of your sins when you have done them; for without sorrow on the
earth, I am confident there is no joy in Heaven: There is no Sinner that
repents.

But Saint Austine makes the Question, Which were more bound to God, he that
should be preserved ever innocent, or he that were converted to be truly
penitent? and he resolves it thus, Innocens majora, poenitens magis debet,
extensively the innocent owes more, intensively the Penitent: Innocence a
Jewel of higher price in the substance, but Repentance of greater value in the
workmanship; so much of greater value, that in the 7 verse of this Chapter, it
is proclaimed, that there is more joy for one repentant Sinner, then for ninety
nine that needed no repentance: but Saint Paul gives a reason for it, when he
says, that where sin has abounded, there grace has much more abounded. So
that I dare say, that God looks neither on the heaven of heavens, nor on the
purest Seraphin, with such content, such joy, as on a heart well wrought, a
heart either carved, or cut, or inlaid with sorrows, where grief has been as
witty in punishing, as pleasure was before in sinning; a heart still under the
Hammer, and broken into a thousand pieces: O how busy is thy Savior at such a
sight, watching thy sighs, and numbering thy tears, gathering up the several
pieces of thy broken heart; as if they were so many scattered Diamonds! how
gently he handles them, how curiously he reunites them, like a rich watch took
asunder to be made the cleaner, and set together again.

But does any doubt, when his heart is thus broken, whether this care will be
taken for it, or no? is he loath to venture on so bitter a Receipt without his
Physicians oath? why, God will swear rather then thy Soul shall waver: for,
look in the 33 of Ezekiel, the 11 verse, Vivo, inquit Dominus: As I live (says
the Lord) I take no delight in the death of a Sinner: Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways: for why will ye die, ye house of Israel? Could any thing be
spoken more passionately? He protests, he exhorts, he expostulates; why then
do we doubt? will he not save us when we repent, that has threatened not to
save us, unless we repent? Cyprian. Ser: de Coena.
Non patitur contriti cordis Holocaustum repulsam, Saint Cyprian had learned so
much of holy David, Psalm. 51.
A broken heart, O God, thou will not (or as some Translations render it, thou
shall not) despise: no, we have him safe in his own fetters, entangled to us in
his own promises, if we repent, he will, he must forgive us, for he neither
will, nor can deceive us: Let every one of us therefore make that confession as
Saint Austine did, O Domine si non sum dignus oculos orando ad coelum levare,
at sum dignus oculos plorando caecare, though I am not worthy O God to lift up
my eyes in praying, yet I am sure, I am worthy to wear out my eyes in weeping:
Though I can plead no innocence, yet I would fain plead repentance; that as my
sins have caused the sorrows of thy Son, so my sorrows might cause the
rejoicing of thy Angels.

I would go on, but me thinks I hear some troubled Soul thus call to me, You
tell me heavenly things of this repentance, what power a religious sorrow has,
that the Lizard does not gaze more earnestly on him that sleeps, nor the
Dolphin on the Mariner, then the Angels do on a weeping Sinner; nay, that God
himself is pleased with such a sight; that he suffers all his anger to be
washed away in such a shower: Credo Domine, I believe this O my God, but wretch
as I am, I cannot sorrow: He that should tell me, that all the joies of heaven
were to be bought for one single tear, how could he comfort me, that could not
shed that tear? when my eyes are dried up, like the parched earth in Summer,
my very heart turned Marble, what Moses shall I call to to strike this rock for
water? But stay, be not discouraged who ever thou art: the Mother of Peter
Lombard, it seems, was in as great a strait as this, when having transgressed
her vow of continency, she told her Confessor plainly, that when she saw what a
Son she had brought forth, she could not repent, that she had sinned in
having him: A hard condition! but her Confessor sadly answered her, Dole faltem
quod dolere non possis, be sorry at least that thou can not sorry: and the
like must I say to thee O troubled Sinner; if thou find'st but so much
impression made as to grieve really, that thou can not grieve, know that thou
art already come to a degree of that which thou grievest thou art not come to;
know again that it is the beginning of that thaw, which at last will dissolve
thy very heart to water.

Six times Elias his Servant looked toward the Sea, before he could see any
thing; the seventh time he saw but a Cloud no bigger then his hand, yet that
Cloud within few hours covered the Heaven with darkness, and the Earth with
rain: just so may be thy case, when thou art praying to thy God as Calebs
Daughter did unto her Father, Dedisti mihi terram aridam, da etiam irriguam,
thou have hitherto made me the owner of a dry, a barren heart, but give me now
some springs of water, some feeling at least, some sorrow for my sins, though
at six times bending of thy knees, God does not grant it thee, though at the
seventh there appear but one small drop swimming in thy eyes; yet be not
discomforted, that drop may prove a shower, or if not suddenly, yet in the
mean time the Angels begin their joy in that; for, as the least piece of a
broken glass may serve to reflect the face that is before it; so from that
small drop, that spot of sorrow, there is a reflection made of thy repentance;
and as there is a full joy for the total, the full conversion of a Sinner, so
there is a proportion, a measure of joy for one tear, nay for one desire of a
tear of any one Sinner that repents.

But stay, you must remember I told you repentance had two faces, not only a
sad one that looked back, but a cheerful, that looks forward on new
resolutions: for, as in diseases, it is not enough to purge, to sweat, to
bleed, unless we keep a stricter diet after it: so neither are tears, nor
sighs, nor a broken heart sufficient, unless we forbear to commit again the
sin we sorrowed for: for, however Bellarmine be pleased to censure Luther for
overmagnifying that saying, Poenitentia optima, nova vita, the best repentance
is a new life; yet in the practice of it we shall all find, that though
contrition may begin our peace with God, yet a new life must crown it; though
tears may soften the wax for pardon, yet a resolute amendment must set to the
seal; you therefore that have recovered out of the contagion of any particular
bosom sin, let me beseech you, as ever you would have the Angels joy for
you, not to lean, or listen, or incline again to the opportunities, the
occasions that have betrayed you, to cast off all inducements to sin, to hate
even the garment that is spotted by the flesh; for who, having escaped the
plague, would not burn the clothes he wore when he was infected? Be not like
those planetary, unsteady Penitents, who having discharged their sin this day
in the ears of their God; take it up again the next day in the Arms of a
Sinner: as if God were bound to set no end of pardoning, because they are
wilful to set no end of sinning: Hoccine poenitere? is this to repent? can the
Angels joy at this? no: as there are no rests, no stops, no pauses in their
intermitted Anthemes; so they look too there should be no digressions, no
breakings off in thy repentance. If then any of thy former sins will needs
knock unseasonably at the door of thy heart for entrance, answer them, as the
Spouse in the Canticles, I have put off my clothes, how should I put them on? I
have washed my feet, how should I defile them? I have put off my sins, why
should I resume them? I am reconciled to my God, why should I offend him? O
what triumphs does he cause above that thus answers his temptations here! what
shouts, what peales, what Jubilees of joy, even for one such sinner that
repents!

We are now come to the last particular, For one Sinner: but what for one? yes
even for one; for could it be supposed, says Saint Austine, that there were
but one lost Soul in the whole world, suppose it were only thine; yet thy
Savior, thy Jesus would have come into the world, he would have suffered all
that he did suffer; those scorns, those buffetings, that passion, and that
death for that one soul of thine: If God then would have died for a single
Sinner, may it not become the Angels to joy for him, whom their God would die
for? Of the ten Leopers whom Christ had cured, there was but one turned back to
thank him, yet there was joy in Heaven even for that one; of the many
She-sinners in Jerusalem there was but one Mary Magdalene that washed her
Saviors feet with tears, yet there was joy in Heaven even for that one.
Should there want one string to a lute, the music would not be full; or one
link to a chain, the chain would be imperfect; or one regenerate soul to
the number of the elect, Heaven would not be satisfied: why then does not every
one of us strive to make up that number? how long shall God expect for one
sinner to make toward him? when shall his holy Angels spy so much as a
promising cloud in thine eyes, that thy tears are coming to a settled
resolution in thy heart that thy life is changed? what shall I say more? Let
there be but one among you that shall reckon his conversion from this day, God
the Father shall bless the memory of this day for ever, for he shall gain a
son: God the Son with his own blood shall give it a red letter in his
Calendar, for he shall gain a Brother: God the Holy Ghost shall sanctify it,
for he shall gain a Temple: or if this be not loud enough, all the glorious
Angels shall at this instant shout for joy, even for that one Sinner that
repents. Who then would not thus make holy day in heaven? who would not feast
the Trinity? or who would not joy the Angels? begin therefore your repentance
early: Begin it now, since this is the only way to fill up the number of those
Angels that expect you, when in stead of having your sorrows, the burden of
their songs, you shall become the fellow-singers of their Anthemes. Amen.

THE END.

