A FULL RELATION of the Passages concerning the Late TREATY FOR A PEACE, BEGUN
AT VXBRIDGE JANUARY 30. 1644.

Printed by His Majesty's Command AT OXFORD, By Leonard Lichfield Printer to
the University. 1645.

A TABLE OR INDEX SHOWING briefly the Method, and Order of this Narrative, and
directing to the places, where each subjects Matter therein contained, is to be
found.
1. ARE set down the Messages and Propositions sent by His Majesty, and
brought to Him, which preceded the Treaty, and were inducements to it,
beginning Page the first, and ending page the 20.

2. The Passages in the beginning of the Treaty preparatory thereunto wherein,

1. Of the several Commissions, and Passages thereupon, beginning page 20.
ending page 29. 2. The Papers Concerning the Manner, and Order of the Treaty,
page 29. ending page 30. 3. The Papers concerning a Scandalous Sermon Preached
at Vxbridge against the Treaty, the first day of the Treaty, and before it
began, page 30. ending page 31
3. The Papers Concerning Religion, during the whole Treaty, Collected
together, page 32. ending. page 50.

4. The Papers Concerning the Militia, during the whole Treaty Collected
together, page 51. ending page 94.

5. The Papers Concerning Ireland, during the whole Treaty, Collected together,
page 93. ending page 140,

6. The Papers Concerning His Majesty's Propositions, and particularly for a
Cessation of Arms, and touching His Majesty's return to Westminster after
disbanding of Armies, and further time for continuing or renewing the Treaty,
are Collected together, page 140. ending page 156.

7. And lastly, an Appendix is added, wherein are contained such things as are
mentioned in the Narrative, or were delivered in writing during the Treaty, and
were not Printed before, or being heretofore Printed, are now out of Print, or
not easily to be had, the particulars whereof are as follows.

1. His Majesty's Message from Evesham of the 4th of July, 1644. page 157. 2.
His Majesty's Message from Tavestock of the 8th of September, 1644. page 159.
3. The Bill for abolishing of Episcopacy etc. page 160. 4. The Articles of the
late Treaty of the date at Edinburgh the 29th of November. 1643. page 169 5. The
Ordinance for calling the Assembly of Divines, page 174. 6. The Votes and
Orders delivered with it, page 180. and 181. 7. The Articles of the 6th of
August 1642. concerning Ireland, page 182. 8. The Ordinances of the 9th of
March, and the 11th of April, touching the Forces in Ireland page 188. 9. The
Letters and advices from the Lords Justices, and Council of Ireland, page 189.
10. The Letters and advices from the Lords Justices, and Council of Ireland,
page 189.
Hereunto is added His Majesty's answers to certain Papers delivered upon the
close of the Treaty, one concerning the Militia, and two concerning Ireland,
beginning page 199.

His MAjESTY having received an Account from His Commissioners, of their
proceedings in the late Treaty at Vxbridge, to the end that all His people may
be fully satisfied, of his earnest and constant endeavors to procure the
public Peace, whereby to put an end to these present miseries, has commanded
this full and plain Narrative, of all the passages concerning that Treaty, to
be made and published.
AFter His Majesty's Message from Evesham of See these Messages in the Appendix
no. 1. and 2.
the 4th of July last, desiring and propounding a Treaty for Peace; And His
second Message from Tavestoke of the 8th of September last renewing that
desire: At length, on the 23 day of November last past, the Earl of Denbigh
and others repaired to His Majesty at Oxford, with Propositions in these words
following:

WE Your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, assembled in the I.
Parliaments of both your Kingdoms, from the sense of that duty we owe unto
Your Majesty, and of the deep sufferings, and many miseries, under which your
People of all Your Kingdoms lie bleeding in this unnatural War, after long
and serious consultation about the best ways and means of their preservation,
and for settling Your Majesty's Throne, and Your Subjects in Peace and Security,
have, with common consent, Resolved upon these Propositions, which we do
humbly tender unto Your Majesty.

The humble desires and Propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace, agreed
upon by the mutual advice and consent of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
united by solemn League and Covenant, to be presented to His Majesty.

1. That by Act of Parliament in each Kingdom respectively, all Oaths,
Declarations and Proclamations against both or either of the Houses of the
Parliament of England, and the late ^onvention of Estates in Scotland, or
Committees flowing from the Parliament, or Convention in Scotland, or their
Ordinances and proceedings, or against any for adhering unto them; And all
Indictments, Outlaries, and Attainders against any for the said Causes, be
declared Null, suppressed and forbidden; And that this be publicly intimated
in all Parish-Churches within His Majesty's Dominions, and all other places
needful.

2. That His Majesty, according to the laudable example of His Royal Father of
happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late solemn League and
Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms
respectively, for enjoining the taking thereof, by all the Subjects of the
three Kingdoms, and the Ordinances concerning the manner of taking the same in
both Kingdoms, be confirmed by Acts of Parliaments respectively, with such
penalties as, by mutual advice of both Kingdoms, shall be agreed upon.

3. That the Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes and
Subdeanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons and Prebendaries; And all
Chanters, Chancellours, Treasurers Subtreasurers, Succentors and Sacrists; and
all Vicars Chorall and Choristers, old Vicars and new Vicars of any Cathedrell
or Collegiat Church; And all other their under officers, out of the Church of
England, and Dominion of Wales, and out of the Church of Ireland, with such
alterations concerning the Estates of Prelates, as shall agree with the
Articles of the late Treaty, of the Date at Edenborough, 29. of November. 1643.
And joint Declaration of both Kingdoms.

4. That the Ordinance concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

5. That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled by Act of
Parliament, in such manner as both Houses shall agree upon after consultation
had with the Assembly of Divines. And for as much as both Kingdoms are mutually
obliged by the same Covenant, to endeavor the nearest Conjunction and
uniformity in matters of Religion, that such unity and uniformity in Religion
according to the Covenant, as after consultation had with the Divines of both
Kingdoms now assembled shall be jointly agreed upon by both Houses of the
Parliament of England, and by the Church and Kingdom of Scotland be confirmed
by Acts of Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively.

6 That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits, Priests, Papists and Popish
Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws, and for the better
discovering and speedy conviction of Recusants, an Oath be Established by Act
of Parliament to be administered to them, wherein they shall abjure and renounce
the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory worshipping
of the consecrated Host, Crucifixes and Images, and all other Popish
Superstitions and Errors; and refusing the said Oath being tendered in such
manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be sufficient conviction in
Law of Recusancie.

7. An Act of Parliament for education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants in the Protestant Religion.

8. An Act for the true leavying of the penalties against them, which penalties
to be leavyed and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree on,
wherein to be provided that His Majesty shall have no loss.

9. That an Act be passed in Parliament, whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed,
and a stricter course taken to prevent the saying or hearing of Mass in the
Court, or any other part of this Kingdom.

10. The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the four last
preceding Propositions, in such manner as the Estates of Parliament there
shall think fit.

11. That the King do give His Royal Assent;

To an Act for the due observation af the Lords day;

And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovations in Churches and Chappells,
in and about the Worship of God; And for the better advancement of the
Preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts of this Kingdom;

And in the Bill against the enjoying of Plaralities of Benefices by spiritual
Persons and non-Residencie;

And to an Act to be framed and agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, for
the reforming and regulating of both Universities, of the Colleges of
Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton;

And to an Act in like manner to be agreed upon for the suppression of
Interludes and Stage Plays, This Act to be perpetual;

And to an Act for the taking the Accounts of the Kingdom;

And to an Act to be made for relief of sick and maimed Soldiers, and of poor
Widows and children of Soldiers;

And to such Act or Acts for raising of Money^ for the payment and satisfying
of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other public uses as
shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament;

And to an Act or Acts of Parliament for taking away the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries, Primer seisins, and Ouster le maynes,
and all other charges incident or arising for, or by reason of Wardship,
Livery, Primer seisin,or* Ouster le Maine;

And for the taking away of all tenures by homage, and all Fines, Licenses,
Seisures, and Pardons for alienation, and all other charges incident thereunto,
and for turning of all Tenures by Knights service, either of His Majesty or
others, or by Knights service or soccage in Capite of His Majesty into free and
common soccag^; And that His Majesty will please to accept in recompense hereof
one hundred thousand pounds per annum;

And give assurance of his consenting in the Parliament of Scotland to an Act
ratifying the Acts of Convention of the Estates of Scotland called by the
Council and Conservatory of Peace, and the Commissioners for the common
Burdens, and assembled the 22 day of June, 1643. and several times continued
since in such manner and with such additions, and other Acts as the Estates
convened in this present Parliament shall think convenient.

12. That an Act be passed in the Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively,
for confirmation of the Treaties passed betwixt the two Kingdoms (viz.) the
large Treaties, the late Treaty for the coming of the Scots Army into England,
and the settling of the Garrison of Berwick of the 29 of November, 1643. And the
Treaty concerning Ireland of the 6th of August, 1642. with all other Ordinances
and proceedings passed betwixt the two Kingdoms in pursuance of the said
Treaties.

13. That an Act of Parliament be passed to make void the Cessation of Ireland,
and all Treaties with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of Parliament,
and to settle the prosecution of the War of Ireland in both Houses of
Parliament, to be managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms; And the King
to assist, and to do no Act to discountenance or molest them therein.

14. That an Act be passed in the Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively,
for establishing the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms bearing date the 30th
of January 1643. in England, and 1644 in Scotland, with the qualifications
ensuing.

1. That the Persons who shall expect no Pardon, be only these following.
RUPERT and MAURICE. Count Palatines of the Rhene, James Earl of Derby, John
Earl of Bristoll, William Earl of Newcastle, Francie Lord Cottington, John
Lord Pawlet, George Lord Digby, Edward Lord Littleton, William ^aud,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, Sir Robert Heath Knight,
Doctor Bramhall Bishop of Derty, Sir John Byron Knight, William Widdrington,
Colonel George Goring, Henry ^ermin Esquire. Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Francis
Doddington, M Endymion Porter, Sir George Ratcliffe, Sir Marmacuke Langdale,
Sir John Hotham, Captain John Hotham his son, Sir Henry Vaughan, Sir Francis
Wirdebanke, Sir Richard Greenvile, M r Edward Hyde, Sir John Marley, Sir
Nicholas Cole, Sir Thomas Riddell Junior, Colonel Ware, Sir John Strangwayes,
Sir John Culpepper, Sir Richard Floyd, John Bodvile Esquire. M. David Ienkins, Sir
George Strode, Sir Alexander Carew, Marquisse of Huntley, Earl of Montrosse,
Earl of Niddisdaill, Earl of Traquayre, Earl of Carnewath, Viscount of
Aubayne, Lord Ogleby, Lord Rae, Lord Harris, Lodwick Lindsey some time Earl of
^rawford, Patrick Ruthen sometime Earl of Forth, James King sometimes Lord
Ethyn, ^^uing younger of Drunim, Gordon younger of Gight, Lesley of
Auchinto^le, Sir Robert Spotswood of Dumipace, Colonel John Cockram, Mr John
Maxwell, sometime pretended Bishop of Rosse, M. Walter Balcanquall, and all
such others, as being processed by the Estates for Treason, shall be condemned
before the Act of Oblivion be passed.

2. All Papists and Popish Recusants, who have been now, are, or shall be
actually in Arms, or Voluntarily assisting against the Parliaments or Estates
of either Kingdom.

3. All persons who have had any hand in the plotting, designing, or assisting
the Rebellion in Ireland.

4. That Humphrey Bennet Esquire, Sir Edward Ford, Sir John Penruddock, Sir
George Vaughan, Sir John Weld, Sir Robert Lee, Sir John Pate, John Ackland,
Edmund Windham Esquires, Sir John Fitzherbert, Sir Edward Laurence, Sir Ralph
Dutton, Henry Lingen Esquire. Sir William Russell of Worcestershire, Thomas Lee of
Adlington Esquire. Sir John Girlington, Sir Paul Neale, Sir William Thorald, Sir
Edward Huffey, Sir Tho. Lyddell Senior, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir John Digby of
Nottingh: Sir Hen: Fletcher, Sir Richard Minshall, Laurence Halsteed, John
Denham Esquires, Sir Edmond Fortescue, Peter St Hill Esquire. Sir Thomas Tildesley,
Sir Hen: Griffith, Michaell Wharton Esquire. Sir Hen. Spiller, Sir George Benion,
Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir Edward Walgrove, Sir Edward Bishop, S ^ Robert Owsley,
Sr John Maney, Lord Cholmely, Sir Thomas Aston, Sir Lewis Dives, Sir Peter
Osborne, Samuel Thorneton Esquire. Sir John Lucas, John Blomey Esquire. Sir Thomas
Ched^e, Sir Nicholas Kemish, and Hugh LLoyd Esquire. And all such of the Scottish
Nation, as have concurred in the Votes at Oxford, against the Kingdom of
Scotland and their proceedings, or have Sworn or Subscribed the Declaration
against the Convention and Covenant; And all such as have assisted the
Rebellion in the North, or the invasion in the South of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, or the late Invasion made there by the Irish and their Adherents; And
that the Members of either House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the
Parliament, but have also Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, may be removed from His
Majesty's Counsels, and be restrained from coming within the Verge of the
Court, and that they may not without the advice and consent of both Kingdoms,
bear any Office, or have any employment concerning the State or Commonwealth.
And also that the Members of either House of Parliament, who have deserted the
Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, and not rendered themselves
before the last of October 1644may be removed from His Majesty's Counsels; and
be restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court, and that they may
not, without the advice and consent of both Houses of Parliament, bear any
Office, or have any employment concerning the State or Common wealth: And in
case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of High Treason, and
incapable of any Pardon by His Majesty, and their Estates to be disposed as
both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the Parliament in
Scotland respectively shall think fit.

5. That by Act of ^arliament, all Judges and Officers toward the Law Common
or Civil, who have deserted the Parliament and adhered to the enemies thereof,
be made incapable of any place of Judicature or Office, toward the Law Common
or Civil; And that all Sergeants, Counselors and Atturneys, Doctors,
Advocates and Proctors of the Law Common or Civil, who have deserted the
Parliament and adhered to the Enemies thereof, be made incapable of any
practice in the Law common or civil, either in public or in private. And
that they, and likewise all Bishops, Clergymen, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the enemies thereof,
shall not be capable of any preferment or employment, either in Church or
Commonwealth, without the advice and consent of both Houses of Parliament.

6. The persons of all others to be free of all personal censure,
notwithstanding any Act or thing, done, in, or concerning this War, they
taking the Covenant.

7. The Estates of those persons, excepted in the first three preceding
qualifications to pay double Debts and Damages.

8. A third part in full value of the Fstates of the persons made incapable of
any employment, as aforesaid, to be employed for the payment of the public
Debts and Damages, according to the Declaration.

9. And likewise a tenth part of the Estates of all other Delinquents within
the joint Declarations; and in case the Estates and proportions aforementioned,
shall not suffice for the payment of the public engagements, whereunto they
are only to be employed, that then a new proportion may be appointed by the
joint advice of both Kingdoms, providing, it exceed not the one moiety of the
Estates of the persons made incapable, as aforesaid, and that it exceed not a
sixth part of the Estate of the other Delinquents.

10. That the persons and Estates of all common Soldiers, and others of the
Kingdom of England, who in Lands or Goods be not worth 200l sterling; and the
persons and Estates of all common Soldiers, and others of the Kingdom of
Scotland, who in Lands or Goods be not worth 100l sterling, be at liberty and
discharged.

11. That an Act be passed whereby the Debts of the Kingdom, and the persons
of Delinquents, and the value of their Estates may be known; and which Act
shall appoint in what manner the confiscations and proportions before
mentioned, may be levied and applied to the discharge of the said engagements.

15. That by Act of Parliament the Subjects of the Kingdom of England, may be
appointed to be Armed, Trained and Disciplined in such manner as both Houses
shall think fit, the like for the K^ngdome of Scotland, in such manner as the
Estates of Parliament there shall think fit.

16. That an Act of Parliament be passed for the settling of the Admiralty and
Forces at Sea, and for the raising of such Moneys for maintenance of the said
Forces, and of the Navy, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit; the
like for the Kingdom of Scotland, in such manner as the Estates of Parliament
there shall think fit.

17. An Act for the settling of all Forces both by Sea and Land, and
Commissioners to be nominated by both Houses of Parliament, of persons of
known integrity, and such as both Kingdoms may confide in, for their
faithfulness to Religion, and peace of the Kingdoms of the House of Peers,
and of the House of Commons, who shall be removed or altered from time to time
as both Houses shall think fit; and when any shall dye, others to be nominated
in their places by the said Houses, which Commissioners shall have power,

1. To suppress any Forces raised without authority of both Houses of
Parliament, or in the intervalls of Parliaments, without consent of the said
Commissioners, to the disturbance of the public peace of the Kingdoms, and
to suppress any Foreign Forces that shall invade this Kingdom, and that it
shall be high Treason in any who shall Leavy any Force without such authority
or consent, to the disturbance of the public peace of the Kingdoms, any
Commission under the Great Seal, or warrant to the contrary notwithstanding,
and they to be incapable of any Pardon, from His Majesty, and their Estates to
be disposed of, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

2. To preserve the Peace now to be settled, and to prevent all disturbance of
the public Peace that may arise by occasion of the late troubles: so for the
Kingdom of Scotland.

3. To have power to send part of themselves, so as they exceed not a third
part, or be not under the number of to reside in the Kingdom of Scotland, to
assist and Vote as single persons with the Commissioners of Scotland, in those
matters wherein the Kingdom of Scotland is only concerned: so for the
Kingdom of Scotland.

4. That the Commissioners of both Kingdoms may meet as a joint Committee, as
they shall see cause, or send part of themselves as aforesaid, to do as
follows,

1. To preserve the Peace betwixt the Kingdoms, and the King and every one of
them.

2. To prevent the violation of the Articles of Peace, as aforesaid, or any
troubles arising in the Kingdoms by breach of the said Articles, and to hear
and determine all differences that may occasion the same according to the
Treaty, and to do further accordingly as they shall respectively receive
Instructions from both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the
Parliament in Scotland, and in the intervalls of Parliaments from the
Commissioners for the preservation of the public Peace.

3. To raise and join the Forces of both Kingdoms to resist all Foreign
Invasion, and to suppress any Forces raised within any of the Kingdoms, to
the disturbance of the public Peace of the Kingdoms, by any authority under
the great Seal, or other warrant whatsoever, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament in England, and the Estates of the Parliament in Scotland, or the
said Commissioners of that Kingdom whereof they are Subjects; and that in
those cases of joint concernment to both Kingdoms, the Commissioners, to be
directed to be there all, or such part as aforesaid, to act and direct as joint
Commissioners of both Kingdoms.

4. To order the War of Ireland, according to the Ordinance of the 11th of
April, and to order the Militia, and conserve the peace of the Kingdom of
Ireland.

18. That His Majesty give his assent to what the two Kingdoms shall agree
upon, in prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty which are not yet
finished.

19. That by Act of Parliament all Peers, made since the day that Edward Lord
Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, deserted the Parliament, and
that the said Great Seal was surreptitiously conveyed away from the
Parliament, being the 21 day of May, 1642. And who shall be hereafter made,
shall not sit or Vote in the Parliament of England, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament, and that all Honor and Title conferred on any, without
consent of both Houses of Parliament, since the 20th day of May, 1642. being
the day that both Houses declared, That the King, seduced by evil Counsel,
intended to raise War against the Parliament, be declared null and void. The
like for the Kingdom of Scotland, those being excepted whose Patents were
passed the Great Seal before the 4th of June, 1644.

20. That by Act of Parliament the Deputy or chief Governor, or other
Governors of Ireland, be nominated by both Houses of Parliament, or in the
intervalls of Parliament by the Commissioners, to continue during the pleasure
of the said Houses, or in the intervalls of Parliament during the pleasure of
the aforementioned Commissioners, to be approved or disallowed by both Houses
at their next sitting. And that the Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer,
Commissioners of the Great Seal, or Treasury, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
Chancellors of the Exchequer, and Dutchee, Secretaries of State, Judges of both
Benches, and of the Exchequer of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, be
nominated by both Houses of Parliament, to continue quam diu se been gesserint,
and in the intervalls of Parliament by the aforementioned Commissioners to be
approved or disallowed by both Houses at their next sitting; The like for the
Kingdom of Scotland, adding the Justice General, and in such manner as the
Estates in Parliament there shall think fit.

21. That by Act of Parliament the Education of Your Majesty's Children, and
the Children of Your Heirs and Successors be in the true Protestant Religion,
and that their Tutors and Governors be of known integrity, and be chosen by
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, or in the intervalls of Parliaments, by the
aforenamed Commissioners to be approved or disallowed by both Parliaments at
their next sitting. And that if they be Male, they be Married to such only as
are of the true Protestant Religion, if they be Female, they may not be married
but with the advice and consent of both Parliaments, or in the intervalls of
Parliament by their Commissioners.

22. That your Majesty will give your Royal assent to such ways and means as
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms shall think fitting for the uniting of the
Protestant Princes, and for the entire restitution and Reestablishment of
Charles Lodwick Prince Elector Palatine, His Heirs and Successors, to His
Electorall Dignity Rights and Dominions; Provided that this extend not to
Prince Rupert, or Prince Maurice, or the Children of either of them, who have
been the Instruments of so much bloodshed and mischief against both Kingdoms.

23. That by Act of Parliament the concluding of Peace or War with Foreign
Princes and States, be with advice and consent of both Parliaments, or in the
intervalls of Parliaments by their Commissioners.

24. That an Act of Oblivion be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
respectively, relative to the Qualifications in the Propositions aforesaid,
concerning the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, with the exception of all
Murderers, The^ves and other Offenders, not having relation to the War.

25. That the Members of both houses of Parliament, or others, who have, during
this Parliament, been put out of any Place or Office, Pension or benefit, for
adhering to the Parliament, may either be restored thereunto, or otherwise have
Recompense for the same, upon the humble desire of both Houses of Parliament.
The like for the Kingdom of Scotland.

26. That the Armies may be Disbanded at such time and in such manner, as shall
be agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, or such as shall be
authorized by them to that effect.

27. That an Act be passed for the granting and confirming of the Charters,
Customs, Liberties and Franchises of the City of London, notwithstanding any
Non-user Mis-user or Abuser. That the Militia of the City of London, may be in
the ordering and Government of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons in
Common Council assembled, or such as they shall from time to time appoint,
whereof the Lord Major and Sheriffs for the time being to be there. And that
the Militia of the Parishes without London, and the Liberties within the weekly
Bills of Mortality, may be under Command of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons in Common Council of the said City, to be ordered in such manner as
shall be agreed on and appointed by both Houses of Parliament.

That the Tower of London may be in the Government of the City of London, and
the Chief Officer and Governor thereof from time to time be nominated and
removeable by the Common Council.

That the Citizens or forces of London, shall not be drawn out of the City,
into any other parts of the Kingdom, without their own consent, and that the
drawing of their Forces into other parts of the Kingdom in these distracted
times, may not be drawn into example for the future.

And for prevention of Inconveniences, which may happen by the long
intermission of Common-Councels; It is desired that there be an Act, that all
By-Lawes and Ordinances already made or hereafter to be made by the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, touching the calling,
continuing, directing, and regulating of the same, shall be as effectual in
Law to all intents and purposes, as if the same were particularly enacted by
the Authority of Parliament. And that the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council, may add to, or repeal the said Ordinances from time to time
as they shall see cause.

That such other Propositions as shall be made for the City for their farther
safety, welfare, and Government, and shall be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, may be granted and confirmed by Act of Parliament.

Upon consideration of which Propositions, His Majesty sent the Duke of
Richmond, and the Earl of Southampton with this Message of the 13th of
December.
HIs Majesty has seriously considered your Propositions, II.
and finds it very difficult, in respect they import so great an alteration in
Government, both in Church and State, to return a particular and positive
answer before a full deb^te; wherein thos^ Propositions, and all the necessary
Explanations, and reasons for assenting, dissenting, or qualifying, and all
inconveniences, and mischiefs which may ensue, and cannot otherwise be so well
foreseen, may be discussed and weighed; His Majesty therefore proposes and
desires, as the best expedient for Peace, That you will appoint such number of
Persons as you shall think fit, to Treat with the like number of Persons to be
appointed by His Majesty, upon the said Propositions, and such other things as
shall be proposed by His Majesty, for the preservation and defense of the
Protest^nt Religion (with due regard to the ease of tender Consciences, as His
Majesty has often offered) The Rights of the Crown, The Liberty and Property
of the Subject, and the Privileges of Parliament. And upon the whole matter to
conclude a happy and blessed Peace.

Unto which Message this Answer of the 27th of December was returned to His
Majesty.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's humble and Loyal Subjects of both Kingdoms, have
considered of Your Majesty's Message III.
of the 13. of December 1644. sent by the Duke of Richmond, and the Earl of
Southampton, directed to the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England at Westminster, and to the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland
now at London. And do in all humbleness return this Answer.

That we do consent there be a Treaty for a safe and well grounded Peace: But
find that it will require some time to resolve concerning the Instructions, and
manner of that Treaty; And therefore, that Your Majesty might not be held in
suspense touching our readiness to make use of any opportunity for attayning
such a blessed and happy Peace in all Your Majesty's Dominions, We would not
stay Your Majesty's Messengers till we did resolve upon all th^se particulars,
which we will take into our serious consideration, and present our humble
desires to Your Majesty with all convenient speed.

Westminster, the 20^h of December. 1644. Gray of Wark, Speaker of the House of
Peers pro tempore.
Signed in the name, and by warrant of the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland.LOWDON.
William Lenthall, Speaker of the Commons House Assembled in Parliament.

And afterward upon the 18th of January following, Sir Peter Killigrew brought
this farther Answer to His Majesty.
May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's humble and Loyal Subjects, the IV.
Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and
the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, do make our further answer to
Your Majesty's Message of the 13th of December last, 1644.

Concerning a Treaty for Peace as follows.

We do consent that there be a Treaty for a safe and well grounded Peace
between your Majesty and your humble and Loyal Subjects, assembled in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms. And for the present have appointed Algernon
Earl of Northumberland, Philip Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery, William
Earl of Salisbury, B^sill Earl of Denbigh, Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman,
Denzill Hollis, William Pierrepoint, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Oliver St John,
Bulstrode Whitlock, John Crew, Edmund Prideaux, for the Lords and Commons
assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster; And John Earl of
Lowdon, Lord Chancellor of Scotland, Archibald Marquisse of Argyle, John Lord
Maitland, John Lord Balmerino, Sir Archibald Iohnston, Sir Charles Erskin,
George Dundas, Sir John Smith, M r Hugh Kennedy, and M r Robert Barclay, for
the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, together with Master Alexander
Henderson, upon the Propositions concerning Religion, who, or any Ten of them
(there being always some of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms) are appointed
and authorized to meet at V^bridge, on what day Your Majesty shall be pleased
to set down before the last day of this present January, with such Persons as
Your Majesty shall appoint under Your Sign Manual for that purpose; And the
number of the persons to Treat, not to exceed seventeen on either part, unless
the persons named for the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland now not here,
or any of them shall come, and then Your Majesty may have the like number if
you please. There to Treat upon the Matters contained in the Propositions we
lately sent unto Your Majesty; according to such Instructions as shall be given
unto them, And the Propositions for Religion, the Militia, and for Ireland, to
be first Treated on and agreed, and the time for the Treaty upon the said
Propositions for Religion, the Militia, and for Ireland, not to exceed Twenty
days, and for the things mentioned in Your Message, to be propounded by Your
Majesty, when the Persons sent by Your Majesty shall communicate the same to
the Committees appointed by us as aforesaid, We have directed them to send the
same to us, That they may receive our Instructions what to do therein. And to
the end that the Persons, that are to be sent from Your Majesty and from us
with their retinue, not exceeding the number of one Hundred and Eight on either
part, may repair to Vxbridge, stay there, and return at their pleasure
without interruption, That mutual safe Conducts be granted to the said Persons
according to the several Lists of their Names,

Signed by Order of the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of
England as Westminster.
Signed in the name and by warrant of the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland.LOWDON.
Gray of Wark Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore.
William Lenthall Speaker of the Commons House in the Parliament of England.

Whereunto His Majesty returned an Answer enclosed in a Letter from Prince
Rupert to the Earl of Essex, dated the 21 of January; which Letter and Answer
were as follows.
The Letter.
My Lord,
I Am commanded by His Majesty to return this His answer V. Together with this
enclosed in a Letter from Prince Rupert to the Earl of Essex, His Majesty
sent a safe Conduct for their Commissioners and their retinue.
to the Message, lately sent Him from the Lords and Commons assembled in the
Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament
of Scotland, by Sir Peter Killigrew. I have likewise sent your Lordship His
Majesty's safe Conduct for the persons desired, and also a List of the names of
those His Majesty has appointed to Treat, for whom, together with their
Retinue, His Majesty has desired a safe Conduct.

The Answer enclosed.
HIs Majesty having received a Message by Sir Peter Killigrew, from the Lords
and Commons assembled in the VI.
Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners o^ the Parliament
of Scotland, concerning a Treaty, returns this answer, That His Majesty does
very willingly consent, that there be a Treaty upon the Matters contained in
the Propositions, lately sent unto him in such manner as is proposed, and at
the place appointed in the said Message; and to that purpose, His Majesty will
send the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, the Earl of Southampton,
the Earl of Kingston, the Earl of Chichester, the Lord Capell, the Lord
Seymour, the Lord Hatton, the Lord Culpeper, Secretary Nicholas, M. Chancellor
of the Exchequer, the L. Chief Baron Lane, Sr Orlando Bridgman, S^ Thomas
Gardener, M. John Ashburnham, M. Ieffery Palmer, (together with Dr Steward,
Clerk of His Majesty's Closet, upon the Propositions concerning Religion,) to
meet with the persons, mentioned in the said Message at Vxbridge on wednesday
night the 29th of this instant January, the Treaty to begin the next day: Which
persons, or any ten of them, shall be sufficiently authorized by His Majesty
to Treat and conclude on His Majesty's part. And to the end that the persons
aforesaid and their Retinue may repair to Vxbridge, stay there, and return at
their pleasure without interruption, or go or send, during their abode there,
to His Majesty, as often as occasion shall require, His Majesty's desires that
a safe Conduct may accordingly be sent for the said persons and their Retinue,
according to a List of their names herewith sent.

And then also enclosed in a Letter from Prince Rupert to the Earl of Essex,
His Majesty sent Propositions to be Treated upon on His Majesty's part, which
Letter and Propositions follow.
My Lord,
I am commanded by His Majesty to send these enclosed Propositions VII. Prince
Ruperts Letter.
to your Lordship, to be presented to the Lords and Commons assembled in the
Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament
of Scotland, to the end that there may be as little loss of time as is
possible, but that the same may be treated on as soon as may be thought
convenient, after the entry upon the Treaty.

His Majesty's Propositions to the Lords and Commons Assembled in the
Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament
of Scotland, for a safe and well grounded Peace.
1. THat His Majesty's own Revenue, Magazines, VIII. His Majesty's
Propositions.
Towns, Forts and Ships, which have been taken or kept from Him by force, be
forthwith restored unto Him.

2. That whatsoever has been done or published, contrary to the known Laws
of the Land, or derogatory to His Majesty's Legal and known Power and Rights,
be renounced and recalled; That no seed may remain for the like to spring out
of for the future.

3. That whatsoever illegal Power has been claimed or exercised by, or over
His Subjects, as imprisoning or putting to death their Persons without Law,
stopping their Habeas Corpusses, and imposing upon their Estates without Act of
Parliament, etc. either by both, or either House, or any Committee of both or
either, or by any persons appointed by any of them, be disclaimed, and all such
persons so committed forthwith discharged.

4. That as His Majesty has always professed His readiness to that purpose,
so He will most cheerfully consent to any good Acts to be made for the
suppression of Popery, and for the firmer settling of the Protestant Religion
established by Law; As also that a good Bill may be framed for the better
preserving of the Book of Common Prayer from scorn and violence; And that
another Bill may be framed for the ease of tender Consciences, in such
particulars as shall be agreed upon. For all which His Majesty conceives the
best expedient to be, that a National Synod be legally called with all
convenient speed.

5. That all such persons, as upon the Treaty shall be excepted, and agreed
upon on either side out of the General Pardon, shall be tried Per Pares,
according to the usual course and known Law of the Land, and that it be left
to that, either to acquit, or condemn them.

6. And to the intent this Treaty may not suffer interruption by any
intervening Accidents, That a Cessation of Arms, and free Trade for all His
Majesty's Subjects may be agreed upon with all possible speed.

Given at the Court at Oxford, the 21th day of Jan. 1644.
The Earl of Essex upon receipt hereof returned to Prince Rupert, together
with a safe Conduct, this Letter of the 25. of January.
Sir,
I Am commanded by both Houses of the Parliament of England, and desired by the
Commissioners of the Kingdom of IX.
Scotland, to desire your Highness to let His Majesty know, That they do
agree, that their Committees do begin the Treaty a^ Vxbridge on Thursday the
30th of this January, with the Persons appointed by His Majesty on the matters
contained in the Propositions lately sent unto His Majesty, in such manner as
was proposed. And their Committees shall have Instructions concerning the
Propositions sent from His Majesty in your Highness Letter. And you will
herewith receive a safe Conduct from the Lords and Commons assembled in the
Parliament of England, for the Persons that are appointed by His Majesty to
come to Vxbridge, to Treat on the Propositions for a safe and well grounded
Peace, with their Retinue in a List hereunto annexed. Sir I am

Westminster, 25th Jan. 1644. Your Highness humble Servant ESSEX.

Thursday the 30th of January, all the Commissioners named by His Majesty, and
Commissioners named by the two Houses of Parliament in England, and the Estates
of the Parliament in Scotland, did meet at Vxbridge, where their Commissions
were mutually delivered in, and read, and are as follows.

His Majesty's Commission.
CHARLES R.

WHEREAS after several Messages sent by us to the X.
Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Westminster, expressing Our
desires of Peace, certain Propositions were sent from them, and brought unto
Us at Oxford, in November last, by the Earl of Denbigh and others, and upon
Our Answers, Messages, and Propositions to them, and their returns to Us, it is
now agreed, That there shall be a Treaty for a safe and well grounded Peace, to
begin at Vxbridge on Thursday the 30th of this instant January, as by by the
said Propositions, Answers, Messages, and Returns in writing may more fully
appear. We do therefore hereby appoint, assign, and constitute, James Duke of
Richmond and Lenox, William Marquisie of H^rtford, Thomas Earl of Southampton,
Henry Earl of Kingston, Francis Earl of Chichester, Francis Lord Seymour,
Arthur Lord Capell, Christopher Lord Hatton, John Lord Culpeper, Sir Edward
Nicholas Knight, one of Our principal Secretaries of State, Sir Edward Hide
Knight, Chancellor and Undertreasurer of Our Exchequor, Sir Richard Lane,
chief Baron of Our said Exchequor, Sir Thomas Gardener, Sir Orlando Bridgeman,
M John Ashburnham, and M. Ieffrey Palmer, (together with Doctor Richard
Steward, upon these Propositions concerning Religion) to be Our Commissioners
touching the premises. And do hereby give unto them, and to any ten or more of
them, full power and authority to meet, and on Our part to Treat with Algernoun
Earl of Northumberland, Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, William Earl
of Salisbury, Basil Earl of Denbigh, Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Denzill
Hollis, William Pieirepoynt Esquires, Sir Henry Vane the younger, Knight, Oliver
S. John, Bulstrode Whitlock, John Crew, and Edmund Prideaux Esquires for the
Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster; and
John Earl of Lowdon, Lord Chancellor of Scotland, Archibald Marquess of
Argile, John Lord Maytland, John Lord Balmerino, Sir Archibald Iohnston, Sir
Charles Erskin, George Dunda^. Sir John Smith, M. Hugh Kennedy, and M. Robert
Barclay, for the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, (together with M.
Alexander Henderson, upon the Propositions concerning Religion) or with any ten
or more of them, upon and touching the matters contained in the said
Propositions, Answers, and Messages, or any other, according to the manner and
agreement therein specified, or otherwise, as they or any ten, or more of them,
shall think fit, and to take all the premises into their serious
considerations, and to compose, conclude, and end all differences arising
thereupon, or otherwise, as they, or any ten or more of them in their
wisdoms shall think fit; And upon the whole matter to conclude a safe and well
grounded Peace, if they can; And whatsoever they, or any ten or more of them,
shall do in the premises, We do by these presents ratify and confirm the
same. Given at Our Court at Oxford, the Eight and Twentieth day of January, in
the Twentieth year of Our Reign. 1644.

Their Commission to the English Commissioners.
Die Martis. 28. January. 1644.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in XI.
Parliament; That Algernoun Earl of Northumberland, Philip Earl of Pembroke
and Montgomery, William Earl of Salisbury, Bazill Earl of Denbigh, Thomas
Lord Viscount Wenman, Denzill Hollis, William Pierrepont, Sir Henry Vane
Junior, Oliver St. John, Bulstrode Whitlock, John Crew, and Edmund Prideaux,
shall have power and authority, and are hereby authorized to join with the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, together with Alexander Henderson
upon the Propositions concerning Religion only, To Treat with the Lord Duke of
Richmond, Marquisse of Hertford, the Earl of Southampton, the Earl of
Kingston, the Lord Dunsmore, Lord Capell, Lord Seymour, Sir Christopher Hatton,
Sir John Culpeper, Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir Edward Hide, Sir Richard Lane, Sir
Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Thomas Gardener, M. John Ashbornham. M. Ieffery Palmer,
or any ten of them, upon the Propositions formerly sent to His Majesty (for a
safe and well grounded Peace) from His Majesty's humble and Loyal Subjects
assembl^d in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, together with Dr Steward, upon
the Propositions, concerning Religion only, and upon his Majesty's Propositions
according to such Instructions as have been given to them, or as they from time
to time shall receive from both Houses of Parliament.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentor.

Their Commission to the Scots Commissioners.
AT Edinburgh the saxteint day of Iulij. The eir of God XII.
M. Vjc fourtye four eires. The Estaistes of Parliament presently conveined be
vertew of the last act of the last Tarliament, haldin by His Majesty and thrie
Estaites in Anno. 1641. Considdering that this Kingdom after all uther means
of supplicationnes, Remonstrances, and sending of Commissionaris to His
Majesty, have bein used without success, Did enter into a solemn league and
Covenant, with the Kingdom and Parliament of England, for Reformationne and
defense of Religionne, the honor and happiness of the King, the peace and safety
of the thrie Kingdoms, of Scotland, England, and Ireland. And ane Treattie
aggried upon, and ane Army and Forces raised, and sent out of yis Kingdom for
these endis. Quhairupone the Conventionne of Estaistes of this Kingdom, the
nynt of Iannuary last, being desirous to use all good and lawful means, that
Treuth and Peace might be established in all His Majesty's Dominions, with such
a blessed Pacificationne betwixt His Majesty and His Subiectis, as might serve
most for His Majesty's true honor, and the safety and happiness of His people;
Granted Commissione to John Earl of Lowdounne heigh Chancellor of Scotland,
Iohne Lord Mait and than and it in England, Sir Archibald Iohnestounne of
Wariestounne, ane of the Lordis of Sessionne, and Master Robert Barclay now in
England, to repair to England, with power to them, or any two of yame, to
endeavoure the effectuating of ye foirsaides endis, conform to the
Commmissione and instructiones than giving to them, as the Commissione of the
dait foirsaid proportis. Like as the saides Iohne Lord of Maitland, Sir
Archibald Iohnestounne, and Master Robert Barclay have evir since attendit in
England, in the discharge of the foirsaid Commissione. Qunhill lately that Sir
Archibald Iohnestounne returned with some Propositiones, prepaired by the
Committie of both Kingdoms, to be presented to the Estaites of Scotland, and
to both howss of the Parliament of England, and by them to be revised, and
considderit, and than by mutual advyse of both Kingdoms to be presented for
ane safe and weill grounded peace. Qwhilkies Propositiones ar revised, and
considderit, and advysed be the Estaites of Parliament now conveined, and their
sense and resultis drawin up yrupone. Which Commissione is to endure while the
coming of the Commissionars underwrittin. And heirewith also considderin, That
the endis for the whilk the samen was granted, are not it effectuate; and that
the Propositiones with ye Estaites their resultis yrupone ar to be returned to
ye Parliament of England. Thairfore the Estaites of Parliament be their
presentis gives full powar and Commissione to the said Iohne Earl of Lowdonne,
Lord heigh Chancellor of yis Kingdom, Archibald Marqueis of Argyle, and Iohne
Lord Balmerino for the Nobility, Sr Archibald Iohnestounne of Wariestonne, Sir
Charles Erskyne of Cambuuskenneth, and Master George Dundas of Manner, for the
Barrones, Sr Iohne Smyth of Grott^ll Proveist of Edinburgh, Hew Kennedy Burges
of Air, and Master Robert Barclay for the Burrowes (the thrie Estates of yis
Kingdom) and to Iohne Lord Maitland supernumerarie in this Commissione, or to
any thrie or mae of the haill number, their being ane of ilk Estate as
Commissionaris from the Estaites of Parliament of this Kinkdome, to repair to
the Kinkdome of England, (sick of them as are not their already) and with powar
to them or any thrie or mae of the whole number, their being ane of ilk
Estaite, to endeavor the effectuating of ye foirsaides endis, the concluding
of the Propositions with the Estaites thaire results thairupon, And all such
uyr matteris conceruing the good of both Kingdoms, as ar or all be from time
to time committed unto them be the Estaites of yis Kingdom or Committies
thairof, according to the instructiones givin, or to be givin, to the
Commissionaris abovenameit, or their quuorums. And for this effect, The
Estaites Ordeanes, Iohne Earl of Lowdonne Chancellor, Iohne Lord Balmerino, Sir
Archibald Iohnstounne of Wariestounne, Sir Charles Erskyne of Cambuskenneth,
and Hew Kennedy, repair with all diligence to the Kingdom of England, to the
effect before rehearsit conform to this Commissione and instructiones. As also
the Estaites Ordeanes ye saides ArchibaldMarqueis of Argyle, M. George Dundas
of Manner, and Sir Iohne Smyth Proveist of Edinburgh to repair to ye Kingdom
of England, with all sick conventencie as the occasion of ye business shall
require, or as they sall be commandit, ather be the Committie from the
Parliament heir, they being in Scotland, or be the Committie with the Army,
they being in England. And Ordeanes them to join with the remanent
Commissionaris to the affect above mentionat, conform to the Commission^ and
instructiones givin, or to be givin to the Commissionais or their quuorums
their anent be the Estaites of this Kingdom or Committies yrof, And the
Estaites of Parliament, be their presents haldis and sall halde firm and stable
all and what sum evir things the Commissionaris abovenameit, or any thrie or
mae of them sall do, conform to this Commisionne, and to the instructionnes
given, or to be given to them. Extractit furthe of the butkes of Parliament,
be me Sir Alexander Gibsone of Dun^ie, Knyt, Clerk of His Majesty's Registers
and Rollis, under my sign^ and subscriptionne Mannuall.

Alexander Gibsonne Cler. Regist.

After the Commissions read, their Commissioners delivered to His Majesty's
Commissioners this paper.
January, the 30.
WE are directed by Our Instructions, to Treat with XIII.
your Lordships upon the Propositions concerning Religion, the Militia, and
Ireland, three days a piece, (alternis vicibus) during the space of twenty
days, from the 30 of January, beginning first with the Propositions of
Religion, and accordingly we shall deliver unto your Lordships a Paper to
morrow morning upon those Propositions.

Accordingly the Treaty did proceed upon those subject^ three days a piece,
(Alternis vicibus,) beginning with that of Religion upon Friday the last of
January, and so continuing Saturday the first, and Monday the third of
February, which was after resumed, Tuesday the 11, Wednesday the 12, and
Thursday the 13, of February, and again the two last days of the 20. And the
like course was held touching the Militia and Ireland.

But because the passages concerning each subject severally will be more
clearly understood, being collected and disposed together under their several
heads, therefore all those which concern Religion, the Militia, and Ireland,
are put together; And in like manner the passages preparatory to the Treaty;
concerning the Commissions, the manner of the Treaty, and a seditious Sermon
made the first day appointed for the Treaty; And such as happened in the Treaty
touching His Majesty's Propositions; The demands of farther time to Treat, and
other emergent passages which have no Relation to those of Religion, the
Militia and Ireland, are in like manner digested under their several heads,
with their particular dates.

And first those which concern the Commissions.

Friday the last of January, His Majesty's Commissioners delivered unto Their
Commissioners this paper;

Vlt. January.
WE having perused the power granted to your Lordships, XIV.
in the Paper delivered by the Earl of Northumberland, and finding the same to
relate to instructions, we desire to see those instructions, that thereby we
may know what power is granted to you; and we ask this the rather, because by
All their Commissioners were not then come to Vxbridge.
the Powers we have seen, we do not find that your Lordships, in the absence
of any one of your number, have power to Treat.

Their Answer.
31. January.
BY Our Instructions we, or any ten of us, whereof some of either XV.
House of the Parliament of England, and some of the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland, to be present, have power to Treat with your Lordships.

Their farther Answer.
Vlt. January.
Whereas your Lordships have expressed unto us a desire XVI.
of seeing our Instructions, to know what Power is granted us; and this the
rather because you say you find not by what you have seen, that in the absence
of any one of our number, we have power to Treat. To this we return in Answer,
that since the Paper already delivered in by us, declaring that by our
Instructions any ten of us, whereof some of either House of the Parliament of
England, and some of the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland to be
present, had power to Treat with your Lordships, has not given you
satisfaction in the particular of the Quorum. We shall send unto the two Houses
of Parliament, to have the Quorum inserted in the Commission, and do expect
the return of it so amended, within two or three days, when we shall present
it unto your Lordships. But as for your desire in general to see our
Instructions, it is that for which we have no Warrant nor is it, as we
conceive, at all necessary, or proper for us so to do, for that the
Propositions upon which we now Treat, have been already presented from the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms unto His Majesty, and whatsoever is propounded by
us in order unto them, is sufficiently warranted by what both Parliaments have
done in the passing and sending of those Propositions, and by the Commissions
authorizing us to Treat upon them, already shown unto your Lordships, so as
there can be no need to show any other power.

Accordingly on Saturday the first of February, they did deliver their
Commission for the English Commissioners renewed as follows.
Die Sabbatis primo Febr.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that Algernon
Earl of Northumberland, Philip XVII.
Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, William Earl of Salisbury, Bazil Earl of
Denbigh, Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Denzill Hollis, William Pierrepont, Sir
Henry Vane junior, Oliver St John, Bulstrode Whitlock, John Crew, and Edmund
Prideaux* shall have power and authority, and are hereby authorized to join
with the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, together with Alexander
Henderson, upon the Propositions concerning Religion only, or any ten of
them, Whereof some of either House of the Parliament of England, and some of
the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, are to be present, To treat
with the Lord Duke of Richmond, the Marquisse of Hertford, the Earl of
Southampton, the Earl of Kingston, the Lord Dunsmore, Lord Capell, Lord
Seymour, Sir Christopher Hatton, Sir John Culpeper, Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir
Edward Hyde, Sir Richard Lane, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Sir Thomas Gardener, Mr
John Ashburnham, and Mr Ieffery Palmer, or any ten of them, upon the
Propositions formerly sent to His Majesty, (for a safe and well grounded
Peace,) from His Majesty's humble and Loyal Subjects assembled in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, Together with Doctor Stuard upon the Propositions
concerning Religion only; And upon His Majesty's Propositions, according to
such Instructions as have been given to them, or as they from time to time
shall receive from both Houses of Parliament.

Io. BROWN Cler. Parliam.

The same last of January, their Commissioners delivered to His Majesty's
Commissioners this paper.
January, 31.
HAving considered your Commission and Power from His Majesty, given in last
night by your Lordships, we find that XVIII.
you are authorized to treat only upon certain Propositions sent to His Majesty
from the Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Westminster, and upon His
Majesty's Answers, Messages and Propositions to them, and their returns to his
Majesty; Wherein we observe, that the Propositions sent to His Majesty, from
His Majesty's Loyal Subjects assembled in the Parliaments of both His
Kingdoms, are mentioned to be sent to His Majesty from the Lords and Commons
of Parliament assembled at Westminster, and upon His Majesty's Answers,
Messages and Propositions to them, and their Returns to His Majesty, that a
Treaty is to begin. And wherein We also observe you have no Power thereby to
Treat upon the Propositions sent to His Majesty from His humble and Loyal
Subjects Assembled in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and the Answers,
Messages, and Propositions sent from His Majesty to the Lords and Commons
Assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Commissioners of
the Parliament of Scotland, then at London, and their returns to His Majesty.
We desire those defects may be cleared and speedily amended.

The King's Commissioners Answer,
31. January.
WE conceive Our Power, being to Treat upon the Propositions XIX.
brought by the Earl of Denbigh and others* and those Propositions being sent
from the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, there need no mention of the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms in that place; but that Our power is ample to
Treat with your Lordships upon the whole, both by express words, and by other
general words in the Commission, which give power to Treat upon those
Propositions, or any other; which general words are not observed by your
Lordships in your paper; And Our power is to Treat with the Lords and others
authorized for the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland by name: yet since you
insist upon it, it shall be altered by Tuesday next. And in the mean time (if
your Lordships please) We desire The Papers intended, are the Propositions
concerned Religion, which were not then delivered.
the papers promised yesterday, in the paper delivered by the Earl of
Northumberland, may be delivered unto Us, that there may be as little loss of
time as may be.

Their Reply,
31. Ian.
IN answer to your Lordships Paper, concerning your Power to XX.
Treat, we are content to proceed in the Treaty with your Lordships, in
expectation that the Defects mentioned by us in our Paper, shall be supplied by
Tuesday next.

On Monday the third of February, the Kings Commissioners did deliver their
Commission renewed, as follows.
CHARLES R.

WHereas certain Propositions were sent unto us from XXI.
the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster,
and from the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, which were brought
unto Us at Oxford in November last, by the Earl of Denbigh and others, and
upon Our Answers, etc. as follows verbatim, in His Majesty's former
Commission.

Touching the manner of the Treaty.
The KING's Commissioners Paper.
31. January.
WE desire, to the end there may be a greater Freedom XXII.
in debate (which We conceive will much conduce to the happy conclusion of this
Treaty) that nothing may be understood to be concluded on either side, but what
is delivered in Writing, according as your Lordships have begun. And we
declare, That what shall be delivered in writing upon any Proposition, or upon
any part of a Proposition, is not to be binding or prejudicial to either
Party, if the Treaty break off upon any other Proposition, or part of any other
Proposition.

Their Answer.
31. January.
WE shall deliver our Demands and Answers in Writing, XXIII.
and desire your Lordships to do the like.

The King's Commissioners Reply, 1. Feb.
WE desire a full Answer of our Paper, that nothing XXIV.
shall be taken as agreed upon, but what is put in writing, and your
Concurrence in declaring that what shall be delivered in writing upon any
Proposition, or upon any part of a Proposition, shall not be binding or
prejudicial to either Party, if the Treaty break off.

Their further Answer.
1. February.
ACcording to our former Paper, we shall deliver our demands XXV.
and answers in writing, and we desire your Lordships to do the like, and
nothing shall be taken as agreed upon, but what is put in writing. And we shall
acquaint the Houses of Parliament, that you have declared what shall be
delivered in Writing upon any Proposition, or upon any part of a Proposition,
is not to be binding or prejudicial to either Party, if the Treaty break off.

3. February.
IN answer to your Lordships Paper formerly delivered, we do XXVI.
declare, that what shall be delivered in Writing upon any Proposition, or upon
any part of a Proposition, is not to be binding or prejudicial to either
Party, if the Treaty break off upon any other Propositions, or part of any
Proposition.

Touching the Seditious Sermon.
The KING's Commissioners Paper,
31. January.
WE have certain Information from diverse Persons XXVII. It was on Thursday,
being Market day, and the first day of the Meeting.
present in Vxbridge Church yesterday, that there was then a Sermon Preached by
one Mr Love, in which were many passages very Scandalous to His Majesty's
Person, and derogat^ry to His Honor, stirring up the people against this
Treaty, and incensing them against Us, telling them, That we come with hearts
full of Blood, and that there is as great distance between this Treaty and
Peace, as between Heaven and Hell, or words to that effect; with diverse other
Seditious passages, both against His Majesty and this Treaty. We know His
Majesty's hearty desire of a happy and well grounded Peace, such as may be for
Gods Honor, and the good of all His Subjects, as well as himself; And we that
are entrusted by His Commission, come with clear Intentions to serve Him in
it, according to our Consciences, and the best of our Judgments. And this
being Preached in your Quarters, where we are now under safe Conduct, We desire
your Lordships to consider, how much this may reflect upon our Safety, how much
it may prejudice and blast the blessed hopes of this Treaty, and how just
offense and distrust it may beget in His Majesty: And therefore We desire
Justice against the Man, that he may have exemplary punishment.

Their Answer.
31. January.
TO the Paper delivered in by your Lordships this day, concerning the
Information received of several Scandalous XXVIII.
passages Preached in a Sermon in Vxbridge Church, by one Mr Love, We do
return this Answer, That the said Mr Love, is none of our Retinue, nor came
hither by any privity of ours; That we conceive it most reasonable, and
agreeable to the business we are ^ow upon, that all just occasions of offense
on either part be avoided; And as it has been our desire, so it shall be our
endeavor, to take the best care we can, to prevent all prejudices upon the
present Treaty which may blast the blessed hopes thereof, or may beget any just
offense and distrust in His Majesty, and shall be as tender of the safety of
your Lordships persons, according to the safe Conduct, as of our own. We shall
represent your Lordships Paper concerning this business (if your Lordships so
desire) unto the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, who
will proceed therein, according to Justice.

The King's Commissioners Reply,
1. February.
WE insist upon our former desire concerning the Sermon XXIX.
Preached by M. Love, and must refer the way of doing Justice to your
Lordships; and if your Lordships are not satisfied that such Words as we have
charged him with were spoken by him, we are ready to produce our proof thereof
to your Lordships.

Their further Answer,
1. February.
WE will represent both your Lordships papers concerning XXX.
M. Love unto the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England at
Westminster, who will proceed therein according to Justice.

In the next place according to the Order before mentioned, do follow the
passages and Papers concerning, RELIGION.
Their Paper,
31. Jan.
ACcording to the The Paper intended, is that before of 30. Ian. no. 13.
paper delivered by us to your Lordships XXXI.
yesternight, we do now offer these Propositions following which concern
Religion.

That the Bill be passed for Abolishing and taking away of all Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. according to the third Proposition.

That the Ordinances, concerning the Calling and sitting of the The
Propositions here intended, are those before mentioned on their part, sent by
the E. of Denbigh, and others to Oxford. And the Bill for abolishing
Episcopacy, is in the Appendix. no. 3.
Assembly of Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

That the Directory for Public Worship, already passed both houses of the
Parliament of England; And the Propositions concerning Church Government,
hereunto annexed and passed both Houses, be enacted as a part of Reformation of
Religion, and uniformity, according to the fifth Proposition.

That His Majesty take the Solemn League and Covenant, and that the Covenant
be enjoined to be taken according to the second Proposition.

To this was annexed the following Paper of the 31. January.
That the Ordinary way of dividing Christians into distinct Congregations, and
most expedient for edification, is by the respective bounds of their dwellings.

That the Minister, and other Church Officers in each particular Congregation,
shall join in the Government of the Church, in such manner as shall be
established by Parliament.

That many particular Congregations shall be under one Presbyteriall Government.

That the Church be Governed by Congregationall, Classical, and Synodicall
Assemblies, in such manner as shall be established by Parliament.

That Synodicall Assemblies, shall consist both of Provincial and National
Assemblies.

The King's Commissioners Paper,
1. February.
HAving considered your Lordships Paper, containing the XXXII.
Propositions concerning Religion, with the paper annexed, and finding the same
to contain absolute Alterations in the Government both of the Ecclesiastical
and Civil State; We desire to know, whether your Lordships have Power to Treat
and debate upon the said Propositions, and upon debate to recede from, or
consent to any alterations in the said Propositions, if we shall make it
appear to be reasonable so to do, or whether your Lordships are bound up, by
your Instructions, to insist upon the Propositions without any alteration.

Their Answer,
1. Feb.
Our Paper given in to your Lordships, concerning Religion, XXXIII.
does contain no alterations, but such as are usual in a time of Reformation,
and by the Wisdom of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms are judged necessary at
this time, for settling Religion and Peace. And as by our Commissions and
Papers, formerly showed your Lordships, we have made known our Power to Treat
upon them; so are we ready, by debate* to show how reasonable they are; And
that there will be no reason to expect that we should alter or recede from
them. But as for your demand of our showing what farther power we have by our
Instructions, It is, that we have no warrant to do, as we have already
signified to your Lordships by a former Paper.

The KING's Commissioners Paper.
1. Feb.
YOur Lordships first Proposition in the Paper concerning XXXIV.
Religion, referring to the third Proposition sent to His Majesty, we find that
referres to the Articles of the late Treaty of the da^e at Edinburgh, 29. Nov.
1643. and to the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms. We desire your Lordships
we may see those Articles and Declarations, and your Lordships second
Proposition in that paper, referring to the Ordinances concerning the calling
and s^tti^g of the Assembly of Divines; We desire to see those Ordinances.

Their Answer.
1. Feb.
ACcording to your Lordships desire in the Meaning the next present Paper.
third Paper, We XXXV.
now deliver in the Articles of the late Treaty of the date at Edinburgh 29 of
November 1643. and the This joint D^claration is already printed. But the
Articles being not Printed are in the Appendix no 4.
joint Declaration of both Kingdoms; And we shall speedily deliver to your
Lordships the Ordinances, concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines.

The KING's Commissioners Paper.
1. Feb.
WE desire to know whether the Propositions, which XXXVI.
we have received from your Lordships touching Religion, be all we are to
expect from you upon that Subject.

Their Answer.
1. Feb.
THere are other things touching Religion to be propounded XXXVII.
by us unto your Lordships, upon the Propositions formerly sent unto His
Majesty from the Parliaments of both Kingdoms; which we shall in due time give
in unto your Lordships: But we do first desire your Answer to the Paper
touching Religion, given in yesterday, that some good progress may be made
therein before the three days, assigned to treat upon Religion in the first
place, do expire.

The KING's Commissioners Paper.
1. Feb.
WE desired to know whether the Propositions XXXVIII.
we formerly received from your Lordships concerning Religion, were all that
would be offered concerning that Subject, because we thought it very necessary
(since so great alterations are proposed by you) to have a full view of the
whole alterations that are desired, since in an Argument of the greatest weight
and highest importance, we cannot possibly give a present Judgment of any
part, till we have a prospect of the whole: But since your Lordships do not
yet think it time to let us have a sight of the rest, but first desire our
Answer to the Sea before No 31.
paper delivered yesterday, which contains many particulars, of which we never
heard before, We shall apply our selves to understand the things proposed by
you, in such manner as we may return your Lordships a speedy answer. And to
that purpose must desire your Lordships information in some particulars, which
are comprised in your Lordships paper. And when your Lordships consider that
the The Directo^y which was delivered in is of great length, and the Covenant
delivered with it, both now Printed and obvious, are therefore forborne to be
inserted here or in the Appendix.
Directory for Worship (being so long) was delivered to us but yesterday; That
the Covenant, the Articles of the Treaty of Edinburgh, the Declaration of both
Kingdoms (which ^re comprehended within the first Proposition) were delivered
to us but this day; and therefore we could return no Answer concerning the
Bill for abolishing Archbishops, and Bishops, (which is proposed to be passed)
according to the third Proposition, in which the said Articles and Declarations
are comprehended; and that the Ordinances for the Sitting of the Assembly are
not yet delivered unto us. We are confident your Lordships will not think us
negligent in making as good a progress in the Treaty upon Religion, as is in
our Power, which we shall endeavor to advance with all diligence, and the best
of our understanding.

Afterward, the same first of February, the Sea them in the Appendix no 5, and
6.
Ordinances for the Assembly of Divines were delivered in.

After some debate touching the nature of the Church Government, intended by
the Paper annexed to the first Paper upon the subject of Religion, which are
here before set down. The Kings Commissioners delivered in this following
Paper.

1. Feb.
THe information we desire from your Lordships for the XXXIX.
present, is, Whether, by the words in the first of those Propositions in your
Lordships paper annexed [ the respective bounds of their dwellings] you intend
the several bounds of their dwelling houses, or the bounds of Parishes; or
whether you intend an alteration of the bounds of Parishes?

In the second Proposition, what other Church Officers your Lordships intend
shall join with the Ministers in the Government of the Church; and what
jurisdiction they shall exercise in Order to that Government, and from whom
they shall derive it, and in what degree be subordinate to the power from whom
they derive it; And what you intend by Presbyteriall Government, in your third
Proposition.

In the fourth Proposition, what your Lordships intend by Congregationall,
Classical, and Synodicall Assemblies.

How Synodicall Assemblies, ^rovinciall and National, shall be constituted as
to persons and causes; and what shall be the bounds and limits of their
Jurisdiction; and from whom the several Jurisdictions, above mentioned, shall
be derived.

To these particulars we would be glad (i^ your Lordships think it fit) to
receive satisfaction by debate, where Questions may be asked and replies made,
before any answer be returned in writing, which may ask much time, and be
less satisfactory, but we refer the way to your Lordships.

Their Answer.
1. Feb.
WE cannot but be sensible of the great loss of time, occasioned XL.
by your Lordships Questions for information in your last Paper, and shall have
small hopes of good success in this Treaty, having these two days made so
little progress, unless your Lordships be pleased to give us full answers to
our demands concerning Religion; Yet to give all satisfaction, with as little
expense of time as may be, we are ready by present conference to clear the
Questions in your Paper.

The King's Commissioners Reply in two several Papers, next following.
2. Feb.
WE conceive there was no cause your Lordships XLI.
should apprehend any loss of time occasioned by our Questions, for that your
Propositions concerning Religion were not delivered to us till Friday last; And
the Directory, then delivered with them, so long, that the reading of it spent
the residue of that day; and diverse other Papers to which the Propositions
referred, and without which we could not consider them, were not deliverd us
before yesterday, and some of them not till after the Paper which imputes a
delay to us; and your Lordships, having propounded only general heads of a
Presbyteriall government, without any particular Model of it, which in
several Reformed Churches (as we are informed) is various both in names and
Powers, it was necessary to understand the particular expressions in your
paper, the alteration desired being so great, and being proposed to be enacted,
which will require His Majesty's consent, whom we ought to satisfy having so
great a trust reposed in us. And we desire your Lordships to consider, how
impossible it has been for us to give your Lordships, in less then two days,
a full answer (which in your last Paper you require) to what you propose, which
is in effect to consent to the utter abolishing of that Government, Discipline,
and public Form of the Worship of God, which has been practiced and
established by Law here, ever since the Reformation; And which we well
understand, and the Alteration of which, in the manner proposed, takes away
many things in the Civil Government, and provides no remedy for the
inconveniences which may happen thereby; And to consent to the Alienation of
the Lands of the Church, by which (for ought appears) besides infinite other
considerations, so many Persons may be put to beg their bread, to oblige His
Majesty and all His Subjects to the taking a new Oath or Covenant, and to
receive and consent to a new Government: we do not, nor without information
cannot understand. And which (in truth) appears to us, by your Lordships
Propositions, not to be yet agreed upon in the particulars. And your Lordships
having declared to us, that you have other things to propose to us concerning
Religion, which you do not yet think it fit time to acquaint us withal:
Notwithstanding all which difficulties, we shall proceed with all possible
expedition, and desire your Lordships will not object delays to us, till we
give you just occasion.

February. 2.
THat we may make a right use of the Information your XLII.
Lordships were pleased yesterday to afford us in Debate upon the Questions
proposed by us concerning the Propositions in your Lordships paper annexed, for
the future Government of the Church, and so have some understanding of that
Government, intended by your Lordships, in place of that you propose to be
abolished, we desire to receive your Lordships answer in writing, whether these
short Collections upon the Debate yesterday, be the Sum of your Lordships
Resolutions or Informations upon the Questions formerly proposed by us.

We conceive that the Information given to us in debate by your Lordships to
the Questions we proposed to you in writing was,

1 That the Congregationall Assemblies consist of the Ministers and Ruling
Elders. 2 That the Classical Assemblies consist of many Congregationall
Assemblies. 3 That the Provincial Assemblies are constituted of the several
Classical Assemblies. 4 That all these Congregationall, Classical and
Provincial Assemblies, together, constitute a National Assembly. 5 That the
Authority and Jurisdiction of the several Assemblies shall be settled by
Parliament.
And if your Lordships have any thing else to inform us concerning this
Government, We desire to receive the same from your Lordships.

The King's Commissioners paper
3o. February.
WE are ready by present Conference to enter upon consideration XLIII.
of your Lordships first Proposition concerning Religion, and shall desire to
receive or give satisfaction, whereby We may be of one mind in that Argument.
And for the better entering into this debate, we desire to know whether in
respect of Alteration mentioned in the third Proposition, to be made in the
Bill for abolishing Episcopacy, you would have this individual Bill pass or
not?

Their Answer,
3o. Feb.
WE desire the Bill for the utter abolishing of Episcopacy, XLIV.
which now remains with His Majesty may be passed without prejudice to us, to
insist upon the The Alterations intended here, and in the third Proposition,
are according to the Articles of the Treaty at Edenborough, (which see in the
Appendix, no. 4.) and the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, which are; That
whereas by the Bill the Bishops Lands are mentioned to be given to the King,
and other Church Lands for other uses, by those Articles and Declarations they
may be taken away, and employed to payment and recompense of the Scots, and for
paying the public Debts, and repairing of particular losses.
Alterations mentioned in the third Proposition; and we are ready to give your
Lordships a present conference upon the first Proposition, concerning Religion,
according to your desire.

After a Conference, wherein much time was spent in debate, concerning that
individual Bill which was presented for abolishing Episcopacy, their
Commissioners delivered this paper;
3o. Feb.
WE desire your Lordships answer to our demands upon the XLV.
Propositions for Religion, and in the first place to the Bill for abolishing
of Episcopacy, which has been so much debated, that upon the expiring of the
first three days, appointed to Treat concerning Religion, we may be able to
return such an account to the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, as may give them
hopes of a happy progress in this Treaty.

The King's Commissioners Answer.
3o. Feb.
WE conceive we have offered so weighty doubts and considerations XLVI.
to your Lordships, in this days debate concerning several parts in the Bill
for abolishing of Episcopacy, (your Lordships having confined and limited our
debate to that individual Bill, as it is now penned, not to the consideration
of abolishing Episcopacy in General) that your Lordships cannot expect a
positive answer from us now (being after eleven a clock at night) touching that
Bill; But we shall be ready by the next day assigned for the Treaty upon this
Argument, to deliver our opinions to your Lordships; the which we shall be then
the better able to do, when we have found by the progress in our other
debates, how far a blessed and a happy Peace is like to be advanced, by our
endeavoring to give your Lordships satisfaction in this particular.

This being the last of the three first days assigned for the Treaty upon
Religion, that subject was again taken up the 11. of Feb. being the first of
the second three days appointed for Religion.

And their Commissioners delivered this paper,
11th. Feb.
HAving received no satisfaction in the first three days appointed XLVII.
to Treat upon the Propositions for Religion, we do now desire your Lordships
clear and full answer to our former demand on this subject, that no farther
time may be lost in a matter which does so much concern the Glory of God, the
honor of the King, and the peace and happiness of His Kingdoms.

The King's Commissioners Answer,
11o Feb.
WE gave your Lordships as much satisfaction in the first XLVIII.
three days appointed to Treat upon the Propositions for Religion, as in so
short a time, and upon so little information from your Lordships, could
reasonably be expected, in a matter of so great and high importance: and as we
have given your Lordships already That was by conference.
many reasons concerning the Injustice and Inconveniency which would follow
upon passing the Bill for abolishing Episcopacy, according to your first
Proposition; so we are now ready, by conference, to satisfy your Lordships,
why we conceive, that the said Bill is not for the Glory of God, or the honor
of the King, and consequently cannot be for the Peace and happiness of His
Kingdoms; and if your Lordships reasons shall convince us in those particulars,
we shall willingly consent to what you desire: if otherwise, we shall offer to
your Lordships our Consent to such other Alterations, as we conceive may better
contribute to the Reformation intended, and such as may stand with the Glory of
God, and, in truth ^e for the honor of the King, and the Peace and happiness
of His Kingdoms.

Their Reply,
11. Feb.
We have received no satisfaction from your Lordships, concerning XLIX.
the Propositions delivered in by us for Religion, in the name of the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, nor have you made appear unto us, any injustice
or inconveniency in the passing of the Bill for abolishing of Episcopacy. And
as it cannot be denied, but the settling of Religion, is a matter which does
highly concern the glory of God the honor of the King, and the Teace and
happiness of his Kingdoms; So do we desire your Lordships will grant those
demands which have been made unto you by us to that end; And we are ready by
present Conference, to receive what your Lordships will offer upon any of those
Propositions, and to return that which may give your Lordships just
satisfaction.

The King's Commissioners Answer,
11. February.
YOur Lordships having expressed in your Paper of the first of L.
February, that there are other things touching Religion, to be propounded by
your Lordships to us, We presume that by this time you may be enabled by your
Instructions to propose the same; And therefore we desire to receive them from
your Lordships, which we hope your Lordship^ will think very reasonable, when
you consider how incongruous a thing it will appear to most men, to consent to
real and substantial alterations in the matter of Religion, without having a
view of the whole Alterations intended, when at the same time there is mention
of other Alterations.

Their Answer thereunto,
11. February.
WE shall deliver in, very speedily, that which remains with LI.
us touching Religion, to be propounded unto your Lordships: But we do desire,
(as before) your Lordships Answers unto our Demands, in the same order that we
have proposed them, not conceiving it reasonable there should be any time spent
in debates, or Answers upon what we shall hereafter offer, till we have
received satisfaction in our former Propositions, which we desire may be
speedily done, least otherwise the Treaty be retarded, and the Expectation of
both Kingdoms altogether frustrated.

Notwithstanding this, they delivered in this further Answer,
11. February.
IN answer to your Lordships Paper this day delivered to us, LII. See no. 59.
we desire, that His Majesty do give His Royal Assent to an Act of Parliament
for the due observation of the Lords Day, and to the Bill for suppressing of
Innovations in Churches and Chappells, in and about the Worship of God, etc.
And for the better advancement of the Preaching of Gods Holy Word in all parts
of this Kingdom; And to the Bill against enjoying of Plurali^ies of Benefices
by Spiritual persons, and non-Residency. And we shall in due time give into
your Lordships our Demands concerning Papists, contained in the sixth, seventh,
eight, ninth, and tenth Propositions; And for His Majesty's Assenting to an Act
to be framed and agreed upon in both Houses of Parliament, for the regulating
and reforming of both Universities, of the Colleges of Westminster,
Winchester, and Eton; and for the Education and Marriage of His Majesty's
Children, and the Children of His Heirs and Successors in the true Protestant
Religion, as is in the 21th Proposition.

Some part of the 11th, and the most part of the 12th of February, was spent in
Argument by Divines touching Episcopacy, and the Presbyteriall Government.
Afterward their Commissioners gave in this Paper.

12. February.
THere having now been several days spent in debate upon LIII.
the Propositions for Religion; and all objections alleged to the contrary,
either from Conscience, Law or Reason, being fully Answered; and the time
allotted for that so important a part of the Treaty almost elapsed, we should
be wanting to the Trust reposed in us, if we should not press and expect (as
we now do) a clear and positive Answer to those Demands concerning Religion,
which we have offered unto your Lordships from the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms, as most necessary for the settling of a safe and wel^ ground^d Peace,
in all His Majesty's Dominions.

The King's Commissioners Answer,
12. February.
WE deny, that the objections alleged by us against the LIVE.
passing the Bill for abolishing Episcopacy, from Conscience, Law, or Reason,
have been fully Answered by your Lordships; Or that, indeed, we have received
any sati^faction from your Lordships in these particulars. We have received no
Information from your Lordships to satisfy us, That Episcopacy is, or has
been, an impediment to a perfect Reformation, to the These words are in the
preamble of the Bill, presented by them, for abolishing Episcopacy.
growth of Religion; or that it is prejudicial to the Civil State, which we
have often desired from your Lordships, without effect, and which are the
Grounds upon which your Lordships propose the abolishing Episcopacy, and we
shall be very willing, and are desirous to receive your Lordships reasons in
these particulars. And how short soever the time allotted is for the Treaty (for
which we cannot be answerable being not bound up in point of time by His
Majesty as your Lordships say you are by your Instructions; And we should be
glad, that the same might be enlarged proportionably to the importance of the
things to be Treated on) we should be wanting to the great Trust reposed in us,
if we should consent to those Demands, as they are proposed to us by your
Lordships, otherwise then as they are agreeable to our Consciences and
understandings; And such an Answer your Lordships shall receive from us, to
your Demands concerning Religion, upon which we hope a safe and well grounded
Peace, by the blessing of God, may be established.

Their Paper,
13. Feb.
WE did assure our selves. That after so many days debate LV.
concerning Religion, and our removal of what ever objections have been
offered by your Lordships, and our making it appear how great a hinderance
Episcopal Government is, and has been, to a perfect Reformation to the growth
of Religion, and prejudicial to the Civil State; That your Lordships would
have been ready to have answered our expectation with the Grant of our Demands;
but if still your Lordships remain unsatisfied, we conceive it cannot with any
Justice, be imputed unto us, and therefore we again desire your Lordships full
and clear Answer to what we have delivered unto you concerning Religion.

Upon this last Paper, and after the several debates between the
Commissioners, and Arguments by the Divines, and consid^^ation had of all that
had been delivered concerning Religion, His Majesty's Commissioners gave in
these four Papers following.
13. Feb.
WE are not yet satisfied, that the Bill insisted on by your LVI.
Lordships, which remains in His Majesty's hands for the utter abolishing of
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, etc. ought to be enacted, believing
it not to be agreeable to Conscience and Justice, to alienate the Lands,
therein mentioned, to Lay-uses; and not understanding that the alienation
thereof is necessary at all to the Reformation of Religion: Besides that there
is no certain provision made for any of those who are now legally vested in
those possessions, whereby they and their Families shall be in evident danger
of want of bread: and it appearing by your Lordships Propositions, which relate
See before in the margin to the Paper, no. 44.
to the Articles of the late Treaty, of the date at Edinburgh 29. of November.
1643, and the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, to which you require our
Assent, as well as to the Bill, that part of the Church-land may be, after the
passing this Bill, assigned to other uses then is expressed in the said Bill.
Upon these considerations, and upon your debate which has passed between us
upon this Bill, whereby it has appeared, that there would be so great an
Alteration in the Civil State, by this Bill being enacted, in the failer of
Justice at the Common Law, and otherwise in many several particulars, of great
importance to the Subjects of this Kingdom, which for ought appears to us, is
not yet provided for. And that by a particular See that Clause in the Bill in
the Appendix, no. 3. at this mark.
Clause in the Bill, His Majesty ancient and undoubted power of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is wholly taken away. Besides, it may be very
considerable what inconveniences would ensue by the passing this Bill now,
which looks back, and is to begin from November was twelve month, whereby all
those Acts of Jurisdiction, exercised by Bishops since that time, are already
void, which would produce great inconveniences and mischiefs touching the
probates of Wills, and Administrations throughout the Kingdom; not to speak of
the doubts which may arise in many conscientious men, who have been ordained by
Bishops since that time; which may seem to be likewise declared void by this
Bill: and so at least to discountenance all Acts which have insued by virtue of
that Ordination; and thereby many Questions may arise in Law concerning
Marriages, Legitimations and Descents of Inheritance, and for many other
reasons expressed in our Conference and Debate, We conceive that your Lordships
may be satisfied, that this individual Bill ought not to pass.

For the matter then of the said Bill, The extirpation of Episcopacy, we desire
your Lordships to consider, That it is evident, and we conceive consented to on
all parts, that it has continued even from the Apostles times by continual
Succession in the Church of Christ, till within these few years, without
intermission, or interruption; and then how perilous a thing it must be, and
prejudicial to the public peace, to remove and destroy a form of
Government, so long exercised in this Kingdom^ and under which we have enjoyed
as great a measure of happiness (to say no more) as any Nation in
Christendom, and which your Lordships have not pretended to be unlawful,
before we particularly see the Model of that Government and Jurisdiction
which is to be established in the place thereof; That thereby we may be assured
that it be such, to which as well those who like, as all those who dislike the
present Government, will submit: Otherwise Peace, which is the maine end and
pretense for Alterations, cannot be established: and therefore we very
earnestly beseech your Lordships to consider and weigh, whether without shaking
Foundations, it be not much better, and more agreeable to Christian Prudence
and Charity, to remove those particulars from ^he present Government, and make
such alterations therein, as may most probably give satisfaction to all persons
seriously disturbed or afflicted in their Consciences; Then by destroying the
whole, to give just Offense and Scandal to very many pious and Religious
Persons.

Under these Considerations, and for the Uniting and reconciling all
Differences between Us in the matter of Religion, and procuring a blessed
Peace, We are willing,

That Freedom be left to all Persons, of what Opinions soever, in matters of
Ceremony, and that all the penalties of the Laws and Customs, which injoyne
those Ceremonies, be suspended.

That the Bishop shall exercise no Act of Jurisdiction or Ordination, without
the consent and counsel of the Presbyters, who shall be chosen by the Clergy
of each Diocese, out of the learnedest and gravest Ministers of that Diocese.

That the Bishop keep his constant residence in his Diocese, except when he
shall be required by His Majesty to attend Him on any occasion, and that (if he
be not hindered by the infirmities of old Age, or sickness) he Preach every
Sunday in some Church within his Diocese.

That the Ordination of Ministers shall be always in a public and solemn
manner, and very strict Rules observed concerning the sufficiency, and other
Qualifications of those men, who shall be received into Holy Orders; and the
Bishop shall not receive any into Holy Orders, without the approbation and
consent of the Presbyters, or the Major part of them.

That competent maintenance and provision be established by Act of Parliament
to such Vicarages as belong to Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, out of the
Impropriations, and according to the value of those Impropriations, of the
several Parishes.

That for the time to come, no man shall be capable of two Parsonages or
Vicarages, with Cure of Souls.

That toward the settling of the public Peace, one hundred Thousand pounds,
shall be raised by Act of Parliament out of the Estates of Bishops, Deanes, and
Chapters, in such manner as shall be thought fit by the King and two Houses of
Parliament, without the Alienation of any of the said Lands.

That the Iuris^iction in Causes Testamentary, Decimall, Matrimonial, be
settled in such manner, as shall seem most convenient by the King and two Houses
of Parliament.

And likewise that one, or more Acts of Parliament be passed for regulating of
Visitations, and against immoderate Fees in Ecclesiastical Courts, and the
a^uses by frivolous Excommunications, and all other abuses in the Exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in such manner as shall be agreed upon by His
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament.

And if your Lordships shall insist upon any other thing, which your Lordships
shall think necessary for Reformation, We shall very willingly apply our selves
to the consideration thereof.

13. February.
FOr the confirmation of the Ordinances concerning the LVII.
calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines, and the taking the Covenant,
We conceive neither of them need be insisted on, if the alterations of
Church Government be agreed upon between Us: And if it be not, it will not be
reasonable that We consent to those Ordinances. And for the Covenant, We cannot
advise His Majesty to Swear and sign the same, nor consent that an Act of
Parliament should pass for enjoining the taking thereof by His Majesty's
Subjects.

13. February.
WE do not yet conceive, that the Directory for LVIII.
public Worship, delivered to Us by your Lordships, ought to be enacted, Or
that it is so likely to procure and preserve the Peace of this Kingdom, as the
Liturgy or Common Prayer Book already established by Law, against which we have
not yet received from your Lordships any objections; which Liturgy (as the same
was compiled by many learned and Reverend Divines, of whom some dyed Martyrs
for the Protestant Religion) We conceive to be an Excellent Form for the
Worship of God, and has been generally so held throughout this Kingdom, till
within these two, or three years at the most; And therefore since there are no
inconveniences pretended to arise from the Book of Common Prayer, to which we
conceive the Directory is not more liable, and since there is nothing
commendable in the Directory, which is not already in the Book of
Common Prayer, we conceive it much better and more conducing to the Peace of
this Kingdom, still to observe the said Form, with such Dispensations as we
have expressed in our first Paper now presented to your Lordships; and if there
shall be any Alterations proposed by your Lordships, of such particulars in the
Book of Common Prayer, as good men are scrupled at, we shall willingly
endeavor to give your Lordships satisfaction in those particulars, But as yet
can make no further, or other Answer, then we have already done; But shall be
ready to receive such Objections as your Lordships shall think fit to make
against the Book of Common Prayer, and your Reasons for introducing the
Directory. And for the Proposition concerning Church Government, annexed to
your first Paper; We have no Information how that Government shall be
constituted in particular, or what Jurisdiction shall be established, or by
whom it shall be granted, or upon whom it shall depend. And therein also we
desire further Information from your Lordships.

13. February.
WE desire to see the Bills for the observation of LIX.
the Lords day, for suppressing of Innovation in Churches and Chappells, and
for the better advancement of the Preaching of Gods Holy Word, which are
mentioned in your Lordships No. 52.
Paper of the 11 of Feb. we being very ready to consent to the Subject Matter
of those Bills. We have expressed in our Paper delivered to your Lordships,
what we conceive fit to be done in the business of Pluralities, which will
prevent any inconveniences that way: And when your Lordships shall give us your
Demands concerning Papists, and when we shall see the Acts for the regulating
and reforming of both Universities, of the Colleges of Westminster, Winchester
and Eton, and for the Education and Marriage of His Majesty's Children, and the
Children of His Heirs and Successors, in the true Protestant Religion, We
shall give your Lordships such Answers as shall be fit, being very willing to
concur with your Lordships in any good means, for the suppressing of Popery,
and advancement of the Protestant Religion. And we are well assured, that His
Majesty has taken a pious care, for the Education of all his Children in the
true Protestant Religion; and having already married one of His Children, to
the satisfaction (we conceive) of all his good Subjects, we are confident, in
due time, His Majesty will so dispose of the rest in Marriage, as shall be most
for the advancement of Religion, and the good and welfare of all His Dominions.

Their Answer to the First.
13. February.
WHereas we expected your Lordships resolution, for His LX.
Majesty's assent unto the Bill for the utter abolishing of Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. We find, by your Paper given in this Evening, that your Lordships
are not yet satisfied that the Bill should pass, and you are pleased to
express several Reasons and Objections against it, which were at large
answered and cleared at the Public debate. But what was then said by us, is
now by your Lordships wholly omitted; nor may we in writing represent it again
unto your Lordships, it not being agreeable to the usage of Parliaments, to
deliver reasons for, or against a Bill, though we were willing, by conference
in the Treaty, to satisfy all doubts, and remove all scruples which remained
with you. And so far were we from consenting that Episcopacy has continued
from the Apostlestimes, by continual Succession, that the contrary was made
evident unto your Lordships, and the unlawfulness of it fully proved. And as
for that which your Lordships have propounded, for uniting and reconciling all
differences in the matter of Religion, it is a new Proposition, which wholly
differs from ours, is no way satisfactory to our desires, nor consisting with
that Reformation, to which both Kingdoms are obliged by their solemn Covenant,
therefore we can give no other answer to it, but must insist, to desire your
Lordships, that the Bill may be past, and our other demands concerning Religion
granted.

The King's Commissioners Reply thereunto.
13. February.
WE conceive that our Answer to your Lordships, concerning the Bill for the
utter abolishing of LXI.
Archbishops, Bishops etc. was so reasonable, that it clearly appears thereby,
that the passing that individual Bill, is not agreeable to Conscience and
Justice, and that it would be very prejudicial to the Civil State, and to the
Peace of the Kingdom; neither have the reasons and objections given by us
against it, first in debate, and since in writing, been answered in debate by
your Lordships. And therefore we know no reason why your Lordships may not give
an Answer to those objections in writing. For as it is not agreeable to the
usage of Parliaments, for the two Houses to give His Majesty reasons why He
should pass any Bill presented by them; so it is no more agreeable to the same
usage, for His Majesty to give reasons why he does not pass Bills so
presented. But we desire your Lordships to consider, that we are now in a
Treaty, and we conceive the proper business thereof, to be, for your Lordships
to give us Reasons, why His Majesty should consent to the Propositions made by
you, or for us to give Reasons to your Lordships, why we cannot consent to
those Propositions; otherwise it would be only a Demand on your Lordships part,
and no Argument of Treaty between us. And we must profess to your Lordships,
that (as we conceived in our former paper) the Succession of Episcopacy, by
Succession from the Apostles time, was consented to on all parts, so we cannot
remember, that the contrary thereof, was so much as alleged, much less that
the unlawfulness thereof was proved, the Question of the lawfulness thereof
having never yet come in debate. And we shall be very ready to receive any
assertion from your Lordships to that purpose, not doubting but we shall give
your Lordships full satisfaction in that point. And we conceive the Alterations
proposed to us by your Lordships, to be a very proper Answer to your Lordships
Propositions, and most agreeable to the end, for which those Propositions seem
to be made. And that since it appears, that the utter abolishing of Episcopacy
in the manner proposed, is visibly inconvenient, and may be mischievous, the
Regulating of Episcopacy, being most consonant to the Primitive Institution,
will produce all these good effects toward Peace and unity; which Regulated
Episcopacy, is the sum of our former paper, we desire your Lordships to
consent to the same, And we again offer to your Lordships, that if you shall
insist upon any other things necessary for Reformation, we will apply our
selves to the consideration thereof.

Their Answer to the Second.
13. Feb.
WE conceive your Lordships second Paper, this day delivered LXII.
to us, is a denial of our demands, that the Ordinance for the Calling and
Sitting of the Assembly of Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament; And that
His Majesty take the Solemn League and Covenant, and the Covenant be enjoined
to be taken, according to the second Proposition. Wherein if we misconceive
your Lordships intention, we desire you would explain the meanings, and
accordingly shall make our reports to the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

The King's Commissioners Reply.
13. February.
COncerning the Ordinances for the Calling and Sitting of LXIII.
the Assembly of Divines, and the taking the Covenant, we can give no farther
Answer then we have done in our second Paper, delivered to your Lordships this
day.

Their Answer to the Third.
13. Febr.
WE do conceive your Lordships third paper is a Denial LXIV.
of our Demands, concerning the Directorie for public worship, and the
Proposition for Church Government, against which your Lordships have made no
objection, and your Queres are already satisfied by Conference. And we shall
accordingly make our reports to the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

The King's Commissioners Reply.
13. Feb.
Our expressions in our Answer to your Lordships demands, LXV.
concerning the Directory for public worship, import only what we, as yet,
conceive concerning that matter, there having hitherto been no debate touching
the same, or concerning the Common Prayer Book, now Established by Law, and
thereby intended to be abolished. And therefore we did in that Paper, and do
still desire to receive your Lordships None were made.
objections against the Book of Common Prayer, and your reasons for introducing
the Directory. Neither can our Answer to the Propositions for
Church Government, annexed to your first Paper, be otherwise taken, then as our
desire to receive information, how that Government should be constituted in
particular, and what Jurisdiction should be established, by whom granted, and
upon whom it should depend; which Quere's were not satisfied by any conference,
your Lordships (as we conceive) having declared your selves, that the
particular form or model of that Government, mentioned in those Propositions
only in general, were not then particularly agreed on; And we have since
desired and expect to receive it, and therefore your Lordships cannot conceive,
we have denied that which we have not yet seen, nor been informed of.

Their Answer to the Fourth.
13. Febr.
TO your Lordships Fourth Paper, we Answer, The Bill LXVI.
for suppressing of Innovations in Churches and Chappells, in and about the
Worship of God, etc. And for the better advancement of the Preaching of Gods
holy Word in all parts of this Kingdom, and against the enjoying of Pluralities
of Benefices by Spiritual persons, and Non-residencie, were heretofore
presented to His Majesty, and remain with him; And we herewith deliver to your
Lordships, the Ordinance for the due observation of the Lords day, and we
insist on our former demands concerning them. And when your Lordships have
given us your full Answers to our desires already with you concerning Religion,
we then shall deliver unto your Lordships our demands concerning Papists, the
regulating the Universities, the Education, and Marriage of His Majesty's
Children, in the true Protestant Religion, contained in our Paper of the 11.of
this instant February.

The King's Commissioners Reply.
13. Feb.
WE have not the Bills here, which we desired of your LXVII.
Lordships, in our fourth Paper, to see, and which you now say were heretofore
presented to His Majesty. But we shall take speedy care to have those Bills,
if they remain with His Majesty, and in the mean time desire your Lordships
to give us Copies of them, and we shall give your Lordships a speedy answer, as
we shall to the Ordinance for the due observarion of the Lords Day, which we
received from your Lordships this night, and had never before seen; and we
shall be ready to receive your Lordships None at all were delivered in.
demands concerning Papists, the regulating the Universities, the Education and
Marriage of His Majesty's Children, and shall return our answers accordingly.

This last Paper concluded the six days, appointed for the Treaty upon
Religion, according to the Order prescribed for disposing the first 18. days
of the 20 for the Treaty. In the end of which 18. days, after some See these
Papers after no. 170. 192, and 193.
papers mutually delivered concerning the manner bow the two last days should
be disposed, this Subject of Religion, with the two others, were again
resumed, and their Papers following, were then delivered in concerning Religion.

Their Paper.
21. Feb.
Where as your Lordships, in your The Paper intended, is the King's
Commissioners Reply, to their first Answer, 13. Feb no. 61.
last Paper of Feb. 13. LXVIII.
were pleased to say, that (as you conceived) the continual succession of
Episcopacy from the Apostles times, was consented to on all parts, and that you
cannot remember that the contrary thereof was so much as alleged, much less
that the unlawfulnes thereof was proved, the Question of the unlawfulnes
thereof having never yet come into debate; We desire your Lordships to
remember, that when a Divine in Commission with you undertook to prove the Ius
Divinum of Episcopacy, his Arguments were not only Answered by another Divine
in Commission with us, but that 4 or 5 several Arguments were then brought by
him out of the Scriptures, to prove the unlawfulnes of it; and afterward in an
extrajudiciall debate between several Divines on both sides, by consent of the
Commissioners, those Arguments were further made good by the Divines on our
side, and the pretended continual succession of Episcopal Government from the
Apostles times was (as we conceive) at the same time sufficiently disproved; So
that we cannot but wonder that your Lordships should forget that the
unlawfulnes of it was debated. And whereas in your Lordships See the Paper, 20.
Feb. after No. 196. being delivered upon another occasion.
last Paper of Feb. 20. you were pleased to say, that if it might be made
appear, that the Government by Bishops is unlawful, or that the Government,
which we desire to introduce in the room thereof, is the only Government that
is agreeable to the word of God, your Lordships would immediately give us full
satisfaction in our Proposition. We desire your Lordships to remember besides,
what has bin proved in debate concerning the unlawfulnes of Episcopal
Government, and not withstanding the general experience, that the government
by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. has bin a hinderance to Reformation, and growth
of Religion, and prejudicial to the Civil State; and the manifest evidence of
the thing it self, that so much of the Government desired by us, as has bin
presented to your Lordships, is agreeable to the word of God, how we have
several times offered our selves to give your Lordships satisfaction by
Conference, if any objections remained with your Lordships to the contrary,
which we are still ready to do, and desire your Lordships full Answer to that,
and the rest of our Propositions concerning Religion.

The King's Commissioners Answer.
21. Feb.
WE did conceive that the continual Succession of Episcopacy LXIX.
from the Apostles times, had bin so clearly manifested to your Lordships, by
our Conference on the 12. of this instant, that your Lordships had bin fully
satisfied therein; the which since you are not, we would gladly be informed,
when, and where any National Church, since the Apostles times, was without
that Government; and since your Lordships are of opinion that the unlawfulnes
of Episcopacy was made good by those Arguments, which were given by the Divines
on your part, which in truth we did not understand to be made to that purpose
when they were first urged, and being now again remembered, in our Judgments do
not in any degree prove the same, we being very ready to consent to the
abolishing thereof if the same can be proved; and your Lordships assuming that
you have proved it, and so that you can again prove it, we desire your
Lordships by Conference, or in writing, to satisfy us in that point; which we
hope being in your power (as you say) to do, and being a sure way to put an
end to this debate by our yielding, your Lordships will not refuse to do it;
But if neither that, nor the other Proposition, that the Government intended to
be introduced by your Lordships, is the only Government, that is agreeable to
the word of God can be evinced; We hope your Lordships will rest satisfied with
the reasons we have given your Lordships in writing, why we cannot consent to
your Propositions concerning Religion, as they are made and insisted on by your
Lordships, and that we have offered your Lordships a remedy against all the
inconveniences that have bin ever pretended in the Government, as is now
established by Law, and which ought not upon less reasons then we have
mentioned to be taken away.

Their Reply,
21. Feb.
WE do not conceive that the continual Succession of Episcopacy from the
Apostles time, has bin at all manifested LXX.
to us in Conference to your Lordships, and for what your Lordships mention
concerning a National Church, it is a new Question which has not, as yet, bin
any part of the Subject of our Debate. But we desire to bring that to a
conclusion which is in issue between us, and not doubting but that your
Lordships are fully satisfied, That Episcopacy is not Iure Divino, we are ready
by Conference to show the unlawfulness of that Episcopacy which we desire to
take away by our Bill, and that the Government which we propose is agreeable to
the Word of God.

In pursuance of this paper, the most part of the next day, being the last of
the Treaty, was spent in dispute between the Divines; and after, their
Commissioners delivered in this paper.
22. Feb.
HAving the last night given in a paper unto your Lordships, wherein we
signified that we doubted not, but that you were LXXI.
fully satisfied, that Episcopacy was not Iure Divino, we are the more
confirmed in it, because your Lordships have since that time given us nothing
in to the contrary, and we hope we have by clear Arguments from Scripture and
reason this day likewise satisfied you, That the government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. which we desire to be taken away by this Bill, is unlawful; and
that the Government, which we desire to be established, is agreeable to the
word of God; and therefore we desire your Lordships to agree to the passing of
this Bill, and to give us your full and clear answer to this, and the rest of
the Propositions concerning Religion.

The King's Commissioners Answer,
22. February.
ACcording to your Lordships paper of the last night, we attended LXXII.
your debate this day, concerning the unlawfulnes of Episcopacy; but did
neither then, nor do now, acknowledge our Selves convinced by any Arguments
offered by you, that Episcopacy is not Iure Divino, the same having bin the
opinion of very many Learned men in all ages, (which we do not censure or
determine) but not insisted on by us, as the ground of any Answer we have
delivered to your Lordships; and we are so far from being satisfied with the
Arguments from Scripture and reason, this day urged, to prove, that the
Government by Arch*Bishops, Bishops, etc. which you desire to be taken away by
this Bill, is unlawful, that the weightiest Arguments which were urged (in our
Judgments) concluded at most against those inconveniences which are remedied
by the Alteration offered by us to your Lordships, in our See before, no. 56.
Paper of the 13. of this Month; and it seems strange to us, that your
Lordships should think that Government (without which no National Church has
bin since the Apostles times, till within these few years) to be unlawful:
and for the Government desired by you to be established, your Lordships have
not offered any such particular Form of Government to us that may enable us to
Judge thereof; and we cannot but observe that the Arguments, produced to that
purpose, were only to prove the same not unlawful, without offering to prove
it absolute necessary, and therefore we conceive our Answer, formerly given to
your Lordships concerning that Bill, and your Propositions concerning Religion,
is a just and reasonable Answer.

After the first three days of the Treaty, spent upon the business of
Religion, according to the Order formerly prescribed, the Propositions
concerning the Militia were next Treated upon the three days following,
beginning the fourth of February, and the same was after resumed the 14. of
February, for other three days.

Their Propositions touching the Militia. 4. Febr.
WE desire that by Act of Parliament, the Subjects of LXXIII.
the Kingdom of England, may be appointed to be Armed, Trained, and
Disciplined, in such manner as both Houses shall think fit.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, in such manner as the Estates of
Parliament there shall think fit.

We desire that an Act of Parliament be passed for the settling of the Admiralty
and Forces at Sea, and for the raising of such moneys for maintenance of the
said Forces, and of the Navy, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, in such manner as the Estates of
Parliament there shall think fit.

An Act for the settling of all Forces by Sea and Land, in Commissioners to be
nominated by both Houses of Parliament, of Persons of known integrity, and such
as both Kingdoms may confide in for their faithfulness to the Religion and
Peace of the Kingdom, of the House of Peers, and of the House of Commons, who
shall be removed or altered from time to time, as both Houses shall think fit.
And when any shall dye, others to be nominated in their places by the said
Houses, which Commissioners shall have power,

First, to suppress any Forces raised without authority of both Houses of
Parliament, or in the intervals of Parliaments, without consent of the said
Commissioners, to the disturbance of the public Peace of these Kingdoms, and
to suppress any Foreign Forces that shall invade this Kingdom; and that it
shall be high Treason in any, who shall leavy any Forces without such authority
or consent, to the disturbance of the public Peace of the Kingdom any
Commission under the Great Seal, or other warrant to the contrary,
notwithstanding; and they to be incapable of any Pardon from His Majesty, and
their estates to be disposed of as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

2. To preserve the Peace now to be settled, and to prevent all disturbances of
the public Peace, that may arise by occasion of the late troubles.

So for the Kingdom of Scotland.

3. To have power to send part of themselves, so as they exceed not a third
part, or be not under the number of to reside in the Kingdom of Scotland, to
assist and Vote as single persons, with the Commissioners of Scotland, in those
matters wherein the Kingdom of Scotland is only concerned.

So for the Kingdom of Scotland.

4. That the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, may meet as a joint Committee, as
they shall see cause, or send part of themselves, as aforesaid, to do as
follows;

1. To preserve the Peace betwixt the Kingdoms, and the King, and every one of
them.

2. To prevent the violation of the Articles of Peace, as aforesaid, or any
troubles arising in the Kingdoms, by breach of the said Articles, and to hear
and determine all differences that may occasion the same, according to the
Treaty; and to do further, according as they shall respectively receive
instructions from both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of
Parliament in Scotland; And in the intervals of Parliaments from the
Commissioners for the preservation of the public Peace.

3. To raise and join the Forces of both Kingdoms, to resist all Foreign
Invasion, and to suppress any Forces raised within any of the Kingdoms, to the
disturbance of the public Pence of the Kingdoms, by any authority under the
Great Seal, or other warrant whatsoever, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament in England, and the Estates of the Parliament in Scotland, or the
said Commissioners of that Kingdom whereof they are Subjects. And that in
those cases of joint Concern^ment to both Kingdoms, the Commissioners to be
directed to be there all, or such part as aforesaid, to Act and direct as joint
Commissioners of both Kingdoms.

We desire that the Militia of the City of London, may be in the Ordering and
government of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council
assembled, or such as they shall from time to time appoint, whereof the Lord
Major and Sheriffs for the time being to be three. And that the Militia of the
Parishes without London, and the Liberties within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, may be under the command of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons, in
Common Council of the said City, to be ordered in such manner as shall be
agreed on, and appointed by both Houses of Parliament.

We desire that the Tower of London, may be in the Government of the City of
London, and the chief Officer and Governor thereof from time to time, be
nominated and removeable by the Common Council.

And that the Citizens, or Forces of London, shall not be drawn out of the City
into any other parts of the Kingdom, without their own consent. And that the
drawing of their Forces into other parts of the Kingdom in these distracted
times, may not be drawn into example for the future.

After these Propositions made, the King's Commissioners, for their Information
concerning these Propositions, gave in several Papers.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 4. February.
WE conceive the Propositions delivered by your Lordships LXXIV.
concerning the Militia, import very great alterations in the maine foundation
of the Frame of Government of this Kingdom, taking by express words, or by
necessary consequence, the whole military and Civil power out of the Crown,
without any limitation in time, or reparation proposed. Therefore we desire to
know for what term you intend the Militia shall be settled in such manner as
may be a reasonable and full security, which we are ready and desirous to give,
to preserve the Peace now to be settled, and to prevent all disturbances of the
public peace that may arise by occasion of the late Troubles. For the better
doing whereof, we are ready by conference to satisfy your Lordships in any
particulars.

Their Answer, 4. Feb.
Our Paper given in to your Lordships concerning the Militia, LXXV.
does not contain the alterations mentioned in your Lordships Answer, but
desires that which, by the wisdom of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms is
judged necessary at this time for the security of His Majesty's Kingdoms, and
preservation of the Peace now to be settled; and until your Lordships shall
declare an assent unto the matter therein expressed, we conceive it will not be
seasonable to give any answer concerning the time; And we are ready to confer
with your Lordships upon what shall be offered by you to our Paper concerning
the Mi^itia formerly delivered.

The King's Commissioners Reply, 4. February.
WE are of opinion, that the Propositions in your Lordships LXXVI.
Paper contain the Alterations mentioned in the paper we lately delivered to
your Lordships, and take by express words, or necessary consequence, the whole
Military and Civil Power out of the Crown, which alterations we are ready to
make appear in debate. And the alterations being so great, we have reason to
desire to know the limitation of time, the consideration of which makes the
Propositions more or less reasonable.

The King's Commissioners second Paper, 4. February.
WE desire to know who the Commissioners shall be in LXXVII.
whose hands the Forces by Sea and Land shall be entrusted; And whether you
intend His Majesty shall be obliged to consent to such Persons; or whether He
may except against them, and name others in their places of known affection to
Religion and Peace.

Their Answer. 4. February.
THe Commissioners in whose hands the Forces by Sea and LXXVIII.
Land shall be entrusted, are to be nominated for England by both the Houses of
the Parliament of England; and for Scotland, by the Estates of the Parliament
of Scotland; as is expressed in our Paper formerly delivered to your Lordships
concerning the Militia.

The King's Commissioners Reply, 4. February.
WE desire a full answer to our Paper concerning the Persons LXXIX.
to be entrusted with the Militia, it being very necessary to know the persons,
before consent can be given to the matter; and whether His Majesty may except
against any such persons, and nominate others in their rooms, against whom
there can be no just exception.

The King's Commissioners 3d Paper, 4. February.
WE desire to know, whether your Lordships intend, that LXXX.
the Militia of the City of London shall be independent, and not subordinate to
those Commissioners in whose hands the Forces by Sea and Land shall be
entrusted.

Their Answer, 4. Febr.
IT appears by the Propositions concerning the Milisia of the LXXXI.
City of London, that the same is to be ordered in such manner as shall be
agreed on, and appointed by both Houses of Parliament.

The King's Commissioners Reply, 4. February.
WE desire an answer to our Paper concerning the Militia LXXXII.
of the City of London, whether the same shall be subordinate to the
Commissioners in whose hands the Forces, by Sea and Land, are to be entrusted;
your Lordships Answer, that the same is to be ordered in such manner as shall
be agreed on, and appointed by both Houses of Parliament (which yet does not
appear by the Propositions) being no answer to the question.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 5. February.
HAving with great diligence perused your Lordships Paper, LXXXIII.
concerning the Militia, and being very desirous to come to as speedy a
conclusion in that Argument as we can; We will be ready* to morrow, to give
your Lordships our full Answer, which we are confident will give your Lordships
fatisfaction concerning the matter of the Militia of this Kingdom.

The King's Commissioners Paper, in Answer to the Propositions concerning the
Militia, 6. February.
TO suppress any Forces that may be raised to the disturbance LXXXIV.
of the public Peace of the Kingdom, or that shall invade this Kingdom, and
to preserve the Peace now to be settled, and to prevent all disturbances of the
public Peace, that may arise by occasion of the late Troubles; And that His
Majesty and all His People may be secured from the Iealousies and apprehensions
they may have of danger; We do consent, that all the Forces of the Kingdom,
both by Sea and Land, shall be put into the hands of Persons of known
faithfulness to the Religion and Peace of the Kingdom, in such manner, and
for such time, as is hereafter mentioned.

That the number of those persons be Twenty; or if that be not accepted by your
Lordships, such greater or lesser number, as shall be agreed upon between us;
And that His Majesty may name half the persons to be so entrusted, and the two
Houses the other half.

That such Forts and Towns, in which Garrisons have been before these
Troubles, and such other as shall be agreed upon between us to be necessary for
a time to be kept as Garrisons, shall be entrusted likewise to persons to be
chosen by the Commissioners, or the major part of them, to be subordinate to
the said Commissioners, and to receive orders from them, and no others; And all
other places, which have been Fortifyed since the beginning of these Troubles,
shall be left as they were before, and the Fortifications and Works slighted
and demolished; And all Forces with all possible expedition to be disbanded,
that the Kingdom may be eased of that intolerable burden.

That an Act of Parliament shall be passed for the raising of such Moneys, for
the maintenance of the Navy and Sea-Forces, as His Majesty and both Houses
shall think fit.

That when any of the said Commissioners shall dye, who was nominated by His
Majesty, His Majesty shall name another; And when any shall dye of those named
by the two Houses, another shall be chosen by them, and in the intervalls of
Parliament by the major part of the said Commissioners named by the two Houses,
and neither the one or the other to be removed but by the joint consent of His
Majesty and both Houses, except it shall be desired by your Lordships, that His
Majesty and the two Houses respectively may remove the respective persons named
by them, as often as they shall see occasion, to which (if it shall be insisted
on) we shall consent.

These Commissioners, or the major part of them, or such other number of them
as shall be agreed upon, shall have power by Act of Parliament, to suppress
any Forces raised sitting a Parliament, without the joint consent of His
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament; or in the intervalls of Parliament
without consent of the said Commissioners, or the major part of them, to the
disturbance of the public Peace of the Kingdom, and to suppress any Forces
that shall invade the Kingdom. And it shall be High Treason in any who shall
leavy any Forces, without such authority or consent, to the disturbance of the
public Peace.

That they shall have like power to preserve the Peace now to be settled, and to
prevent all disturbances of the public Peace, that may arise by occasion of
the late Troubles; And if any Forces shall be brought into the Kingdom, without
the joint consent of the King and the two Houses of Parliament, it shall be
lawful for any four of the said Commissioners to leavy Forces for the
suppressing, resisting and destroying of the said Forces so brought in.

We are content that this power to such Persons shall continue for the space of
three years, which we doubt not, but by the blessing of God, will be
abundantly sufficient to secure all persons from their doubts and Fears, and
in which time such a mutual confidence may be begot betwixt His Majesty and
all His People, that the peace will be firm and lasting.

That the Commissioners, before their entrance upon the said Trust, shall take
an Oath for the due execution of the said Commission, and that after the
expiration of the said term of three years, from the time of the issuing the
said Commission, they shall not presume to continue any execution of the said
authority, and it shall be high Treason in any of them to execute the said
authority after the expiration of the said three years. And all the Commanders
in chief of the Garrisons, Forts, and His Majesty's Ships, shall likewise take
an Oath for the due execution of their Trust.

That the Commissioners shall have power to prevent the violation of the
Articles of Peace, or any troubles arising in the Kingdom by breach of the
said Articles, and to hear and determine all differences that may occasion the
same.

We shall be willing that any just Privileges and Immunities be granted by His
Majesty to the City of London, as being the chief City of this Kingdom, and
the place His Majesty desires to Honor with his most usual and most constant
Residence: But we conceive it too envious a thing, and may prove very
prejudicial to the happiness of that great City, to distinguish it in a
matter of so high importance as the business of the Militia, from the
Authority that the whole Kingdom is to submit to.

If your Lordships shall not consent to the election of persons, in that manner
as we have proposed, half by His Majesty, and the other half by the two
Houses, we do then propose to your Lordships, that the said persons who shall
have the said powers in manner and form above mentioned, may be named by
mutual consent upon debate between us; in which consideration may be taken of
the fitness or unfitness of those who shall be named; And in case that any of
them who shall be thus agreed upon, shall dye within the said term of three
years, the survivors, or the major part of them, shall nominate and choose
another in his place who shall be deceased. This way we should most have
desired, but in regard the consideration of persons may take up a long time in
debate, which neither the time allotted for the Treaty, nor the present
distractions will permit, we do propose the former as the most expedite and
certain way, but leave the election to your Lordships.

And whatsoever shall be found deficient in the settling this according to the
present agreement, or shall be thought fit to be added to it upon any
inconveniences or defects that shall be hereafter discovered, the same shall
be mended or supplied in such manner as shall be thought reasonable by the
joint consent of His Majesty, and the two Houses of Parliament.

After which the King's Commissioners delivered in this paper. 6. Februray.
WE shall be ready against the time that the Militia is again LXXXV.
in order to be Treated upon, to give your Lordships an answer to your demands,
concerning the Militia of the Kingdom of Scotland; the which for the present we
have not had time to do, having wholly spent these three days in the perfecting
the paper delivered to your Lordships this day, and the debates in preparation
thereof.

And at the same time their Commissioners delivered in this Paper. 6. Feb.
YOur Lordships paper which we have received so late at the LXXXVI.
end of the third day, appointed to Treat upon the Militia, on which we
expected a satisfactory answer to our demands concerning it is very far
differing from what we have proposed, and unsatisfactory to our just and
necessary desires, for securing the Peace of the Kingdoms, and wherein we
cannot but observe, that the Kingdom of Scotland is wholly omitted. We do
therefore insist upon our paper formerly delivered concerning the Militia, and
desire your Lordships full and clear answer, being ready by conference to
remove all objections, which may be made to the contrary.

The King's Commissioners Answer thereupon. 6. February.
WE conceive the paper delivered by us to your Lordships, LXXXVII.
may justly satisfy your Lordships for the secureing the Peace of this
Kingdom against all Forces that may any ways endanger it at home, or from
abroad, and for securing the performance of all things that shall be agreed in
this Treaty; and we are ready by Conference to make the reasonablenes thereof
appear, and to receive any reasons from your Lordships to the contrary. And as
touching Scotland, we hope your Lordships will be satisfied by the last paper
we delivered to you.

Their Paper. 6. Feb.
IN our last Paper we insisted upon our former demands for the LXXXVIII.
Militia, and offered by Conference to satisfy your Lordships of the
reasonablenes of them, if any doubts remained with you to the contrary, which
we are still ready to do, they being the proper subject of this part of the
Treaty. And whereas your Lordships have in your Paper, referred what concerns
the Kingdom of Scotland unto another time, and seems to intend it a several
answer; both Kingdoms being united in the same cause, and under the same
danger, and mutually providing for the joint safety, and security of both, and
each other, our Propositions are jointly made by both, and are inconsistent
with a divided answer.

The King's Commissioners Answer. 6. Feb.
WHereas your Lordships have offered in your last paper LXXXIX.
to satisfy us, by Conference, of the reasonablenes of your demands, if any
doubts remain with us to the contrary: We desire to receive satisfaction by
Conference, that it is reasonable for us to grant the nomination of the persons
by the two Houses only, and that the time ought not to be limited.

Their Paper. 6. Feb.
AS we have given to your Lordships our Propositions, for the XC.
Militia of both Kingdoms, in writing, so do we again desire your Lordships
full and clear answer to them both, in writing, and we are ready to answer any
doubts you shall make upon them in order as we delivered them, and as they do
relate to both Kingdoms, but we cannot Treat upon your Lordships answer which
divides them.

The three first days, allotted for the Treaty upon the Militia, being spent,
and that subject resumed upon Friday the 14, Saturday the 15, and Monday the 17
of February. In those days diverse Papers were delivered, and some debates had
touching the nomination of the Persons, who were to be entrusted with the
Militia, whether they should all be nominated by the two Houses only; and
touching the time, how long they should have it, and whether the same should be
unlimited, as it was in the Propositions, or be limited to a certain time; as
likewise concerning the Powers of the English, and Scottish Commissioners for
the Militia, which are so intermingled in the Propositions, that it was not
well understood upon the Propositions, how far the Commissioners of one
Kingdom, and their power might extend unto, and have influence upon the other,
and the one upon the Government of the other, and concerning some other
passages having relation to the Militia; which would be intricate, if they
should be set down in the order of time as they were delivered; and because
sometimes diverse papers were delivered together, therefore they are here
placed according to their distinct matters. And first touching the nomination
of Persons, and limitation of the time.

The King's Commissioners delivered in this Paper. 14. Febr.
IF your Lordships are not satisfied, with the Sea no. 84.
Papers delivered XCI.
to your Lordships by us on the 6. of February, concerning the Militia, as
far as the same concerns this Kingdom, we desire according to your
Lordships offer in your See no. 86, and 88.
first, and second Paper delivered to us the sixth of February, that your
Lordships will satisfy us of the reasonableness of your demands, and that the
nominating of the Persons ought to be by the two Houses only, and that the time
ought not to be limited.

Their Answer. 14. Feb.
BY your Lordships Paper received this day, we apprehend XCII.
your desire to proceed in the Treaty, upon the Propositions for the Militia,
as far as the same concerns this Kingdom, without any mention of the
Kingdom of Scotland. In answer whereunto, we refer your Lordships, to a
former Paper of the 6. of February instant, whereby we desired your full and
clear answer to our Propositions for the Militia of both Kingdoms, in order as
we have delivered them, and as they do relate to both Kingdoms, and that we
could not Treat upon your Lordships answer which divides them. We still insist
on that Paper, and when your Lordships shall be pleased to give an answer
thereunto, we shall be ready to clear any doubts which may remain with your
Lordships.

The King's Commissioners Reply. 14. Febr.
WE do desire to proceed in the Treaty, upon the Proposition XCIII.
for the Militia, as the same concerns both Kingdoms jointly, as well as
either of them severally, neither is the contrary expressed (as we conceive) in
the Paper delivered by us to your Lordships this day; But we cannot reasonably
Answer to them as they concern one or both Kingdoms, before we receive
satisfaction from your Lordships of the reasonableness of your demands, which
your Lordships were pleased to promise us by two of your Papers of the sixth of
February, and which we again desire of your Lordships concerning the Persons
and the time, conceiving it unreasonable, that all the Persons shall be
nominated only by the Houses, and that the time should be unlimited.

Their Answer. 15. Feb.
WE have formerly desired your Lordships answer to XCIV.
the Propositions for the Militia, in order as we delivered them, and as they
do relate to both Kingdoms, and not to give any Answer which shall divide
them. Yet we observe in the matter of your Lordships See the Paper intended,
no. 105.
third Paper yesterday received, that you desire satisfaction in the
Particulars there mentioned, as the same concern the Kingdom of England, only
in pursuance of a former Paper given in by your Lordships the 6. of February.
We therefore again desire as formerly, that such answer as your Lordships
shall think fit to make to our Propositions concerning the Militia, may be
applied to both Kingdoms jointly, and then we shall be ready by conference to
clear any Objections, which your Lordships shall make against the
reasonableness of our demands.

The King's Commissioners Paper. 15. Febr.
WE desire that your Lordships will satisfy us of the XCV.
reasonableness of your demands concerning the settling the Militia of both
Kingdoms, and that the nominating of the Persons ought to be by the two Houses
of Parliament, and the like for the Kingdom of Scotland, and that the time
ought not to be limited.

Their Paper, 15. Febr.
YOur Lordships demand in your The precedent Paper.
4th Paper being made concerning XCVI.
the Militia of both Kingdoms, we are ready upon conference, to give
satisfaction to what your Lordships shall object against the nominating of the
Commissioners by the two Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Estates
of the Parliament of Scotland respectively, or against the time for which the
Militia is demanded in the Propositions.

After some time spent in conference, for limiting the time, wherein the debate
was, touching the unreasonablenesse of the demand, for taking from the King the
Power of the Militia* and settling it in Commissioners, to be nominated by the
two Houses, not limited to any time, The Kings Commissioners gave in this Paper.

15. Febr.
WE desire to know, whether your Lordships can, by your XCVII.
instructions, consent to a limitation of time, in the settling the Militia, or
whether you must insist, that the time be unlimited.

Their Answer. 17. Febr.
IN Answer to your The next precedent paper.
sixth Paper of the 15. of this instant, XCVIII.
concerning the limitation of time, in the settling of the Militia, We do
insist that the time be unlimited, according to our former demands.

The King's Commissioners Reply. 17. Febr.
AFter so long debate between us, concerning the limitation XCIX.
of time, in the settling of the Militia, (in which we conceive your Lordships
had been satisfied, that as it is no way necessary, for the security of the
observation and performance of the present agreement, that the time should be
unlimited, so in respect of other considerations, it may be very mischievous,
that it should be unlimited) we had great reason to desire to know, whether
your Lordships had any power by your Instructions, to consent to a limitation
of time, and are sorry that your Lordships will not give us an answer to that
question, that thereupon we might have endeavored to have given your Lordships
other satisfaction, then by not knowing your power therein, we are enabled to
do.

Their Paper. 17. Febr.
WE conceive that after so long a debate between us, C.
your Lordships would have been satisfied, that it was most fit concerning the
settling the Militia, for the time to be unlimited, as we have formerly desired,
and which by our Instructions we are to insist upon.

They also delivered in this Paper. 17. Febr.
WE desire a full and clear answer to what we have delivered CI.
to your Lordships concerning the Militia, and to know whether your Lordships
be limited by any Instructions or Directions, what to grant or deny in the
same, and that we may have a sight of such Instructions or Directions.

The Answer. 17. Febr.
WE do The paper after no 128. was delivered with this.
herewith deliver to your Lordships, such a full and clear answer to your
Propositions concernthe Militia, as we hope will give your Lordships
satisfaction, being such, as upon the conference and information we have
received from your Lordships, seems to us to be most reasonable.

It appears by our Commission, whereof your Lordships have a Copy, that it
has not any reference to any Instructions. It is true, that as we have
(according to our duty) from time to time acquainted His Majesty with our
proceedings, so in some particular cases, we have desired to be assisted with
His Majesty's opinion, but what answers we have therein received from His
Majesty, we conceive it not proper for us to communicate to your Lordships, nor
have we any warrant so to do.

Their Reply. 17. Febr.
WE again desire of your Lordships, to know, whether you CIII.
be limited by any Instructions, or Directions, what to grant or deny unto us,
concerning the Militia, and that we may have a sight of such instructions or
directions, and which we conceive, your Lordships in Justice and reason cannot
deny, seeing by your Papers and debates, you insisted, that it was just and
reasonable for us to let you know, whether we had any power by our
Instructions, to consent to a limitation of time, which we did accordingly. And
your Lordships 7th Paper this day delivered gives no answer or satisfaction to
our former demand herein.

The King's Commissioners Answer. 17. Febr.
WE conceive it was just and reasonable, for us to demand CIV.
of your Lordships, whether you had power by your instructions to consent to a
limitation of time concerning the Militia, because the time is left indefinite,
and not expressed in the Propositions. And your Lordships Commission, which
gives you power to Treat, relating to instructions, they are thereby part of
your power, and yet your Lordships to that our demand, have given no other
answer, then, That by your instructions, you were to insist, to have the time
unlimited; but have not answered, whether you had power to consent to a
limitation of time. And we desire your Lordships to remember, that formerly
upon our desire to see your instructions, that thereby we might see what power
was granted to you, by your See before no 16.
Paper of the last of January, your Lordships did answer, it was that for which
you had no warrant; and it appearing to your Lordships, that our Commission
has no reference to instructions, we conceive that your Lordships cannot
expect any other answer, then we have already given to your Lordships demand,
touching any instructions or directions to us, what to deny, or consent to
grant in the Militia, assuring your Lordships, that we shall not deny, but
willingly consent, to grant whatsoever shall be therein requisite for a full
security, for observing the Articles of the Treaty, or otherwise agreeable to
Justice or reason.

Touching the Power which should be given to the Commissioners for the Militia,
The King's Commissioners Paper. 14. February.
WE desire to know, what authority the Commissioners, CV.
nominated by the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, are to have in the
Militia of this Kingdom; and what influence, the Orders and advice, from the
Estates of the Parliament there, shall have upon this Kingdom; and how far
the same is to be consented, or submitted to here.

Their Answer. 14. Feb.
YOur Lordships desire, expressed in your second Paper this CVI.
day, may be fully satisfied by the Propositions concerning the Militia, where
the authority of the Commissioners to be nominated, is clearly expressed, both
in cases of several, and of joint concernment, of the Kingdoms; And if upon
perusal thereof any doubts shall occur to your Lordships, we are ready by
conference to clear the same.

The King's Commssioners Paper. 15. Febr.
WE do not conceive that the authority of the Commissioners CVII.
of both Kingdoms, and in both Kingdoms, is clearly expressed in your
Lordships Propositions, and therefore we desire to be informed, whether your
Lordships intend that the Commissioners of Scotland shall have any power in the
settling of all Forces by Sea and Land in this Kingdom, and what authority they
shall have.

Their Paper, 15. Feb.
WE do conceive, that the authority of the Commissioners of CVIII.
both Kingdoms, and in both Kingdoms, is clearly expressed in our
Propositions: By which it does appear how they are to act as several or as
joint Commissioners. And if your Lordships shall propound any objections
against our Propositions concerning the Mili^ia of both Kingdoms, we are ready
upon conference to give your Lordships satisfaction.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 15. February.
WE desire to know, whether in that part of the Proposition, CIX.
wherein the Commissioners of both Kingdoms are appointed to meet as a joint
Committee, and to receive Instructions in the intervalls of Parliament from the
Commissioners for the preservation of the public Peace, your Lordships mean
the Commissioners to be nominated according to these Propositions, or the Sea
the Printed Act.
Commissioners intended by the Act of Pacification, or what other
Commissioners; And what Jurisdiction you intend the said Commissioners of both
Kingdoms shall have, by the power given them to hear and determine all
differences that may occasion the breach of the Articles of the Peace,
according to the Treaty, and by what Law they shall proceed to hear and
determine the same.

Their Answer, 15. Feb.
WE intend that the Commissioners are to be nominated CX.
according to the Propositions, and are to proceed in such manner as is therein
expressed; and if your Lordships shall make any ob^^ctions hereupon, we are
ready by Conference to give you satisfaction.

Their further Answer, 15. Feb.
FOr further answer to your Lordships second Paper, we conceive CXI.
that the matter of the Jurisdiction to be exercised by the Commissioners, is
expressed in the Proposition, and for the manner of exercising that
Jurisdiction, and by what Law they shall proceed to hear and determine, the
same are to be settled by the two Houses of the Parliament of England, and the
Estates of the Parliament of Scotland respectively.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 15, Feb.
WE desire to receive a perfect and full answer from your CXII.
Lordships to our See no. 107, and 109, and no. 105.
first and second Papers, delivered by us this morning to your Lordships, and
whether your Lordships intend, that the Commissioners of Scotland shall have
any power and authority in the settling of all Forces by Sea and Land in this
Kingdom, and what authority they shall have; and whether the advice or orders
of the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, shall have any influence upon the
affairs of this Kingdom, or the Commissioners to be named according to these
Propositions, otherwise then as the said advice or orders shall be approved,
and confirmed by the two Houses of Parliament of England; and what Jurisdiction
you intend the Commissioners shall have who are to determine all differences,
that may occasion the breach of the Articles of Peace; and by what Law or rule
they shall proceed, try, and Judge, in the hearing and determining the same;
And it is most necessary for us to desire satisfaction from your Lordships to
these particulars in writing, since the answer we shall give to your Lordships
upon so much of your Propositions, will very much depend upon our clear
understanding your Lor^ships in these particulars, it being agreed between us,
that nothing shall be binding, or taken as agreed upon, but what shall be in
writing on either part.

Their Answer. 17. Feb.
WE conceive there is a full answer already given by us in CXIII.
See the papers intended, no. 92, and 106.
several papers of the 14 of this instant, to the former parts of your paper,
delivered in on the 15 day, and to the latter part, what Jurisdiction the
Commissioners shall have, who may determine all differences, that shall be by
breach of the Articles of Peace, and by what Law and rule they shall proceed to
hear and determine, the same is clearly set down in our No. 111.
further answer of the 15 of this instant, to your second paper delivered in to
us the day before.

The King's Commissioners Answer thereunto. 17. February.
WE had great reason to desire a perfect and full answer CXIIII.
from your Lordships, to our first and second Papers delivered by us to your
Lordships on the 15 of Feb. and we desire your Lordships to consider how
difficult a thing it is for us, to give your Lordships a satisfactory answer to
your propositions, as they relate to either, or both Kingdoms, or to the power
of the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, as they are to be a joint Committee to
hear and determine all differences, according to instructions from both Houses
of Parliament of England, or the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, before
your Lordships are pleased to inform us, whether you intend, the Commissioners
of Scotland shall have any power or authority in the settling all Forces by Sea
and Land in this Kingdom, and what authority they shall have; and whether the
advice, instructions, or orders of the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland,
shall have any influence upon the affairs of this Kingdom, or the
Commissioners to be named according to those Propositions, otherwise then as
the said advice, instructions, or orders shall be approved and confirmed by the
two Houses of Parliament of England; and what Jurisdiction you intend the
Commissioners shall have, who are to determine all differences that may
occasion the breach of the Articles of the Peace; and by what Law or rule they
shall proceed, try, and Judge, in the hearing and determining the same. In all
which particulars we are very sorry that we can receive no answers from your
Lordships, for want whereof we may fail in giving your Lordships so
satisfactory answers to your Propositions, as otherwise we might be enabled to
do.

Their Reply. 17. Febr.
IT is clearly expressed in our Propositions delivered to your CXV.
Lordships, that all Forces by Sea and Land in this Kingdom, are to be settled
by the two Houses of the Parliament of England, and in the Kingdom of Scotland,
by the Estates of the Parliament there; and we conceive that the advice,
instrustions, or orders of either Kingdom, are to have no influence upon the
affairs of the other, but such as is and shall be mutually agreed upon by the
two Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland; And for the Jurisdiction of the Commissioners, and by what Law or
rule they shall proceed, we have given your Lordships a full and clear answer
thereunto, in our 5 See before, no. 111.
paper of the 15 of February.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 17. February.
IN the 12th Proposition your Lordships desire an Act to be CXVI.
passed for confirmation of the late Treaty, for the settling of the Garrison of
Berwick of the 29 of November. 1643. which relating to the business of the
Militia, we hold it necessary to see before we can make our full answer upon
the whole, and desire it accordingly of your Lordships.

Their Answer, 17. Feb.
AS for what concerns the Act for Confirmation of the late CXVII.
Treaty, and for settling the Garrison of Berwick, It is not now to be Treated
upon, but is reserved to its proper time.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 17. February.
WE desire to know, whether by the joint power mentioned CXVIII.
in your Lordships Propositions, to be given to the Commissioners for both
Kingdoms, to preserve the Peace between the Kingdoms, and the King and every
one of them, your Lordships do intend any other then Military power for
suppressing Forces only, which is expressed after in a distinct clause by it
self; And if your Lordships do intend any further power, that your Lordships
would declare the same in certainty and particular.

Their Answer, 17. Feb.
WE conceive the power of the Commissioners, mentioned CXIX.
in the 17th Proposition, is there fully expressed to preserve the Peace
betwixt the Kingdoms, to prevent the violation of it, or any troubles arising
in the Kingdoms by breach of the Articles, and to hear and determine all
differences which may occasion the same, according to the Treaty, and to raise
Forces to resist Foreign Invasion, and suppress intestine Insurrections, as
is more at large set down in the Proposition, to which we refer your
Lordships.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 17. February.
WE desire to know, whether the Commissioners of CXX.
both Kingdoms meeting as a joint Committee, The Commissioners of each
Kingdom shall have a Negative voice, so as nothing can be done without their
joint consent in matters of joint concernment: And how, and by whom it shall be
decided, what are cases of joint concernment to both Kingdoms.

Their Answer, 17. Feb.
IN all matters of joint concernment, the Commissioners of both CXXI.
Kingdoms are to Act jointly. And when they shall meet as a joint Committee
upon such matters of joint concernment, the Commissioners of each Kingdom are
to have a Negative voice; And in doubtful cases, not expressed in the 17th
Proposition, to be of joint concernment, where the Commissioners cannot agree,
whether or no they be of joint concernment, they are to represent them to the
two Houses of Parliament of England, and the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively, to be by them determined if they be sitting, and in the
intervalls of Parliament, if the cases be such as cannot without prejudice to
both, or either Kingdom, admit of delay; we conceive the Commissioners of each
Kingdom are to Act severally, and to be accomptable for it to the two Houses
of Parliament of England, and the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland
respectively, at their next sitting.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 17. February.
WE desire to know, whether by the Propositions for settling CXXII.
the Forces in Commissioners to be nominated by both Houses of Parliament, such
as both Kingdoms may confide in, your Lordships do intend, That the Estates of
the Parliament of Scotland shall approve or except against the Commissioners to
be nominated for the Kingdom of England, both at present, and from time to
time, as the Commissioners shall dye, or be removed, or altered.

Their Answer. 17. Feb.
WE conceive it to be plain by the Proposition it self, that CXXIII.
the Commissioners of both Kingdoms are respectively to be nominated by the
Parliaments of either Kingdom, and neither Parliament has power to except
against, or approve the persons chosen by the other, and we are confident there
will be no cause of exception, but who are chosen by either, will be such as
both may confide in.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 14. February.
WE desire to know, whether your Lordships intend by CXXIV. T^^ Admiral^y is an
of fice of Inheritance in Scotland, and settled by Act of Parilament.
your proposition concerning the settling of the Admiralty of Scotland by Act of
Parliament, to alter the inheritance of any person, which is already settled by
the Laws of that Kingdom.

Their Answer thereunto, 15. Feb.
TO your Lordships fourth Paper of the 14 of Feb. it is answered, CXXV.
that by our Propositions for settling the Admiralty of Scotland by Act of
Parliament, it is intended that the Admiralty, and Forces at Sea etc. shall be
settled in such manner as the Estates of Parliament there shall think fittest,
for the safety and security of that Kingdom. And as touching the inheritance of
any person which is already settled, by the Laws of that Kingdom, the Estates
of Parliament will do that which is agreeable to Justice.

The King's Commissioners Paper. 15. Febr.
WE desire to know, whether the Papers delivered to us CXXVI.
touching the Militia, contain all your Lordships Propositions touching the
Militia of England and Scotland: and if they do not, that your Lordships will
deliver the rest, that we may make our answers upon the whole.

Their Answer. 15. Feb.
Whatsoever is contained in the Propositions concerning the CXXVII.
Militia of England and Scotland, is delivered in to your Lordships, except the
23 Proposition, and the last Article in the 26 Proposition, which are reserved
for their proper place.

After all these passages, the King's Commissioners delivered in this Paper, in
further answer to their Propositions concerning the Militia.

17. February.
WE had no purpose in our No. 84.
answer delivered by us to CXXVIII.
your Lordships on the 6th day of February, to divide our answers concerning
the Militia of the two Kingdoms, otherwise then in point of time, and till we
might receive satisfaction from your Lordships, concerning the powers to be
given to the Commission^rs of both Kingdoms, and the other particulars
mentioned in our Papers, since delivered to your Lordships, wherein we are not
as yet satisfied by any Papers delivered by your Lordships to us. Our further
answer to those Propositions concerning the Militia is, that we are willing and
do agree, That the like course shall be taken and observed touching the
Militia of the Kingdom of Scotland, as is offered in our said paper of the 6th
of February, and as shall be hereafter agreed on for the Kingdom of England,
which we conceive to be a full security for the performance and observation of
all Articles, which shall be agreed upon between us in order to a blessed
Peace; which we are so desirous may be punctually and exactly observed, That we
are willing that His Majesty be desired to take a most solemn strict Oath, for
the full observation thereof; And likewise that all persons of any immediate
trust, by office or attendance on His Majesty, and any other whom you shall
think fit, shall take such Oath, for the due observance of the same, with such
reasonable penalties as shall be proposed by your Lordships, and agreed to by
us; in which we believe we shall not differ with your Lordships, being willing
that whosoever shall in the least degree infringe the agreement which shall be
made between us, may be looked upon and accounted, as most pernicious enemies
to King and Kingdoms; And if it shall be thought necessary to make any
additionall settlement of the Militia, with a general reference to the good of
the Kingdoms respectively, we desire the same may be done after the Peace
established, by the joint consent of His Majesty and the two Houses of
Parliament in England, and His Majesty and the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively; And as we shall desire and endeavor to remove all
occasions that may interrupt the Peace and Tranquillity of that Kingdom, and a
perfect amity with them, and shall not desire any change off, or to intermeddle
in their Laws or Government, or give them cause to apprehend any disturbance
or violation of them from this Kingdom; so are we obliged with all tenderness
to preserve the Honor, Dignity, and Constitution of this Realm. And therefore
as we are yet satisfied, we cannot consent that any persons authorized by the
Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, or any advice from thence, shall have
any influence upon the Militia of this Kingdom, or further interpose in the
affairs of this Kingdom, then is already provided by the Act of Pacification.
And we offer to your Lordships considerations, whether unless there could be
an union of the Laws of both Kingdoms, such a mixture of power, as is now
proposed, and the influence thereof, both upon Martial, and Civil affairs,
may not prove very inconvenient and prejudicial to both Kingdoms, and give
cause of Iealousies to each other, to the disturbance of that mutual Amity so
much desired; But if this intermingling of power in both Kingdoms, shall be
further insisted on by your Lordships, we propound that the same may be settled,
as (after a Peace established) shall be agreed by the joint consent of His
Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament of England, and of His Majesty, and the
Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, and if your Lordships shall insist on
any thing further for necessary security, we shall apply our selves to the
consideration thereof, if we shall have further time so to do, according to our
desires grounded upon His Majesty's Letter.

Their Paper, 17. Febr.
WE do conceive that we have in our former Papers punctually CXXIX.
satisfied your Lordships, in all you desired to know, concerning the Powers of
the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, and the other particulars mentioned by your
Lordships; and what your Lordships now offer concerning the Militia of the
Kingdom of Scotland, that the like course shall be taken in it, as is
expressed in your Lordships Paper of the 6th of Feb. to be observed for the
Militia of this Kingdom; your Lordships may remember that in our answer to that
paper, we told your Lordships it was differing from what we had proposed, and
unsatisfactory to our just and necessary desires for securing the Peace of the
Kingdoms, and it cannot be expected that what was so then for the Kingdom of
England, should now be thought other for the Kingdom of Scotland. And though
both Kingdoms be now united in the same cause, and laboring under the same
dangers, and therefore necessitated to a mutual and reciprocal assistance of
each other, had proposed a joint remedy, and security by that Commission
desired in our 17th Proposition, we find your Lordships say, that (as yet you
are satisfied) you cannot consent unto it* to which we answer, that we believed
we had given your Lordships such convincing reasons as might have satisfied
you, and we doubt not but they, may if you will recollect your memoryes
concerning them, and rightly weigh them. This being the last day we are to
Treat upon this subject, it cannot be expected, and as we conceive, it is
altogether needless to use any more Arguments; we do therefore desire your
Lordships will be pleased now at the last, to give us your full and positive
answer to our demands, as we have often already pressed your Lordships. And
where as your Lordships do propound, that if we shall further insist upon the
uniting of the powers of both Kingdoms, it may be done after the Peace
established, we desire your Lordships to consider that it is demanded by us in
order to a Peace, and a chief and most necessary means for the attaining and
establishment of it. And we further observe, that your Lordships have given us
no answer at all to our 15 Proposition; which we do likewise insist upon, and
defire your answer.

The King's Commissioners Answer, 17. February.
IF your Lordships had punctually, or in any degree satisfied CXXX.
us in what we desired to know concerning the powers of the Commissioners of
both Kingdoms, and the other particulars mentioned by us, we had not troubled
your Lordships with so many questions, to most of which we could receive no
other Answers, then the referring us to the Propositions themselves, upon which
we grounded our questions. And we conc^ive that your Lordships Propositions
upon the Militia, upon which you still insist, have in truth appeared upon
debate to be most unreasonable in many particulars; as that the persons to be
entrusted with the Militia, should be nominated only by the two Houses, and
that His Majesty who is equally to be secured, that the Peace should not be
broken, should name none; That the power given to the Commissioners, shall be
framed and altered as occasion serves by the two Houses only; And that His
Majesty, who is so much concerned therein, shall have no Negative Voice, as to
such powers, but is absolutely excluded, and that the time should be unlimited:
So that His Majesty for himself and his Posterity should for ever part with
their peculiar Regal power of being able to resist their Enemies, or protect
their good Subjects, and with that undoubted and never denied Right of the
Crown, to make War and Peace; And in no time to come, His Majesty or His
Posterity should have power to assist their Allies with any supplies of Men,
though Volunteers, or ever more to have any Jurisdiction ov^r their own Navy
or Fleet at Sea, and so consequently must loose all estimation and confidence
with Foreign Princes. And many other expressions in the said Propositions,
do either signify what we find your Lordships do not expect, or inten^, or
at least are so doubtful, that the clear sense thereof is not evident to all
understandings; As by the literal sense of your Propositions, neither the
Sheriffs of Counties, or Justices of Peace, and other legal Ministers, may
raise Forces by the Posse Comitatus, or otherwise to suppress Riots, and
remove forcible Entries, or to perform the other necessary duties of their
places, without being liable to the interpretation of the Commissioners for the
Militia, that such Forces are raised, or Actions done, for the disturbance of
the public Peace; As likewise all Civil Actions and differences may be
comprehended within those Propositions to be tried before the said
Commissioners; neither of which we believe your Lordships intend should be.

And therefore we have in our Answers proposed, what we thought would be
agreeable to the matter and end of those Propositions, that i^, a reasonable
and full security, for the observation of the Articles of the Treaty, which
according to what we have offered, cannot be broken on either part, without
evident prejudice and danger, to that part, which shall endeavor the breaking
thereof. And that the memory of these unhappy distractions may be forgotten as
soon as may be, that the ti^e of this settlement may be limited to three
years, which, by the blessing of God, will be sufficient to beget a good
understanding between His Majesty and all His People. And that the fifteenth
Proposition, and all the other parts of your Lordships Propositions, being not
at all necessary to the present union and Reconciliation, may be deferred till
after the Peace established, to be settled by Hi^ Majesty, and the two Houses of
Parliament in England, and His Majesty, and the Estates of the Parliament in
Scotland respectively. But if your Lordship shall not think this way of
nomination of Persons to be Commissioners, or the other proposed likewise by
us, in our Paper of the 6th of February, for the agreement of the Commissioners
between your Lordships and us, to be equal; We shall gladly receive any more
equal way from your Lordships, since it is apparent, that that already
proposed by your Lordships, and which you insist upon in T^rminis, is not fit
to be consented to for the quiet and Peace of the Kingdom, presuming that you
will think the security ought to be mutual, as the Fears and Iealousies are
mutual. And we are most confident, that His Majesty so much desires to give
all reasonable and fit security on his part, that the agreement and Peace to be
now made, shall be inviolably observed; That as he will name no man for this
great Trust, against whom there can be just exception, (if the persons are
named equally between him and you) so if the whole nomination were left to Him,
He would pitch only upon such as both Kingdoms might have great cause to
confide in and we believe might give full satisfaction to your Lordships. And
therefore we hope your Lordships will believe, that the reason we consent not
to your Propositions, is, because we conceive them destructive to the end for
which they are proposed, Justice, Peace, and Unity; and not that we deny, to
consent to any reasonable security, for observance of the agreement to be made,
of which we will always be most tender, with regard to all persons concerned.

This was the last paper, delivered in the last of the six days touching the
Militia, but that being taken up again, in some part of the two last days of
the Treaty, as those of Religion and Ireland also were, their Commissioners
upon their breaking up of the Treaty, about two of the clock in the morning
after the 22th of February, gave in a Paper intended for an Answer to this
Paper, which nevertheless relates to the Paper here next following, delivered
by them the 21. of February mentioning a limitation of time for seven years,
and for that cause is herein set down after that Paper, and as their last of
that subject; and the Papers upon that Subject, delivered in the mean time, in
the two last days, are these following.

Their Paper, 21. Febr.
WHereas your Lordships have in several Papers much insisted, CXXXI.
that the Commissioners mentioned in the 17th Proposition, should be for a
limited time, that your Lordships might better give a full Answer to our
desires concerning the Militia, though we conceive the Reasons we have given,
might have satisfied your Lordships for the time to be unlimited, yet to
manifest our earnest desires of Peace, we propose to your Lordships, the time
for the said Commissioners, to be for seven years, from the time of the
passing the Act for the Militia. And that after the expiration of such term,
the Militia of the Kingdom, to be settled and exercised in such manner, as shall
be agreed upon by His Majesty, and the two Houses of the Parliament of England,
and by His Majesty and the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland respectively,
and not otherwise.

At the same time the Scotch Commissioners, from themselves a part, delivered
in this Paper, signed by their own Secretary only, all the other Papers being
signed by two Secretaries, for the English and Scotch Commissioners.

21. February.
WE the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, do CXXXII.
declare, that our consent to the Paper given in this day concerning the
limitation of the power of the Militia, in Commissioners according to the 17th
Proposition, to continue for seven years, from the time of the passing of the
Act for the Militia; and after the expiration of that term, to be settled in
such manner as shall be agreed upon by His Majesty, and the two Houses of the
Parliament of England, And by His Majesty, and the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively, and not otherwise, is to be understood as follows;
That we will represent the same to the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland,
or their Committees, to which we are confident they will assent, as that which
is conceived to conduce to a happy agreement, and settling of a firm and
blessed Peace.

The King's Commissioners Answer. 22. February.
WE have hitherto conceived, that this Treaty has CXXXIII.
been betwixt us that are appointed Commissioners by His Majesty, and your
Lordships, the Commissioners from the two Houses of the Parliament of England,
and your Lordships the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland jointly and
not severally: But finding that your Lordships, the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland, have delivered to us a distinct Paper, signed only by
your Secretary, of the 20th of Febr. concerning the Militia, and that not
concurring with the other joint Paper, delivered and subscribed by both your
Secretaries upon that Subject that day; We desire to know, whether the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland have a negative voice, or have not
power to conclude^, without farther power to be granted, from the Estates of
the Parliament of Scotland, and expect in this Treaty to be severally Treated
with; and after your Lordships Answer to this paper, we shall be able to give
your Lordships a farther Answer to your joint Paper of the 20th of February.

Their Paper. 22. February.
THe Treaty is betwixt us that are the Commissioners of the CXXXIV.
Parliaments of both Kingdoms jointly, and not severally; And your Lordships
the Commissioners from His Majesty, And the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland, did join with the Committees of the two Houses of the Parliament of
England, in giving in the other joint Paper concerning the Militia delivered
yesterday, subscribed by both Secretaries, but seeing it contains an
alteration, limiting the time to seven years, which in the former Propositions
agreed to by both Parliaments is indefinite; They did declare, that they are
confident, the Parliament of Scotland will assent thereto, and they have showed
your Lordships sufficient power to conclude any thing by them agreed unto.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 22. February.
WE cannot rest satisfied with your Lordships answer to CXXXV.
our paper delivered to you this day, concerning your Lordships the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, it being indeed; but a repetition
of your Lordships paper, and no answer to ours thereupon; and it being very
necessary for us to know, whether the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland have a negative voice, and whether they have not power to conclude,
without farther powers to be granted from the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland, upon the answer to which, we must the rather insist, because your
Lordships last paper, gives the reason of the distinct paper delivered to us,
from the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland to be, because the
limitation of time now offered, differs from the Propositions agreed on by both
Parliaments, in which the time is indefinite, which seems to us to intimate,
that your Lordships, who are the Commissioners from the Parliament of Scotland,
have not power to consent to any alteration from the said Proposition, without
first acquainting the Parliament of Scotland, although the other joint paper,
delivered upon that Subject, be signed by both your Secretaries; and thereby it
is evident, that it much concerns us to know, whether the said Commissioners
have a negative voice in this Treaty. For the matter of your Lordships paper
concerning the limitation of time for the Militia to seven years, it is not
possible, by reason of this shortness of time for the Treaty (it being ten
of the clock this night when your paper was delivered) to give your Lordships a
full answer, it being necessary for us to receive satisfaction from your
Lordships in writing, or by conference, whether by the words, And not
otherwise, your Lordships intend, that after the expiration of the time
limited, His Majesty shall not exercise the legal power, which he now has
over the Militia, before the same be agreed upon, by His Majesty and the two
Houses of the Parliament of England, and by His Majesty, and the Estates of the
Parliament of Scotland respectively, for which resolution and debate, we
heartily wish the time were sufficient, being very willing to give your
Lordships all reasonable satisfaction. And therefore we do propose to your
Lordships, that if the Treaty may not now continue, it may be adjourned for
such time as you shall think fit, and not totally dissolved, but again
resumed, which we propose as the best expedient now left us for the procuring
of a blessed Peace, and by it, the preservation of this now miserable Kingdom
from utter ruin and desolation.

After this, about two of the clock the next morning, they gave this paper
following, which is here mentioned, to be delivered upon their breaking up the
Treaty, and intended for an Answer to the paper of the 17th of February, no 129.

Their Paper. 22. Feb.
WE conceive, if your Lordships would weigh our Demands CXXXVI.
concerning the power of the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, you will be
satisfied with our Answers to your several Questions; where any doubts were of
the expressions we did explain them, and where the Propositions were so
clear, as they could bear no doubtful sense, we did refer your Lordships
to the Propositions themselves. And we conceive our Demands concerning the
Militia, to be most reasonable, and all objections made against them to be by
us removed; And why your Lordships should insist that the Commissioners should
not be nominated by the two Houses only, and His Majesty, who is to be equally
secured, should name none, we much marvel at, when you may well consider this
power was not to be exercised by the Commissioners, until a Peace had been
concluded upon this Treaty, and then His Majesty had been fully secured by the
Laws of the Kingdom, and by the duties and affections of His Subjects,
neither could the Commissioners do any thing in violation of the Peace, to the
prejudice of His Majesty, contrary to the Trust reposed in them, they having a
rule prescribed which they were not to transgress, and being removeable by
both Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively, and being liable for any miscarriage to severe
punishment. And as for their security who have been with His Majesty in this
War, an Act of Oblivion is desired to be passed, whereby all His Majesty's
Subjects in both Kingdoms would have been put in one and the same condition,
and under the same protection, with some exceptions mentioned in those
Propositions; And if the Commissioners had been severally chosen, the memory of
these unnatural Divisions must needs have been continued, and probably being
severally named, would have acted dividedly according to several interests,
and the War thereby might be more easily revived: whereas the scope of the
Propositions we have tendered, was to take away occasions of future
differences, to prevent the raising of Arms, and to settle a firm and durable
Peace. And to your Lordships objections, that the Commissioners were to
continue without any limitation of time, although the reasonableness thereof
has been sufficiently manifested to your Lordships, yet out of most earnest
desires of Peace, we have proposed to your Lordships a time of seven years, as
is expressed in our Paper delivered to your Lordships the 21th of this instant.

And for the peculiar Royal Power which your Lordships mention to reside in
His Majesty concerning the Militia, and to make Peace and War, we cannot
admit thereof, or that it is otherwise exercised then by authority from His
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament of England, and the Estates of the
Parliament of Scotland respectively; Neither are the Commissioners to have
power to make Peace or War, but that is referred to the 23d Proposition to be
Treated upon in due time.

And for the Navy and Fleet at Sea, the principal means to maintain them,
is, to be raised by the free gift of the Subjects out of Tonnage and Poundage,
and other payments upon Merchandise, and the Navy and Fleet being a principal
means of our security, the reasons are the same for them as for the Militia by
Land.

And for what your Lordships allege concerning Sheriffs, and Justices of
Peace, and other legal Ministers, not to raise the Posse Comitatus, or Forces
to suppress Riots, without being liable to the interpretation of the
Commissioners; we say this is no part of the Militia to be exercised by the
Commissioners, but in executing of Justice and legal Process, nor can be
intended to be any disturbance, but for the preservation of the Peace; Nor can
their power of hearing and determining Civil Actions and differences be
extended further then preservation of the Articles of the Peace to be made, and
as is clearly and plainly expressed in the 27th Proposition.

And whereas we seek the Militia to be settled in the 15th Proposition, and the
other parts of our Propositions in order to, and for procuring of a Peace, and
which are necessary to a present Union, your Lordships defer them until the
Peace shall be established, which delay we hope, upon second thoughts, your
Lordships will not judge to be reasonable.

And when your Lordships do take into serious consideration, the great
Calamities, and how occasioned, (to say no more) you cannot think, but that we
ought to be most careful of preventing the like for the future.

And seeing all we desire for these so important ends, is limited to a few
years, we ought to insist upon such a remedy as may be a fitting cure, and in
so doing, we hope we shall be justified before God and Man.

Wherefore we again most earnestly desire your Lordships, as you tender the
deplorable Estates of these bleeding Kingdoms, the settling of Religion, the
Honor of His Majesty, and the composing these miserable Distractions, that
your Lordships will give your full and clear Answer to our Demands concerning
the Militia.

This last Paper was delivered about two of the clock, when the Treaty was at
that instant breaking up, and at the same time the King's Commissioners had
(upon the like occasion of two Papers of theirs, given in a little before,
concerning Ireland hereafter mentioned) delivered in a Paper, No. 179. that
they might give answer thereto the next day, dated as of that day, as had been
formerly used, which was not granted; so that in Answer to this Paper so
earnesty requiring an Answer in the Close thereof; It was impossible to give in
any Paper at the present, neither would any be received, but at present.

The Papers touching Ireland.
After the first six days of the Treaty, spent upon Religion, and the Militia,
according to the same order formerly proposed, the Propositions concerning
Ireland, were ^ext Treated upon, the three days followi^g, beginning the 7th
of February; and the same was also taken up again the 18th of February, for
other three days.

Their Proposition^ touching Ireland, 7. February.
WE desire that an Act of Parliament be passed to make CXXXVI.
void the Cessation of Ireland, and all Treaties with the Rebels without
consent of both Houses of Parliament, and to settle the prosecution of the War
of Ireland, in both Houses of the Parliament of England, to be managed by the
joint advice of both Kingdoms, and His Majesty to assist, and to do no act to
discountenance, or molest them therein.

The King's Commissioners Paper. 7. February.
WE desire to know, whether the Paper we have received CXXXVII.
from your Lordships, contain in it all the demands your Lordships are
required by your Instructions to insist upon concerning Ireland, which if it
does, we are ready to enter upon that debate, but if it do not, we then desire
to receive all the Propositions your Lordships intend to make concerning
Ireland together, being confident that upon a whole view of the business, we
shall give you full satisfaction in that Argument.

Their Paper. 7. Feb.
WE are to insist upon other things concerning Ireland, which CXXXVIII.
being part of other Propositions, we conceive not so proper to give your
Lordships, till we have received your answer, to our paper formerly delivered,
and are ready by present conference, to satisfy any doubts that remain with
your Lordships concerning that paper.

Notwithstanding they delivered in these further papers, and Propositions
following.

Their Paper. 7. Feb.
WE desire, that an Act be passed in the Parliament of both CXXXIX.
Kingdoms respectively, to confirm the Treaty concerning Ireland of the 6th of
August 1642. (which Treaty we herewith deliver) and that all Persons who have
had any hand in plotting, designing, or assisting the Rebellion of Ireland, may
expect no pardon, and their estates to pay public debts and damages. And that
the Commissioners to be nominated as is appointed in the 17 Proposition, may
order the War of Ireland, according to the Ordinance of the 11th of April,
1644. (which we herewith deliver) and to order the Militia, and to conserve the
Peace of the Kingdom of Ireland.

And that by Act of Parliament, the Deputy, or chief Governor, or other
Governors of Ireland, be nominated by both Houses of the Parliament of
England, or in the intervalls of Parliament, by the said Commissioners, to
continue during the pleasure of the said Houses; or in the intervalls of
Parliament during the pleasure of the said Commissioners to be approved, or
disallowed by both Houses at their next Sitting; And that the Judges of both
Benches, and of the Exchequer in Ireland, be nominated by both Houses of
Parliament, to continue Quam diu been se gesserint, and in the intervalls of
Parliament, by the aforesaid Commissioners to be approved, or disallowed by
both Houses at their next sitting.

Together with these last Propositions, they delivered the Treaty of the sixth
of August 1644, and the Ordinance of the 11th of April therein mentioned,
together with another of the 9th of March; which see in the Appendix, no 7. and
8.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 9. February.
WE desire to know what your Lordships intend, or expect, CXL.
by those words in your No. 136.
first paper concerning Ireland, [and His Majesty to assist] since you propose
to have the prosecution of the War of Ireland, to be settled in both Houses of
the Parliament of England, to be managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms.

Their Answer, 9. Feb.
BY the words in our paper concerning Ireland [and His Majesty CXLI.
to assist] we conceive is to be understood, the giving of His Royal assent to
such Acts of Parliament, as shall be presented unto Him by both Houses, for
raising of monyes from the Subject, and for other things necessary to the
prosecution of the War in Ireland, and to be further ayding by His Power and
countenance, in whatsoever shall be requisite for the better carrying on of
that War.

The King's Commissioners Paper. 10. Febr.
WE conceive that His Majesty had, and has power, to CXLII.
make a Cessation in Ireland, and having upon just grounds, and for the good
and safety of His Protestant Subjects there, and for the preservation of that
whole Kingdom, consented to such a Cessation, we desire to be informed by your
Lordships, how that Cessation can be declared void, without a breach of Faith
and honor in His Majesty? and we are ready by conference particularly to
inform your Lordships, of the motives which induced His Majesty to consent to
that Cessation.

Their Answer. 10. Feb.
WE conceive that His Majesty had not power to make the CXLIII.
Cessation in Ireland, nor had any just grounds to do the same, and therefore
we insist, as in our former paper, That an Act of Parliament be passed to make
voy'd the Cessation of Ireland; and conceive that His Majesty is bound in
honor and justice to consent unto the same, and we are ready to confer with
your Lordships as is desired, and to receive your Lordships full answer to
this, and the other particulars, expressed in our paper concerning Ireland.

After long debates in conference, which spent the greatest part of the day,
touching the motives of that Cessation, and the King's power to make it, His
Majesty's Commissioners delivered in this paper;

10. Febr.
WE have received no satisfaction, or information in your CXLIV.
Lordships debate, to alter our opinion^ of His Majesty's power, to make the
Cessation in Ireland; and having carefully produced and considered the Statute
alleged by your Lordships, we cannot find any particular clause in that
Statute, neither have your Lordships mentioned any, (though often desired by us
so to do) whereby His Majesty's power to make a Cessation there is taken away;
and therefore we are still of opinion, that His Majesty had full power to make
and consent to that Cessation; and we conceive that we have given your
Lordships an account of very just grounds to induce His Majesty to do the
same, it appearing to His Majesty by the Letters and advice from the Lords
Justices, and Council of that Kingdom, and of the Officers of His Majesty's
Army there (which we have read to your Lordships, and of which Letters and
advices we now give Copies of the Letters and advices, were accordingly
delivered.
Copies to your Lordships) that His Majesty's good Protestant Subjects of that
Kingdom, were in imminent danger to be Over-runne by the Rebels, and His Army
to be disbanded for want of necessary supplies, and that there was no such
probable way for their preservation, as by making a Cessation; neither have
your Lordships given us any satisfying reasons against the making the said
Cessation, or made it appear to us, that that Kingdom could have bin preserved
without a Cessation, and therefore we cannot apprehend how His Majesty can,
with Justice and honor, declare the same to be void.

We shall be ready, against the next time assigned for the Treaty touching
Ireland, to give your Lordships a further answer to your Propositions
concerning that Argument, the Treaty concerning Ireland of the 6th of August,
1642. and the Ordinance of the 11th of April, 1644. (which we did never see
till your Lordships delivered us Copies of them) making so great an alteration
in the Government there, that we cannot be prepared for the present to make a
full answer to those Propositions.

Their Answer, 10. Feb.
IT is very contrary to our expectation to find your Lordships unsatisfied,
CXLV.
after those Arguments and Reasons alleged by us, that His Majesty had not
power to make the Cessation with the Rebels in Ireland, and that upon the
perusal of the Statute, it appears not to you, that His Majesty had no power
to make that Cessation; it is strange to us your Lordships should forget all
the other Arguments used by us from the Common Law, from other proceedings in
Parliament, and circumstances as this case stands, on which we still insist,
and do affirm, that His Majesty had no power to make or consent to that
Cessation; we do not see any just grounds in the Copies of the Letters, given
us by your Lordships, for His Majesty's assenting to the Cessation, nor do we
know by whom those Letters were written; we are therefore still clearly of
Opinion, notwithstanding all your Lordships have alleged, that it was unfit
for His Majesty to agree unto that Cessation, being destructive to His good
Subjects, and to the Protestant Religion there, and only for the advantage of
the Popish Rebels, to the high dishonor of God, the Disservice of His
Majesty, and evident prejudice of His three Kingdoms. We therefore again
desire your Lordships full answer to what we have delivered to you concerning
Ireland.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 10. February.
WE have given your Lordships our reasons, why we are CXLVI.
not satisfied with your Arguments, that His Majesty had not power to make the
Cessation; and as upon the perusal of the Statute, we can find no ground for
that Opinion, so your Lordships in your whole debate, have not insisted or
mentioned one Clause in that Statute (though often desired) which makes See the
l^te Statute concerning the Adventurers for Ir^sh Lands.
it good, neither have your Lordships given us any Argument from the
Common Law, other, then by telling us, That it is against the Common Law,
because the private Interest of the Subscribers for Money was concerned in it;
to which we give this Answer, That their Interest was Conditional, upon
payment of their Moneys for the maintenance of the War, which was not
performed; And that if they had paid their Moneys, yet this Cessation was
rather for the advance of that Interest, there being (as it appears by the Sea
the Letters and advices in the Appendix. no. 9.
Papers) no other visible means of preservation of the Army in Ireland, and
that the Statute which gave that private Interest, does not take away the Kings
Power of making a Cessation; and we conceive that Argument of Interest was
waved: But it your Lordships shall insist upon it, we again desire, as we did
formerly, That a Case may be made of it, and that the debate may be again
resumed. Neither do we know that any Argument was used by your Lordships from
the proceedings in Parliament; And if you shall give any, we shall be ready to
Answer it: And we conceive, that the advice given to His Majesty, from the
Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, and the Testimony of the Officers of
the Army, expressing the miserable condition of that Kingdom, and inability to
bear the War, should appear to your Lordships to be just grounds, for His
Majesty's assenting to the Cessation. One of the Letters delivered by us to
your Lordships, bearing date the fourth of April, 1643. was sent by the Lords
Justices and Council of Ireland, to Mr Secretary Nicholas, in which was
enclosed their Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons, of which your
Lordships have likewise an Extract, and a Remonstrance of the Officers of the
Army to the Lords Justices and Council there; and the other Letter of the
fifth of May, 1643. to His Majesty, was from the Lords Justices and Council of
that Kingdom: All which (if your Lordships please) shall be examined by you
with the Originalls; And we are therefore of opinion, that our Answer formerly
delivered, is a good Answer to the point of Cessation in question. And that it
was not unfit for His Majesty to agree to that Cessation, nor destructive to
the Protestant Religion, nor for the advantage of the Popish Rebels: but much
for the advantage of the Protestant Subjects there, who were in apparent hazard
of destruction by Force and Famine, occasioned by the want of Supplies, which
had been promised to them, as we have formerly said. And we shall give yout
Lordships a further Answer to your other Propositions concerning Ireland, when
the time comes again for that Debate.

Here ended the first three days of the Treaty concerning Ireland, and the
night before the return of the next three days, their Commissioners delivered
this Paper.

17. February.
WE conceived that the Arguments used by us, that His CXLVII.
Majesty neither had, or has power to make the Cessation with the Rebels of
Ireland, might have fully satisfied your Lordships, and if any doubts
yetremaine, we are ready by Conference to clear them. Your Lordships may well
call to mind the several Clauses we insisted upon in the Statute, and the
Arguments we have given from the Common Law, and other proceedings in
Parliament; And we do affirm that several great Sums of Money were paid by
particular Persons, and by Corporations, who according to the true intent of
the Statute, ought to have the benefit of the same, according to diverse other
Acts of Parliament in pursuance thereof; and upon failer of payment by any
particular Persons, the forfeiture was to accrue to the Common benefit of the
rest, not failing; And we do deny that the Argument of Interest was at all
waved by us. And we conceive those wants alleged by your Lordships (if any
such were) in justifying the Cessation, were supplied from time to time by the
Houses of Parliament, until His Majesty's Forces were so Quartered in and
about the common Roades to Ireland, that Provisions going thither were
intercepted, and neither Money, Clothes, Victuals, or other things could pass
by Land, with safety to be transported. And when that both Houses of Parliament
were desirous further to supply those Wants, and for that purpose did tender a
Bill to His Majesty, It was refused. And we still allege that we have no
reason to be satisfied concerning the Cessation by any Arguments used by your
Lordships, or by any thing contained in the Extracts of the Letters and Papers
delivered to us by your Lordships, as from the Lords Justices and Council of
Ireland, and the Officers of the Army, nor (though desired by us) have your
Lordships afforded us Liberty to compare those Extracts with the Originalls,
whereby we might have the names of the Persons by whom they were written, which
we now again desire. We are therefore still clearly of Opinion as is expressed
in our former Paper of the 10th of February, concerning the Cessation, and do
desire your Lordships full Answer to our Demands concerning Ireland.

The King's Commissioners Answer. 18. February.
WE did not conceive that your Lordships had believed CXLVIII.
that any Arguments used by you could satisfy us against His Majesty's Power
to make a Cessation with the Rebell^ in Ireland, which appears to have been
made by Him, by the Advice of his Council there, and for the preservation of
His Majesty's Protestant Subjects of that Kingdom, who in all probability
would have perished by Famine and the Sword, if that Cessation had not been
made; And we shall be very ready to receive farther Information from your
Lordships by Conference, or otherwise, in that particular, either concerning
any Clauses in the Statute, or Arguments at Common Law, or proceedings of
Parliament (your Lordships having never mentioned the one, or made any Case
upon the other) upon which you intend to insist. And for the several great
Sums of Money that were paid by particular Persons and Corporations, upon
that Statute mentioned by your Lordships, we are sorry that we are compelled by
your Lordships insisting thereon, to inform your Lordships, that His Majesty
had clear information, that not only much of the money raised by the Act for
the 400 thousand pound, which was passed, for the better suppressing that most
wicked and execrable Rebellion in Ireland, and for the payment of the debts of
this Kingdom, but also of the Money raised by the Statute (on which your
Lordships insist) for the speedy and effectual reducing of the Rebels of
Ireland, etc. and other moneys raised by Contribution and Loan, for the
relief of His Majesty's distressed Subjects of that Kingdom, were expended,
contrary to the intent of the Acts by which the same were levied, and of the
Persons who lent and contributed the same, toward the maintenance of the
Forces in this Kingdom, under the Command of the Earl of Essex; And that many
Regiments of Horse and Foot, leavied for the War of Ireland, under the
command of the Lord Wharton, the Lord Kerry, Sir Faithful Fortescue, and
others, were likewise employed in that Army under the Earl of Essex at
Edgehill, and therefore His Majesty refused to consent to the Bill, presented
to His Majesty after this, for the Levying more money for Ireland, justly
fearing, that the same might be used, as the former had been; And for the few
clothes (for there were no Moneys) intercepted by His Majesty's Soldiers, in
His Majesty's Quarters, which are said to be intended for Ireland, the same
were intercepted near Coventrey, and going thither, after that City had
refused to receive His Majesty, though at the Gates. But His Majesty never
refused to give any safe Pass through His Quarters, for any Goods or
Provisions which were intended or prepared for Ireland, neither was the same
ever desired. For the extracts and Copies of the Letters delivered by us to
your Lordships, from the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, and the
Officers of the Army, We have been, and are willing that your Lordships should
compare them with the Originalls; But for your having the names of the Persons
who writ the same (since there can be no doubt of the truth of our Assertions)
we conceive it not reasonable to desire the same, not knowing what
inconvenience any of them (since you seem not to like that advice) might
incur, if at any time they should be found within your Quarters. And having
now satisfied your Lordships in the Matter of the Cessation, we shall gladly
proceed in the Treaty with your Lordships, upon any thing that may be
apparently good for His Majesty's Protestant Subjects there, and the resetling
of that Kingdom in His Majesty's Obedience.

Their Reply. 18. Feb.
WE do conceive, that the Arguments used by us, might CXLIX.
have fully satisfied your Lordships, against His Majesty's power to make a
Cessation with the Rebels in Ireland, having answered whatsoever your
Lordships have hitherto alleged to the contrary; and Offered, if any other
doubts yet remain, by conference to clear them, which still we are ready to
do; And we have heard nothing just, or reasonable for that Cessation. It will
be made evident, that the necessities, which by your Lordships were made
excuses for the Cessation, were created on purpose to color the same, and we
are compelled by your Lordships paper, to let you know, that the Committees of
Parliament, sent into Ireland, to endeavor to supply their necessities, were
discountenanced by the principal instruments for that Cessation, and when they
had taken up 2000l upon their personal security for the Army there, they were
presently after commanded from the Council, by a Letter brought thither from
His Majesty, by the Lord Ormonds Secretary; And when the Officers of the Army
were contented to subscribe for Land, in satisfaction of their Arreares, it was
declared from His Majesty, that He disapproved of such subscriptions, whereby
that course was diverted. And we do affirm, that what ever sums of money
raised for Ireland, were made use of by both Houses of Parliament, were fully
satisfied with advantage, and as we are informed, before the Bill mentioned in
our former paper was refused by His Majesty; And for the Regiments of Horse and
Foot mentioned by your Lordships, to be raised for Ireland* and employed
otherwise by the Houses of Parliament: It is true that Forces were so designed,
and when the Money, Arms and other Provisions were all ready, and nothing
wanting but a Commission from His Majesty for the Lord Wharton who was to
Command them, the same could not be obtained, which was the cause those Forces
did not go thither, and when twelve Ships, and six Pinnaces were prepared
with 1000, or more land Forces, for the service of, Ireland, and nothing
desired but a Commission from His Majesty, the Ships lying ready and staying
for the same, were three weeks together at 300l a day charge, yet the same was
denied, though often desired. And where your Lordships seem to imply, that the
provisions seized by His Majesty's Forces, were going for Coventrey, it was
made known to His Majesty, that the same were for Ireland. And your Lordships
must needs conceive (that the papers you delivered to us, being but Extracts,
and for that you deny us, so to compare them with the Originalls, as to have
the names of the Persons, by whom they were Written) it is altogether
unreasonable for us to give any credit to them, it being manifest by this, and
our former papers and debates, that the Cessation with the Rebels in Ireland is
both unjust and unlawful: We therefore insist on our demands concerning
Ireland, as apparently good for His Majesty's Subjects there, and for reducing
that Kingdom to His Majesty's Obedience.

Before His Majesty's Commissioners gave answer to this last paper, they being
also to answer the rest of the demands concerning Ireland, for their necessary
information, touching some doubts that did arise upon those demands, and the
Articles of the Treaty, of the 6th of August concerning Ireland, and Ordinances
delivered with them, the Kings Commissioners gave in these several papers.

The King's Commissioners first Paper, 19. February.
IN the eight Article of the Treaty, for the coming of the CL.
Scots Army into England, dated 29. Nov. 1643. at Edenbourgh, delivered to us
by your Lordships, among the papers for Ireland, and desired by the 12th
Proposition, to be confirmed by Act of Parliament; It is agreed that no
Cessation, nor any Pacification or agreement for Peace whatsoever, shall be
made by either Kingdom, without the mutual advice and consent of both
Kingdoms, or the Committees in that behalf appointed, who are to have full
power for the same, in case the Houses of the Parliament of England, or the
Parliament, or Convention of Estates of Scotland, shall not sit. We desire to
know whether that Article extend to any Cessation, Pacification, or Agreement
in Ireland.

The Answer. 19. Febr.
WE did, in answer to your Lordships Paper of the first of CLI.
February, upon the Propositions concerning Religion, deliver the Treaty of the
29th of November 1643. mentioned by your Lordships, and not among the Papers
for Ireland, to which it has no relation.

The King's Commissioners Reply. 20. February.
YOur Lordships did deliver the Treaty of the 29th of November, CLII.
1642. to us, with the Papers concerning Ireland, and on the 7th day of this
instant February, and not upon the first of February, upon the Propositions
concerning Religion.

Their Answer. 20. Feb.
WHen your Lordships peruse your Papers, you will rest CLIII.
satisfied, with our Answer of the 19th of this instant, to your first Paper
that day given to us, for it will appear by your Lordships 3d Paper of the
first of February, and our Paper given to your Lordships in answer of it, that
the Treaty of the date at Edenbourgh 29 November. 1643. Was delivered to your
Lordships on the first of February, upon the Proposition of Religion, and not
upon the 3d of February, with the Papers concerning Ireland.

The Article of the Treaty, of the 29. of November 1643. which occasioned these
Papers, being by their Papers thus acknowledged not to concern Ireland, and so
not pertinent to that subject, the Kings Commissioners insisted no farther.

The King's Commissioners second Paper. 19. February.
BY the 13th Proposition it is demanded, that an Act be CLIV.
passed to settle the prosecution of the War of Ireland in both Houses of
Parliament of England, to be managed by the joint advices of both Kingdoms. We
desire to know, Whether if the two Kingdoms shall not agree in their advice
touching that War, each have a Negative voice, or whether the Scots Commander
in chief of the Forces in Ireland, may manage that War in such case,
according to his own discretion.

Their Answer. 19. Febr.
IN answer to your Lordships second paper, the prosecution of CLV.
the War of Ireland, is to be settled in the two Houses of the Parliament of
England, but is to be managed by a joint Committee of both Kingdoms, wherein
the Committee of each Kingdom has a Negative voice; but in case of
disagreement, the Houses of Parliament of England, may prosecute the War as
they shall think fit, observing the Treaty of the sixth of August 1642. between
the two Houses, and the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, and the
Ordinance of the 11th of April, 1644. delivered to your Lordships formerly.

The King's Commissioners third paper. 19. February.
BY the 20th Proposition, in the Intervals of Parliament, the CLVI.
Commissioners for the Militia, have power to nominate the Lord Deputy of
Ireland, and other Officers and Judges there. We desire to know, whether that
power be limited to the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, or only to the
Commissioners for England, and whether in such cases, the Commissioners in
Scotland, shall vote as single persons?

Their Answer, 19. Feb.
THe power of the Commissioners, in the Intervals of Parliament, CLVII.
to nominate the Lord Deputy of Ireland, and other officers and Judges there,
mentioned in the 20th Proposition, being no matters of joint concernments, is
to be limited to the Commissioners for the Parliament of England, wherein the
Commissioners of Scotland are to Vote as single persons.

The King's Commissioners fourth Paper. 19. February.
THe Articles of the Treaty of the sixth of August, giving CLVIII.
power to the Lieutenant of Ireland (when the Scottish Army shall be joined
with His Army) to give Instructions to the Scottish commander in chief, and
the Orders of the two Houses of the 9th of March 1644. and the 11th of April,
See all these in the Appendix.
1644. appoynting the General of the Scottish Forces in Ireland, to command in
chief, over all the Forces, as well British as Scots, and both being desired
to be enacted. We desire to know, whether the Lieutenant of Ireland shall
command the Scots Forces, or whether the Scottish General, shall command all
Forces, both British and Scots?

Their Answer. 19. Feb.
IN Answer to your Lordships 4th Paper, we say that the Ordinances CLIX.
of the 9th of March, and 11th of April 1644. were made when there was no
Lieutenant of Ireland, and when a Lieutenant shall be made, with the
approbation of both Houses, according to our former Demands in the ^7th and
20th Propositions, it will be a fitting time to give further Answer to your
Lordships.

The King's Commissioners Reply, 20. Feb.
WE desire a full answer from your Lordships, to our CLX.
fourth paper, delivered to your Lordships yesterday, concerning the Power of
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and the General of Scots Forces, your Lordship
having proposed to us that the Articles of the Treaty, and the Ordinance of the
11. of April, be enacted by His Majesty; by one of which the General of the
Scotch Forces is to receive instructions for the manageing the War there from
the Lieutenant of Ireland; and by the other (which is the later) the General
of the Scots Forces is to command in chief, both the British and Scots Forces,
by which it seems the Lieutenant of that Kingdom is to have no power in the
prosecution of that War.

Their Answer, 20. Feb.
WE do insist upon our former papers, that the prosecution of CLXI.
the War in Ireland, is to be settled in both Houses of Parliament, and is to be
managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, as in those Papers is set down,
and when a Lieutenant of Ireland shall be appointed, as is expressed in the
Propositions; and it shall be necessary for the good of the service, that he
and the Commander in chief of the Scottish Army ioyn; The Commander of the
Scottish Army shall receive Instructions from the Lord Lieutenant or Deputy, or
other who shall have the chief Government of that Kingdom for the time,
according to the Orders which shall be given by the Commissioners of both
Kingdoms.

The King's Commissioners fifth Paper, 19. February.
THe last part of the 17th Proposition gives power to the CLXII.
Commissioners for the Militia of both Kingdoms, as a joint Committee to order
the War of Ireland, according to the Ordinance of the 11th April, and to order
the Militia, and conserve the Peace of the Kingdom of Ireland, and by that of
the 11th of April, the Earl of Leven being appointed Commander in chief over
all the Forces, as well British as Scots: We desire to know, whether he shall
be subordinate to those Commissioners for the Militia, and be obliged to
observe such orders as he shall receive from them.

Their Answer, 19. Feb.
THe Commissioners of the Militia desired by the 17th Proposition, CLXIII.
are to order the War of Ireland, according to the Ordinance of the 11th of
April, and the Earl of Leven being by that Ordinance Commander in chief of the
Forces there, is obliged to observe such Orders, as he shall receive from those
Commissioners.

Their Commissioners likewise the same 19 of Feb. delivered in some Papers of
Demands on their part.

Their Answer. 19. Feb.
WE desire that no Cessation of Arms, or Peace in Ireland CLXIV.
may be Treated upon, or concluded, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament of England.

Another, 19. Feb.
WE desire to know, whether any Peace or Cessation of Arms CLXV.
in Ireland, be consented unto by His Majesty, and for what time, and whether
any Commission be now on foot, or other authority given by His Majesty for
that purpose.

The King's Commissioners Answer to both, 20. February.
CLXVI.
TO your Lordships Which were the two next precedent Papers.
sixth and seventh Papers delivered to us yesterday concerning any Peace or
Cessation of Arms in Ireland, your Lordships well know that long after the
War begun in this Kingdom, and the want of a supply from hence, that a
Cessation has bin made with His Majesty's consent, and we conceive that the
same expires in March next, and we are confident there is no Peace made there:
But for the making a Peace, or a farther Cessation, we can give no farther
answer till we may know, whether there may be a blessed Peace made in England,
since if the miserable Civil Wars shall continue in the Kingdom, we cannot
conceive it possible for His Majesty by Force to reduce the Kingdom of
Ireland, or to preserve His Protestant Subjects there, without a Peace or
Cessation.

Their Reply, 20. Febr.
WE conceive your Lordships have given no answer to us, whether CLXVII
any Commission be now on foot, or other authority given by His Majesty for
any Peace, or Cessation of Arms in Ireland, other then that which determines
in March next, nor to our desire that no Cessation of Arms, or Peace in
Ireland, may be Treated upon, or concluded, without consent of both Houses of
the Parliament of England; nor do we understand why your Lordships should delay
your answer herein till the Peace in England be concluded, since it has bin so
clearly manifested to your Lordships, by the true meaning of the Act passed by
His Majesty this Parliament, that His Majesty can make no Peace nor Cessation
without the consent of the two Houses, and that your Lordships satisfactory
answer to this, and our other demands concerning Ireland, will much conduce to
the settling the Peace of this Kingdom, we therefore again desire your Lordships
full and clear answer to the particulars expressed in our sixth and seventh
papers, yesterday delivered to your Lordships.

The King's Commissioners Answer, 20. Febr.
WE do not hold our selves any ways obliged to answer CLXVIII.
your Lordships demand, whether any Commission be on foot, or other authority
from His Majesty, for a Peace or Cessation of Arms in Ireland, (that question
not arising upon any Propositions on His Majesty's part) yet for your Lordships
satisfaction, we do again assure you, we do not know there is any Peace or
Cessation made there, other then that which determines in March next. But what
Commission the Marquess of Ormond, as Lieutenant of Ireland, or G^nerall of
the Forces there, has to that purpose, we do not know, and therefore cannot
inform your Lordships. And as to the other particulars in that paper, we do The
two Papers following, no. 171, and 172. were delivered in before this Paper,
and the reference is to them, and others, formerly delivered on that subject.
refer our selves to the answers formerly given in to your Lordships demands,
touching that subject, with this, that we do conceive it to be most clear, that
His Majesty is in no wise restrained by express words, or by the meaning of
any Act made this Parliament, from making a Peace, or a Cessation in Ireland,
without the consent of the two Houses.

Their Paper, 19. Feb.
THere being but 3 days left to Treat upon the Propositions CLXIX.
for Religion, the Militia, and for Ireland, and for that your Lordships have
given no satisfactory answers to our d^mands concerning them, we therefore now
desire to confer with your Lordships, how to dispose of the 3 days yet
remaining, that we may receive your Lordships full and clear answers thereunto?

The King's Commissioners Answer, 19. February.
WE see no cause why your Lordships should think our CLXX.
Answers upon the Propositions for Religion and the Militia were not
satisfactory. And for that of Ireland, we have received many Papers from your
Lordships concerning that business, besides the Propositions themselves, to
all which, we doubt not to give a full and clear Answer to your Lordships to
morrow, being the time assigned, and the last day of the Treaty upon that
subject. See the Paper, 20. Feb. no. 192. touching His Majesty's return to
Westminster.
After we shall be ready to confer with your Lordships of disposing the
remainder of the time.

Accordingly after the before mentioned Demands, and Answer thereunto of the
19th of February, the King's Commissioners in Answer to theirs of the 18th of
February, No. 149. delivered in this Paper.

20. February.
WE have already told your Lordships, how far we CLXXI.
are from being satisfied by what you have alleged against His Majesty's
Power to make a Cessation with the Rebels in Ireland, neither have your
Lordships in any degree answered the important reasons which induced His
Majesty so to do, it being very evident, that by the Cessation there, His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects have been preserved and subsisted, which without
it they could not have done, the two Houses forbearing to send any relief or
supply to them, and His Majesty not being able. And we desire your Lordships to
consider how impossible it was, whilst the War continued in England with
such fierceness and animosity, by Arms to reduce the Kingdom of Ireland to
His Majesty's Obedience, and therefore His Majesty had great reason to preserve
that by a Cessation, which He could not reduce by a War; And we are most
confident, that the necessities (which are not offered as excuses for, but were
the real grounds of the Cessation) were very visible to all those in that
Kingdom, whose advices His Majesty ought in reason to follow, and whose
interests were most concerned, and would not have given such advice, if any
^ther way could have been found out to preserve them; And we have been credib^y
i^formed, that the Committee sent into Ireland (which His Majesty never
understood to be sent thither to supply the necessities, but to observe the
Actions of His Majesty's Ministers there, having, in their ^ourney thither,
signed Warrants in their own names, to apprehend the Persons of Pecres of this
Realm, and Persons of His Majesty's Privy Council) were never discountenanced
there for His Majesty's directions, that Persons who were not of His Privy
Council there, should not be present at those Counsels, cannot be interpreted
a discountenance to them in any thing they ought to do; And we are most
assured, that His Majesty sent no Message or Letter to divert the course of the
Officers Subscribing for Land in satisfaction of their Arreares, but the
Soldiers were merely discouraged from the same, by discerning that for want of
Supplies, they should not be able to go on with that War; And we do assure
your Lordships, that His Majesty does not believe, that the Sums of Money
raised for Ireland (which your Lordships do admit to have been made use of by
both Houses of Parliament, otherwise then was appointed) are yet satisfied in
any proportion, the greatest part of the Money raised upon the Bill for
400000l, and of the Moneys raised upon the charitable Collections, as well as
the Adventurers Moneys being employed upon the War here; And if the same were
since satisfied, it does no ways excuse the diverting of them, when in the
mean time that Kingdom suffered by that divertion; And that the fear that
other moneys so raised, might likewise be misimployed, was a great reason
(amongst others) that made His Majesty not consent to that Bill mentioned by
your Lordships; And for the Regiments of Horse and Foot, which your Lordships,
in your Paper of the 18th of this month, say were designed for Ireland, though
they were employed otherwise, because a Commission could not be obtained for
the Lord Wharton, who was to Command those Forces, It is well known, that
those Forces were raised before His Majesty's Commission was so much as
desired, and then the Commission that was desired, should have been independent
upon His Majesty's Lievrenant of that Kingdom, and therefore His Majesty had
great reason not to consent to such a Commission; and so the damages of keeping
those six Pinnaces, and the 1000 Land Forces (if any such were) proceeded not
from any default of His Majesty; And for the Provisions seized by His Majesty's
Forces, it is notorious that they were seized in the way to and near
Coventrey, and that it was not made known to His Majesty, that the same were
for Ireland, till after the seizure thereof, when it was impossible to recover
the same from the Soldiers, who had taken them; Whereas if a safe Conduct had
been desired by His Majesty, as it ought to have been, the same being to pass
through his Quarters, there would have been no Violence or Interruption
offered; For the giving the Names of the Persons, who subscribed the Letters
delivered to your Lordships (the Originalls of which have been showed to you by
us) We have given your Lordships a full and reasonable Answer, and if your
Lordships will assure us, that the giving their names to you, shall be no
prejudice to the Persons who did subscribe, if at any time any of them shall be
found within your Quarters, we will forthwith deliver their names to you;
otherwise we conceive your Lordships cannot, but give credit to that We have
said, and showed to you; all which, we hope has clearly satisfied your
Lordships, that the Cessation with the Rebels was neither unjust or unlawful,
and that you will proceed to satisfy us by what means the War may be
managed in Ireland, with probable hope of the preservation of His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects there, we being very willing to concur with your
Lordships in any just and honorable way, for the good and settlement of that
miserable Kingdom.

And together with this last, the King's Commissioners delivered in this other
Paper.

20. February.
HAving given your Lordships clear Reasons, why the CLXXII.
Cessation which has been made in Ireland, is not in reason or justice to be
made void, and that the making void thereof (if the same might be done) is not
or cannot be for the benefit or advantage of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects
in that Kingdom, so long as the unhappy Wars in this Kingdom continue; To
the other part of your Lordships first Paper concerning Ireland for the
prosecution of the War there, to be settled in both Houses of the Parliament
of England, to be managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, and His
Majesty to assist, we say, That it appears by the other Papers delivered to us
by your Lordships, as the Articles of the Treaty of the sixth of August, and
the Ordinances of the eleventh of April, and ninth of March, and otherwise,
That the intent is, that that War shall be managed by a joint Committee of
both Kingdoms, and that the Committee of each Kingdom, shall have a Negative
voice, and consequently it is very probable that upon difference of Opinion
between them, that War may stand still, or to the utter ruin of His
Majesty's good Subjects there be absolutely dissolved; For whereas your
Lordships say, That in case of such disagreement, the Hou^es of the Parliament
of England may prosecute the War as they shall think fit, observing the Treaty
of the sixth of August, 1642. and the Ordinance of the 11th of April, your
Lordships well know, that by that Treaty and that Ordinance, the two Houses of
the Parliament of England alone, cannot prosecute that War, that Ordinance of
the 11 of April, expressly making the Earl of Leven the Scots General,
Commander in chief of all Forces in that Kingdom, both British and Scottish,
without any reference unto His Majesty, or His Lieutenant of that Kingdom,
and di^ecting that the War shall be managed by the Committee of both
Kingdoms, without any other reference to the two Houses of the Parliament of
England; and therefore we cannot consent that such an Act of Parliament be
passed for the confirmation of that Treaty, or the Ordinance of the 11th of
April, as your Lordships propose, by reason that thereby all His Majesty's
authority would be wholly taken away in that Kingdom; And in truth that whole
Kingdom be thereby delivered into the hands of His Majesty's Subjects of
Scotland, which we conceive is neither just, prudent, or honorable to be done;
And we are of opinion, that it is not agreeable to His Majesty's honor, or the
justice and protecttion which He owes to His Subjects of His Kingdom of
Ireland, to put the nomination of His Lieutenant, and Judges of that Kingdom,
out of Him self, and to committ the whole power of that Kingdom to others, and
to bind Himself to pass all such Acts of Parliament, as any time hereafter
shall be presented to Him, for raising of Moneys, and other things necessary
for the prosecution of the War in that Kingdom, which your Lordships say in
your paper the 9th of this instant, you intend by those words [His Majesty to
assist,] in your first paper; And we conceive it cannot be expected that His
Majesty should consent to an Act of Parliament for prosecution of the War in
Ireland, to be managed by the advice of the Houses of Parliament here, and the
Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, so long as the War in this Kingdom shall
continue.

For these and many other reasons, we conceive it does app^a^e to your
Lordships, that the Propositions, as they are delivered to us by your
Lordships, are by no means fit to be consented to; and therefore we desire
your Lordships to make other Propositions to us, which may be for the
preservation and releif of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects there, and for the
settlement of that Kingdom, in which we shall very readily concur, and we
shall be very willing that the business of that Kingdom shall, after a Peace
settled in this, be taken into consideration, and ordered as His Majesty, and
both Houses of Parliament here shall think fit.

Their Answers to these two Papers, Their Paper, 20. Feb.
WE expected that your Lordships would have bin fully satisfied CLXXIII.
by what we have alleged against His Majesty's power, to make the Cessation
with the Rebels in Ireland, and w^ cannot find those important reasons, which
your Lordships mentioned to have induced His Majesty so to do, or that thereby
His Majesty's Protestant Subjects there have bin preserved, or subsisted; but
we have made it evident, that this Cessation tended to the utter destruction of
the Protestants in that Kingdom, as we conceived was designed by those who
advised His Majesty thereunto, and we observe your Lordships urge that this
Cessation was the only means for the subsistence of the Protestants there,
when it cannot be denied, but that very many of the Protestants in Vlster,
Munster, and Connaught, have yet subsisted, although they have refused to
submit to the Cessation, and opposed the same, as the means intended for their
ruin; and we do affirm unto your Lordships, that the 2 Houses of Parliament
have bin so far from failing to supply His Majesty's good Subjects in that
Kingdom, that although His Majesty's Forces have as much, as lay in their
power, endeavored to prevent the same and have taken to themselves that which
was provided for those whom your Lordships mention to have bin in so great want
and extremity, yet the two Houses not discouraged thereby, have constantly sent
great proportions of all necessary supplies unto the Protestants there, whereby
they have subsisted, and have very lately sent thither, and have already
provided to be speedily sent after in Money, Victuals, Clothes, Ammunition, and
other necessaries, to the value of seavenscore thousand pounds: And they have
not desired any other provision from His Majesty, but what he was well able to
afford herein, only His Assistance and consent in joining with His two Houses
of Parliament, for the better ^nabling them in the prosecution of that War;
and we are so far from apprehending any impossibility of reducing that Kingdom,
dureing the unhappy Distractions here, that although many of the Forces
provided by the two Houses for that end, were diverted and employed against the
Parliament, to the increasing of our distractions, yet the Protestants in
Ireland have subsisted, and do still subsist, and we have just cause cause to
believe, that if this Cessation had not bin obtained by the Rebels (and that in
the time of their greatest wants) and that these Forces had not bin withdrawn,
they might in probability have subdued those bloody Rebels, and finished the
War in that Kingdom: For the pretended necessities offered, as grounds of this
Cessation, we have already given your Lordships, (We hope) clear information;
For the persons whose advice His Majesty followed therein, your Lordships have
not thought fit to make them known unto us, and we cannot conceive their
interest in that Kingdom to be of such consideration as is by your Lordships
supposed; But we know very well, that many persons of all sorts have forsaken
that Kingdom, rather then they would submit unto this Cessation, and great
numbers of considerable persons and other Protestants yet remaining there, have
opposed, and still do oppose that Cessation, as the visible means of their
destruction. The two Houses sent their Committees into Ireland, for the better
supplying and encouraging of the Armies there, and to take an account of the
State of the War to be represented hither, that what should be found
defective might be supplied. What Warrants they issued we are ignorant off, but
are well assured that what they did was in pursuance of their duty, and for
advancement of the public service, and suppressing of that horrid Rebellion;
and we cannot but still affirm they were discountenanced and commanded from
the Council there, where the prosecution of that War was to be managed, and
that i^ was Declared from His Majesty, that he disapproved of the subscriptions
of the Officers of the Army, by means whereof that course was diverted.

Concerning the moneys raised for Ireland, we have in our former Papers given
your Lordships a full and just answer, and we are sorry the same cannot receive
credit, those monyes raised upon charitable collections, we do positively
affirm were only employed to those ends for which they were given, and we
cannot but wonder the contrary should be suggested; we are confident the
Commission desired by the two Houses for the Lord Wharton (and which your
Lordships acknowledge was denied) was only such as they conceived most
necessary for advancement of that service, and the denial thereof proved very
prejudicial thereunto; And we must again inform your Lordships, that it was
well known at the time when the goods were seized by His Majesty's Forces (as
your Lordships allege near Coventry) that the same were then carrying for the
supply of the Protestants in Ireland, and some other provisions, made and sent
for the same purpose, were likewise seized and taken away by some of his
Majesty's Forces, as we have bin credibly informed, not without his Majesty's
own knowledge and direction; your Lordships may believe that those who signed
the Letters, mentioned in your Papers, have done nothing, but what they may
well justify, and if the same be well done, they need not fear to give an
Account thereof, nor your Lordships to suppose that if they come within our
Quarters they shall be otherwise dealt withal then shall be agreeable to
Justice. Upon the whole matter, notwithstanding the allegations, pretenses, and
Excuses, offered by your Lordships, for the Cessation made with the Rebels in
Ireland, we are clearly satisfied, that the same was altogether unjust,
unlawful, and destructive to His Majesty's good Subjects, and of advantage to
none but the Popish bloody Rebels in that Kingdom; And therefore we still
earnestly insist, as we conceive our selves in Conscience and duty obliged upon
our former demands concerning Irelan^, which we conceive most just and
honorable for His Majesty to consent unto. We know no other ways to propound
more probable for the reducing of the Rebels there, but these being granted, we
shall cheerfully proceed in the managing of that War, and doubt not by ^ods
blessing, we shall speedily settle that Kingdom in their due Obedience to His
Majesty.

Their other Paper. 20. Feb.
WE cannot understand how out of any of the Papers, Articles, CLXXIV.
and Ordinances, delivered by us unto your Lordships, there should be a ground
for your opinion, that upon any differences between the Committees or
Commanders, employed about the War of Ireland, the War should stand still
or be dissolved; nor do we find that the Ordinance of the 11th of April can
produce any such inconvenience as your Lordships do imagine; Nor does the
making of the Earl of Leven Commander in chief of the Scottish and British
Forces, and the settling of the prosecution of the War of Ireland, in the two
Houses of the Parliament of England, to be managed by the joint advice of both
Kingdoms, take away the relation to His Majesty's authority, or of the two
Houses of Parliament, or of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; For in the first
place, His Majesty's consent is humbly desired, and the whole power is derived
from him, only the execution of it is put into such a way, and the General is
to carry on the War, according to the Orders he shall receive from the
Committee of both Kingdoms, and in case of disagreement in the Committee, the
two Houses of Parliament are to prosecute that War as is expressed in our
Answer to your Lordships second Paper of the 19. of February. And when there
shall be a Lieutenant of Ireland, and that he shall join with the Commander in
chief of the Scottish Army, the said Commander is to receive Instructions from
him, according to the Orders of the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, as we have
said in our answer to your Lordships second Paper of this day; nor does the
naming of the Earl of Leven to be General, any more take away the power of
the two Houses, then if he were a Native of this Kingdom, or is there any part
of the Kingdom of Ireland, delivered over into the hands of His Majesty's
Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland, who do only join with their Counsels
and Forces, for carrying on the War, and reducing that Kingdom to His
Majesty's obedience; And we conceive it most conducing for the good of His
Majesty's service, and of that Kingdom, that the Lieutenant and Judges there,
should be nominated by the two Houses of Parliament, as is expressed in the 20.
Proposition, who will recommend none to be employed by His Majesty, in places
of so great trust, but such, whose known ability and integrity shall make them
worthy of them, which must needs be best known to a Parliament; Nor are they to
have any greater power conferred upon them, by the granting this Proposition,
then they have had, who did formerly execute those places; And we know no
reason, why your Lordships should make difficulty of His Majesty's consenting
to such Acts, as shall be presented unto Him, for raising moneys, and other
necessaries from the Subject, which is without any charge to Himself, for no
other end, but the settling of the true Protestant Religion in that Kingdom, and
reducing it to His Majesty's Obedience, for which we hold nothing too dear,
that can be employed by us. And we cannot but wonder that your Lordships should
make the prosecution of the War of Ireland, which is but to execute Justice
upon those bloody Rebels, who have broken all Laws of God and Man, their
Faith, their Allegiance, all bonds of Charity, all rules of Humanity, and
Humane society, who have Butchered so many thousands of Innocent Christians,
Men, Wo^men, and Children, whose blood cries up to Heaven for Vengeance, so
many of His Majesty's Subjects, whose lives He is bound to require at their
hands that spilt them, and to do Justice upon them, to put away innocent blood
from Himself, His posterity, the whole Land, these execrable antichristian
Rebels, who have made a covenant with Hell, to destroy the Gospel of Christ,
and have taken up Arms to destroy the Protestant Religion, to set up Popery,
to rend away one of His Majesty's Kingdoms* and deliver it up into the hands of
strangers for which they have negotiations with Spain and other States; a
War which must prevent so much mischief, do so much good, offer up such an
acceptable sacrifice to the great and just God of Heaven, who groans under so
much wickedness to lie so long unpunished; A War which must reduce that
Kingdom unto His Majesty's obedience, the most glorious work that this Kingdom
can undertake; That the prosecution of such a War, your Lordships should make
to depend upon any other condition; that the distractions of these Kingdoms,
should be laid as an impediment unto it, and that there should be any thought,
any thing which should give those Rebels hope of impunity, if our miseries
continue; whereas according to Christian reason, and the ordinary course of
Gods providence, nothing can be more probable to continue our miseries, then
the least connivance in this kind; what can be said or imagined should be any
inducement to it, we hope not to make use of their help and assistance, to
strengthen any party here, to bring over such Actors of barbarous cruelties, to
exercise the same in these Kingdoms; we desire your Lordships to consider these
things, and that nothing may remain with you, which may hinder His Majesty
from giving His consent to all good means for the reducing of Ireland,
according to what is desired by us in our Propositions.

The King's Commissioners Reply to the two last Papers.
The King's Commissioners Paper, 20. February.
WE are very sorry, that our answer formerly given to CLXXV.
your Lordships, in the business of the Cessation, which was so necessary to
be made, and being made to be kept, has not given your Lordships satisfaction;
and that your Lordships, have not rather thought fit to make the
reasonableness of your Propositions concerning Ireland appear to us, or to
make such as might be reasonable in the stead, then by charging His Majesty,
with many particulars, which highly reflect upon His honor, to compel us to
mention many things, in answer to your Lordships Allegations, which otherwise
in a time of Treaty, when we would rather endeavor to prevent future
inconveniences, then to insist on past mistakes, we desired to have omitted;
And we can no ways admit, that when the Cessation was made in Ireland, His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects there, could have subsisted without that
Cessation, nor that the War can be maintained and prosecuted to the subduing
the Rebels there, so long as the War continues in this Kingdom, which are the
chief grounds laid for the assertions in your Lordships first Paper delivered
this day, concerning the business of Ireland; neither can we conceive, that
your Lordships have alleged any thing, that could in the least deg^ee satisfy
us, that His Majesty had no power to make that Cessation, or had no reason so
to do, considering (as we have formerly said, and do again insist upon it)
that by that Cessation, (which was not made till long after this Kingdom was
embroyled in a miserable War) the poor Protestants there, (who for want of
supplies from hence were ready to famish and be destroyed) were preserved, and
that Kingdom kept from utter ruin, (so far was it from being a design for
their destruction, or for the advantage of the Popish bloody Rebels, as is
insinuated;) for it appears by the Letters of the Lords Justices of Ireland,
Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Borlase, and of the Council there, of the
4th of April, 1643. before that Cessation made, directed to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, a Copy whereof we delivered to your Lordships, though we
presume you may have the Original; That his Majesty's Army and good Subjects
there, were in danger to be devoured for want of needful supplies forth of
England; and that His Majesty's Forces were of necessity sent abroad, to try
what might be done, for sustaining them in the Country, to keep them alive
until supplies should get to them, but that design failing, those their hopes
were converted into astonishment, to behold the miseries of the Officers and
Soldiers for want of all things, and all those wants made unsupportable in the
want of food; and diverse Commanders and Officers declaring they had little
hope to be supplied by the Parliament pressed with so great importunity, to be
permitted to depart the Kingdom, as that it would be extreme difficult to keep
them there. And in another part of that Letter (for we shall not grieve you
with mention of all their complaints) they exprested, That they were expelling
thence all strangers, and must instantly send away for England thousands of
poor despoyled English, whose very eating was then unsupportable to that
place; that their confusions would not admit the writing of many more Letters,
if any, (for they had written diverse others, expressing their great
necessities.) And to the end His Majesty and the English Nation, might not
irrecoverably, and unavoydably suffer, they did desire that then (though it
were almost at the p^ynt to be too late) supplies of victuals and Ammunition
in present, might be hastened thither to keep life, until the rest might
follow, there being no victual in the store nor a hundred Barrells of Powder
(a small proportion to defend a Kingdom) left in the store, when the out
Garrisons (as they were to be instantly) were supplied, and that remainder,
according to the usual necessary expense, besides extraordinary accidents,
would not last above a Month. And in that Letter they sent a Paper, Signed by
sundry Officers of the Army, delivered to them as they were ready to sign that
dispatch, and by them apprehended to threaten imminent danger, which mentioned,
That they were brought to that great exigence, that they were ready to rob and
spoil one another, that their wants began to make them desperate; That if the
Lords, Justices, and Council there, did not find a speedy way for their
preservation, they did desire that they might have leave to go away; That if
that were not granted, they must have recourse to the Law of Nature, which
teaches all men to preserve themselves.

And by a letter of the 11th of May following (a Copy whereof we have also
delivered to your Lordships) the Lords Justices and Council there did
advertise His Majesty, that they had no victual, clothes, or other
provisions, (no money to provide them of any thing they want) no Arms, not
above 40 Barrells of Powder, no strength of serviceable Horse, no visible means
by Sea or Land, of being able to preserve that Kingdom, and that though the
Winds had in many days, and often formerly stood very fair for accessions of
supplies forth of England, (the two Houses having then, and ever since the full
Command of those Seas) yet to their inexpressible grief, after full six months
waiting, and much longer patience, and long suffering, they found their
expectations answered, in an inconfiderable quantity of provisions, viz. 75
Barrells of Butter, and 14 Tunn of Cheese, being but the 4th part of a small
Vessells-loading, which was sent from London, and arrived there on the 5th of
May. which was not above 7, or 8 days provisions for that part of the Army, in
and about Dublin; No mon^y or victuals (other then that inconsiderable
proportion of victuals) having arrived there as sent from the Parliament of
England, or from any other forth of England, for the use of the Army since the
beginning of Novem. before. And besides these whereof, we have Copies to your
Lordships, it was represented to Hi^ Majesty by Petition from that Kingdom,
That all means by which comfort and life should be conveyed to that Gasping
Kingdom seemed to be totally obstructed, and that unless timely releife were
afforded, His Loyal Subjects there must yield their fortunes for a Prey, their
lives for a sacrifice, and their Religion for a scorn, to the mercylesse
Rebels. Upon all which deplorable passages, represented by persons principally
interessed in the managing of the affairs of that Kingdom, and the War there,
in which number were Sr William Parsons Sr John Temple, Sr Adam Loftus, and Sr
Robert Merideth, persons of great estimation with your Lordships; to which we
could add many other advices, and letters from several men of repute and
quality, but that we will not trouble your Lordships with repetition of private
advices, we cannot think but your Lordships are now satisfied, that the
necessities of that Kingdom, which were the ground of the Cessation there, were
real, and not pretended, and therefore for excuses we leave them, to them who
stands in need of them; and we desire your Lordships, to consider as the
distracted condition of this Kingdom was, what other way could be imagined for
the preservation of that Kingdom, then by giving way to that Cessation, and
though it is insisted on in your Lordships paper, that some Protestants in
Vlster, Munster, and Connaught, (who have refused to submit to that Cessation)
have yet subsisted, yet your Lordships well know, these were generally of the
Scottish Nation, who had strong Garrisons provided, and appointed to them, and
were in these parts of Ireland, near the Kingdom of Scotland, whence more
ready supplies of Victuals might be had, then the English could have from
England, and for whose supply (as His Majesty has bin credibly informed, and
we believe that your Lordships know it to be true) special care was taken,
when the English Forces, and other English Protestant Subjects there, were
neglected, whereby they were exposed to apparent destruction, by Sword and
Famine; and we cannot but wonder at the assertion, that His Majesty's Forces
have as much as lay in them, endeavored to prevent those supplies for Ireland,
and at the mention of the intercepting those provisions near Coventry, with His
Majesty's own knowledge and direction, whereas, as we have formerly acquainted
your Lordships, it was not known to His Majesty that those provisions, which
were taken near Coventry going thither, when His Majesty's Forces were before
it, were intended for Ireland, till after the seizure there of, when it was
impossible to recover them from the Soldiers, which might have bin prevented,
if a safe Conduct had bin desired through His Majesty's Quarters, which we are
assured He would have readily granted for those or any other supplies for that
Kingdom, but was never asked of Him; and as there is no particular instance of
any other provisions for Jreland intercepted by His Majesty's Forces, but those
near Coventry, which were considerable, so we can assure your Lordships, that
when His Majesty was in the greatest wants of all provisions, and might have
readily made use of some provided for Ireland, lying in Magazines within His
Quarters, yet he gave express order for the sending them away, which was done
accordingly, and would have supplied them further out of His own store, if he
had bin able; and no man can be unsatisfied of His Majesty's tender sense, of
the miseries of His Protestant Subjects in Jreland, when they shall remember
how readily he gave His Royal assent to any Proposition or Acts for raising of
men, monyes, and Arms for them, that he offered to pass over in Person for
their releife, (which His Majesty's Subjects of Scotland approved, and declared
it to be an argument of care in His Majesty,) and if that had proceeded, it
might in possibility have quenehed the flames of that unhappy Rebellion, as
long before it mi^ht probably have bin prevented, if the Army of Jrish Natives
there had bin suffered to have bin transported out of that Kingdom, as was
directed by His Majesty.

What Provisions are Iately sent, or are now sending to Ireland from the two
Houses, we know not; But His Majesty has been informed, that even those
provisions are designed in pursuance of the late Treaty concerning Ireland,
made with His Subjects of Scotland without His Majesty's Consent, and only for
such, who have deelared themselvea against His Majesty's Ministers, and in
opposition to that Cessation to which many of them had formerly consented,
though they have since upon private Interest, and the encouragement and
solicitations of others opposed the same; and therefore His Majesty cannot look
upon those Supplied, as a support for the War against the Irish Rebels, or as
a repayment of those monyes which being raised by Acts of Parliament for that
War, have been formerly diverted to other uses, of which Money 100000l at one
time was issued out for the payment of the Forces under the Earl of Essex.

And as to d^verting the Forces provided, for the reducing of Ireland, though
we conceived it ought not to be objected to His Majesty, considering the Forces
under the Command of the Lord Wharton, raised for Ireland had been formerly
diverted and employed against him, in the War here in England, yet it is
evident they were not brought over, till after the Celsation, when they could
no longer subsist there: And that there was no present use for them, and before
those Forces brought over, there was an attempt to bring the Scottish Forces in
Ireland, as likewise diverse of the English Officers there into this Kingdom,
and since the Earl of Leven their General, and diverse Scotch Forces were
actually brought over.

To the Allegations that many Persons of all sorts have forsaken the Kingdom,
rathen then they would submit to that Cessation, we know of none; But it is
manifest, that diverse who had left that Kingdom, because they would have been
famished if they had continued thene, since that Cessation, have returned.

Touching the Committee sent into Ireland, we have already answered, they were
not discountenanced by His Majesty, in what they lawfully might do* although
they went without his Privity, but conceive your Lordships will not insist,
that they should sit with the Privy Council there, and assume to themselves to
advise and interpose as Privy Counselors; And we again deny the Subscriptions
of the Officers of the Army was diverted by His Majesty; and it is well known,
that some Officers apprehending upon some Specches, that the drift in requiring
Subscriptions was to engage the Army against His Majesty, in detestation there
of upon those Speeches, rent the book of Subscription in pieces.

For the diversion of the moneys raised for that War, if they had been since
repayed, (the contrary whereof is credibly informed to His Majesty,) yet that
present diversion might be, and we believe was a great means of the future
wants of that Kingdom which indueed the Cessation. As to the Lord Wharton's
Commission we conceive we have already fully satisfied your Lordships the just
reasons thereof.

For the Letters, whereof your Lordships had Copies, we conceive that you being
thereby satisfied of the Contents, and that they came from the Lord Justices
and Council there, your Lordships need not doubt of the truth of the matter;
And for the names of the single persons subscribing; we cannot conceive it is
desired for any other purpose, then to be made use of against such of them as
should come into your Quarters, you having not granted, though desired, that it
shall not turn to their prejudice, if we should give in their Names.

Upon what has been said, it appears, That His Majesty's English Protestant
Subjects in Ireland could not subsist without a Cessation; And that the War
there cannot be maintained or prosecuted to the subduing of the Rebels there,
during the continuance of this unnatural War here, it is evident to any man,
that shall consider, that this Kingdom laboring in a War which imployes all
the Force and wealth at home, cannot, nor will spare considerable Supplies to
send abroad; or if it could, yet whiles there are mutual Iealousies, that
there cannot be that concurrence in joint advices betwixt the King and the two
Houses, as will be necessary, if that War be prosecuted; And that His Majesty
cannot condescend, or your Lordships in reason expect His Majesty should, by
his Consent to Acts of Parliament for the managing of that War, and raising
monyes to that purpose, put so great a power into their hands, who, during
these Troubles, may if they will turn that power against Him; And it is
apparent, that the continuance of the War here must inevitably cause the
continuance of the miseries there, and endanger the rending of that Kingdom
from this Crown.

The King's Commissioners other Paper. 10. February.
WE do very much wonder that it does not clearly appear CLXXVI.
to your Lordships, that upon any difference between the Committees of both
Kingdoms, in the managing the War of Ireland, (in the manner proposed by your
Lordships) the War there must stand still, or be dissolved, for if the
Ordinance of the 11th of April, be by His Majesty's Royal assent made an Act
of Parliament, (as your Lordships desire) all the Forces of that Kingdom both
British and Scottish, are put under the absolute Command of the Earl of Leven
the Scottish General, and the managing the War committed wholly to the Committee
of both Kingdoms, without any reference to the two Houses of the Parliament of
England, by themselves, so that whatsoever your Lordships say of your
intentions, that the two Houses of Parliament here, shall upon such difference
manage the War, (which yet you say must be observing the Treaty, of the 6th of
August, and the said Ordinance of the 11th of April,) it is very evident if
that Ordinance should be made a Law, the War must stand still, or be dissolved
upon difference of opinion between the Committee of both Kingdoms, or else the
Earl of Leven must carry on that War according to his discretion, for he is in
no degree bound to observe the Orders or directions of the Houses of Parliament
in England by themselves, neither does the asking His Majesty's consent at all,
alter the case from what we stated it to your Lordships, in our paper of the 20
of this instant, for we said then, and we say still, that if His Majesty should
consent to what you propose, He would divest Himself of all His Royal Power in
that Kingdom, and reserve no power or authority in Himself over that War,
which is most necessary for His Kingly office to do; for your Lordships
expression, when there shall be a Leivtenant of Ireland. we presume your
Lordships cannot but be informed, that His Majesty has made, and we doubt not
but you acknowledge He has power, to make the Lord Marquisse of Ormond His
Leivtenant of that Kingdom, and who is very well able to manage and carry on
that War, in such manner as shall be thought necessary for the good of that
Kingdom, and there is no question, but that the naming the Earl of Leven to be
General to receive Orders only from the joint Committee of both Kingdoms, does
more take away the power of the two Houses here, then if he were a Native of
this Kingdom, and to obey the Orders of the two Houses. And we conceive it
evident, that the giving the absolute Command of all Forces, both British and
Scottish, to the Earl of Leven, General of the Scottish Forces, who is to
manage the War according to the Directions of the joint Committee of both
Kingdoms, does not amount to less, then to deliver the whole Kingdom of
Jreland over into the hands of His Majesty's Subjects of the Kingdom of
Scotland, and therefore we must ask your Lordships pardon, to believe out
selves obliged in prudence, honor, and Conseience, very much to insist on that
Consideration, and very earnestly to recommend the same to your Lordships; And
we conceive it most conducing to the good of His Majesty's Service, and of that
Kingdom, that the Lieutenant and Judges there be nominated (as they have
always been) by His Majesty, who will be sure to employ none in places of so
great Trust, but such whose known ability and integrity shall make them
worthy, and if at any time he shall find himself deceived by those he shall
choose, can best make them examples of His Justice, as they have bin of His
Grace and Favor; and we beseech your Lordships to consider how impossible it
is for His Majesty, to receive that measure of duty, everence, and
application, which is due to Him, and His Royal Progenitors have always
enjoyed, if it be not in His own immediate power to reward those, whom he
shall by experience discern worthy of public trust and employment. We have
made no difficulty to your Lordships, of His Majesty's consenting to Acts for
the raising of moneys, and other necessaries for the settling of the true
Protestant Religion in that Kingdom, only we think it unreasonable, that His
Majesty should engage Himself, (as is proposed) to pass all such Acts as shall
be presented to Him, before He know whether such Acts are reasonable or no, and
whether those (other necessaries) may not comprehend, what in truth is not only
unnecessary, but very inconvenient; neither will the Argament, that the moneys
are to be raised from His Subjects, without any charg to Himself, seem
reasonable to His Majesty, His Majesty considering His own charge much less
then the damage and pressures which may thereby befall His good Subjects, the
preserving them from which is His Majesty's most sollicitous and earnest
desire; and we cannot but wonder, that your Lordships should conceive any
expressions made by us, concerning the prosecution of that War of Ireland, to
be unagreeable to the zeal of persons abundantly sensible of the Blood and
horror of that Rebellion; we agree with you, they have broken the Laws of God
and man, their Faith, their Alleagiance, the bonds of Charity, rules of
Humanity, and humane Society, and we heartily wish that it were in His
Majesty's power to do Justice upon, and make up those breaches of all those
rules and bonds; and to that purpose we have desired to be satisfied by your
Lordships, what probable course may be taken, for the remedying those
mischeifs, and preserving the remainder of His Majesty's good Protestant
Subjects; but without doubt the prosecution of that War so much depends upon
the condition and distractions of His Majesty's other Kingdoms, that the
information your Lordships gives us, of the negotiation with Spain, and other
States, for delivering up that Kingdom from His Majesty's obedience, into the
hands of Strangers, deserves the most strict consideration, how His Majesty's
two other Kingdoms can be applied to the releife of the third, whilst these
distractions are in their own Bowels, and the continuance of the miseries in
the two, must render those in the third remedilosse, if it be not preserved by
some other means, then the prosecution of the War; neither can it be
foreseen or determined, what help or Assistance either party may make use of,
where it finds it self oppressed, and over-powred by the other, especially
when it calls in any help, and leaves no means unattempted to destroy the
other. And we beseech your Lordships, in the Bowels of Christian Charity and
compassion, and in the name of him, who is the Prince of Peace, and who will
make an inquisition for blood, to consider, whether all our endeavors, ought
not to be, to stop these bloody issues in all His Majesty's Dominions; and
whether the just God of Heaven, who for our sins, has made the several
Nations, under His Majesty's Government, to be Scourges of one another, and of
His Majesty himself, under whose Obedience they should all live, can be
delighted with the sacrifice of blood, and the blood of Christians; and whether
it would not be more agrecable to our Christian profession, to endeavor the
binding up of those wounds, which interests, passion, and animosity have made.
We desire your Lordships to consider these things, and to make such
Propositions to us concerning Ireland (since it is apparent, that those already
made by you, are by no means fit to be consented to) as may be for the growth
and propogation of the true Protestant Religion, the Peace and happiness of
that Kingdom, and the welfare of all His Majesty's Dominions.

The last of the six days concerning Ireland being now spent, being the last
of the 18, appointed to treat upon Religion, Militia, and Ireland, by three
days a piece, Alternis vicibus; according to the order formerly proposed, the
two remaining days were employed for the most part concerning Religion, but
toward the end of these two days, being the last of the Treaty (about 12. of
the clock at night) they delivered in these two following Papers concerning
Ireland, in Answer to the two last Papers.

Their Paper. 22. Feb.
WE are very sorry, that your Lordships should continue CLXX VII.
in that opinion, That it was necessary to make the Cessation in Ireland, when
by undeniable proofs, and consideration of all circumstances, it is most
clear, that the necessities alleged for grounds of that Cessation, were made
by design of the Popish and Prelaticall party in England and Ireland, who so
wickedly contrived the same, that the provisions sent thither by the
Parliament, for relief of His Majesty's good Subjects in reland, were disposed
of, and afforded to the Rebels there in their greatest wants, and then when
your Lordships affirm the Protestants to be in so great extremity, and even at
that time also, when the Officers of our Army and Garrisons, pressing for leave
to March into the Enemies Country, to live upon them, and save their own
stores, some, who were driven forth, had great quantities of provisions out
with them, yet were not permitted to March into the Enemies Country, but kept
near Dublin, until their Provisions were spent, and then commanded back
again; others could not obtain leave to go forth, but were commanded to stay
at home, that their own provisions might be the sooner consumed, and thereby
the necessity made greater. Notwithstanding by the care of hoth Houses of
Parliament here for their supply, they were able to subsist, and did subsist at
the time of that Cessation, although the making thereof reduced them to far
greater necessities, then otherwise they could have suffered, besides the
notorious advantage thereby to the Rebels, when their wants and extremities
were most pressing. And we should not again have troubled your Lordships with
these answers, had they not been caused by your own repetition of the Letters,
of part whereof you have given us Copies, though not the knowledge of the
Persons from whom they came, only you were pleased to mention, the Lords
Justices, and Council there, yet we are assured, even by some who were of the
Council at that time when the Letters were written, that the same was done
only to press for supplies from hence, without the least intention in them, of
inducing a Cessation, neither do the Copies contain any thing tending to a
Cessation, or the least mention thereof; And we have cause to grieve, not only
at what your Lordships express concerning the complaints from Ireland, and
their great extremities, but that the same being procured and increased by the
Popish Party, yet we should find such earnest endeavors to lay the blame and
neglect therein upon the two Houses of Parliament here, who have been so
zealous for their relief, and whose only care (under the blessing of God)
has been their preservation, and that in the heat of our own miserable
Distractions have continued their Supplies, and from our own great wants, have
not spared to afford our Brethren there the means of their subsistence.

The Protestants in Munster, Connaught, and Vister, who opposed this Cessation,
were many of them English, and both they and the Scots suffering under as great
wants and failer of Supplies, as the Protestants in other places, and in no
better posture of their own defense; Notwithstanding in a true sense of their
own duty and Conscience, they have opposed and still do oppose the same,
neither were the English there neglected, as your Lordships have been
misinformed, by such who labor to destroy both Nations, and as a means
thereto to divide them.

Besides the goods seized near Coventry, we have mentioned other particulars
asserted to be seized, not without His Majesty's own knowledge and direction,
as we are informed, and are most unwilling to believe; Neither do we
understand it to be an excuse for feizing some goods, to say that His Majesty
did forbear to seize others in his Power, but when His Majesty shall rightly
ponder the horridness of that Rebellion, we hope those wicked Instruments who
contrived, and do support the same, will have no power to alter His Majesty's
tender sense of the miseries of His Protestant Subjects in that Kingdom, nor
at all to lessen His Piety and gracious Care for quenching the flames of that
unhappy Rebellion.

We do again affirm unto your Lordships the truth of what we said before
concerning the Supplies of Ireland by the two Houses, and it seems strange,
that what has been lately sent, should not be looked upon, as a support of the
War against the Rebels, by which only the Protestants were enabled to defend
themselves, and to infest their Enemies; Nor can we imagine any other means as
a support of that just War, being most assured, that if this had not been
done, the Rebels must certainly have prevailed, and the remnant of His
Majesty's good Subjects of that Kingdomr have perished.

Your Lordships are pleased to remember some monyes by us employed,
particularly one hundred Thousand Pounds, which was raised for Ireland, all
which have been resatisfied with advantage; And we must as often as you are
pleased to repeat it, refer your Lordships, to our former just and clear
Answers concerning the same, and the like for the Forces under the Command of
the Lord Wharton; And we believe what your Lordships express, concerning the
Forces brought hither to His Majesty out of Ireland, after the Cessation, it
being one end for which the Cessation was made, that those Forces might be
employed against the two Houses of Parliament here; And those Scottish Forces
which came over, were not sent for.

We know of no Persons who have returned into Ireland since the Cessation,
except such as were Agents for the procuring thereof, and diverse principal
Rebels who presumed to address themselves unto His Majesty at Oxford, and were
there countenanced.

It is probable, that some might endeavor to alienat^ the hearts of the
Officers of the Army there from the two Houses, whereby their service against
the Rebels might be interrupted.

To that particular of the Subscriptions of the Officers, and of the Committee
sent into Ireland, and of the diversions of Monyes alleged, and of the Copies
of Letters given us by your Lordships, without the names of those who
subscribed them; We have already given your Lordships a full and clear answer,
but have not received satisfaction concerning the denial of the Lord Whartons
Commission, whereby the service of that Kingdom was much prejudiced.

It is so far from being made appear, that His Majesty's English Protestant
Subjects in Ireland, could not subsist without a Cessation, that the untrary is
undeniable, and that His Majesty's Protestant Subjects there, both English and
Scottish, who have opposed that Cessation, have subsisted and do still
subsist, And we are sorry to find any inclination to continue that Cessation,
which whenever made, will be esteemed by all good Protestants a countenancing
of that bloody Rebellion.

We do insist upon our former Demands concerning Ireland, and doubt not but
those being granted, notwithstanding our present miserable Distractions here,
we shall (by the blessing of God) bring those bloody Rebels to a speedy and
just punishment, and settle that unhappy Kingdom in their due Obedience to His
Majesty, and the Crown of England.

Their other Paper, 22. Feb.
IT is not possible for us to give a more clear Answer, then we CLXXVIII.
have done, to show that there can no such inconvenience follow, upon
confirming the Ordinance of the 11th of April, by Act of Parliament, as your
Lordships do imagine; It being desired that the Treaty of the sixth of August,
be in like manner confirmed; By which the Commanders of the Scottish Forces in
Ireland, are to be answerable to His Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament
of England, for their whole deportment and proceeding there; and it being
desired by the 13th Proposition, that the prosecutions of the War of Ireland,
should be settled in both Houses of Parliament; all which taken together, it
cannot follow, that upon any disagreement between the Committees there, the
Earl of Leven may carry on the War according to his own discretion; as for our
expression (when there shall be a Lieutenant in Ireland) which was used in
answer to your Lordships second paper of the 20 of February, it was was to
satisfy your Lordships, that there could be no interfering between the powers
of the Lord Lieutenant, and of the Earl of Leven, and still we say when there
shall be a Lord Lieutenant chosen as is expressed in our 20th Proposition, (for
we do not admit the Marquess of Ormond to be so) the Commander in chief of
the Scottish Army, is to receive Instructions from him in such manner as we
have laid it down, in that answer of ours to your Lordships paper above
mentioned, which will, we hope, satisfy your Lordships other objection, that
this is not to deliver over the whole Kingdom of Ireland into the hands of His
Majesty's Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland, seeing such of that Nation as
are there employed, are to be subordinate to the Committee of both Kingdoms and
in case of disagreement, an appeal lies to the two Houses of the Parliament of
England, in whom the power of prosecuteing the War is to be settled. And we must
insist to desire that the Lord Leivtenant, and the Judges in that Kingdom, may
be nominated by the two Houses of Parliament, who have by sad experience (to
the great cost of this Kingdom, expense of so much treasure and blood, the
loss of many thousand lives there, and almost of that whole Kingdom from His
Majesty's obedience, and an inestimable prejudice to the true Protestant
Religion,) found the ill consequence of a bad choice of persons for those great
places of trust. Therefore for His Majesty's honor, the good of His service,
the great advantage it will be to the rest of His Majesty's Dominions the great
comfort to all good Christians, and even an acceptable service to God himself,
for the attaining of so much good, and the prevention of so much evil, they
desire to have the nomination of those great Officers, that by a prudent and
careful Election, they may, by providing for the good of that now miserable
Kingdom discharge their duty to God, the King, and their Country. And
certainly if it be necessary to reduce that Kingdom, and that the Parliament
of England be a faithful Council to His Majesty, and fit to be trusted with
the prosecution of that War, (which His Majesty was once pleased to put into
their hands, and they faithfully discharged their parts in it, notwithstanding
many practices to obstruct their proceedings, as is set forth in several
Declarations of Parliament) then we say your Lordships need not think it
unreasonable that His Majesty should engage himself to pass such Acts as
shall be presented to him, for raising monyes and other necessaries for that
War, for if the War be necessary (as never War was more) that which is
necessary for the maintaining of it must be had, and the Parliament that does
undertake and manage it, must needs know what will be necessary, and the People
of England, who have trusted them with their Purse, will never begrudge, what
they make them lay out upon that occasion; Nor need His Majesty fear the
Parliament will press more upon the Subject then is fit in proportion to the
occasion; It is true, that heretofore Persons about His Majesty have
endeavored and prevailed too much, in possessing him against the Parliament
for not giving away the money of the Subject, when His Majesty had desired it
But never yet did His Majesty restrain them from it, and we hope it will not
be thought that this is a fit occasion to begin; We are very glad to find that
your Lordships are so sensible in your expressions of the Blood and horror of
that Rebellion and it is without all question, in His Majesty's Power to do
Justice upon it, if your Lordships be willing that the Cessation, and ali
Treaties with those bloody and unnatural Rebels be made void, and that the
prosecution of the War be settled in the two Houses of the Parliament of
England, to be managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, and the King to
assist, and to do no Act to discountenance or molest them therein: This we
dare affirm to be more then a probable course for the remedying those
mischiefs, and preserving the remainder of His Majesty's good Subjects there.
We cannot believe your Lordships will think it fit, there can be any Agreement
of Peace; any respight from hostility with such Creatures as are not fit to
live, no more then with Wolves or Tigers, or any ravennous Beasts, destroyers
of mankind. And we beseech you do not think it must depend upon the condition
of His Majesty's other Kingdoms to revenge or not revenge Gods quarrel upon
such perfidious Enemies to the Gospel of Christ, who have imbrued their hands
in so much Protestant blood, but consider the Cessation that is made with them,
is for their advantage, and rather a protection than a Cessation of Acts of
hostility, as if it had been all of their own contriving; Arms, Ammunition,
and all manner of Commodities may be brought unto them; and they may furnish
themselves, during this Cessation, and be assisted and protected in so doing,
that afterward they may the better destroy the small remainder of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects. We beseech your Lordships in the bowels of
Christian charity, and compassion to so many poor Souls, who must perish, if
the strength of that raging Adversary be not broken, and in the Name of him who
is the Prince of Peace, who hates to be at Peace with such shedders of Blood,
give not your consents to the continuation of this Cessation of War in
Ireland, and less to the making of any Peace there, till Justice have been
fully executed upon the Actors of that accursed Rebellion. Let not the
Judgment of War within this Kingdom, which God has laid upon us for our
sins, be increased by so great a finne, as any Peace or friendship with them;
whatsoever becomes of us, if we must perish, yet let us go to our graves with
that comfort, that we have not made Peace with the Enemies of Christ, yea even
Enemies of mankind, declared and unreconciled Enemies to our Religion and
Nation; Let not our War be a hindrance to that War, for we are sure that
Peace will be a hindrance to our Peace; We desire War there, as much as we
do Peace here, for both we are willing to lay out our Estates, our Lives, and
all that is dear unto us in this World; and we have made Propositions unto
your Lordships for both, if you were pleased to agree unto them; We can but
look up to God Almighty, beseech him to oncline your hearts, and casting our
selves on him, wait his good time for the return of our Prayers in settling a
safe and happy Peace here, and giving success to our Endeavors in the
prosecution of the War of Ireland.

It had been used by the Commissioners, during the Treaty, that when Papers
were delivered in of such length, and so late at night that present particular
answers could not be given, by agreement between themselves, to accept the
answers the next day, dated as of the day before, although they were Treating
of another Subject; And these two last papers concerning Ireland being of such
great length, and delivered about twelve of the clock at night, when the Treaty
in time was expiring, so an no answer could be given without such consent and
agreement, Therefore the King's Commissioners delivered in this Paper;

22. February.
YOur Lordships cannot expect a particular answer from us CLXXIX.
this night, to the two long Papers concerning Ireland, delivered to us by your
Lordships, about twelve of the clock this night, but since there are many
particulars in those Papers, to which, if they had been before mentioned, we
could have given your Lordships full satisfaction. And for that we presume your
Lordships are very willing to be satisfied in those particulars, which so
highly reflect upon His Majesty, we desire your Lordships to receive the
Answers, which we shall prepare to those papers, in the evening to Morrow,
dated as of this night, and we doubt not to give your Lordships clear
satisfaction therein.

This desire was not granted, nor any Paper delivered in answer to it, but soon
after the Treaty broke off.

During the 20. days Treaty, upon Religion, Militia, and Ireland, the
particular passages whereof are before expressed, some other passages did
occur, concerning His Majesty's Propositions, and particularly for a It is
the sixth of His Majesty's Propositions.
Cessation, and touching His Majesty's return to Westminster after disbanding
of Armies, and further time for continuing or renewing the Treaty, which do
here follow. And first touching His Majesty's Propositions, the Kings
Commissioners delivered in this Paper the second day of the Treaty.

I. February.
WE desire to know, whether your Lordships have any CLXXX. See His Majesty's
Propositions no 8. And the Letter from the Earl of Essex no 9. That their
Commissioners should have Instructions to Treat upon them.
Instructions concerning His Majesty's Propositions, for settling a safe and
well grounded Peace; And if you have any touching the same, we desire to have a
sight of them.

Their Answer. I. Feb.
WE have not yet received Instructions concerning His CLXXXI.
Majesty's Propositions, and shall therefore acquaint the Lords and Commons
Assembled in the Parliament of England, with the desires expressed in that
Paper, who having taken those Instructions into their consideration, before our
coming from them, will send them to us in time convenient.

After upon the third of February, His Majesty's Commissioners delivered this
Paper, concerning His Majesty's sixth Proposition, for a Cessation of Arms.

3. February.
WE desire to know, whether your Lordships have received CLXXXII
any Instructions concerning that Proposition of His Majesty's for a Cessation;
and if your Lordships have not received any, that you will endeavor to procure
Authority to Treat thereupon; which we have power to do, and conceive it very
necessary, that during the time we are endeavourin^ to establish a blessed and
happy Peace, the issues of blood may be stopped in this miserable Kingdom, and
His Majesty's oppressed and Languishing Subjects, have some earnest and
prospect of the Peace we are endeavoring, by Gods blessing, to procure for
them.

To this no particular Answer was given.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 10. February.
HAving now spent three days severally, upon each of CLXXXIII
your Lordships three Propositions, concerning Religion, the Militia, and
Ireland, we desire to know, whether your Lordships have received any
instructions concerning His Majesty's Propositions, that we may prepare our
selves to Treat upon them, when your Lordships shall think fit.

Their Answer, 11. Feb.
WE have received Instructions, concerning His Majesty's CLXXXIV
Propositions; And when the Houses of Parliament shall be satisfied, in the
good Progress of the Treaty upon their Propositions concerning, Religion, the
Militia, and Ireland, they will give time for the Treaty upon those
Propositions sent by His Majesty.

But there was not any time given to Treat upon His Majesty's Propositions.

Touching further time for continuing or reviveing the Treaty; and His
Majesty's Return to Westminster, after Disbanding, those Papers were delivered.
The King's Commissioners Paper. 14. Febr.
WE have this day received directions from His Majesty, CLXXXV.
to move your Lordships, that you will endeavor to procure an addition of time
for this Treaty, after the expiration of the days limited for the same, upon
the reasons mentioned in His Majesty's Letter, which Letter we herewith deliver
to your Lordships.

The Letter mentioned in the last Paper, from His Majesty to His Commissioners,
is this.
RIght Trusty, etc. Having received from you a CLXXXVI.
particular account of your proceedings in the Treaty, and observing thereby
how impossible it is, within the days limited, to give such full Answers to
the three Propositions you are now upon, as you might, if upon Consideration
had of the rest of the Propositions, you could clearly see, what fruit such
Answers will produce in order to a blessed Peace, for the present and the
future good and happiness of this Kingdom; We have thought it fit to advise
you, That you propose and desire of the Commissioners with whom you Treat, that
they will procure such farther time to be allowed, after the expiration of the
Twenty days, as may be sufficient for you, upon a full understanding one of
another upon the whole, to make such a Conclusion, that all Our Subjects may
reap the Benefit good men pray for, Deliverance from these bloody distractions,
and be united in Peace and Charity; And if you think fit, you may communicate
this Our Letter to them. And so we bid you heartily farewell. Given at Our
Court at Oxford 13. Feb. 1644.

By His MAJESTY'S Command, GEORGE DIGBY.

To Our Right Trusty etc. the Lords and others Our Commissioners for the Treaty
at Vxbridge.
Their Answer. 14. Feb.
COncerning the paper delivered by your Lordships for addition CLXXXVII
of time for the Treaty, We can give no other answer, then that we will send
Copies of His Majesty's Letter, and of the paper unto the Houses of Parliament,
and after signification of their pleasure, we will give further answer.

Afterward on the 18th of Feb. they delivered this paper, 18. February.
YOur Lordships may please to take notice, that in the 20 days CLXXXVIII
appointed to Treat upon the Propositions concerning Religion, Militia, and
Ireland, the first Thursday, and three Sundays, are not to be included.

The King's Commissioners paper. 20. February.
BY our paper delivered to your Lordships the 14th of this CLXXXIX.
month, we moved your Lordships to endeavor an addition of time for this
Treaty, after the expiration of the days limited for the same, upon the
reasons mentioned in His Majesty's Letter, which letter, we then delivered to
your Lordships; whereunto your Lordships then returned answer, that you would
send Copies of His Majesty's Letter, and of our paper to the Houses of
Parliament, and after signification of their pleasure, you would give farther
Answer; we now desire to know, whether there may be an addition of time for
this Treaty, after the expiration of the days limited for the same, upon the
reasons mentioned in His Majesty's said letter, and what time may be added.

Their Answer, 20. Feb.
YOur Lordships paper of the 14th of this month, for an addition CXC.
of time for this Treaty, together with His Majesty's Letter concerning the
same, were sent by us to the Houses of Parliament, who ( See their Paper,
before 11. February, no. 185.
as we have already acquainted your Lordships) have declared, That if they
shall be satisfied in the good progress of the Treaty upon the Propositions,
concerning Religion, the Militia, and Ireland, will give time for the Treaty
upon the Propositions by His Majesty; but farther then this, have not, as yet,
signified their pleasures unto us.

The King's Commissioners Paper, 20. February.
HAving now spent 18 days with your Lordships, in the CXCI.
Treaty upon Religion, the Militia, and Ireland, and besides the present
satisfaction we have given your Lordships in those particulars, we having
offered that further consideration, and order be taken therein by His Majesty,
and the two Houses of Parliament; and your Lordships having proposed many
important things in the said several particulars to be framed, settled, and
disposed by the two Houses, before a full Agreement can be established, we
propose to your Lordships, whether the two days remaining may not be best
spent, toward the satisfying your Lordships in those 3 Propositions, and the
procuring a speedy blessed Peace, upon finding out some expedient for His
Majesty's repair to Westminster, that so all differences may be composed, and
this poor Kingdom be restored to it is Ancient happiness and security; and to
that purpose if your Lordships shall think fit, we are willing to Treat with
your Lordships, concerning the best means whereby (all Armies being first
disbanded) His Majesty may with honor, freedom, and safety, be present with
his two Houses of Parliament at Westminster; To which two particulars, that is,
first concerning the Disbanding all Armies, and then for His Majesty's speedy
repair and residing at Westminster, with Honor, Freedom, and safety; We
shall (if your Lordships think fit) apply our selves, and accordingly to
morrow, will be ready to deliver to your Lordships some Propositions upon that
subject; And if your Lordships shall concur with us herein, we hope it will
be a good inducement to procure an addition of time to this Treaty, according
to His Majesty's Proposition in his late Letter to Us, which we delivered to
your Lordships.

Their Paper, 20 Feb.
WE shall according to mutual agreement between His Majesty CX CII.
and the two Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Commissioners for the
Parliament of Scotland, Treat these two remaining days upon the three
Propositions for Religion, the Militia, and Ireland, and shall be glad to
receive satisfaction in them from your Lordships as the best expedient for
procuring a speedy and blessed Peace, that the Armies may be disbanded, and the
happiness of His Majesty's presence may again be enjoyed by those, who have
nothing more in their prayers and endeavors, then by His Majesty's conjunction
with his Parliament to see all these sad differences composed, and these
distracted Kingdoms restered to their Ancient happiness and security:
Accordingly we shall be ready to begin again to morrow upon the Propositions
for Religion, and receive what your Lordships will propose, and being satisfied
upon that and the other two Propositions, we are confident we shall have
further time given us to Treat upon such other particulars, as shall be
necessary for the attaining of those ends we all desire.

There was no other Answer given concerning His Majesty's Commissioners desire
to Treat touching His return to Westminster, and Disbanding Armies, whereupon
His Majesty's Commissioners delivered this Paper;

20. February.
WE conceive that the reasons why your Lordships do CXCIII.
not give us any Answer to our Paper, concerning the Treating for the
disbanding all Armies, and for His Majesty's coming to Westminster, may be,
because you have no authority by your Instructions so to do, though we
proposed the same to your Lordships, and do still conceive it most conducing
to the conclusion of the Propositions, upon Religion, the Militia, and Ireland;
upon which we have Treated. And we therefore desire your Lordships, that you
will endeavor to have your Instructions so enlarged, that we may Treat upon so
important and necessary an expedient for the public Peace. In the mean time
we shall be ready to receive whatsoever your Lordships please to propose in the
business of Religion, presuming, that if your Lordships are not satisfied with
our Answer therein, in which we have applied remedies to whatsoever has ever
been complained of as a grievance in the present Government of the Church, that
your Lordships will make it appear See their Paper. no. 68. referring to this.
that the Government by Bishops is unlawful; or that the Government you intend
to introduce in the room thereof, is the only Government that is agreeable to
the word of God; either of which being made evident to us, we shall immediately
give your Lordships full satisfaction in that you propose.

The King's Commissioners Paper. 22. February.
BY our paper delivered to your Lordships 1. February, we CXCIV.
did desire to know, whether your Lordships have any Instructions concerning
His Majesty's Propositions for settling a safe and well grounded Peace; And by
our paper of the third of Feb. we did desire to know, whether your Lordships
had received any Instructions concerning that Proposition of His Majesty for a
Cessation, and if your Lordships had not received any, that you would endeavor
to procure authority to Treat thereupon; And by our Paper of the 10th of Feb.
we did desire to know, whether your Lordships had received any Instructions
concerning His Majesty's Propositions, that we might prepare our selves to
Treat upon them, when your Lordships should think fit; And by our paper
delivered to your Lordships, 14th Feb. we moved your Lordships upon direction^
received from His Majesty, that you would endeavor to procure an addition of
time for this Treaty, after the expiration of the days limited for the same,
upon the reasons mentioned in His Majesty's Letter, which Letter we then
delivered to your Lordships; And by our Paper delivered to your Lordships the
20th of this month, we moved your Lordships to endeavor an addition of time
for this Treaty, after the expiration of the days limited for the same, upon
the reasons mentioned in His Majesty's said Letter, to which we have not yet
received full Answer; Nor have we yet had any notice from your Lordships,
whether the two Houses of Parliament have given any further time for this
Treaty; And having hitherto according to the order prescribed us Treated only
upon the three first heads of Religion, the Militia, and Ireland, and the
twenty days expiring this day, we again desire to know, whether there is any
addition of time granted for this Treaty, our safe Conduct being but for two
days longer.

Their Answer, 22. Feb.
YOur Lordships Papers of the first, third, and tenth of Feb. CXCV.
whether we had any Instructions concerning His Majesty's Propositions and
power to Treat for a Cessation, as also your Papers of the 14 and 20th of Feb.
concerning His Majesty's Letter for an addition of time to this Trenty, with
your Lordships desire thereupon, have been by ^^ sent up to both Houses of
Parliament from time to time, as we received them, together with our Answer
given to them; and in our Answers we have from time to time declared to your
Lordships, that when the Houses shall be satisfied in the good progress of the
Treaty upon their Propositions concerning Religion, Militia, and Ireland, they
will give an addition of time for the Treaty; And we do conceive, that if your
Lordships Answers to our Demands concerning Religion, the Militia, and Ireland,
had been such, as to have given satisfaction in the good progress of this
Treaty, mutually consented for twenty days upon the said Propositions, we
should have before this been enabled with power to continue the Treaty, as well
upon his Majesty's as the rest of the Propositions. But your Lordships having
not given full and satisfactory Answers concerning Religion, the Militia, and
Ireland, you cannot, for the reasons above mentioned, expect an addition of
time; neither have we received any Instructions to continue this Treaty longer
then the twenty days, of which this is the last: And as for your Lordships
safe Conduct, we conceive the three Sundays last past being not accounted any
days of the Treaty, so this next Sunday is not to be esteemed one of the two
days allowed after the Treaty in your Lordships safe Conduct, but your
Lordships are to have two days besides this next Lords day.

The King's Commissioners Reply. 22. February.
WE cannot express the great sadness of our hearts, that CXCVI.
all our earnest endeavors to give your Lordships satisfaction in all
particulars of this Treaty, have produced no better effects toward a blessed
Peace, which His Majesty, and we who are trusted by him, do so heartily pray
for, and that so many and great offers made by us to your Lordships in the
particulars we have treated upon, should not be thought a good progress on our
part in the said Treaty, as we find by your Lordships last paper (to our great
grief) they are not; and therefore that this must be the last day of the
Treaty, we desire your Lordships to consider, that we being entrusted by His
Majesty to Treat with your Lordships for a safe and well grounded Peace, have
upon the matter of your Lordships Propositions, consented to so many
particulars and alterations of very great importance, and that your Lordships,
who were to Treat with us, have not abated one tittle of the most severe and
rigorous of your Propositions, saving what you were pleased the last night to
propose in the point of time concerning the Militia, which though it seems to
be limited to seven years, in truth leaves it as unlimited as it was before in
your Propositions, for at the end of seven years, it must not be exercised
otherwise then shall be settled by His Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament:
so that all the legal power now in His Majesty is taken away, and not restored
after the seven years expired. Neither is there a full consent to that
limiration offered by your Lordships the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland. Nor have your Lordships offered to us any prospect toward Peace,
other then by submitting totally to those Propositions, the which if we should
do, we should consent to such alterations, as by constructions and
consequences may dissolve the whole frame of the present Government, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in this Kingdom. And though the particulars
proposed by your Lordships, have by debate appeared, not only evidently
unreasonable, but literally considered, to comprehend things, to be extended,
to powers not intended by your selves, yet your Lordships have not been
pleased, either to restrain or interpret any particular in any other manner,
then is set forth in the said Propositions.

In the matter of Religion, we have offered all such alterations, as we
conceive may give satisfaction to any objections that have been, or can be made
against that Government, and have given your Lordships reasons, not only why we
cannot consent to your Lordships Propositions, but that even those
Propositions, if consented to, could not be in order to a Reformation, or to
the procuring the public Peace. And we must desire your Lordships to
remember, that though you do not only in your Covenant (which you require may
be taken by His Majesty, and enjoined to be taken by all His Subjects)
undertake the Reformation in point of Government, but even in point of Doctrine
too, thereby laying an imputation upon the Religion it self, so long professed
in this Kingdom with the general approbation of all reformed Churches; yet
your Lordships have not given us the least argument, nor so much as intimated
in your debate, the least Prejudice to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against which we presume you cannot make any colorable objection, nor have you
given us the view in particular, of the Government you desire should be
submitted to, in the place of that you propose to be abolished; and therefore
we propose to your Lordships, if the alterations proposed by us, do not give
your Lordships satisfaction, that so great an alteration as the total
abolition of a Government established by Law, may for the importance of it, and
any reformation in Doctrine, for the scandal of it, be suspended, till after
the disbanding of all Armies, His Majesty may be present with the two Houses of
Parliament, and calling a National Synod, may receive such advice both from
the one and the other, as in a matter of so high concernment is necessary; And
we are most confident that His Majesty will then follow the advice which shall
be given him. And as any Reformation thus regularly and calmely made, must
needs prove for the singular benefit and Honor of the Kingdom; so we must
appeal to your Lordships, whether the centrary, that is an alteration even to
things though in themselves good, can, by the principles of Christian Religion,
be enforced upon the King or Kingdom?

In the business of the Militia, though your Lordships do not deny that the
Iealousies and apprehensions of danger are mutual, and that the chief end of
depositing the Militia in the hands of certain Persons, is for security against
those Jealousies and possible dangers, yet your Lordships insist, That all
those Persons to be entrusted, shall be nominated by the two Houses of
Parliament in England, and the Estares of the Parliament in Scotland, and that
the time for that great General, and unheard of Trust, shall be in such
manner, that though it seem to be limited to seven years, yet in truth by
declaring, That after those scaven years, it shall not be otherwise exercised
then His Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament shall agree, and His Majesty
may thereby be totally, and for ever divested of the power of the Sword,
without which He can neither defend himself against Forteigne Invasions, or
Domestic Insurrections, or execute His Kingly Office in the behalf of His
Subjects, to whom He is Sworn to give Protection: And to both these your
Lordships add the introducing a Neighbor Nation, governed by distinct and
different Laws (though united under one Sovereign) to a great share in the
Government of this Kingdom. In stead of consenting to these Changes, we have
offered and proposed to your Lordships. That the Persons to be Trusted with the
Militia of the Kingdom, may be nominated between us; or if that were refused.
That an equal number shall be named by you, and the other number by His
Majesty, and that half the Forts and places of strength within the Kingdom,
shall be in the custody of those whom you think fit to be trusted therewith,
and the other half, in such hands as His Majesty please to commit the same to
And all persons, as well those nominated by your Lordships, as by His Majesty,
to take an Oath for the due discharge of the said Trust, which being considered
as the sceurity is mutual, so neither part can be supposed to violate the
agreement, without very evident inconvenience and danger to that part who shall
so violate it, the whole Kingdom being likely, and indeed obliged to look upon,
whosoever shall in the least degree violate this agreement, as the authors of
all the miseries which the Kingdom shall thereby suffer. And as it is most
reasonable, that for this security, His Majesty should part with so much of his
own power, as may make him even unable to break the agreement, which should be
now made by him and on his part, so it is most necessary, that all apprehension
and danger of such breach being over, that sovereign power of the Militia
should revert into the proper channel, and be, as it has always been, in His
Majesty's proper and peculiar charge: And therefore we have proposed that the
time limited for that trust, should be for three years, which by the blessing
of God, will product a perfect understanding between His Majesty and all His
people; and if there should be any thing else necessary to be done in this
argument, either for power or time, that the same be considered after the
settlement of Peace in Parliament; but whatever is now, or hereafter shall be
thought necessary to be done, we desire may by so settled, that this Kingdom may
depend upon it self, and not be subject to the Laws or advice of Scotland, as
we think sit, that Scotland, should not receive rules or advice from this,
having offered the like for Scotland as for England.

In the business of Ireland your Lordships propose not only, that His Majesty
diselaime and make void the Cessation, made by His Royal Authority, and at the
desires of the Lords Justices, and Council of that Kingdom, and for the
preservation of the remainder of His poor Protestant Subjects there, who were
in evident danger of destruction, both by Famine and the Sword, but also to put
the whole managery of that War and disposal of the Forces within that
Kingdom, and consequently the Government of that Kingdom, into the hands of the
Scots General, to be managed by the advice of a joint Committee of both
Kingdoms, wherein each should have a Negative Voice; In Answer to which, we
have acquainted your Lordships, with the just grounds of His Majesty's
proceedings in the business of Ireland, which we are confident, being weighed
without prejudice, may satisfy all men of His Majesty's Piety and Justice
therein; And we are very ready and desirous, to join with your Lordships in
any course which may probably preserve and restore that miserable Kingdom.

Having put your Lordships in mind of these particulars, as they have a
general reference to the public good of the Kingdoms, we beseech your
Lordships to consider, that we have this great Trust reposed in us by His
Majesty, and to remember how far these Propositions trench upon His peculiar
Kingly Rights, without any, or any considerable recompense or compensation.

In the business of Religion, your Lordships propose the taking away the His
whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, His Donations, and Temporalties of
Bishoprics, His first Fruits, and Tenths of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters,
instead whereof your Lordships do not offer to constitute the least dependence
of the Clergy upon His Majesty; and for that so considerable a part of His
Revenue, you propose only the Bishops Lands to be settled on His Majesty,
(reserving a power to dispose even those Lands as you shall think fit) whereas
all the Lands both of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters (if those Corporations must
be dissolved) do undoubtedly belong to His Majesty in His own Right.

In the business of the Militia; as it is proposed, His Majesty is so totally
divested of the Regal Power of the Sword, that He shall be no more able,
either to assist any of His Allies with aid, though men were willing to engage
themselves voluntarily in that service, or to defend His own Dominions from
Rebellion or invasion, and consequently the whole power of Peace and War (the
acknowledged and undoubted Right of the Crown) is taken from Him.

In the business of Ireland, the power of nominating His Lieutenant, or
Deputy, and other Officers there, of managing, directing, or in the least
manner of meddling in that War, or of making a Peace, is proposed to be taken,
from Him; and to add to all these attempts upon His Kingly Rights, it is
proposed to bereave Him of the Power of a Father, in the Education and Marriage
of His own Children, and of a Master, in the rewarding His own Servants; And
therefore we refer it to your Lordships, whether it be possible for us, with
a good Conscience and discharge of the Trust reposed in us, to Consent to the
Propositions made to us by your Lordships? Lastly, we must observe to your
Lordships, That after a War of near four years, for which the Defense of
the Protestant Religion, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and the
Privileges of Parliament were made the cause and grounds, in a Treaty of
Twenty days, nor indeed in the whole Propositions upon which the Treaty should
be, there has been nothing offered to be Treated, concerning the breach of any
Law, or of the Liberty or Property of the Subject, or Privilege of Parliament:
but only Propositions for the altering a Governmenment Established by Law, and
for the making new Laws, by which almost all the old are, or may be cancelled;
and there has been nothing insisted on of our part which was not Law, or
denied by us, that you have demanded, as due by Law.

All these things being considered, and being much afflicted that our great
hope and expectation of a Peace, is for the present frustrated by your
Lordships See their last Paper.
Declaration, that no more time will be allowed for this Treaty, we are earnest
Suitors to your Lordships, that you will interpose with the two Houses, to whom
we believe you have transmitted the Answers delivered by us to your Lordships
upon Religion, the Militia, and Ireland, That this Treaty, though for the
present discontinued may be revived, and the whole matter of their
Propositions, and those sent to them by His Majesty, which have not yet been
Treated on, may be considered; and that depending that Treaty, to the end we
may not Treat in Blood, there may be a Cessation of Arms, and that the poor
People of this Kingdom, now exposed to Plundrings and Spoils, and other
direful effects of War, may have some earnest of a blessed Peace. And
because this Treaty is now expiring, if your Lordships cannot give a present
Resolution, we desire when you have represented this to the two Houses, His
Majesty may speedily receive their Answer.

Their Answer. 22. Febr.
WE conceive your Lordships cannot in reason expect an answer CXCVII.
to the long paper delivered to us very late this night at the close of the
Treaty, a thing of many days labor, which we apprehend to be rather a
declaration upon the Treaty, then any part thereof, and we could not imagine
would be offered, but we cannot forbear, upon the reading thereof, to mention
thus much That it seems by many particulars in that Declaration, it was
resolved the Treaty should end with the 20 days, the means to continue it,
being well known to be a good progress in the Propositions for Religion, the
Militia, and Ireland, and by what we have received, we cannot find any
satisfaction in these was intended to be agreed unto.

To that, whereby your Lordships ascribe so much to your own Concessions, we
shall only say; That for Religion you have granted very little or nothing, but
what we are already in possession o^ by the Laws of this Kingdom. For the
business of the Militia your Lordships have not thought fit, to consent to any
one of ou^ demands, but in that, as in Religion, have made some new
Propositions of your own, which are not in any degree sufficient for settling,
and securing the Peace of the Kingdoms; As for the Propositions for Ireland,
your Lordships have bin so far from affording a consent thereto, that you have
justified the distructive Cessation there, and strongly employed an intention to
renew the same, and have not yielded to any part of our Propositions concerning
that Kingdom^ we shall represent your Lordships papers to the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms, who upon due consideration thereof, will do what is farther
necessary for the good and Peace of His Majesty's Dominions.

Besides these several desires above mentioned from time to time for addition,
and enlargment of time, for continuing and prolonging the Treaty, or if
discontinued, that it might be revived, and after a representation to the
Houses, their answer might be sent to His Majesty. In another paper before No.
135. upon the head of the Militia, His Majesty's Commissioners did propose,
That if the Treaty might not then continue, it might be Adiourned for such time
as they should think fit, and not totally dissolve, but be again resumed; which
paper is not here inserted, to avoid repetition, being before upon the head of
Militia, and to which, as to that point of Adiournment, no answer was given.

No papers were given in to their Commissioners, in answer to the last
mentioned paper, dated the 22 of Feb. No. 197, which came in about two of the
clock in the morning after; Nor to that of the same date No. 135. concerning
the Militia, which came in with it; Nor to their two last concerning Ireland of
the 22 of Feb. No 177, and 178, which came in about 12 of the clock that night
all which were of such length, and delivered upon the close of the Treaty, and
those which came in about two of the clock upon the departure of the
Commissioners, that it was impossible to give present answers, nor could any be
given after, as part of the Treaty, without consent, which was required by His
Majesty's Commissioners, but not granted; neither is any thing here inserted in
answer to those papers, because by the agreements between the Commissioners in
the beginning of the Treaty, nothing was to be taken as part of the Treaty, but
what should be put in writing. And this Relation is intended only for a
Narrative of the Treaty, (conformable to the agreements) without any
observations upon it, or additions unto it, other then necessary Introductions,
and Transitions for coherence, and more clear understanding the Passages of
the Treaty.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE FROM EVESHAM of the 4th of July, 1644.
To the LORDS and COMMONS of Parliament Assembled at Westminster. CHARLES R.

WE being deeply sensible of the miseries I.
and calamities of this Our Kingdom, and of the grievous sufferings of Our poor
Subjects, do most earnestly desire, that some expedient may be found ou^,
which, by the blessing of God, may prevent the further effusion of blood, and
restore the Nation to Peace; from the earnest and constant endeavoring of
which, as no discouragement given Us on the contrary part shall make Us cease,
so no success on Ours shall ever divert Us. For the effecting whereof, We are
most ready and willing to condescend to all that shall be for the good of Us
and Our People, whether by way of confirmation of what we have already granted,
or of such further co^cession, as shall be requisite to the giving a full.
Assurance of the Performance of all Our most real Professions, concerning the
maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Religion established in this
Kingdom, with due regard to the ease of tender consciences, the just
Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty and Property of the Subject,
according to the Laws of the Land; As also by granting a general Pardon
without or with exceptions, as shall be thought fit. In order to which blessed
Peace, We do desire and propound to the Lords and Commons of Parliament
assembled at Westminster, That they appoint such, and so many Persons as they
shall think fit, sufficiently authoriz^d by them, to attend Us at Our Army,
upon safe conduct, to come and return, (which we do hereby grant) and
conclude with Us, how the Premises, and all other things in question betwixt
Us and them, may be fully settled; whereby all unhappy mistakings betwix^ Us and
Our People being removed, there may be a present Cessation of Arms, and, as
soon as may be, a total Disbanding of all Armies, the Subject have his due,
and We be restored to Our Rights. Wherein if this Our offer shall be accepted,
there shall be nothing wanting on Our part, which may make our people secure
and happy.

Given at Our Court at Evesham the 4. of July, 1644.
His Majesty's Message from Tavestock, of the 8. of September, 1644.
To the Lords and Commons of Parliament Assembled at Westminster. CHARLES R.

IT having pleased God in so eminent a II.
manner, lately to bless Our Armies in these parts with success, We do not so
much joy in that blessing for any other consideration, as for the hopes We have
that it may be a means to ma^e others lay to heart, as We do, the miseries
brought and continued upon Our Kingdom by this unnatural War, and that it may
open your ears, and dispose your minds, to embrace those offers of Peace and
Reconciliation, which have been so often, and so earnestly made unto you by Us,
and from the constant and fervent endeavors of which We are resolved never to
desist. In Pursuance whereof, We do, upon this occasion, conjure you to take
into consideration Our (too long neglected) Message of the fourth of July from
Evesham, which We again renew unto you; And that you will speedily send Us such
an Answer thereunto, as may show unto Our poor Subjects, some light of a
deliverance from their present calamities, by a happy Accommodation, toward
which We do here engage the word of a King, to make good all those things which
We have therein promised, and really to endeavor a happy conclusion of this
Treaty. And so God direct you in the ways of Peace. Given at Our Court at
Tavestock the 8. of September. 1644.

THE BILL FOR ABOLISHING EPISCOPACY.
WHEREAS the Government of the III.
Church of England, by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours, and
Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers, depending upon the Hierarchy has by long experience
been found to be a great impediment to the perfect Reformation, and growth of
Religion, and very prejudicial to the Civil State and Government of the
Kingdom; Be it therefore Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that from* and after the fifth day of November, in the year of our
Lord, one Thousan^ six Hundred forty and three, there shall be no Archbishop,
Bishop, Chancellor, or Commissarie of any Archbishop, or Bishop, nor any
Deane, Sub-Deane, Deane and Chapter, or Archdeacon, nor any Chancellor,
Chaunter, Treasurer Sub-Trea^urer, Succentor, or Sacrist, of any Cathedral, or
Collegiate Church, nor any Prebendary, Canon, Canon-Residenciary, Petty-Canon,
Vicar, Chorall, Choristers, Old-Vicars, or new-Vicars, of, or within any
Cathedral, or Collegiate Church or any other their Officers, within this
Church of England, or Dominion of Wales; And that from, and after the said
fifth day of November. the Name, Title, Dignity, Jurisdiction, Office, and
Function, of Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours, and Commissaries,
Deanes, Sub-Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and
Prebendaries, and all Chaunters, Chauncellours, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers,
Succentors, and Sacrists, and all Vicars, Coral, and Choristers, old-Vicars,
and new-Vicars, and every of them, and likewise the having, using, or
exercising of any Power, Jurisdiction, Office, or Authority, by reason, or
color of any such Name, Title, Dignity, office, or Function, within this
Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, shall thenceforth cease, determine,
and become absolutely void, and shall be abolished out of this Realm, and the
Dominion of Wales, any Usage, Law, or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. And that from, and after the said fifth day of November, no
Person or Persons whatsoever* by virtue of any Letters Patents, Commission, or
other authority derived from the Kings Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors,
shall use or exercise any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or
Dominion of Wales, but such, and in such manner as shall be appointed, and
established by Act of Parliament. And that all Counties, Palatine, Manors,
Lordships, Castles, Granges, Messuages, Mills, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Leasues, Pastures, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, Parks, Annuiti^s*
Franchises Liberties, Privileges, Immunities, Rights, Rights of Action, and of
Entry, Interests Titles of Entry, Conditions, Commons, Courts-Leete, and
Courts-Baron, and all other Possessions, and Herediments whatsoever, of what
nature or quality soever they be or wheresoever they lie or be (other then
Impropriations Parsonages Appropriats, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Pention
Portions of Tithes, Parsonages, Vicarages, Churches, Chapp^ls* Advowsons,
Nominations, Collations, Rights of Patronage, and Presentation,) which now are,
or lately were of, or belonging unto any Archbishop* Bishop, Arch-bish^prick,
or Bishop^i^k, or any of them, or which they or any of them held, or injoy^d in
right of their said Arch-bish^prick, or Bishopric, respectively* shall by the
authority of Parliament, be vested adjudged* and deemed to be and shall be in
the very real* and actual possession, and seisin of the Kings Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors; And shall have, hold, possess, and enjoy the same, to
Him His Heirs and Successors without any Entry, or other Act whatsoever, and
that the Kings Maiestic, His Heirs and Successors, His and their Lessees,
Farmers and Tenants shall hold an^ ^n^oy, the same discharged and acquitted of
payment of Tithes* as f^eely and in as large, ample, and beneficial means to
all intents and purposes, as any Archbishop or Bishop, at any time or times
within the space of two years last past, held or enjoyed, or of right ought to
have held or inioyed the same. Provided nevertheless, and be it enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that all Leases, Grants, Gifts, Letters Patents,
Conveyances, Assurances, or Estates whatsoever, hereafter to be made by the
Kings Majesty* His Heirs or Successors, of any the Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, which in or by this Act shall come or be limited, or disposed
of, unto His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, (other then for the Term of
one and twenty years, or three Lives, or some other Term of years
determinable, upon one two or three Lives, and not above from the time as any
such Lease or Grant shall be made or granted, whereupon the accustomed yearly
Rent or more, shall be reserved and payable yearly during the said Term: And
whereof any former Lease is in being, not to be expired, surrendered or ended,
within three years after the making of any such new Lease* shall be utterly
void and of none effect, to all intents constructions and purposes, any clause
or words of (non obstante) to be put in any such Patent, Grant, Conveyance, or
Assurance, and any Law, Usage* Custom, or any thing in this Act to the
contrary, in any wise notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted and Ordained,
that all Impropriations, Parsonages Appropriate, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions,
Portions of Tithes, Parsonages, Vicaridges, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons,
Nominations, Collations, rights of Patronage and Presentation, which now are,
or lately were belonging unto any Archbishop, or Bishop, Archbishopric, or
Bishopric* And all Manors, Castles, Lordships, Granges, Messuages, Mills,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Parsonages Appropriate, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Pensions, Portions of
Tithes, Parsonages, Vicaridges, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons, Nominations,
rights of Patronage, and Presentation, Parkes, Arnuities, Franchises,
Liberties, Privileges, Immunities, Rights, Rights of Action, and of Entry,
Interests, Titles of Entire, Conditions, Commons, Courts Leete, and Courts
Baron, and all other Possessions, and Hereditaments whatsoever, of what nature
or quality soever they be, or wheresoever they lie or be, which now are, or
lately were of, or belonging to any Sub-Deane, Deane, Deane and Chapter,
Archdeacon, Chanter, Chancellor, Treasurer, Sub- Treasurer, Succentor,
Sacrist, Prebendary, Cannon, Cannon Residentia^ie, Petty-Cannon, Vicars,
Chorall, Choristers, old Vic^rs and ^ew Vicars* or any of them, or any of the
Officers of them, or any of them which they held, or inioyed in right of their
said Dignities, Churches, Corporations, Offices, or Places, respectively shall
by Authority of this present Parliament be Vested, Adjudged, and deemed to be,
and shall be in the very real and actual Possession, and Seisin, of Sr
William Roberts Knight, Thomas Atkins* Sr Wollaston, John Warner, John Towes*
Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer Esquire, Peter Malborne Esquire,
and they shall have, hold, possess, and enjoy the same to them, their Heirs
and Assigns, without any Entry or other Act whatsoever, and that for
themselves, their Lessees, Farmers* and Tennants, discharged and acquitted of
payment of Tithes, as freely, and in as large, ample, and beneficial manner to
all Intents, and Purposes, as any of the Persons, or Corporations, whose
offices or places are taken away by this Act at any time, or times within the
space of two years now last past, held, or enjoyed, or of right ought to have
held, or enjoyed the same In trust, and Confidence nevertheless, and to the
intent, and purpose that they the said Sir William Roberts Knight* Thomas
Atkins, Sir John Wol^aston, John Warner, John Towes, Aldermen of the City of
London, John Packer, Esqu. Peter Malborne Esqu* and the Survivors and Survivor
of them, his and their heirs, and Assigns shall satisfy, and pay unto all
and every Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, Sub-deane, Archdeacon* Chanter,
Chancellor, Treasurer, Sub-Treasurer, Succentor, Sacrist, ^rebendary* Cannon,
Cannon Residentiary, Petty Cannon, Vicars Chorall Choristers, old Vicars, and
new Vicars, and other Officers, and persons belonging unto, or now employed in,
or about the said Cathedral or collegiate Churches, such yearly Stipends, and
Pensions, for so long time, and in such manner as by the Lords, and Commons in
Parliament Assembled shall be ordered dir^cted, and appointed; And shall
dispose of all, and singular the aforesaid Manors, Lands, Tithes,
Appropriations, Advowsons, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises,
and of every part, and parcel thereof, and of the Revenues, Rents, Issues, and
profits thereof to the uses, intents, and purposes above, and hereafter
expressed, (that is to say) for a competent maintenance for the su^port of such
a number of preaching Ministers, for the service of every Ca^he^rall and
collegiate Church, and His Majesty's free Chapel of Windsor, as by the Lords
and Commons shall be ordered, and appointed; And lik^wise for the maintenance
of preaching Ministers throughout the Kingdom of E^gland, Dommion of Wales, and
Town of Barw^^k, in such places where such maintenance is wanting, and for a
proportionable allowance for, and toward the reparation of the said
Cathedral, and collegiate Churches* in such manner, and form, and to such
persons, and for such other good uses, to the advancement of true Religion, and
the maintenance of Piety and Learning, as by this or any other Act or Acts of
Parliament now, or hereafter to be made, shall be set down, or declared, And be
it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Leases, Gifts, Grants,
Conveyances, Assurances, and Estates whatsoever hereafter to be made by the
said Sir William Roberts Knight, Thomas Atkins, Sir John Wollaston, John
Warner, John Towes, Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer, Esqu. Peeter
Malbourne, Esqu. the Survivors and Survivor of them, or the greater part of
them, his, and their Heirs and Assigns of any the Manors, Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments, within, or by this Act shall come, or be limited, or disposed
of unto the said Sir William Roberts Knight, Thomas Atkins, Sir John Wollaston,
John Warner, John Towes, Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer, Esqu.
Peeter Malbourne, Esquire (other then for the Term of one and Twenty years,
or three Lives, or some other Term of years determinable upon one, two, or
three Lives, and not above from the time, as any such Lease, or Grant shall be
made, or granted, whereupon the accustomed yearly Rent, or more, shall be
reserved, and payable yearly during the said Term) whereof any former Lease
is in being, and not to be Expired, surrendered, or ended, within three years
after the making of such Lease, shall be utterly void, and of none effect, to
all Intents, Constructions, and purposes, any thing in this Act to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding. Provided nevertheless, where no Lease has been
heretofore made, nor any such Rent has been reserved, or payable of any the
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, in this Act limited, or disposed of unto
the said Sir Willi^m Roberts Knight, Thomas Atkins, Sir John Wollaston, John
Warner, John Towes, Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer, Esqu. Peter
Malbourne, Esqu. that in such case it shall be lawful for the said Sir William
Roberts, Knig^t, Thomas Atkins, Sir John Wollaston, John Warner, John Towes
Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer, Esqu Peter Malb^urne, Esqu. the
Survivors, and Survivor of them, or the greater part of them, his, and their
Heirs, to make any Lease, or state for the Term of one, and Twenty years, or
three Lives, or some other Term of years determinable, upon one* two* or
three Lives, and not above taking such Fine as they in their Judgments shall
conceive indifferent, and reserving a reasonable Rent* not being under the
third part of the clear yearly value of the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
contained in such Lease. And it is further Declared to be the true intent, and
meaning of this Act; That all, and every the Lessees, Farmors and Tenants of
all and every the said Persons, and Corporations, whos^ Offices or places are
taken away by this Statute, now having* holding or enjoying any Estate, Term,
or Interest, in possession by himself, his under Tenants or Assigns, of or in
any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Appropriations, or other Hereditaments
whatsoever, shall and may be preferred in the taking and renewing of any
Estates, Leases, or Grants of any such Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, before any other Person, the said Lessees, Farmors, or Tenants,
or other Parties interessed as aforesaid desiring the same, and giving such
Fines, Rents and other considerations for the same, as by the said Sir William
Roberts, Knight, Thomas Atkins, Sir John Wollaston, John Warner, John Towes,
Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer, Peter Malbourne, Esquires, or the
Survivors, or Survivor of them, or the major part of them, his, or their
Heirs, or Assigns shall be thought, and held just and reasonable. Provided
also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and singular
Revenues, Rents, Issues, Fees, Profits, Sums of Money, and allowances
whatsoever, as have heretofore been, and now ought to be paid disposed, or
allowed unto, or for the maintenance of any Grammar School or Scholars, or
for, or toward the Reparation of any Church, Chapel, Highway, Causey,
Bridge, Schoole-house, Almes-house, or other charitable use payable by any the
Corporations, or Persons whose Offices or places, are taken away by this Act,
or which are chargeable upon, or ought to issue out of, or be paid, for or in
respect of the said premises, or any of them, shall be and continue to be
paid, disposed and allowed, as they were and have been heretofore any thing in
this present Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And to the intent and
purpose the Parliament may be certainly and clearly informed of the premises,
to the end the same may be distributed, applied, and employed to, and for such
pious, and godly uses and purposes as is intended, and herein declared. Be it
ordained and enacted* that the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England for
the time being, shall by virtue of this Act have full Power and Authority, and
is hereby required to award and issue forth several Commissions under the
Great Seal of England into all and every the Counties and Cities with in the
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, to be directed unto such and so many
Persons as b^ the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled* shall
be nominated, assigned, and appointed, thereby authorizing and requiring them
or any five or more of them, and giving them full Power and ^uthority by the
Oaths of good and lawful men, as by all other good and lawful ways and
means to inquire and find out what Manors, Castles* Lordships, Granges,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasues, Pastures, Woods, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Parsonages appropriate, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions*
Pensions, Portions of Tithes, Vicaridges, Churches, Chappells, Advowsons,
Nominations, Presentations, Rights of Patronage, Parkes, Annuities, and other
Possessions and Hereditaments whatsoever, of what nature or quality soever they
be, lying and being within every such County, or City not hereby limited, or
disposed of unto His Majesty, do belong, or appertain unto all, every, or any
such Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, Sub-Deane, Deane and Chap^er, Archdeacon,
Chanter, Chancellor, Treasurer, Sub Treasurer, Succentor, Sacrist, Prebendary,
Canon, Canon Residenciary, Petty Canon, Vicar Chorall, Chorister, old Vicar, or
new Vicar, in right of their said Dignities, Churches, Corporations, Offices,
or places respectively, and what and how much of the same is in possession and
the true yearly value thereof, and what and how much there^f is out in Lease,
and for what Estate, and when and how determinable, and what Rents, Services,
and other Duties are reserved, and payable during such Estate, and also the
true yearly value of the same, as they are now worth in Possession, as also
what Rents, Pensions, or other Charges, or other sums of money are issuing,
due or payable out of any the Manors, Lands, or Premises, and to make an
exact and particular survey thereof, and to take and direct, and settle such
course for the safe custody, and keeping of all Charters, Evidences,
Court-Rolls, and writings whatsoever, belonging unto all or any the Persons,
Dignities, Churches, Corporat^ons, Offices and Places, or concerning any the
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, or other premises before mentioned,
as in their discretion shall be thought meet and convenient, and of all and
singular their doings and proceedings herein fairly written, and engrossed in
Parchment to make return, and Certificate into the Court of Chancery, and to
this further intent and purpose, that speedy care and course may be taken for
providing of a competent maintenance for supply and encouragement of Preaching
Ministers in the several Parishes, within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales. Be it likewise ordained and enacted, that the same Commissioners and
Persons authorized as abovesaid, shall have full power and authority by the
Oaths of good and lawful men, as by all other good ways and lawful means,
to enquire and find out the true yearly value of all Parsonages, and Vicaridges
Presentative and all other Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Benefices and Livings
unto which any Cure of Souls is annexed lying and being within such Counties
and Cities, and of all such particularly to enquire and certify into the Court
of Chancery, what each of them are truly and really worth by the year* and
who are the present Incumbents or Possessors of them, and what, and how many
Chapels belonging unto Parish Churches are within the limits of such Counties
and Cities, within which they are directed and authorized to enquire, and how
the several Churches, and Chapels, are supplied by Preaching Ministers, that
so course may be taken for providing both, for Preaching, and of maintenance,
where the same shall be found to be needful and necessary, provided always,
that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any
College, Church, Corporation, Foundation, or house of Learning, in either of
the Universities within this Kingdom, and the said Sr William Roberts, Sr
Thomas Atkins, Sr John Wollaston, John Warner, John Towes Aldermen of the City
of London, John Packer, and Peter Malbourne Esquires, and the Survivors and
Survivor of them, or the greater part of them, his, and their Heirs and
Assigns a,re hereby directed, and authorized, to give and allow, unto such
Officers as by them shall be thought fitting, and necessary, for keeping of
Courts, Cellecting of Rents, Surveying of Lands, and all other necessary
employments, in and about the premises, and unto the Comm^ssioners authorized
by this Act, and such others, as shall be necessarily employed by them, all
such reasonable Fees, Stipends, Salaries, and Sums of Money as in their
discretion shall be thought just, and conventent; And the said Sir William
Roberts Knight, Thomas Atkins, Sir John Wollaston, John Warner, John Towes,
Aldermen of the City of London, John Packer, and Peter Malborne Esquires, the
Survivors and Survivor of them, his, and their Heirs and Assigns of their
several Receipts, Employments, Actions and Proceedings, shall give an account,
and be accomptable unto the Lords and Commons in Parliament or such Person or
Persons, as from time to time, by both Houses of Parliament shall be nominated
and appointed in such manner, and with such Power, Privilege, and
Jurisdiction, to hear, and determine all matters concerning such accounts as
by both Houses of Parliament, shall from time to time be thought necessary to
be given them, and not elsewhere, nor otherwise, saving to all, and every
Person, and Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate their Heirs and
Successors, and the Heirs and Successors of them and every of them, other then
such Person or Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, whose Offices,
Functions, and authorities are taken away and abolished by this Act, as to any
Estate, Right, Title, or Interest, which they, or any of them claim to have or
hold in right of their said Churches, Dignities, Functions, Offices, or places
and other then the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as Patrons,
Founders, or Donors, and all and every other Person and Persons, Bodies
Politic and Corporate, as may claim any thing as Patrons, Founders or
Donors, all such Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Rents, charge Rent,
Service, Annuities, Offices, Pensions, Portions, Commons Fees, ^rofits, claims
and demands, either in Law or Equity whatsoever. And all and singular such
Leases for Years, Life or Life's, as were before the Twentieth day of Ia^uary,
in the year of our Lord, one Thousand six Hundred Forty two, made unto them
or any of them, by any the Persons or Corporations above named, according to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and warranted by the same, and all such
Leases and Estates, as having been heretofore made, have been established, or
settled by any Judgment or Decree, in any of the Courts at Westminster, and
have been accordingly enjoyed; And all duties and profits whatsoever, which
they, or any of them, have, or may claim, or of right ought to have, of, in,
to, or out of any the said Manors, Lands or Premises whatsoever, or any pars,
or parcel thereof, in such sort, manner, form, and condition, to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as if this Act had never been made.

The Articles of the late Treaty, of the date Edinburgh, the 29. of November.
1643.
Die Mercurii 3. Ianuarii, 1644.
ARTICLES of the Treaty agreed upon betwixt the Commissioners of both Houses of
the Parliament of England, having Power and Commission from the said Honorable
Houses, and the Commissioners of the Convention of the Estates of the Kingdom
of Scotland, Authorized by the Committee of the said Estates concerning the
solemn League and Covenant, and the Assistance demanded in pursuance of the
ends expressed in the same.

Whereas the two Houses of the Parliament of England, IV.
out of a just and deep sense, of the great and imminent danger of the true
Protestant Religion, in regard of the great Forces of Papists, Prelates,
Malignants, and their Adherents, raised and employed against the constant
Professors thereof in England, and Ireland, thought fit to send their
Commissioners unto the Kingdom of Scotland, to Treat with the Convention of
Estates and general Assembly there, concerning such things as might tend to
the preservation of Religion, and the mutual good of both Nations; And to that
end, to desire a more near, and strict union betwixt the Kingdoms: And the
Assistance of the Kingdom of Scotland, by a considerable strength to be raised,
and sent by them into the Kingdom of England. And whereas upon a consultation
held betwixt the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, the Committees of
the Convention of Estates, and General Assembly; No means was thought so
expedient to Accomplish, and strengthen the Union, as for both Nation^ to enter
into a Solemn League and Covenant, and a form thereof drawn and presented to
the two Houses of Parliament of England, the Convention of Estates, and
General Assembly of Scotland, which has accordingly been done, and received
their respective Approbation. And whereas the particulars concerning the
Assistance desired by the two Houses of the Parliament of England, from their
Brethren of Scotland, were delivered in by the English Commissioners, August
the 19. to the Convention of Estates, who did thereupon give power to their
Committee, to consider and debate further with the English Commissioners, of
what other Propositions might be added, or concluded; Whereby the assistance
desired, might be made more effectual and beneficial: And in pursuance
thereof, these Propositions following, were considered of, and debated by the
Committee and Commissioners aforesaid; To be certified with all convenient
speed, to the two Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Convention of
Estates of Scotland by their respective Committees and Commissioners, to be
respectively taken into their consideration, and proceeded with, as they should
find cause. Which being accordingly done, and these ensuing Propositions
approved, agreed, and concluded of by the Houses of the Parliament of England,
and the Committee of the Estates of Scotland respectively, and power by them
given to their respective Committees, and Commissioners, formerly to agree and
conclude the same as may appear by the Votes of both Houses, dated the first
of November, and the Order of the Committee, bearing date the 17th of November,
We the said Commissioners, and Committees, according to their Votes, and
Orders, do formally conclude, and agree upon these Articles following. And in
confirmation thereof, do mutually subscribe the same.

1. It is agreed and concluded, that the Covenant represented to the Convention
of Estates, and General Assembly of Scotland, and sent to both Houses of the
Parliament of England, in the same form as it is now returned from the two
Houses of the Parliament of England, to their Brethren of Scotland, and allowed
by the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of the General Assembly, be
sworn, and subscribed by both Kingdoms, as a most near Tie, and Conjunction
between them, for their mutual defense against the Papists and Prelaticall
Faction, and their adherents in both Kingdoms, and for pursuance of the ends
expressed in the said Covenant.

2. That an Army to this purpose, shall be Levied forthwith, consisting of
Eighteen Thousand Foot effective, and two Thousand Horse, and one Thousand
Dragooners effective, with a suitable Train of Artillery: To be ready at some
General Rendezvous near the Borders of England; to March into England for the
purposes aforesaid, withal convenient speed, The said Foot and Horse, to be
well and completely Armed, and provided, with Victuals and Pay for Forty
days: And the said Train of Artillery, to be fitted in all points ready to
March.

3. That the Army be commanded by a General, appointed by the Estates of
Scotland, and subject to such Resolutions and directions as are, and shall be
agreed, and concluded on mutually between the two Kingdoms: or by Committees
appointed by them in that behalf, for pursuance of the ends above mentioned.

4. That the Charge of Levying, Arming, and bringing the said Forces together
Furnished, as also the fitting the Train of Artillery in readiness to March,
be computed and set own according to the same Rates, as if the Kingdom of
Scotland were to raise the said Army for themselves, and their own Affairs:
All which, for the present, is to be done by the Kingdom of Scotland upon
Account, And the Account to be delivered to the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
England: and when the Peace of the two Kingdoms is settled, the same to be
repaid or satisfied to the Kingdom of Scotland.

5. That this Army be likewise paid, as if the Kingdom of Scotland were to
employ the same for their own occasions, and toward the defreying thereof, (it
not amounting to the full months pay) shall be Monthly allowed and paid the
sum of thirty thousand pounds sterling by the Parliament of England, out of
the Estates and Revenues of the Papists, Prelates, Malignants, and their
Adherents or otherwise; And in case the said Thirty thousand pounds Monthly, or
any part thereof, be not paid at the time when it shall become due, and
payable, The Kingdom of England shall give the Public Faith for the paying of
the remainder unpaid, with all possible speed. Allowing the rate of eight
pounds per centum, for the time of the performance thereof. And in case, that
notwithstanding the said Monthly sum of Thirty Thousand pounds paid as
aforesaid, the States and Kingdom of Scotland, shall have just cause to demand
furthar satisfaction of their Brethren of England, when the Peace of both
Kingdoms is settled, for the pains, hazard, and charges they have undergone in
the same, They shall by way of brotherly assistance, have due recompense made
unto them by the Kingdom of England; And that out of such Lands and Estates of
the Papists, Prelates, Malignants, and their Adherents, as the two Houses of the
Parliament of England shall think fit; And for the assurance thereof, the
Public Faith of the Kingdom of England shall be given them.

6. And to the end the said Army in manner aforesaid, may be enabled and
prepared to march: The Kingdom of England is to pay in ready money to their
Brethren of Scotland, or such as shall have power from the Estates of that
Kingdom, the sum of one hundred thousand Pounds sterling, at Leith, or
Edinburgh, with all convenient speed, by way of advance, before hand, which is
to be discounted back again unto the Kingdom of England, by the Kingdom of
Scotland, upon the first Monthly allowance, which shall grow due to the
Scottish A^my, from the time they shall make their first entrance into the
King^^m of England.

7. That the Kingdom of Scotland to manifest their willingness to their utmost
ability, to be helpful to their Brethren of England, in this common Cause,
will give the Public Faith of the Kingdom of Scotland, to be jointly made use
of with the Public Faith of the Kingdom of England, for the present taking up
of two hundred thousand pounds sterling, in the Kingdom of England, or else
where, For the speedy procuring of the said Hundred Thousand pounds sterling as
aforesaid, As also a considerable sum, for the satisfying in good proportion*
the Arreares of the Scottish Army in Ireland.

8. That no Cessation, nor any Pacification, or Agreement for Peace whatsoever,
shall be made by either Kingdom: or the Armies of either Kingdom, without the
mutual advice and Consent of both Kingdoms, or their Committees in that behalf
appointed, who are to have full Power for the same in case the Houses of the
Parliament of England, or the Parliament, or convention of Estates of Scotland
shall not sit.

9. That the Public Faith of the Kingdom of Scotland, shall be given to
their Brethren of England, That neither their entrance into, nor their
continuance in the Kingdom of England, shall be made use of to any other ends,
then are expressed in the Covenant, and in the Articles of this Treaty; And
that all matters of difference* that shall happen to arise between the Subjects
of the two Nations, shall be resolved and determined by the mutual advice and
consent of both Kingdoms, or by such Committees, as for this purpose shall be
by them appointed, with the same power, as in the precedent Article.

10. That in the same manner, and upon the same conditions as the Kingdom of
Scotland, is now willing to aid and assist their Brethren of England, the
Kingdom of England does oblige themselves to aid and assist the Kingdom of
Scotland, in the same, or like cases of streights, and extremities.

11. Lastly, it is agreed and concluded, That during the time that the Scottish
Army shall be employed as aforesaid, for the defense of the Kingdom of
England, There shall be fitted out as Men of War, Eight Ships, whereof six
shall be of Burden, betwixt one hundred and Twenty, and two hundred Tonne, the
other between three and four hundred Ton^e, whereof two shall be in Lieu of
the two Ships appointed by the Irish Treaty; All which shall be maintained at
the charge of the Kingdom of England, to be employed for the defense of the
Coast of Scotland, under such Commanders as the Earl of Warwick for the time
of his being Admiral shall nominate, with the approbation of the Committees of
both Kingdoms, which Commanders shall receive from the said Earl, general
Instructions, that they do from time to time observe the directions of the
Committees of both Kingdoms.

The Ordinance for calling the Assembly of Divines.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the calling of an
Assembly of Learned and Godly Divines, and others, to be consulted with, by the
Parliament, for the settling of the Government and Liturgy of the Church of
England, and for vindicating and clearing of the Doctrine of the said Church
from false aspertions and interpretations.

WHereas amongst the infinite blessings of Almighty V.
God upon this Nation, none is, or can be more dear unto us, then the purity
of our Religion, and for that as yet many things remain in the Liturgy,
Discipline and Government of the Church, which do necessarily require a further
and more perfect Reformation, then as yet has been attained: and whereas it
has bin declared and resolved by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that the present Church- government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellors, Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending upon the Hierarchy, is evil and iust^y
offensive and burdensome to the Kingdom, a great impediment to Reformation and
growth of Religion, and very preiudicial^ to the State and government of this
Kingdom, and th^^ therefore they are resolved that the same shall be taken
away, and that such a government shall be settled in the Church, a^ may be most
agreeable to Gods holy word, and most apt to pro^ure and preserve the peace of
the Church at home, and nearer agreement with the Church of Scotland, and other
reformed Churches abroad, and for the better effecting hereof, and for the
vindicating and clearing of the doctrine of the Church of England, from all
false calumnies and aspersions, It is thought fit and necessary, to call an
Assembly of Learned, Godly, and judicious Divines, who together with some
Members of both the Houses of Parliament, are to consult and advise of such
matters and things touching the premises, as shall be proposed unto them by
both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, and to give their advice and
counsel therein, to both or either of the said Houses, when and as often, as
they shall be thereunto required. Be it therefore ordained by the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That all and every the persons
hereafter in this present Ordinance named, that is to say, Algernon Earl of
Northumberland, William Earl of Bedford, Philip Earl of Pembroke and
Montgomery, William Earl of Salisbury, Henry Earl of Holland, Edward Earl of
Manchester, William Lord Viscount Say and Seal, Edward Lord Viscount Conway,
Philip Lord Wharton, Edward Lord Howard of Estr. John Seldom Esqu. Francis Rows
Esqu. Edmund Prideaux Esqu. Sr Henry Vane Knight senior, John Glyn Esqu.
Recorder of London, John White Esqu. Bouldstrode Whitlocke Esqu. Humphrey
Salloway Esqu. M. Serjcant Wild, Oliver Saint-John Esqu. His Majesty's
Solicitor, Sr Benjamen Rudyard Knight, John Pym Esquire. Sir John Clotworthy
Knight, John Maynard Esqu. Sir Henry Vane Knight junior, William Pierpoint
Esqu. William Wheeler Esqu. Sir Thomas Barrington Knight, Walter Young Esqu.
Sir John Evelin Knight, Herbert Palmer of Ashwell Bachelor in Divinity, Oliver
Boles of Sutton Bachelor in Divinity, Henry Wilkinson of Waddesdon Bachelor
in Divinity, Thomas Valentine of Chalfont-Giles Bachelor in Divinity, D*
William Twiss of Newbury, William Raynor of Egham, Mr. Hannibal Gammon of
Maugan, Mr. Jasper Hick^ of Lawrick, Dr. Joshua Hoyle late of Dublin in
Ireland, William Bridges of Yarmouth, Thomas Wincop of Ellesworth Doctor in
Divinity, Thomas Goodwin of London B^tchelor in Divinity, John Ley of Budworth
in Cheshire, Thomas Case of London, John Pyne of Bereferrers, Mr. Whidden of
Mooreton, Dr. Richard Love of Ekington, Dr. William Gouge of Blackfriers
London, Dr. Ralph Brownerigg Bishop of Exeter, Dr. Samuel Ward, Master of
Sidney College, John White of Dorchester, Edward Peale of Compton, Stephen
Marshall of Finchingfild Batchellor in Divinity, Obediah Sedgewicke of
Cogshall, Batchellor in Divinity, M. Carter, Peter Clerk of Carnaby, William
Mew of Estington Batchellor in Divinity, Richard Capell of Pitchcomb,
Theophilus Bathurst of Overton Watervile, Phil. Nigh of Kimbolton, D. Brocket
Smith of Barkway, D. Cornelius Burges of Watford, John Green of Pencombe,
Stanley Gower of Brampton-Bryan, Francis Tailor of Yalding, Tho. Wilson of
Otham, Antho. Tuckney of Boston, Batchellor of Divinity, Thomas Coleman of
Bliton, Charles Herle of Winwicke, Richard Herricke of Manchester, Richard
Cleyton of Showell* George Gibbs of Ayleston, D. Calibute Downing of Hackney,
Jeremy Boroughes of Stepney, Edmund Calamy Batchellor in Divinity, George
Walker Batchellor in Divinity, Joseph Carroll of Lincolns Inn, Lazarus Seaman
of London, D. John Harris, Warden of Winchester College, George Morley of
Mildenhall, Edward Reynolds of Branston, Thomas Hill of Titchmarch, Batchellor
in Divinity, D. Robert Saunderson of Boothby Pannell, John Foxcroft of Gotham,
John Iackson of Marske, William Carter of London, Thomas Thoroughgood of
Massingham, John Arrowsmith of Lynne, Robert Harris of Hanwell, Batchellor in
Divinity, Robert cross of Lincoln College, Batchellor in Divinity, James
Archbishop of Armagh, Dr Matthias Styles of Saint George Escheape London,
Samuel Gibson of Burley, Jeremiah Whitacre of Stretton, D. Edmund Stanton of
Kingston, D. Daniel Featley of Lambeth, Francis Coke of Yoxhall, John
Lightfoote of Asheley, Edward Corbet of Merton College Oxon, Samuel Heldersham
of Felton, John Langley of Westuderley, Christopher Tisdale of Vphusborne,
T^^^as Young of Stowmarket, John Phillips of Wrentham, Humphrey Chambers of
Claverton Batchellor in Divinity, John Conant of Lymington Barchellor in
Divinity, Henry Hall of Norwich Batchellor in Divinity, Henry Hutton, Henry
Scuddir of Colingborne, Thomas Baylie of Manningford Bruce, Benjamine Pickering
of Easthoateley, Henry Nigh of Clapham, Arthur Sallaway of Seavernestoake,
Sydrake Sympson of London, Anthony Burgess of Sutton Coldfield, Richard Vines
of Calcot, William Greenhill of Stepney, William Moreton of Newcastle, Richard
Buckley, D. Thomas Temple of Battersey, Simeon Ash of Saint Brides, M.
Nicholson, Thomas Gattaker of Rotherhithe Batchellor in Divinity, James Weldy
of Sylatten, D. Christopher Pashley of Hawarden, Henry Tozer Batchellor in
Divinity, William Spurstow of Hampden in Com. Bucks. Francis Channel of Oxon,
Edward Ellis of Gilffield Batchellor in Divinity, D John Hacket of Saint
Andrews Holborne, Samuel de la Place, John de la March, Matthew Newcomen of
Dedham, William Lyford of Sherborne in Com. Dorset, M. Carter of Dynton in Com.
Bucks. William Lance of Harrow in Middlesex, Thomas Hodges of Kensington in
Com. Middlesex, Andreas Perne of Wilby in Com. Northampton, D. Thomas Westfield
of S. Bartholomew le great London Bishop of Bristoll, D. Henry Hammon of
Penshurst in Kent, Nicholas Prophet of Marlborough in Com. Wilts, Peter Sterry
of London, John Earl of Bishopston in Com. Wilts, M Gibbon of Waltham, Henry
Painter of Exceter, Batchellor in Divinity, M. Michel^hwaite of Cherryburton,
D. John Wincop of S. Martins in the fields, M. Price of Paul's Church in Covent
garden, Henry W^lkinson Junior, Batchellor in Divinity, D. Richard Oldsworth
Master of Emanuell College in Cambridge, M. William Duning of Coldaston, and
such other person and persons, as shall be nominated and appointed by both
Houses of Parliament, or so many of them, as shall not be let by sickness
or other necessary impediment, shall meet and assemble, and are hereby required
and enjoined upon summons signed by the Clerks of both Houses of Parliament,
left at their several respective dwellings, to meet and assemble themselves at
Westminster, in the Chapel called King Henry the sevenths Chapel, on the
first day of July, in the year of our Lord, one Thousand six hundred forty
three: and after the first meeting, being at least of the number of forty,
shall from time to time sit and be removed from place to place, and also that
the said Assembly shall be dissolved in such manner, as by both Houses of
Parliament shall be directed; And the said persons, or so many of them, as
shall be so Assembled, or sit, shall have power and authority, and are hereby
likewise enjoined, from time to time during this present Parliament, or until
further order be taken, by both the said Houses, to confer and treat amongst
themselves, of such matters and things, touching and concerning the Liturgy,
Discipline, and Government of the Church of England, or the vindicating and
clearing of the doctrine of the same, from all false aspertions and
misconstructions, as shall be proposed unto them by both, or either of the said
Houses of Parliament, and no other, and to deliver their opinions and advices
of, or touching the matters aforesaid, as shall be most agreeable to the Word
of God, to both or either of the said Houses, from time to time, in such manner
and sort, as by both or either of the said Houses of Parliament, shall be
required, and the same not to divulge by Printing, writing, or otherwise
without the consent of both or either House of Parliament. And be it further
Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that William Twiss Doctor in Divinity
shall sit in the Chair as Prolocutor of the said Assembly, and if he happen to
die, or be let by sickness, or other necessary impediment, then such other
person to be appointed in his place, as shall be agreed on, by both the said
Houses of Parliament; And in case, any difference of Opinion shall happen among
the said persons so assembled, touching any the matters, that shall be proposed
to them as aforesaid, that then they shall represent the same, together with
the reasons thereof to both or either of the said Houses respectively, to the
end such further direction may be given therein, as shall be requisite in that
behalf. And be it further ordained by the authority aforesaid, that for the
charges and expenses of the said Divines, and every of them, in attending the
said service, there shall be allowed unto every of them that shall so attend,
during the time of their said attendance, and for ten days before, and ten
days after, the sum of four shillings for every day, at the charges of the
Commonwealth, at such time and in such manner as by both Houses of Parliament
shall be appointed. And be it further Ordained, that all and ^very the said
Divines, so as aforesaid required and enjoined to meet and assemble, shall be
freed and acquitted of, and from every offense, forfeiture, penalty, loss or
damage, which shall or may arise or grow by reason of any non-residence or
absence of them or any of them, from his or their, or any of their Church,
Churches, or Cures, for, or in respect of their said attendance upon the said
Service, any Law or Statute of Non-residence, or other Law or Statute enjoining
their attendance upon their respective Ministeries or Charges to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding; And if any of the persons before named shall happen to
dye before the said Assembly shall be dissolved by Order of both Houses of
Parliament, then such other person or persons shall be nominated and placed in
the room and stead of such person and persons so dying, as by both the said
Houses shall be thought fit and agreed upon: And every such person or persons
so to be named, shall have the like Power and Authority, Freedom, and
acquittall to all intents and purposes, and also all such wages and allowances
for the said service, during the time of his or their attendance, as to any
other of the said persons in this Ordi^ance is by this Ordinance limited and
appointed. Provided always, that this Ordinance, or any thing therein
contained, shall not give unto the persons aforesaid, or any of them, nor shall
they in this assembl^ assume to exercise any Jurisdiction, Power, or Authority
Ecclesiastical whatsoever, or any other Power, then is herein particularly
expressed.

The Votes or Orders delivered with it.
Die Mercurii 5. Iulii, 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, VI.
That it shall be propounded to the Assembly to Morrow at their meeting, to
take into their Consideration the Ten first Articles of the 39 Articles of
the Church of Englan^, to free, and Vindicate the Doctrine of them from all
Aspersions, and false interpretations.

Iovis 6. Iulii, 1643.
Some general Rules for the Assembly, directed by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled.

1. THat two Assessors be joined to the Prolocutor, to supply his place in case
of Absence or Infirmity. 2. Two Scribes to be appointed to set down all
proceedings, and these to be Divines, who are not Members of the Assembly, viz.
Mr Henry Rowberry, and Mr Adoniram By field. 3. Every Member at his first
entrance into the Assembly, shall make a serious and solemn Protestation, not
to maintain any thing but what he believes to be Truth, and to embrace Truth in
sincerity when discovered to him. 4. No Resolution to be given upon any
Question on the same day wherein it is first Propounded. 5. What any man
undertakes to prove as necessary, he shall make good out of the Scriptures. 6.
No man to proceed in any dispute after the Prolocutor has enjoined him
silence, unless the Assembly desire he may go on. 7. No man to be deemed to
enter his dissent from the Assembly, and his Reasons for it in any point after
it has first been debated in the Assembly; And thence (if the dissenting party
desire it) to be sent to the Houses of Parliament by the Assembly, (not by any
particular Man or Men in a private way) when either House shall require it. 8.
All things agreed on and prepared for the Parliament to be openly Read and
allowed in the Assembly, and then offered as the Judgment of the Assembly, if
the Major part Assent, Provided that the opinion of any Persons dissenting, and
the Reasons urged for it, be annexed thereunto (if the dissenters require it)
together with the Solutions (if any were) given in the Assembly to those
Reasons.
Jovis 6. Iulii, 1643.
I A. B. do seriously and solemnly in the presence of Almighty God, that (in
this Assembly whereof I am a Member) I will not maintain any thing in matters
of Doctrine, but what I think in my Conscience to be Truth, or in point of
Disci^line, but what I shall conceive to conduce most to the glory of God, and
the good, and Peace of his Church.

Veneris 15. Sept. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That, it be referred
to the Assembly of Divines, to set forth a Declaration of the Reasons and
Grounds, that have induced the Assembly to give their Opinions, that this
Covenant may be taken in point of Conscience.

Eodem Die.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, that it be referred
to the Committee formerly appointed, to Treat with the Scotch Commissioners: to
Treat with them about the manner of taking the Covenant in both Kingdoms.

Mercurii 22. August. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled* that it be
pr^pounded to the Assembly of Divines, to consider of the Doctrine of the Nine
next Articles of the ^9* Articl^s of the Church of England, to clear, and
vindicate the same from all Aspersions and false interpretations.

The Articles of the sixth of August, 1642.
ARTICLES of the Treaty, concerning the Reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland to
the Obedience of the Kings Majesty, and Crown of England, agreed upon between
the Commissioners for Scotland, authorized by Hi^ Majesty, and the Parliament
of that Kingdom, and the Commissioners for England, authorized by His Majesty
and the Parliament of that Kingdom, at Westminster, the sixth day of August,
1642.

FIrst, The Scottish Commissioners out of the sense of that duty VII.
which the Kingdom of Scotland owes to His Majesty, and the true affection
they bear toward the Kingdom of England, being willing to contribute their
best assistance for the speedy relief of those distressed parts in Ireland,
which lie nearest the Kingdom of Scotland; Have in the name of that Kingdom,
made offer of Ten Thousand Men, to be employed in that Service; And for a
further Testimony of their Zeal to His Majesty's Service, and Brotherly
respect to the Kingdom of England, have declared, that the Kingdom of
Scotland, will upon their own Charge* Levy and Transport these Men.

Secondly, Because the Kingdom of Scotland, are to send over with their Army,
the number of six thousand Muskets and four thousand Pikes, with such Canon
and Ammunition as shall be fitting for the service; It is agreed, that four
thousand Muskets, and two thousand Pikes, shall be presently sent by the
Kingdom of England, into the Kingdom of Scotland, and delivered at L^^th; As
also that the residue of the said ten thousand Arms, and ten thousand Swords,
and Belts, shall be delivered there, at the first of August next; And that as
many Canon and Field-Peeces of the same bore, weight, and mettle, shall be
carried into Scotland, upon their demand, as they shall Transport into Ireland*
for the s^^vice of that Kingdom. And that the said whole Arms and Ammunition
shall remain in Scotland, until the return of the Sc^ttish Army from
Ireland: At which time the same shall be restored to the Kingdom of England,
the Kingdom of Scotland receiving satisfaction for such of their Arms and
Ammunition, as shall be spent or lost in the service of Ireland; As also that
there shall be presently sent over from England, and delivered to the Scottish
Army in Ireland, for the defense of the Province of Vlster, six Pieces of Demi
Canon, of the Ball of Four and twenty pound weigh^ (...) their Equipage.

Thi^^^y, It is agreed, That there shall be two Ships of War pres^^t^^ ^^nt
by the Kingdom of England, to Lochryan, Lamal^c^, (...) Patrick, or Air, to
Guard and waft over the Scottish Souldi^^s: And that the said Ships shall
attend at the Ports in Ir^^and; for serving the Scottish Army, in going, and
returning betwixt the Coasts, and keeping the Passages clear, as they shall
receive Orders from the chief Commanders of the Scottish Army for the time
being, according to Instructions received, or to be received by the Master of
these Ships from the Lord Admiral, or Commissioners of the Admiralty for the
time being, to that purpose.

Fourthly, It is agreed, That there shall be Levied and furnished by the
Kingdom of England, ten Troops of sufficient and well Armed Horsemen,
consisting of sixty in a Troop, besides the Officers; And that there shall be a
Commissary General, a Serjeant-Major, and a Quartermaster appointed over
them, which shall join and remain with the Body of the Scottish Foot, and
shall receive and obey the Orders and Instructions of the Commanders of the
Scottish Army; And that there shall be presently advanced the sum of twelve
Hundred Pounds sterling, for the Levying of a Troop of one hundred Horsemen in
Scotland, besides the Officers, to be a Guard to the General of the Scottish
Army.

Fifthly, It is agreed, That the Commanders and Soldiers of the Scottish Army,
shall have such Pay respectively as the Commanders and Soldiers of the English
Army have, according to a List presently agreed upon by the Commissioners of
both Kingdoms; As also that the Officers of that Army, shall have such
allowance for their Wagons* as is contained in the said List.

Sixthly, It is agreed, That the Towns and Castle of Carickfergus, and
Colrayne, shall be put into the hands of the Scottish Army, to be places for
their Magazines, and Garrisons, and to serve them for Retreat upon occasion;
And that the Magistrates, and Inhabitants thereof, shall be ordained to carry
themselves to the Commanders of the said Army as is fitting and ordinary in
such Cases; And that the said Towns, and Castle shall remain in the Scots
hands, until the War shall end* or that they shall be discharged of that
service, Like as the Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland do promise in
the Pu^lique Faith of that Kingdom, to redeliver the said Towns and Castle to
any, having Commission from the King and Parliament of England, as also the
Commissioners for the Kingdom of England, do promise in the name, and on the
Public Faith of that Kingdom, That Payment shall be made to the Kingdom of
Scotland, and their Army* of all dues that shall arise upon this present
Treaty, and that when the Scottish Army employed in the service of Ireland
shall be discharged, they shall be disbanded by Regiments, and no lesser
proportions, and so may of them paid off, as shall be disbanded, and the
residue kept in pay, till they be disbanded.

Seventhly, It is agreed, that the Towns of Charickfergus, and Colrayne, shall
by the Kingdom of England, be with all expedition provided with Victuals,
necessary for Soldiers, either in Garrisons, or expeditions, according to a
List to be agreed on, and Subscribed by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms; And
that such quantities thereof, as the Scottish Army shall have occasion to use,
shall be sold unto them, and bought by them, at the several Prices contained
in the aforesaid List. And also that the said Towns of Carickfergus, and
Colrayne, shall be provided by the Kingdom of England, with Powder, Ball,
Match, and other Ammunition for the service of the said Army, conform to the
particular List to be condescended unto by both Commissioners, and that Carts
and Wagons shall be provided by the Kingdom of England, for carrying of
Ammunition for the use of the said Army in Marches; As also, that there shall
be Gun-Smiths, Carpenters, and one, or two Engineers, appointed to attend the
Army, and that hand Mils shall be provided to serve the Companies in Marches.

Eighthly, It is agreed, that the Kingdom of England, shall deposite two
Thousand Pounds English money, in the hands of any, to be appointed by the
Scottish Commissioners, to be disbursed upon account, by warrant of the
General of their Army, upon Fortifications, Intelligences, and other
Incidents: so that there be not above the sum of two Thousand pounds in a
year Imprested upon these occasions, without particular and special warrant
from the Parliament of England, As also that there shall be deposited, two
Thousand and five hundred pounds English, to be disbursed upon Account, for the
providing of a thousand Horses, for the Carriage of the Artillery, the Baggage,
and Victual of their Army, and for Dragooners upon occasion: And likewise that
the Scottish Army during the time of the War, shall have power to take up
such Horses in the Country, as be necessary for the uses aforesaid.

Ninth, It is agreed, that the Inhabitants of the Towns and Villages, in the
Province of Vlster, and in any other Province of Ir^land, where the Scottish
Army shall be by it self, for the time, shall receive Orders from the Scottish
Commanders, And shall bring in Victuals for Money in an orderly way, as shall
be directed by them, with Provision of Oats, Hay, and Straw, and such other
Necessaries. And that the Country People shall Rise and Concur with the
Scottish Troops, when the Commanders thereof, shall find it for the good of the
Service* and shall receive Orders and Directions from the said Commanders of
the Scottish Army.

Tenth, It is agreed, that the said ten thousand men, to be sent out of the
Kingdom of Scotland, shall go in the way and order of an Army under their own
General, and Subalterne Officers; And the Province of Vlster is appointed unto
them, wherein they shall first prosecute the War, as in their Judgment they
shall think most expedient for the honor of the King, and Crown of England,
And that the Commanders of the said Army, shall have power to give Conditions,
to Towns, Castles and Persons which shall render and submit themselves* as
shall be most expedient for the service according to the course of War;
Provided no Toleration of the Popish Religion be granted, nor any condition
made touching or concerning any of the Rebels Lands, and that the Commanders ^f
the Scottish Army shall be answerable for their whole deportment, and
proceedings to His Majesty, and the two Houses of the Parliament of England
only, but shall from time to time give an account thereof, to His Majesty, the
two Houses of the Parliament of England, and to the Chief Governor, or
Governors of Ireland for the time being, that such Towns and Places* as shall
be recovered from the Rebels by the Scottish Army, shall be at the disposing of
the Commanders thereof, during their aboade for that service in those parts,
where such Towns and Places are; And if it shall be found for the good of the
service, that the Scottish Army shall join with the Kings Lieutenant of
Ireland and his Army, in that case, the General of the Scottish Army shall
only cede to the Kings Lieutenant of Ireland, and receive in a free and
honorable way Instructions from him, or in his absence from the Lord Deputy,
or any other who shall have the Chief Government of that Kingdom for the
time, by authority derived from the Crown of England, and shall precede all
others, and that he only shall give Orders to the Officers of his own Army; And
that the Armies shall have the right and lefthand, Vand, and Rear, Charge, and
Retreat successively, and shall not mix in Quarterings, nor Marchings, and
when it shall be found fit to send Troops out of either Army, that the Persons
to be sent out of the Scottish Army, shall be Commanded out by their own
General the Lieutenant of Ireland prescribing the number, which shall not
exceed the fourth part of the whole Foot of the Scottish Army, nor of the
Horse appointed to join therewith, whereunto they shall return when the
service is done. And that no Officer of the Scottish Army, shall be Commanded
by one of his own quality, and if the Commanders of the Troops so sent out of
either Army, be of one Quality, that they Command the Party by turns; And it
is nevertheless provided, That the whole Scottish Army may be called out of
the Province of Vlster, and the Horses appointed to join with them by His
Majesty's Lieutenant of Ireland, or other Chief Governor, or Governors of
that Kingdom for the time being, if he, or they shall think fit, before the
Rebellion be totally suppressed therein.

Eleventh, It is agreed, That the Scottish Army shall be entertained by the
English for three months, from the Twentieth of June last, and so along after,
until they be discharged; and that they shall have a months Pay advanced,
when they are first Mustered in Ireland, and thereafter shall be duly paid from
Month to Month; And that there shall be one Muster-Master appointed by the
English Muster-Master General, to make strict and frequent Musters of the
Scottish Army, and that what Companies of Men shall be sent out of Scotland,
within the compass of the ten Thousand Men, shall be paid upon their Musters
in Ireland, although they make not up complete Regiments.

Twelfth, It is agreed, That the Scottish Army shall receive their discharge
from the King and Parliament of England, or from such Persons as shall be
appointed and authorized by His Majesty and both Houses of Parliament for that
purpose; And that there shall be a Months warning before hand of their
disbanding: which said discharge and Months warning, shall be made known by
His Majesty and them, to the Council of Scotland, or the Lord Chancellor, a
Month before the discharging thereof; And that the Common Soldiers of the
Scottish, at their dismission, shall be allowed fourteen days Pay for carrying
of them home.

Thirteenth, It is provided and agreed, That at any time, after the three
Months now agreed upon for the entertainment of the Scottish Army, shall be
Expired, and that the two Houses of Parliament, or such Persons as shall be
authorized by them, shall give notice to the Council of Scotland, or to the
Lord Chancellor there, That after one Month from such notice given, the said
two Houses of Parliament will not pay the said Scottish Army now in Ireland any
longer, then the said two Houses of Parliament shall not be obleiged to pay the
said Army any longer then during the said Month; Any thing in this Treaty
contained to the Contrary notwithstanding.

The Ordinances of the 9th of March, and 11th of April.
Die Sabbati 9. Martii, 1644. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled.
THat he who does, or shall command in chief over the said VIII.
Army, by joint advice of both Kingdoms, shall also command the rest of the
British Forces in Ireland; And for the further managing of that War, and
prosecuting the ends expressed in the Covenant. That the same be done by joint
advice with the Committees of both Kingdoms.

Die Iovis 11. April, 1644. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament Assembled.
THat the Earl of Leven, Lord General of the Scots Forces in Ireland (being
now by the Votes of both Houses agreed to be Commander in Chief, over all the
Forces, as well British as Scots, according to the Fourth Article of the
result of the Committees of both Kingdoms passed both Houses) be desired with
all convenient speed by the advice of the said Committees, to appoint and
nominate a Commander in chief under his Excellency over the said Forces, to
reside with them upon the place.

Resolved, etc.

THat Committees be nominated and appointed by the joint advice of both
Kingdoms, of such numbers and Qualities as shall be by them agreed on, to be
sent with all convenient speed to reside with the said Forces, and enabled with
all ample Instructions by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, for the Regulating
of the said Forces, and the better carrying on of that War.

The Letter of the Lords, Justices, and Council of Ireland, to the Speaker of
the House of Commons in England, 4. Aril. 1643. a Duplicate whereof (the
original being sent to Westminster) was by them sent to Mr Secretary Nicholas
for His Majesty.
SIR,
Our very good Lord the Lord Marquess of Ormond having IX.
in his march in his last expedition, consulted several times with the
Commanders and Officers of the Army in a Council of War, and so finding that
subsistence could not be had abroad for the Men and Horses he had with him, or
for any considerable part of them, it was resolved by them, that his Lordship
with those Forces should return hither, which he did on the six and twentieth
of March.

In his return from Rosse (which in the case our Forces stand, he found so
difficult to be taken in, as although our Ordinance made a breach in their
walls, it was found necessary to desert the Siege) he was encountered by an Army
of the Rebels, consisting of about six thousand Foot, and six hundred and
fifty Horse well Armed and Horsed, yet it pleased God so to disappoint their
Counsels and strength, as with those small Forces which the Lord Marquess had
with him, being of fighting men about two thousand five hundred Foot, and five
hundred Horse not well armed, and for the most part weakly horsed, and those as
well Men as Horses much weakened by lying in the fields several nights in much
Cold and Rain, and by want of mans-meat and horse-meat, the Lord Marquess
obtained a happy and glorious deliverance and Victory against those Rebels,
wherein were slain about three hundred of them, and many of their Commanders
and others of quality, and diverse taken Prisoners, and amongst those Prisoners
Colonel Cullen a Native of this City, who being a Colonel in France, departed
from thence, and came hither to assist the Rebels, and was Lieutenant General
of their Army in the Province of Leinster, and the Rebels Army were totally
Routed and defeated, and their Baggage, and Munition seized on by His Majesty's
Forces, who lodged that night where they had gained the Victory, and on our
side about Twenty slain in the fight, and diverse wounded.

We have great cause to praise God, for magnifying his goodness and mercy to
his Majesty, and this his Kingdom so manifestly, and indeed wonderfully in
that Victory.

However the joy due from us upon so happy an occasion, is we confess mingled
with very great distraction here in the apprehension of our unhappiness, to be
such, as although the Rebels are not able to overcome His Majesty's Army, and
devour his other good Subjects here as they desire, yet both his Army and good
Subjects are in danger to be devoured by the wants of needful Supplies forth
of England, for as we formerly signified thither, those Forces were of
necessity sent abroad to try what might be done for susteining them in the
Country, so as to keep them alive until Supplies should get to us; But that
design now failing, those our hopes are converted into astonishment to behold
the unspeakable miseries of the Officers and Soldiers for want of all things,
and all those wants made the more unsupportable in the want of Food, whilst
this City (being all the help we have) is now too apparently found to be unable
to help us, as it has hitherto done, and diverse Commanders and Officers in the
Army do now so fair express their sense of their sufferings, (which indeed
are very great and grievous) as they declare that they have little hope to be
supplied by the Parliament, and press with so great importunity to be
permitted to depart the Kingdom, as it will be extreme difficult to keep them
here.

By our Letters of the three and twentieth of March, we signified thither the
unsupportable burden laid on this City, for Victualling those of the Army left
here, when the Lord Marquess with the Forces he took with him, marched hence,
which burden is found every day more heavy then other in regard of the many
housekeepers thereby daily breaking up house, and scattering their Families,
leaving still fewer to bear the burden. We also by those Letters, and by our
Letters of the five and twentieth of February, advertised thither the high
danger this Kingdom would incur, if the Army so sent abroad, should by any
distress, or through want be forced back hither again, before our relief of
Victuals should arrive forth of England.

When we found that those men were returning back hither, although we were (and
are still) full of distraction, considering the dismal consequences threatened
thereby in respect of our wants, yet we consulted what we could yet imagine
f^sible, that we had not formerly done, to gain some Food for those men, and
found, that to send them, or others abroad into the Country, we cannot, in
regard we are not able to advance Money for procuring the many requisites
incident to such an expedition. In the end therefore, we were enforced to fix
on our former way, and so to see who had any thing yet left him untaken from
him to help us, and although there are but few such, and some of them poor
Merchants, whom we have now by the Law of necessity utterly undone and
disabled, from being hereafter helpful to us, in bringing us in Victuals, or
other needful Commodities, yet were we forced to wrest their Commodities from
them, and certainly there are few here of our selves, or others, that have not
felt their parts in the enforced rigor of our proceedings, toward preserving
the Army, so as what with such hard dealing, no less grievous to us to do,
then it is heavy to others to suffer, and by our discending (against our
hearts) far below the honor and dignity of that power we represent here,
under his Royal Majesty, we have with unspeakable difficulty prevailed, so as
to be able to find Bread for the Soldiers for the space of one month.

We are now expelling hence all strangers, and must instantly send away for
England, thousands of poor dispoyled English, whose very eating is now
unsupportable to this place.

And now again and finally, we earnestly desire, (for our confusions will not
now admit the writing of many more Letters, if any) that His Majesty and the
English Nation may not suffer so great, if not irrecoverable prejudice and
dishonor, as must unavoydably be the consequence of our not being relieved
suddenly, but that yet (although it be even now at the point to be too late)
supplies of Victuals, and Munition in present be hastened hither to keep life,
until the rest may follow, there being no victual in the store, nor will
there be a hundred barrells of powder left in the store, when the out Garrisons
(as they must be instantly) are supplied, and that remainder according to the
usual necessary expense, besides extraordinary accidents, will not last above
a month, and the residue of our provisions must also come speedily after, or
otherwise England cannot hope to secure Ireland, or secure themselves against
Ireland, but in the loss of it, must look for such enemies from hence, as will
perpetually disturb the Peace of His Majesty, and his Kingdom of England, and
annoy them by Sea, and Land, as we often formerly represented thither, which
mischeifes may yet be prevented, if we be yet forthwith enabled from thence
with means to overcome this Rebellion.

We hope that a course is taken there for hastening hither the provisions of
Arms and Munition mentioned in the docquet, sent with our Letters of the
twentieth of January, and the six hundred horses, which we then moved might be
sent hither for recruites, and that the seven thousand eight hundred fourscore
and thirteen pounds three shillings for Arms to be provided in Holland
(besides those we expect in London) has bin paid to Anthony Tierens, in
London, or to Daniell Wibrants in Amsterdam, and if that Sum had been paid as
we at first desired, we might well have had those provisions arrived here by
the tenth of March as we agreed, however we now desire that, that Money, if it
be not already paid, may be yet paid to M. Tierens in London, or M. Wibrants in
Amsterdam, that so those provisions may arrive here speedily, which
(considering that summer is now near at hand) will be very necessary, that when
our supplies of Victuals, Munition, Clothes, Money, and other provisions shall
arrive, we may not in the public service here loose the benefit and advantage
of that season. And so we remain, from His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 4.
April. 1643.

POSTSCRIPT,

As we were ready to sign this dispatch, we received at this Board, a paper
signed by sundry Officers of the Army, now here at Dublin, which is in such a
style, and threatens so much danger, as we hold necessary to send a Copy
thereof here inclo^ed, whereby still appears the high necessity of hastening
away money, for them, and the rest of the Officers, and Victuals for the
Soldier, without which it will be impossible to contain them from breaking
out into mutiny.

The Letter enclosed.
MY LORDS,
AT our first entrance into this unhappy Kingdom, we had no other design, then
by Our Swords to assert and vindicate the right of His Majesty, which was here
most highly abused, to redress the wrongs of His poor Subjects, and to advance
our own particulars in the prosecution of so honest undertakings; And for the
first of these, we do believe they have since our coming over succeeded pretty
well, but for the last which concerns our selves, that has fallen out so
contrary to our expectations, that in stead of being rewarded, we have been
prejudiced; instead of getting a Fortune, we have spent part of one; and though
we behave ourselves never so well abroad, and perform the Actions of honest
men, yet we have the reward of Rogues and Rebels, which is, misery and want
when we come home. Now (my Lords) although we be brought to so great an
exigence, that we are ready to rob and spoil one another: yet to prevent
such outrages, we thought it better to try all honest means for our
subsistence, before we take such indirect courses; Therefore if your Lordships
will be pleased to take us timely into your considerations, before our urgent
wants makes us desperate, we will as we have done hitherto, serve your
Lordships readily and faithfully; But if your Lordships will not find a way for
our preservations here, we humbly desire we may have leave to go where we may
have a better being, and if your Lordships shall refuse to grant that, we must
then take leave to have our recourse to that first and prymary Law, which God
has endued all men with, we mean the Law of nature, which teaches all men to
preserve themselves.

The Letter of the Lords Justices, and Council of Ireland to His Majesty, of
the 11. of May. 1643.
May it please Your most excellent Majesty,
AS soon as we your Majesty's Justices, entered into the X.
charge of this government, we took into our consideration at this Board, the
state of your Army here, which we find suffering under unspeakable extremities
of Want of all things necessary to the support of their Persons, or maintenance
of the War, here being no Victuals, Clothes, or other provisions requisite
toward their sustenance; No Money to provide them of any thing they want; No
Arms in Your Majesty's stores, to supply their many defective Arms; Not above
forty Barrells of Powder in Your stores; No strength of serviceable Horses
being now left here, and those few that are, their Arms for the most part lost
or unserviceable; No Ships arrived here to guard the Coasts, and consequently
no security rendered to any that might (on their private adventures) bring in
provisions of Victuals, or other necessaries, toward our subsistence, and
finally, No visible means by Sea or Land, of being able to preserve for You
this your Kingdom, and to render deliverance from utter destruction, to the
remnant of Your good Subjects yet left here.

We find that Your Majesty's late Justices, and this Board, have often and
fully by very many Letters, advertised the Parliament in England of the
extremities of Affairs here, and besought relief with all possible
importunity, which also have been fully represented to Your Majesty, and to the
Lord Lieutenant, and Mr Secretary Nicholas, to be made known to Your Majesty,
and although the Winds have of late for many days (and often formerly) stood
very fair for accessions of supply forth of England hither, and that we have
still with longing expectations, hoped to find provisions arrive here, in some
degree answerable to the necessities of Your affairs, yet now (to our
unexpressible grief) after full six months waiting, and much longer patience
and long suffering, we find all our great expectations answered in a mean and
inconsiderable quantity of provisions, (viz.) threescore and fifteen barrells
of Butter, and fourteen Tun of Cheese, being but the fourth part of a small
Vessels loading, which was sent from London, and arrived here on the fifth day
of this Month, which is not above seven or eight days provision for that part
of the Army which lies in Dublin, and the out Garrisons thereof, No money or
victuals (other then that inconsiderable proportion of Victual) having
arrived in this place, as sent from the Parliament of England, or from any
other forth of England for the use of the Army, since the beginning of November
last.

We have (by the blessing of God) been hitherto prosperous and successful in
Your Majesty's affairs here, and should be still hopeful by the mercy of God,
under the Royal Directions of Your Sacred Majesty, to vindicate Your Majesty's
Honor, and recover your rights here, and take due vengeance on these Traitors,
for the innocent blood they have spilt, if we might be strengthened and
supported therein by needful supplies forth of England: but these supplies
having hitherto been expected to come from the Parliament of England, (on which
if Your Majesty had not relied, we are assured You would in Your High Wisdom
have found out some other means to preserve this Your Kingdom) and so great
and apparent a failer having happened therein, and all the former and late long
continuing Easterly Winds, bringing us no other Provisions, then those few
Cheeses, and Butter; and no advertisements being brought us of any future
supply, to be so much as in the way hither, whereby there might be any
likelihood, that considerable means of support for Your Majesty's Army, might
arrive here in any reasonable time, before we be totally swallowed up by the
Rebels, and Your Kingdom by them wrested from you. We find our selves so
disappoynted of our hopes from the Parliament, as must needs tren^h to the
utter loss of the Kingdom, if Your Majesty in Your high Wisdom, ordain not
some present means of preservation for us.

And considering, that if now by occasion of that unhappy and unexpected
failing of support from thence, we shall be less successful in your Services
here against the Rebels, then hitherto (whilst we were enabled with some means
to serve you) we have been, the shame and dishonor may in common construction
of those that know not the in-wards of the cause be imputed to us, and not to
the failings that disabled us, and considering principally, and above all
things, the high and eminent trust of your Affairs here, deposited with us by
your Sacred Majesty, we may not forbear in discharge of our Duty, thus freely,
and plainly to declare our humble apprehensions, to the end your Majesty thus
truly understanding the terriblenesse of our Condition, may find out some such
means of support to preserve to your Majesty's and your Royal Posterity, this
your Ancient and Rightful Crown and Kingdom, and derive deliverance and
safety to the Remnant of your good Subjects, yet left here; as in your
Excellent Judgment you shall find to be most for your Honor and Advantage.

And so praying to the King of Kings to guide and direct you for the best in
this high and important Cause, and in all other your Counsels and Actions, we
humbly remain from your Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 11th day of May, 1643.

Your Majesty's most Loyal, and most faithful Subjects and Servants.

FINIS.
HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWERS TO CERTAIN PAPERS, DELIVERED IN to His Commissioners at
Vxbridge, upon the close of the TREATY: ONE CONCERNING THE MILITIA, AND TWO
CONCERNING IRELAND, To which (being long, and coming in so near the breaking
up of the Treaty) no Answers could then be given: See them in the Narrative, No
136. 177. and 178.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1645.

HIS Majesty's Answers to certain Papers delivered See them in the Narrative,
no. 136. 177, and 178.
in to His Commissioners at Vxbridge, upon the close of the Treaty concerning
the Militia, and Ireland, etc.
HAving received an account of the passages of the late Treaty from our
Commissioners, We caused a Narrative thereof to be made and published, wherein
besides the necessary connexions there is nothing set down but what pa^^ed in
writing; But because their last Paper upon the subject of the Militia, and two
last Papers concerning Ireland, were delivered upon the close of that Treaty;
although We conceive the answers given in the papers formerly delivered by Our
Commissioners, are abundantly sufficient to give satisfaction to those also:
Yet because there may be a want of memory in some, and of observation in
others, who shall read that Narrative, to bring home and apply the former
answers of Our Commissioners to those papers; and because they seem to expect
answers, which (the Treaty being determined) cannot be given by Our
Commissioners, and to vindicate Our Self from many passages scattered in those
papers, particularly reflecting upon Our Person, and Royal Authority, We have
thought fit for the the further satisfaction of all Our good People to make
these ensuing answers.

And first to that See it in the Narrative, no. 136.
Paper concerning the Militia.
WHoseover shall observe the passionate expressions in the close of this Paper,
(wherein they do most earnestly desire Our Commissioners, as they tender the
deplorable Estate of these bleeding Kingdoms, the settling Religion, Our
Honor, and the composing these miserable distractions, to give full and clear
answers to the demands concerning the Militia) might very well believe, that
they who so importunately demanded, would as willingly have received an answer.
But when it shall be considered, that this p^per was not delivered in till
after two of the clock in the morning, upon the breaking off the Treaty, when
^hey had denied any furth^r time to treat, or to receive any papers dated as
within the time of the Treaty, (as formerly was mutually done, and this very
paper of theirs delivered in truth upon the 23, was received as dated the 22 of
February) it will be most apparent they kept it as a Reserve to be purposely,
and by design delivered so, as it should remain unanswered.

For the matter of that paper. They say, they have by their answers satisfied
the several questions proposed to them by Our Commissioners touching the
Militia, It was necessary they should have done so, that it being proposed to
Us to part with so great a trust as the power of the Sword, and to put it
wholly out of Our own hands, we might know, how, and to whom, and for what
time, and upon what terms We parted with it. But We will look back upon some
of their answers, that it may appear what they are.

Our Commissioners desired to know, who the Commissioners should be, in whose
hands the Forces both by Sea and Land See the Narrative, no. 77.
should be entrusted, and whether we might except against such persons, and
name others in their places of known affections to Religion and Peace. To that
part of the question, whether we might except against the Persons, they made no
answer. To the other part requiring who the Commissioners should be, they
answered, That the Commissioners were to be named for No. 78.
England by the two Houses, and for Scotland by the Estates of the Parliament
there; whereas the question was not, who should name those Commissioners, but
who they were that should be named, a thing most necessary for us to know,
before we entrusted them with so great a power.

Our Commissioners desired to know, whether the Militia No. 80.
of London should be independent and not subordinate to those Commissioners?
They answered, It appeared by the Propositions, No. 8^.
the same was to be ordered in such manner, as should be agreed on by both
Houses. Which was no answer to the question, though likewise necessary to be
known, the Militia of London, being so great and of such importance.

Our Commissioners desired to know, what Authority the No. 105, and 107.
Commissioners, nominated by the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, were to
have in the Militia, and settling of all Forces by Sea and Land in this
Kingdom, and what influence the advices and orders from the Estates of that
Parliament, should have upon this Kingdom? They answered, That might be No.
106, 107, 112.
fully satisfied by the Propositions concerning the Militia. And though Our
Commissioners desired it, they could get no other answer from them in writing.

Our Commissioners desired to know, what Jurisdiction they No. 109.
intended the Commissioners of both Kingdoms should have, by the power given
to them to hear and determine all differences that might occasion the breach
of the Articles of the Peace, and by what Law they should proceed to hear and
determine the same? They answered, That the Commissioners No. 110.
were to proceed in such manner as was expressed in the Propositions. Whereas
the Propositions express no more, then what is contained in the words of the
question. And being further pressed to an answer, they answered, That the
matter of the No. 111.
Jurisdiction of the Commissioners was expressed in the Propositions; and for
the manner of exercising of it, and by what Law they should proceed, The same
was to be settled by the two Houses of the Parliament of En^land, and the
Estates of the Parliament of Scotland respectively. This being no answer, and a
full and direct answer being required to these questions, the answer No. 113.
115.
given was, That they referred themselves therein to their former answers.

Our Commissioners desired to see the Act of the late Treaty No. 116.
for the settling of the Garrison of Berwick of the 29th of November, 1643.
(being made betwixt the two Houses and those of Scotland, without Our Privity)
as rela^ing to the business of the Militia, They answered, It was not then to
be Treated on, No. 117.
but was reserved to it is proper time, and Our Commissioners could never see it.

Our Commissioners desired to know, whether by the joint No. 118.
power mentioned in the Propositions to be given to the Commissioners for both
Kingdoms to preserve the Peace between the Kingdoms, and the King and every
one of them, they intended any other then Military power for suppressing Forces
only, which question was asked, because in the Proposition, there are two
distinct Clauses, one whereby they have that power to preserve the Peace, the
other, whereby they have No. 119.
power to suppress Forces: In answer to this, they refer Our Commissioners
to the Propositions.

That these answers (though made to questions arising upon the doubtful
expressions in their Propositions) referring to the Propositions themselves, or
to what was not then, but was after to be settled by the two Houses, are not
satisfactory answers to those questions, is most evident, but We do not wonder
they were unwilling We should see the clear drift of those Propositions, the
ill consequence whereof (which hereafter appears) We are willing to believe
most of those who agreed unto them, did not at first apprehend.

They say, They marvel why it should be insisted on, that the Commissioners
for the Militia should not be nominated by the two Houses only, and that we
who were to be equally secured, should name These are their words, but seem to
be mistaken, for our Comm^ssioners always insisted, We should name some of
them.
none, since this power was not to be exercised, till a Peace concluded upon
the Treaty, and then we had been secured by the Laws of the Kingdom, and by
the duties and affections of Our Subjects: We think it far more matter of
wonder (since it is confessed, that We, and such Our Loyal Subjects, who have
faithfully and constantly adhered to Us, were equally to be secured) that they
would allow Us no security at all, but to put Our Selves wholly upon them, who
even afterward in this paper, deny Our Just Power of the Militia, and of
making Peace and War, and might with much more color hereafter do so, if by
Our Consent that power should be once, though for a time only, put wholly into
their hands. It is true, the Laws of the Land, and the hearts of the people,
are the best security for a Prince, that he shall enjoy what belongs to Him:
But it is as true, that the Laws of the Land, and the Love of the Prince
toward His People are likewise their best security, that they shall enjoy what
belongs to them; It is a mutual confidence each in other that secures both:
But this is to be understood in calm and quiet times, the present distempers
have bred mutual Iealousies, and if they think it not at this time reasonable
wholly to trust the Laws and Us concerning their security, but ^equire the
power of the Militia, in which they have no Right, much less is it reasonable,
that We should wholly trust them concerning Our security, who avowedly bear
Arms against Us; but if for the love of Peace We are content for a time to
part with this great Power which is our known Right, it is reasonable that We
should have the nominating of some of those who should be trusted with it; yet
on Our part We were well content to repose Our Selves in that security they
mention, if the two Houses would likewise have relied upon the same security of
the Laws, and affections of the people, to which they so much pretend; But
though it was offered that We should return to Our two Houses, whereby all
Armies See Our Commissioners Paper, touching Our Return to the two Houses,
after Disbanding of Armies, no. 191.
being Disbanded, both they and We, might have been restored to the Laws, and
guarded by those affections of the people, yet that was not admitted. They say,
This power of the Militia was not to be exercised till after a Peace, but they
do not remember it is to be agreed on before a Peace, and proposed in order to
a peace; and We might with as much reason (and far more Justice, in respect of
Our undoubted Right over the Militia of this Kingdom) have insisted upon the
sole nomination of the Commissioners, because their power was not to be
exercised till a Peace concluded, as they for that cause to have excluded Us
from the nomination of an equal number, and assumed that power wholly to
themselves, not affording Us so much as the Liberty to except against any of
them. And whereas they say these Commissioners for the Militia, have a rule
prescribed, and being removeable and liable for any miscarriage to a severe
punishment, cannot do any thing to Our prejudice, contrary to the trust
reposed in them: If they had such a Rule (which yet by their Propositions and
papers We cannot find, (having by general and indefinite terms an unlimited
power given to them:) it proves they should not, not that they would not break
it. He that has power (as these Commissioners would have the greatest that
ever Subjects had) and will to abuse that power, may extend and interpret the
Rule prescribed Him, as He shall please himself, and therefore since out of
Our ardent desire of Peace, We were content to part with this power) We had
reason to r^quire, that at least some of those who should execute it, might be
such, whom We Our Selves should nominate, and could trust.

For that which is said, that if the Commissioners had bin severally chosen,
the memory of these unnatural divisions must needs have bin continued, and
probably being severally named, they would have acted dividedly according to
several interests, and the War thereby might be more easily revived. It is
apparent the memory of the War must as much continue where any Commissioners
are named at all, as where they are named by either party, since by putting
that power into their hands, it is put out of the proper Channel, but it is
not the memory of a past War that is dangerous, but such a Remembrance of it,
as is joined with a desire or inclination to revive it; And if it were
probable, as is alleged, that if the Commissioners were partly chosen by Us,
and partly by them, that being severally named, they would have acted dividedly
according to several Interests, it would be much more probable, that being
wholly named by them, they would have acted only according to their Interest,
and so on Our part, instead of an equal security, we must have bin contented
with what Laws and conditions they would have imposed. But We shall again
remember, that the offer on Our part, was to name such, against whom there No.
130.
could be no just exception, if the Persons were named equally betwixt us. It
was likewise offered, That those Commissioners should take an Oath for the true
discharge of their trust, that We Our Selves were willing to take an Oath to
observe the Articles of the Treaty, and that all Persons of any immediate trust
by offices or attendance upon Us, and all others whom they should nominate,
should take the like Oath, and with such penalties, that whosoever should
infringe the agreement, should be accounted most pernicious enemies to us and
the Kingdoms. And if this way of mutual nomination were not approved, there
was another proposed, that the Persons should be nominated between our
Commissioners and theirs, by whose mutual consent, it might well have been
hoped, such persons might have been named, in whom we and they might have
confided; but to this no answer (...) been vouchsafed nor could any thing
satisfy concerning the Mi^^tia, unless, without knowing who the persons were
who should be entrusted, we should with an implicit Faith in Persons wh^m we
did not know, put that power into their hands.

They say that though by their Propositions the Commissioners No. 131.
were to continue without any limitation of time, yet they have since proposed
a time of seven years. We know not that they have, during the whole Treaty, in
any one particular, receded from insisting on their demands, as they are set
down in their Propositions in terminis. And in this point though they seem to
reduce the time, which in their Propositions was indefinite, to a certainty, to
which yet the Scottish Commissioners See no. 132.
have not absolutely agreed, the alteration is more in show, then indeed, and
rather to the heightning, then abateing their demands, for whereas they have
limited the time to seven years, yet it is with an additionall clause, That
after those seven years, it was to be executed as We and they should agree, and
not otherwise; so that though the Commissioners should have the power but for
seven years, yet we should not have it after those seven years, nor at any
time unless they and we could agree in it: so much would they have gained by
this seeming compliance in point of limitation of this power to a time, though
not to that time of three years, which we proposed. But they justify the
reasonableness of it, for whereas our Commissioners in their Paper (to which
this of theirs is applied as No. 130.
an answer) tell them, that if the time for this power be unlimited, we and our
posterity shall for ever part with our peculiar Regal power, of being able to
resist our Enemies, or protect our good Subjects, and with that undoubted and
never denied right of the Crown to make War and Peace, or ever more to have
jurisdiction over our own Navy and Fleet at Sea, (the command thereof being
also a part of this great power to be given to these Commissioners.) They
answer plainly, they cannot admit of this peculiar Regal Power, which Our
Commissioners mention to reside in us concerning the Militia, and to make Peace
and War, or that it is otherwise to be exercised then by authority from us
and both Houses of Parliament of England, and the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively. We approve of their ingenuity, that now at the breaking
off of the Treaty, they tell us in plain terms what they mean, though the
Common Law Books and Records of Parliament have mentioned, that the sole power
of protecting the Subjects belongs to the King, and that he alone has power to
make Peace and War, though it has been the language of former Parliaments,
even of the last Parliament, and at the beginning of this Parliament, that the
power of Peace and War is in the King, but if he will have money from His
Subjects to maintain the Wars, he must have their consents, and though the
universal consent and common opinion heretofore has gone accordingly: yet
they cannot admit thereof as to have been our right (for the answer is made to
the assertion concerning our right) And not admitting it, it seems their oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, to defend our Crown and Dignity, and to
assistand defend, all Jurisdictions, Privileges and authorities belonging to
us oblige them not; And as they do not admit this power in right to have been
in us alone for the time past, so neither will they admit it for the time to
come, in Us, or Our successors, to be able to resist our Enemies, or protect
our Subjects, or to make Peace or War, but it must be, by authority from Us
and the two Houses, and the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland respectively.
They are to be associated in these Regal Powers, and the Scepter and the Sword
may in Pictures or Statues, but are not indeed to be in the Kings hand alone.
Upon these grounds, We wonder not that they would have the Navy and Fleet at
Sea, to be put into the hands of their Commissioners for seven years as the
Militia for the Land, and after the seven years to be commanded in such manner
as they and we should agree and not otherwise, for they say, the reasons are
the same for them, as for the Militia by land: It is a principal means they
say of their security, and We cannot find they think themselves to have any
security, if We and Our Successors have any Power; But if We will part with Our
Power wholly unto them, We and Our Posterity shall be fully secured by the
aflections of Our Subjects (that is by the Lords and Commons now at
Westminster, who in their sense represent all the people) who by themselves
during the Parliament, or when they shall please to make any recesses by their
Commissioners during the intervalls, will free us from the burden of the
Militia, and of Our Navy, and so of protecting Our Subjects, and will save Us
the Charge of Our Navy, because it is to be principally maintained by the free
gift of the Subject out of Tonnage and Poundage, and other Impositions upon
Merchandise. And having taken this care for Our security (suitable to all their
Actions these three years last past) They say, that for security of those who
have been with Us in the War, an Act of Oblivion is desired to be passed,
whereby all Our Subjects would have been put in one and the same condition, and
under the same protection, with some exceptions mentioned in the Propositions.
We are not willing to mention those exceptions, by which not only most of Our
best Subjects (who have been with Us in the War according to their duties) by
express or general terms are excepted, but all the Estates of some of them,
and a great part of the Estates of the rest of them for that very cause,
because they were with Us in the War, are to be forfeited; As for securing
them by an Act of Oblivion, they have less cause to desire it then they who
propose it, as being more secured by the Conscience of doing their duties, and
the protection of the known common Law of the Land, if it might take place,
then any protection under the two Houses, or their Commissioners for the
Militia; yet We were not unwilling for the security of all Our Subjects to have
assented to an Act of Oblivion, being willing, as much as in Us lies, to have
made up these breaches, and buried the memory of these unhappy Divisions.

It was urged by our Commissioners, that according to the literal sense of the
Propositions (in the powers given to the Commissioners for the Militia) That
Sheriffs and Justices of Peace, and other legal Ministers could not raise the
Posse Comitatus, or Forces to suppress Riots, without being liable to the
interpretation of the Commissioners. To this they answer, That this is no part
of the Militia to be exercised by the Commissioners, but in executing of
Justice and legal Process, nor can be intended to be any disturbance, but for
the preservation of the Peace. We shall admit that to be their meaning, but it
being by the Propositions made Treason in any, who shall leavy any Forces
without authority or consent of the Commissioners, to the disturbance of the
public Peace, it is apparent that the Sheriffs or Justices of Peace, if they
raise any Forces to suppress any tumultuous Assembly, (which it is possible
some of the Commissioners may countenance) or for executing of other legal
Acts, may not only be liable to the interpretation of being disturbers of the
public Peace, but feel the punishment of it. And whereas they say, That the
Power (given by the Propositions to the Commissioners for the Militia of both
Kingdoms as a joint Committee) for the hearing and determining Civil Actions
and differences cannot be extended further then preservation of the Articles of
the Peace to be made: We conceive that a Court being thereby allowed to them
for the hearing and determining of Civil matters for the preservation of the
Articles of the Peace, they may in order thereunto (upon pretense it is for the
preservation of the Peace) entertain and determine any cause or difference
they please, especially their power by the Propositions, being not only to
preserve the Peace, but to prevent the violation of the Articles of the Peace;
and having the power of the Sword in their hands, and being not tied up to any
certain Law, whereby to judge, (for ought appears by their answers to the
questions proposed by Our Commissioners) and the common Law not being the rule
in such case, (because part of them are to be of the Scottish Nation) they may
without control exercise what arbitrary power they please.

And whereas it is insisted upon in this paper, That an answer be given to the
fifteenth Proposition, which is, that the Subjects be appointed to be Armed,
Trained, and Disciplined in such manner as both Houses shall think fit; which
Our Commissioners thought fit to have deferred till after the Peace
established, and then to be settled by Us and the two Houses: It is apparent,
that Proposition concerned not (that which was desired as the end of their
Propositions) the security for the observation of the Articles, and We conceive
there is already sufficient provision made by the Law in such cases, and if
there were not, it were fit that that defect were supplied by Law, not to be
left at large, as the two Houses should think fit, without expressing the
manner of it, but to proceed by a Bill, wherein we might see before we
consented to it, how Our Subjects should be charged; we being as much concerned
and sensible of the burden to be put upon Our Subjects, as the two Houses can
be, who, We are sure, since they took upon them the authority of imposing upon
their fellow Subjects without Us, have laid the heaviest Impositions that ever
were.

And whereas they say, the scope of these their Propositions touching the
Militia, was to take away occasions of future differences, to prevent the
raising of Arms and to settle a firm and durable Peace: If we look upon the
whole frame of their Militia, as they have proposed it to us, we cannot but
conclude those Propositions to be most destructive to those ends: For first,
they have proposed it to us (as they have settled it already by their Ordinance)
That the whole Militia of ^reland, as well of Our English Subjects as Scottish,
shall be Commanded by Lesley Earl of Leven their Scottish General, and be
managed by the jo^nt advice of the Scottish and English Commissioners, and
therein the Scottish as well as the English to have a Negative Voice, and so by
consequence subjecting the whole Government of that Kingdom to the manage of
Our Scottish Subjects. And (having thus ordered the Militia of Ireland, where
they will be sure to keep Forces on Foot (for that is another part of the
Propositions. That We shall Assent to whatsoever Acts shall be proposed for
monyes for the War of Ireland) which Forces shall be ready upon all occasions
to serve them) For the Militia and Navy of England, that is likewise to be
ordered and Commanded by these Commissioners, and though We their Sovereign
are denied to nominate any to be joint Commissioners, they are content to admit
those of Scotland (who though Our Subjects, yet are strangers to their
Government) to a nomination of Scottish Commissioners to be joined with them.
These Scottish Commissioners in matters wherein both Kingdoms are jointly
concerned (and they may easily call, and make what they will to be of joint
concernment) are to have a Negative Voice, so that the English can do nothing
without them, not so much as to raise Force to suppress a Commotion, or
prevent an invasion, if the Scottish Commissioners, though not a third part of
the number of the English, say it is of joint concernment; And in matters
solely concerning England, the Scottish Commissioners (to a third part of the
whole number of the Commissioners) are to reside in England, and to Vote as
single Persons.

These Commissioners, as well Scottish as English as they have the sole power
of the Forces by Sea and Land, so they must have a Court in a Civil way, to
hear and determine whatsoever Civil action that shall tend to the preservation
of the peace, or whatsoever else is for the prevention of the violation of it,
within which general words, and in order thereunto, they may comprehend any
cause or thing they please; And as these Commissioners, as well Scottish as
English, are to name all Commanders and Officers in Our Forts and Ships, so in
the intervalls of Parliament, lest there should be too much dependence upon us,
they are to name all the great Officers and Judges of both Our Kingdoms of
England and Ireland.

To these so unreasonable Propositions, wherein the Parliament and Subjects of
Scotland, would have so great an influence and power over the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, if (as reflecting merely upon our selves, and not
entertaining such thoughts of our Scottish Subjects, as perhaps some may by the
danger of such a power) we should have agreed, as hoping that the good
affections of our Subjects in Scotland, might in time have restored us to that
power which the two Houses of England would take away; yet when we consider,
that we are in conscience obliged to maintain the Rights of Our Crown, so
far as to be able to protect Our Subjects, and what jealousies and
heartburnings, it might probably produce betwixt Our Subjects of the two
Kingdoms, what reluctance all Our Subjects here may have, when they shall see
Our Power so shaken, and they must have so much dependency upon their fellow
subjects both English and Scotch, We conceive it so far from being a remedy
to the present distempers, (as they affirm in their papers) that as at present
it would alter the whole frame and conditution of the Government of this
Kingdom, both Civil and Military, so in the conclusion it would occasion the
ruin and desolation of all Our Kingdoms.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER See these in the Narative no. 177. and 178.
to the two Papers concerning Ireland.
IT has been one of the chiefest designs of the Authors of the present
distractions, to insinuate unto our people, that We were either privy to the
Rebellion in Ireland, or assenting to the continuance of it; And if it could
not be personally fixed upon Our self, yet to persuade them into a belief
that evil Counselors, and others prevalent with us did encourage and assist
it. By this means having a color to raise Forces, and to levy money for the
supply of those Forces, they might so dispose of both, as under a pretense of
suppressing the Rebels in Ireland, they might thereby also raise a War in
England, for the effecting of their Ambitious and Covetous desires in both
Kingdoms; And they so carried on this design, that whereas out of Our earnest
desire of the relief of Our poor Subjects in Ireland and to show the great
sense we had of their miseries, We had given way to several unusual Bills for
raising of Forces, and likewise to the Bill for the 400000l for the adventurers
and others, for raising of Moneys, (which Moneys by those Acts were to be paid
to particular Persons, or otherwise out of the ordinary course, and not into
Our Exchequer (as was usual in like cases thence to be issued for public
use) those supplies were diverted and employed to feed and nourish a Rebellion
in England, rather then to suppress that in Ireland. Thus 100000l of the
Adventurers Money was imp^oyed for the Earl of Essex his Army when he first
Marched against us, and that employment of it, though contrary to the express
words of the Act, which are, that no part of that Money shall be employed to
any other purpose, th^n the re^u^ing of those Rebels, was publicly justified
by a Declaration made in the name of the House of Commons, the 6th of
September, not long before the Battle at Edgehill, and at the same Bartaile,
several Regiments of Horse and Foot raised for Ireland, under the Command of
the Lord Wharton, Lord of Leny, S Faithful Fortescue, and others, were
employed against us at Edgehill, the moneys raised upon the Bill of 400000l,
and others have been wholly made use of against V^, And it was impossible,
without thus working themselves (under the specious pretense of suppressing the
Rebellion of Ireland) into the managery of that War, and misapplying the ayds
intended for Ireland, to have brought this Kingdom into the bleeding and
desperate condition wherein it now languisheth.

The Propositions concerning Ireland, as they are insisted upon by these
Commissioners (though in charity we shall hope not so intended by all of them)
are apparently in pursuance of that original design, in begetting a suspicion
of our integrity in that business of Ireland, and engrossing the managing of
that War, and the Power of that Kingdom into their hands. They would have the
Cessation (which We have avowed to be assented to by Us, and advised as most
necessary for the preservation of that Kingdom) to tend to the utter
destruction of the Protestants there, and the continuance of the Ceslation
there, (though but during the War here) to be a countenancing of that bloody
Rebellion, and We Our selves are charged to be privy, and to give directions
for the seizing of some provisions made, and sent for the supply of ^he
Protestants in Ireland. In the next place, concerning the War there, they
demand that the prosecution of that War be settled in both Houses of
Parliament, to be managed by the advice of both Kingdoms of England and
Scotland (that is, a Committee of both Kingdoms, those of each Kingdom to have
a negative voice) And all the Forces there, to be under the Command of the
Scotch General: The Lieutenant and other great Officers and Judges there, to
be nominated by both Houses, and that we should consent to pass all Acts to be
proposed by them, for the raising of moneys, and other things necessary for the
prosecution of that War. And notwithstanding all the zealous and patheticall
expressions in those Papers, desiring the continuance of that War, and the
execution of Justice upon those Rebels: It is not barely the prosecution of the
War in zeal of Justice that is desired, that might be managed either by Us
(whom God and the Law have entrusted solely with that power, and whose
Pr^decessors have alone, and without the concurrence of their Parliaments,
other then by competent assistance with Moneys, suppressed great Rebellions in
that Kingdom) or by fit Ministers to be appointed, upon just occasion to be
removed by Us, They have not made any the least Proposition or desire to that
purpose. But they insist upon such a prosecution of the War, wherein those
who are in Arms against us, may have the sole managing of the War, and of
moneys to maintain that War, even while they are in Arms against Us. For
the Cessation already made, it is apparent it was the only visible means,
whereby the Kingdom was preserved, the poor Protestants there being in danger
inevitably to have perished, either by Famine, for want of Food, or by the
Rebels, for want of Ammunition, there being not above Forty Barrells of Powder
there, as appears by the Letters of the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland,
mentioned by Our Commissioners, and no supplies of Victuals or Money sent in
six months time before those Letters (although Our Ships were then taken away
from Us, and all the Forces at Sea belonging to this Kingdom, were under their
command:) Neither could the not making void, or declaring against that
Cessation, have hindered a Peace upon this Treaty, if it had been intended
really on their part, it being to expire in March, and so before the Treaty
could probably have been perfected, and there being no further Peace or
Cessation made in Ireland; And therefore Our Commissioners did earnestly desire
them to make such Propositions, as were fit to be consented to, for the growth
of the Protestant Religion, and the good of that Kingdom.

But instead of such Propositions, they still except against the Cessation, and
though expiring within a month, they insist upon their demands of an Act of
Parliament to make that Cessation void, to which if We should have consented,
as We must have rendered our selves incapable of being trusted at any time
after, and odious abroad in breaking that Cessation, solemnly made by our
public Ministers of State in Ireland, and after consented unto by our selves,
so we must have implicitly confessed, contrary to the truth, that which they
allege against the Cessation, that it was destructive to the Protestants
there, and a countenancing of that bloody Rebellion, and thereby having lost
the Plea of our innocence, have also lost the hearts of Our people, and
rendered our selves guilty of those infamous slanders which have bin charged
upon Us concerning the Irish Rebellion, and which some were so willing to fix
upon Us, that even during this Treaty, when Mack Quire was impeached by them
for this Rebellion, for which he was by them after executed, (though they well
knew confessions of men in his condition, in hopes of Pardon or Reprives are
not to be credited,) he was strictly examined concerning Us (as We are credibly
informed) whether or no We gave any Commission to the Rebels of Ireland, or any
assistance to them, and if he had not absolutely denied it to his last, with
more sense of Conscience in that particular, then they who examined him
expected, it is likely whatsoever untruths reflecting upon Us had bin forced
from him, had bin (as others were) published to Our disgrace. And although they
long questioned the credit and truth of those Letters of the Lords Justices and
Council of Ireland, notwithstanding one of them being directed to the Speaker
of the House of Commons, was received and communicated to the House, and Ours
was but a Duplicate thereof, and Copies were delivered to them of both Letters,
which two of their Commissioners com^ared with our originalls, and saw the
names of all the Councell-subscribers, as well as the two Lords Justices, some
of which Counselors were of principal estimation with themselves, and they
might also have had Copies of their names who subscribed, if they would have
assured Our Commissioners, that such of them as should have come into their
Quarters, should not have been prejudiced by it; yet the extremity of Our poor
English Subjects, inducing that Cessation, being so notorious, and that
attestation thereof undeniable, they fall at last to confess and avoid them.
They say, That some who were of the Council when those Letters were written,
assure them, that those Letters were written only to press for Supplies,
without any intention of inducing a Cessation, neither do the Letters contain
any mention of a Cessation. It is true those Letters do not, nor was it
alleged they did mention any Cessation, but they pressed for Supplies from
hence, and laid open their necessities to be such, that it was apparent to any
man (as we had also private advices from some of the Council there, and of
credit with those at Westminster) that if Supplies failed there was no way for
the preservation of Our good Subjects there, but by a Cessation. And these
bleeding wants of Our Army, and good Subjects there, so earnestly calling for
Relief, and (this Kingdom being then engaged in the height of an unnatural
War) Our Selves unable to supply them, and no timely supply, nor hopes of it
coming from the two Houses, what course less dishonorable for Us, or more
for the good and safety of the poor English there could be taken, then to
admit of a Treaty for a Cessation, which was managed by Our public Ministers
of State there, and that Cessation assented unto as best for that Kingdom, by
the chief Officers of the Army, and the Lords Justices and Council of
Ireland, before Our Approbation thereof.

They say, That those necessities were made by a design of the Popish and
Prelaticall Party, (the Prelaticall Party must come in upon all tur^es, though
none suffered more by the Irish Rebellion, nor were less advantaged by the
Cessation, then those poor Prelates) and that at this very time, when the
Protestants were in such Extremity, Provisions sent thither by the Parliament
for their relief, were disposed of and afforded to the Rebels: The Letters of
the Lords Justices and Council, tell us, That no Provisions at all were sent
by the Parliament, and if they had not told it, yet this being barely affirmed,
might as easily be denied, unless they had instanced in particular, what
Provisions were sent, and how, and when, and by whom, or to whom they were
disposed. But they say, That at the same time the Officers of the Army and
Garrisons, pressing for leave to march into the Enemies Country to live upon
them, and save their own stores; some could not obtain leave to go, and
those who were drawn forth, had great quantities of Provisions out with them
yet were not permitted to go into the Enemies Country, but kept near Dublin,
till their Provisions were spent, and then Commanded back again. They might
remember, at that time (wherein they suppose this miscarriage) the chief
manage of those Affairs was in the hands of such Ministers of State, whom they
did, and do still rely upon; but sure those Ministers are not to be blamed,
if they durst not suffer the Soldier to march far, or stay long in the
Enemies Country, when there was but forty Barrells of Powder in all the Store,
or if they called them back in such case when the Enemy approached.

Let such as these, or what other pretenses, and excuses soever be made for not
relieving Ireland, we are sure the chief Impediment to it was their active
promoting this Rebellion in England; And therefore, as they made use of the
Supplies both of Men and Money, provided for that Kingdom, against Us at
Edgehill: so from the time of that Battle (some Supplies sent before (which
else perhaps had been also countermanded) arriving in Ireland, about the time,
or shortly after that Battle) they were so careful of recruiting and
supplying their Armies here, that though they received much Monyes for Ireland,
and had at their disposal great store of Our Ammunition, neither the one, nor
the other was ever after afforded to the English Army and Forces, or to the
Protestants about Dublin, though the Cessation was not made till September
following. As for those Protestants in Munster, Connaught, and Vlster, who,
they say, opposed the Cessation, and did and do still subsist, they were most
of them of Our Scottish Subjects, the rest (excepting some few wrought upon by
private interest or particular solicitation) were such, who being under their
power, were forced for their relief to concur with them against it. These
indeed, as they did not suffer under so great wants as the English at the time
of the Cessation, as is well known, though it seem to be denied, more special
Provisions being made for them, and for their Garrisons, then for the English,
(as does in great part appear even by the Articles of their Treaty of the
sixth of August) so they have since subsisted by Supplies sent from the two
Houses, whereof none were suffered to partake but such as take their new
Covenant, and doubly break the bonds of their obedience and duty, both by
taking that dangerous ensnaring Oath prohibited by God and their King, and
opposing Our Ministers of State there, without whose Authority (a Cessation
being concluded) during that Cessation they ought not to have continued a War
in that Kingdom. We easily believe the Provisions they mention are, or may be,
sent for supply of those Forces as being a means to keep up a Party against Us
there, and to have a Reserve of an Army ready upon any accidents of War to be
drawn hither against Us, and being also necessary for the satisfaction of Our
Scottish Subjects (whom they must please) who would not be so forward in their
service without some good assurance (such as is the having an Army of theirs
kept on foot in Ireland at the charge of this Kingdom, and two of our
strongest Towns and Castles there delivered to them Cautionary Towns, as we
may believe Berwick also is (being denied the sight of that Treaty) and by the
Command of all the English Forces there by the General of the Scots) that they
shall be well paid the Arreares to the Armies in both Kingdoms before they
quit their Interest in Ireland. If we shall allow Provisions thus employed to
be for the preservation of the English Protestants in Ireland, We may believe
they have repaid the 100000l taken up of the Adventurers money; and yet thus to
resatisfie this money, admitting it be current satisfaction for the debt, can
be no satisfaction or excuse for the former diversion.

But since they cannot excuse themselves for this diversion of the Adventurers
money, nor of the other moneys raised for Ireland, nor of the employing the
forces raised for that Kingdom, under the Command of the Lord Wharton against
us at Edgehill, which they deny not, They fall to recriminate Us.

They say, They have mentioned particulars of provisions for Ireland, (besides
those few clothes taken near Coventry, which being formerly answered by Our
Commissioners, they do not again urge) asserted to be seized, not without Our
own knowledge and directions, as they were informed. This they had formerly
alleged and our Commissioners had answered (as we do now) that they have
instanced no particulars at all of any such provisions seized. And whereas they
say, that Out forbearance to seize some provisions (which Our Commissioners
alleged in our greatest wants, we forbore to take, though they lay in
Magazines, within Our own Quarters, but took order to send away into Ireland,)
was no excuse for seizing others, they misapply that to be an excuse, which was
alleged as an evidence that We seized none, since we might in Our great want
have seized those if we had been minded to have seized any.

They say again, the service of that Kingdom, was much prejudiced by denying
the Lord Wharton's Commission, of which they have not received satisfaction. To
this it has been already answered, that those Forces were raised for him,
before any Commission demanded from us, and that the Commission for him
proposed to us, was, to have been independent of the Lieutenant of that
Kingdom; Causes (though not satisfactory to them) yet sufficient in themselves
to justify Our re^usall. But besides these, it is apparent the Army which was
brought down against Us, was their raising, that the Lord Wharton was one of
the most active in it, and We had cause to be confident (nor did he fail us
therein) that what Forces he should raise for Ireland, he would employ against
us in England, neither did that service depend upon the Lord Wharton, other
able Officers were appointed over those Forces, whom (if they had as much
affected that service as the Person of the Lord Wharton) they might have
trusted with the Transport of them to Ireland, where others of more experience
and fitter for Conduct, then the Lord Wharton, might have taken the charge of
them. They say further, That it was one end for which the Cessation was made,
that the Forces might be brought hither to Us, out of Ireland, and employed
against the two Houses. The bleeding necessities of the poor English there
(which have been mentioned, and whereof they cannot but be convinced) will best
speak the cause of that Cessation, and the fight of those Soldiers half
starved, when they came over, having neither Clothes to their Backs, nor so
much as Shoes to their Feet, nor any pay to provide either, will witness the
necessity of bringing them over, when there was no subsistence for them in
Ireland, nor use for them there, during the Cessation; And for making use of
them here, how can they quarrel at Our employing Our own English Soldiers,
who should otherwise have disbanded, when they make use of an Army of Scots
against Us.

They have bin told that they brought over out of Ireland the Earl of Leven,
their General, and diverse Scottish Officers, (which they deny not;) and that
before the English Forces brought over, they attempted the bringing once the
Scottish Forces in Ireland, as likewise diverse English Officers there into
this Kingdom; to which all the answer given is, that the Scottish Forces, which
came over, were not sent for. Which as it denies not what is objected, so
neither can it excuse their not sending them back to the service of Ireland,
and employing them here in an unnatural Rebellion against Us.

But whatsoever their own acts or failings have bin in this business of
Ireland, and though apparently the necessities, which caused the Cessation,
were occasioned by the two Houses, yet rather then they shall be guilty of the
blame and neglect therein, Our people must be made to believe, that either
there were no such necessities, or when that is so apparent, then that those
necessities were designed and contrived by a Popish and Prelaticall party,
prevalent with Us, and the supplies denied and stopped by Our Self, and so
that it is reasonable for them to press and insist, (as they do with much
fervor) in their last Paper concerning Ireland, upon their demands for the
settling of the prosecution of the War in themselves, or the Scots, excluding
Us, and that there shall be no further Cessation or Peace made there; (though
the War should continue here,) to have the nomination of the Leivtenant, and
all the great Officers there, and to have Us bound up to assent to whatsoever
acts they shall propose for moneys, or other necessaries for the prosecution of
that War, and if We agree not to these Propositions, We are like to be charged
with countenancing of that Bloody Rebellion.

And therefore (though the unreasonablenesse of those Propositions has been
fully laid open by Our Commissioners ^n their Paper, yet because this of theirs
is framed in answer to those, and the fervency and fluency of their expressions
may make impressions on those who do not warily weigh the matter, We shall
examine what new inforcements they bring to make good those demands.

The prosecution of the War there, though it be demanded (generally) in the
13th Proposition, to be settled in both Houses of the Parliament of England, to
be managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, yet according to their 17th
Proposition, it is to be ordered according to the Ordinance of the 11th of
April, 1644. which is also proposed to be enacted. By that Ordinance the
Scottish General Leven is to command all the Forces in Ireland, both English
and Scottish, and that War is to be managed by a joint Committee, to be named
by the two Houses of England, and the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland;
And the Committees of each Kingdom is to have a negative voice; They insisting
to have the prosecution of the War thus settled, Our Commissioners answered,
That this was in effect to deliver the Kingdom of Ireland into the hands of Our
Subjects of Scotland, and neither agreeable to the rules of honor or prudence.
That it was unreasonable if the War continued here, that We by Our consent to
Act of Parliament for the manageing of that War, and raising moneys for that
purpose, should put so great power into their hands, who during these troubles
may turn that power against Us. And lastly, that if the distractions continued
here, the Forces and Wealth of this Kingdom would be so employed at home, that
the prosecution of that War to the subduing of the Rebels, was impossible,
but probably might be destruction of the remainder of Our good Subjects.

For the power given to Our Scottish Subjects in that Kingdom, Our
Commissioners urged, that General Leven being to Command all the Forces in
Ireland, and the Committee of Scotland having a Negative voice upon difference
of opinion, that War must either stand still to the ruin of Our Subjects
there, or be carried as the Earl of Leven pleased, whose power was not bounded
by any refeerence to Us, or Our Lieutenant of Ireland, no nor to the Houses of
England, and though it had bin answered, that in cases of disagreement betwixt
the Committee, the two Houses might prosecute the War, observing the Treaty of
the sixth of August, and the Ordinance of the 11th of April, yet by referring to
that Ordinance, (which is desired to be enacted) and by that Ordinance the
power being thereby put into the Earl of Leven, and that Committee without
mention of the two Houses, it was apparent the Earl of Leven would not be
bound to observe the directions of the Houses of England by themselves.

But they Reply in this last Paper of theirs, That as the Ordinance of the 11th
of April, 1644. so the Treaty of the 6th of August, 1642. is desired to be
confirmed, by which the Commander of the Scottish Forces in Ireland was to be
answerable to Us, and the two Houses of the Parliament of England, for his
whole deportment. But this is apparently no answer at all, for this Treaty of
the sixth of August, binds not the Coommittee who are to manage that War, and
relates to the Scottish General as General of the Scots only, the other of
April, 1644. being later in time, giving him power also as Commander in chief
over the English Forces in Ireland, and according to this later, he is to
receive his Orders from the Committee, without reference to us or the two
Houses, neither can the two Houses be hereby brought in to have Command over
this Scottish General, or Committee more then Our Selves, whom they intend
wholly to exclude; yet We cannot but observe even upon these Articles of the
Treaty of the sixth of August, how little cause there is to expect this Scottish
General will manage that War for the good of this Kingdom, who being by
those Articles to be answerable to Us, as well as to the two Houses (for then
though the same design was on foot, yet their outward pretenses were somewhat
more modest then now they are) did without directions from Us leave his charge
in Ireland, to bring an Army into England against Us. Well they say at last,
they had (by the 13th Proposition) desited the prosecution of the War to be
settled in the two Houses, and so taking all together, that the Earl of Lev^n
cannot manage that War according to his own discretion: But we must remember
them, the Proposition is not barely to settle the prosecution of the War in
the two Houses, but to settle it in the two Houses, to be managed by the joint
advice of both Kingdoms, and that joint advice is by a joint Committee
according to the Ordinance of the 11th of April, in which Committee they
confess those of Scotland have a Negative Voice, and by the last part of the
17th Proposition, the War of Ireland is to be ordered according to that
Ordinance.

But they say, The Scottish Commander is to receive Orders from the Lieutenant
of Ireland, if a Lord Lieutenant shall be chosen by the two Houses (for a
Lieutenant nominated by Us, is not allowed by them to give Orders to the
Scottish General) This indeed (though not warranted by their Propositions,
upon which nevertheless they insist) yet being admitted, in this latitude
might seem to give some power to the two Houses over the Scotch General in the
manage of the War, as giving the Lieutenant such a power, and by consequence
the two Houses who have power over this Lieutenant. But they say not generally;
that he shall receive Instructions from the Lieutenant, but that he shall
receive Instructions from the Lieutenant in such manner a^ they have set down
in their Paper of the 20th of February, that is, when it shall be necessary for
the good of that Service, that he and the Commander in chief of the Scottish
Army join; but how shall it be for the service that he join with him when he
shall Command no Forces with which he may join, the Scotch General being by
the Ordinance of the 11th of April, to Command all the Forces whatsoever in
Ireland? But admit them to have joined; Then the Scotch General is to receive
Instructions from the Lieutenant, according to the Orders which shall be given
by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, so and no otherwise. Still the case is
the same: The Scottish General is not bound to obey any Orders, but such as
shall come mediately or immediately from the Committee of both Kingdoms. And
(whatsoever evasions and disguises are made to cover it from Our Peoples Eyes)
the Scottish Committee being an equal number, and having an equal share in
the Counsels, and their General having the Command of all the Forces; It is
apparent the whole power over that Kingdom, is in effect to be transferred to
them.

But should We admit that these Propositions did not give so great power in
Ireland to Our Subjects of Scotland, yet how should it be imagined, that We
should put the prosecution of this War in the two Houses in such manner as is
insisted on by them, so long as they maintain a Rebellion against Us in this
Kingdom? It is not denied, but by their authority, diverse Forces raised, and
the Moneys levied for Ireland, were employed against us in England, and upon
the same pretenses, that they made use of those aids (because (as they
allege in their Declaration upon that Subject) that the subsistence of
Ireland, depended upon their welfare here) they may still make use of such
Power as shall be given them for the manage of that War, and raising Moneys
for that purpose against Us in England; neither if a Peace should be concluded
here, could we assent that the prosecution of the war should be settled in the
two Houses, excluding Our Selves as they intend it by those words, The King not
to molest them therein. Queen Elizabeth managed the War in Ireland solely,
when the two Houses were sitting, and excluded them, though we insist not upon
that example, we should be wanting to the trust we have received from God, and
that care of our Subjects which lies upon us (and of which We are to give him
an account) to exclude Our self. They themselves know, great bodies are not so
fit to carry on the war as a few, and therefore they have in a manner given
up their power in this unhappy war at home to their State Committee, whose
resolutions are rather brought to them for Countenance and execution, then for
debate and deliberation.

They tell us, the Parliament of England is a faithful Council to us, and
that we have trusted them with the prosecution of that War, and they
faithfully discharged their parts in it, We wish, though We are willing to be
silent in it, that yet the ruins and desolations of this Kingdom would not
speak to posterity what Counselors those are, who have divested Us of Our
Revenue, Arms, Ships, Power, and even the security of Our person, who have
Armed Our Subjects here, who have brought in the Scots into this Kingdom, to
the tearing up the bowels of it, who have infamously libelled against Us and
Our Consort, who have threatened to depose Us, and impeached Her of Treason, and
who those are, who have denied Peace to this miserable Kingdom, unless We
would consent to their unreasonable destructive Propositions, overturning the
whole frame of government, both in Church and State. They say, and it is true,
We trusted them with the Prosecution of that War, and how faithfully they
discharged it, We will not again repeat, but We never trusted them so, as to
exclude Our Selves, as they now suppose, and if we had relied more on the
judgments and advice of Our Privy Council, and less on theirs, neither that
nor this Kingdom, had been in the condition they now are; It was their
interposition and advice which hindered the transportation of the Army of Irish
Natives out of that Kingdom into Spain (even to Our disreputation abroad, who
had agreed with the Spanish Ambassador to send them over, and he in confidence
of Our performance, had disbursed Money for their transport) and had they been
transported (their stay as it provoked them, so it emboldening and
strengthening the other Irish, we are confident the flames of that Rebellion
would never have broken forth at all, or at most have been so small, as might
suddenly have been extinguished: It was their advice that staid Our going over
thither in person, which probably might have stopped the rage of that war,
and by the blessing of God, would have saved the effusion of much blood, which
was since shed in that Kingdom: It was their unseasonable Declarations at the
beginning of the Rebellion (before the old English and other Papists had
engaged themselves with the Rebels of Vlster) of making it a war of Religion,
and against that connivence which had been used in that Kingdom ever since the
Reformation, and tending to make it a National quarrel, and to eradicate the
whole stock of the Irish (which they now pursue by giving no quarter to those
few of that Nation in England, who never were in that Rebellion, but according
to their duty assist Us their Sovereign) which made the Rebellion so general,
whereas otherwise the old English, as in former times (though Papists) would
have joined against those Rebels. When We had offered in December 1641. That
10000 volunteers should be raised presently in England, for the service of
Ireland, if the House of Commons would declare they would pay them; Instead
thereof, in January following, Propositions were made for the transporting the
Scots into Ireland, and We were advised by the two Houses, to give the Command
and keeping of the Town and Castle of Carickfergus to the Scottish, who were to
be transported thither, and paid by this Kingdom, to which we returned answer,
that we did not approve the same as prejudicial to the Crown of England, and
the service intended, and implying too great trust for auxiliary Forces; yet
afterward because, We perceived the insisting upon it would breed a great
delay in the necessary supply of that Kingdom, we did admit of the advice of
the Parliament in that particular, (and since by the Articles of the 6th of
August 1642. (which though said to be made by Commissioners, authorized by Us
and the Parliament of England, we never were made acquainted with them, till
upon this Treaty almost three years after) both the Towns and Castles of
Carickfergus and Colerane, are left with them as Cautionary) the consequence
whereof was such* that though the service of Ireland was little advanced, or
the poor English Protestants relieved by it, and this Kingdom drayned to pay
those (whose great arrears growing upon that agreement, must be paid out of
Lands in Ireland, where they have so good footing already, or of Our good
Subjects in England, according to their other Propositions) By this means the
Scottish having an Army there, under color of supplying them, Our Arms and
Ammunition were sent into Scotland, for the supply of another Army, to be
brought into England, and the countenance of that Army in Ireland, as it gave
encouragement to some of Our Scottish Subjects, so it overawed others, and was
a means without any the least provocation to those Our ungrateful Subjects, of
bringing of another Army into this Kingdom. where they still remain, to the
utter ruin of many of Our good Subjects, and the probable destruction of the
whole Kingdom. And lastly, it was upon their advice in February 1641. (shortly
after those Propositions tendered for transporting the Scots into Ireland) that
we agree, that the Rebels Lands should be shared amongst the Adventurers, and
the Rebels to have no Pardons, though we then expressly declared, We did it
merely relying upon their Wisdom without further examining, (what we in Our
particular judgment were persuaded) Whether that course might not retard the
reducing of that Kingdom, by exasperating the Rebels, and rendering them
desperate of being received into grace, if they should return to their
obedience. And it is most apparent, that those Propositions, and the Act drawn
upon them, wherein also a further Clause (not observed by Us, but passed, as
conceiving that Act had wholly pursued the Propositions) was inserted, That
every Person, who should make enter into, or take any Compact, Bond, Covenant,
Oath, Promise or Agreement, to introduce, or bring into the said Realm of
Ireland, the Authority of the Sea of Rome, in any case whatsoever, or to
maintain or defend the same, should forfeit his Lands and Goods, (as in case
of Rebellion) were great causes, not only of provoking, bu^ increasing and
encouraging the Rebels: who having no pretense before for that horrid
Rebellion, had now some color to make it a matter of Religion, and so to make
their application to Foreign Princes, and to negotiate with them for
delivering that Kingdom into their hands. We profess Our aversion from their
Religion and hatred to their Rebellion, but though We think them worse
Christians, because they are Rebels, we think them not worse Rebels, because
they are Papists. A Protestant Rebel in the same degree of Rebellion, has
far more to answer, as having more light, and it being more expressly
against the Religion he professes, whereof it has heretofore been a maxim
(though it be now taken for Apocryphal doctrine) not to take up Arms against
their Frince upon any pretense whatsoever. And as we have endeavored by Our
Personal example and otherwise, so we shall still continue, by all good means
to propagate the Protestant Religion, but we are far from that Mahumetane
doctrine, that we ought to propagate Our Religion by the Sword. And though We
shall be most willing to hearken to the advice of Our People Assembled in a
free Parliament, yet we should be wanting to the Trust that God has reposed in
Us, and Our use of that reason with which he has endowed Us, if We should
wholly give up that Kingdom to be managed solely by their Counsels, secluding
Our Selves from all Interest therein, especially when We consider that which
experience has taught Us, if they have the sole power of that War (by which
all the Soldiers and Commanders, being to be nominated and paid, removed and
advanced by them the necessary application (passing by V^) must be made to such
as are powerful with them) how easy a matter it will be for a prevalent
Faction (if they shall have a mind to demand other things hereafter not fit to
be granted) again to bring over an Army raised and paid by them into this
Kingdom, especially so much composed of Our Scottish Subjects. And whereas
they desire further, The nomination of the Lord Lieutenant, and other great
Officers and Judges in that Kingdom (which they also desire in this of
England) they cannot but know, that it must o^ necessity take away all
dependency upon Us, and application to Us, when the power to reward those who
are worthy of public Trust, shall be transferred to others, and having
neither force left Us to punish, nor power to reward, We shall be in effect a
titular contemptible Prince. We shall leave all Our Ministers to the known
Laws of the Land to be tried and punished according to those Laws if they
shall offend, but We cannot consent, to put so great a Trust and Power out of
Us, and we have just cause to conceive, that notwithstanding all their speciou^
pretenses this desire of nomination of those great Officers, is but a cloak to
cover the Ambition of those, who having been the Boutefeux of this Rebellion,
desire to advance themselves and their own Faction. And to that which is said
that Our bad choice of Our Lievtenants of Ireland, was the loss of many
thousand Lives there, and almost of the whole Kingdom from Our Obedience: They
cannot but witness who know that Kingdom, that during the Government there by
Lievtenants of Our Choice, that Kingdom enjoyed more plenty and Peace, then it
ever had since it was under the subjection to the Crown of England; Traffic
by Sea, and Trade by Land increased, Values of Land improved, Shipping
multiplied beyond belief, Never was the Protestant Religion more advanced, nor
the Protestant protected in greater security against the Papists; And We must
remember them, that that Rebellion was begun, when there was no Lieutenant
there, and when the Power and Government, which had been formerly used in that
Kingdom, was questioned and disgraced, when those in the Parliament there, by
whom that Rebellion was hatched, were countenanced in their Complaints and
prosecution.

But they are not content to demand all the power over Ireland, and the
nomination of all Officers, but We must also engage Our Self, to pass such
Acts as shall be presented to Us for raising of Monyes and other necessaries
for that War: Our former readiness to pass Acts for Ireland, because they
were advised by the two Houses, (when they were apparently prejudicial to Our
Self, and contrary to Our own Judgment) might sufficiently satisfy them, We
would make no difficulty to consent to such Acts as should be for the good of
that Kingdom but they have been already told it was unreasonable to make a
general engagement, before we saw the Acts whether reasonable or no, and
whether those other necessaries may not in truth comprehend what is not only
unnecessary, but very inconvenient. But the People they say, who have trasted
them with their Purse will never begrudge what they make them lay out upon that
occasion. The two House^ indeed were entrusted, that Our Subjects should not be
charged without them, but they never were solely trusted by Our Subjects, with
a power to change them, the care that no pressure in that, or any other kind
should be upon Our Subjects, is principally in Us, without whose consent
(notwithstanding the late contrary and unexampled practice) no such charge can,
or ought to be levied, and we ought not to give that consent, ^ut where it is
visible for the good of Our Kingdoms, which upon such an unbounded power of
raising Monyes may fall out otherwise, especially in so unusual a cas^ as
this, where those who must have the sole manage of the War, shall have the
sole command of the Purse, without any ch^ck or control upon them. But they
say again; We have heretofore been possessed against the Parliament, for not
giving away the Money of the Subject when We had desired it, but never yet did
We restrain them from it. It is true, We had no great cause heretofore to
restrain the two Houses from giving the Subjects Money to Us, having found
more difficulty to obtain from them three or four Subsidies, then they have
met with, in raising so many Millions. But Our People cannot think themselves
well dealt with by Us, if We shall consent to put an unlimited power of raising
what Monyes they please, in those Persons, who have drayned more wealth from
them in four years, then We believe all the Supplies given to the Crown in
400 years before have amounted unto.

In the last place, We wish every man to consider how the Rebels in Ireland can
be reduced by War, whilst these unhappy distractions continue here, whilst
contrary Forces and Armies are raised in most parts of this Kingdom, and the
blood of Our People is spils like water upon the ground, whilst the Kingdom in
wasted by Soldiers, and the people exhausted by maintaining them, and (as if
this Kingdom were not sufficient to destroy it self) whilst on Army of Scots
is brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, and maintained at the charg of it*
whilst this Kingdom labors under such a War, how is it possible, that a
considerable supply of men or money can be sent into Ireland?

To this with much fervor of expression they say, It must not depend upon the
condition of Our other Kingdoms to reveng Gods quarrel upon such perfidious
Enemies to the Gospel of Christ, who have embrewed their hands in so much
Protestant blood. That the Cessation is for their advantage, Arms and
Ammunition, and all manner of Commodities may be brought to them. That it is
not fit there be any agreement of Peace or respite from hostility with such
creatures as are not fit to live, more then with Wolves or Tigers, or any
ravenous Beasts, destroyers of mankind.

We are most sensible of the blood and horror of that Rebellion, and would be
glad that either a Peace in this Kingdom, or any other expedient might furnish
Us with means and power to do Justice upon it. If this cannot be, We must not
desperately expose Our good Subjects to their Butchery without means or
possibility of protection, God will in his due time revenge His Own Quarrel,
in the mean time His Gospel gives Us leave in case of War to sit down, and
cast up the cost, and estimate Our power to go through with it, and in such
case where prudence advises, it is lawful to propose conditions of Peace,
though the War otherwise might justly be pursued. And surely as a Cessation in
Ireland may be some advantage to the Rebels, as all Cessations in their nature
are to both parts, they having thereby time and liberty to procure Arms and
Ammunition to be brought to them: So it is not only for the advantage, but
necessary preservation of Our good Subjects there, whose bleeding dangers call
for Our bowels of Charity and Compassion, by suspending the rage of the
Adversary by this Cessation, till means may be found to turn their hearts, or
to disable their malice from pursuing their cruelty, to the utter ruin of that
remainder of Our good Subjects there, it being more acceptable to God and man
to preserve a few good men from destruction, then to destroy a multitude,
though in the way of Justice, and perhaps a Cessation may bring some of those
Rebels to reflect upon their offenses, and to return to their duty, all are not
in the same degree of guilt, all were not authors of, nor consenting to the
Cruelties committed, some were enforced to comply with, or not resist their
proceedings, some were seduced upon a belief the Nation was designed to be
eradicated, and the War not against the Rebellion only, but their Religion. The
War destroys all alike without distinction, (even innocent Children have
suffered, not by the Rebels only) and all are not Tigers, or Wolves, there may
be grounds of mercy to some, though no severity be excessive toward others;
However We cannot desire the d^struction, even of the worst of those Irish
Rebels, so much as We do the preservation of the poor English remaining there;
But should make choice rather, to save the Rebels, for preserving the lives of
those poor Protestants, then destroy them to ruin the Rebels. And therefore
exceeding strange it is to Us, and we are sor^y to find, that any English men
(who have seen this their Native Country heretofore, (even in Our time)
flourishing beyond most of the Kingdoms and Churches in the world, and now
most hideous and deformed, weltring in the blood of her own Children, and if
this War continue, like to be a perpetual spectacle of desolation,) should
express, that they desire war in Ireland, as much as they do peace here, no
more valuing the sparing of English blood here, then they do the effusion of
the blood of the Rebels in Ireland. They say indeed* they are willing to lay
out their Estates and Lives, both for the war in Ireland, and peace in this
Kingdom, but withal they say, They have made Propositions for both, if Our
Commissioners would agree to them: These are the conditions they offer, neither
peace is to be had here, without agreeing to their Propositions, nor that War
in Ireland to be managed, but according to those Propositions, such
Propositions, as apparently tend to the ruin of the Church, to the subversion
of all Our Power, to the setting up a new frame of popular government, to the
destruction of Our Loyal and true-hearted Subject^; Propositions, which
associate Our Subjects of Scotland in their Counsels and power, and invest
them in a great share of the Government and wealth of this Kingdom, and render
both the wealth and Power of Ireland, to be at their command. These
Propositions they insist upon, and for the obtaining these, they are resolved
to engage the Lives and Estates of Our poor People in this unnatural
Rebellion. But We trust God Almighty, will open the Eyes and the Hearts of Our
People, not to assist them any longer against Us in the shedding innocent Blood
in this War. And We cast Our Selves on him, waiting his good time for the
restoring the Peace of Our Kingdoms, and Our deliverance from these Troubles,
which at length We are assured he will give unto Us.

The material Faults escaped, are these.
Page 8. lin. 14. read public debts and damages. p. 9. l. 13. r. In
Commissioners, p. 52. l. 3 r. proposed by us to your Lordships, p. 55. in the
marg^r. no 164. for 166, p. 57. r. conference by your Lordships, p. 98. l. 16.
r. perused for produced, p. 108. l. 2. r. of Scotland, p. 144. in the marg. r.
184. for 185. p. 180. r. denied for deemed, p. 205. against the last line put
no 136.

FINIS.

