THE Fullness and Freeness OF GODS GRACE IN JESUS CHRIST; DECLARED In the
Point of Election, by a middle way between Calvin and Arminius, and different
from them both, In an uniforme Body of Divinity.

By Francis Duke.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Oulton and Gregory Dexter, Anno Dom. 1642.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
GENTLE READER,
IN this Treatise, you have the general scope of sacred Scriptures, cleared
from Genesis the first, to Revelations the last; and to induce you to read it
without prejudice, you shall find this encouragement, that there is nothing
which will lead you to arrogate to your self that which is not yours, nor to
derogate from Gods glory, which ever of right is his, and also to induce you to
read it heedfully, here is Gods good will intended to you, whether you are an
Heathen or Christian, within the confines of Christendom, or in the remotest
parts of the world; and to either without difference in respect of the end,
viz. eternal life, although different in respect of the means leading to that
end, the which difference you shall find distinctly and clearly manifested
from sacred Scriptures: therefore apply your mind to prudence in true
godliness, that is, according to your light, pitch upon the right end, and
then by patience in weldoing, orderly apply the means to the end, because to
this prudence, our Savior has by promise entailed his further assistance
herein, saying, I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find out the knowledge of
witty inventions; if thou keep them within thee, they shall withal be fitted in
thy lips, Prove. 22. verse 18. and Chap. 8.12.

Yours in CHRIST JESUS, F. D.

The general Method of the whole BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF the first estate of man.
Nature perfect rendered Adam a fourefold good. 1. His Personal perfections. 2.
A continued support of the same. 3. With the parts of the whole Creation, Adam
had an oneness or selfenesse, from whence in him did the second Table of the
moral Law originally spring. 4. The perfections of the whole creation led Adam
to a perfect union with God in the original of the first Table of the moral
Law, and also to a perfect righteousness and holiness.
CHAP. II. Of the second Estate of man.
Man in his perfect nature entered into a covenant of works with God, which was
his second Estate, in which is declared these four particulars. 1. What the
place was wherein this work was to be done. 2. What the figures of that place
were in respect to the work in the Covenant. 3. What Adams obedience in the
work of the Covenant was. 4. What was the intended end in the Covenant.
CHAP. III. Of the third Estate of man.
Opening the State of the world in the fall of Adam, wherein is handled: 1.
What we lost. 2. What we lost not. 3. What we found: first, the evil of
sin; secondly, the evil of punishment.
CHAP. IIII. Of the fourth Estate of man.
1. That the fallen world was redeemed and restored by the second Adam. 2. God
appointed him so to be, and so to do before the world was. 3. That in the
point of time when the first Adam fell from the work of the Covenant, then the
Lord Jesus as the second Adam, entered into the same work. 4. That this
entrance removed for ever that judgment which upon the fall was to pass upon
the world to execution, so as never man perished for the same. 5. By Christ the
world together with all mankind was then estated to go on, traveling toward
that perfection it lost in Adams fall. 6. Foureteen Objections against the
premises are answered.
CHAP. V.
Wherein is laid down a fifth general point, scil. That Gods proceedings in
this fourth estate of man, is intending and extending eternal life to all and
every individual of mankind alike, without any personal respect- through all
ages, the which point is referred to three heads. 1. From the time that Adam
was cast out of the garden of Eden to Abraham's time. 2. From Abraham's to
Christ's coming in the flesh, and manifested in the Gospel. 3. From that time
to his coming to judgment the first part of time is handled and finished in
this Chapter. The second part of time is handled and finished in the sixth
Chapter, and ninth Chapter to the Romans is expounded. The 7th. Chapter is
answer to a question propounded at the end of the 6th. Chapter, viz. in what
estate for eternal life stood all the Gentiles or Heathens till they were
called to Christ by the Gospel. The eighth Chapter is an introduction to the
third part of time. The ninth Chapter opens what was Gods extraordinary call
of the Gentiles in the third part of time. The 10th. 11th. 12th. Chapters
opens what was, and is Gods ordinary proceedings in the third part of time,
and shall be, till time shall be no more, and in the 12th. Chapter is answered
13. Objections.
A Table containing the Particular contents of this TREATISE.
THe Covenant which God made with Adam was only it which originally gave
mankind right and power to inherit the heavenly glory. Page 10. 11. How by
creation the first Adam was made a living soul, and how by the covenant he was
made a quickening spirit, the which quickening spirit is now only originally
from the second Adam. page 12, 13. That the two globes of this inferior world
shall be changed into a nature, for kind near to the spiritual nature of the
glorified bodies of the Saints, toward which it groningly travelleth with them.
pag^ 34, 3^. In Adams fall we lost all good that is communicated to us by the
creation, and also that intended by God for us, by instituting the Covenant, as
appears, by comparing Gods proceedings in our redemption by Christ, Chap. 4.
p. 17. 25, 26. By Gods justice in the covenant for Adams sin we were more
deeply dead in sin then now we can be, although twice dead in sin, and
plucked up by the roots. page 20 The manner how God cast Adam out of the Garden
of Eden distinctly explained. p. 48 The grounds why God so loved the fallen
world that he gave his Son the second Adam Christ Jesus to redeem it. page
40. 41. That man now sins not against God by the rule of that covenant then
made with the first Adam. page 39. When we in the fall were internally and
totally devils, yet in the restoration of the fallen world by the promised
seed God put into the nature of man an internal principle disposing him to
come to receive his gift of faith and salvation in Christ. page 28 Gods
distinct proceedings to Cain and Abel, page 95 Man was justified before faith,
and without it. page 32 Faith and works foreseen nor any respect to man's
person was any ground why God accepted or elected man to eternal blessedness.
page 33, 61, 65 All mankind dying in Infancy or natural Idiots, or the like,
are saved by Christ, and the grounds why. page 36. 37, 38. 44. 45 How by
tradition, the ten Fathers before the flood by belief of truth, reached the
Oracle of life from hand to hand through their generations. page 53. 54 That
God would rather have glorified his mercy in the salvation of the old world
then his Justice in their destruction, yet all that perished in that flood
perished not eternally. p. 55 That upon Noah his offering in a figure Christ's
satisfactory sacrifice, God renewed his mercy universally to the world. page
56, 57 A particular description how Noah's first offspring carried themselves
to God ungratefully for that mercy, and how God proceeded against them for
that. page 58 From whence all hellish Paganism did originally spring. page 59
Because of man's apostasy from God in the object of justification, therefore
he confined the Oracle which conveyed that object to narrow bounds three
times. page, ibid. What the number of eight did signify in reference to Noah.
page 56 In what sense Christ is the Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe. page ibid. That God the second time predestined man in Christ by
covenant with Abraham, man being by his universal apostasy then fitted to
destruction. page 60 61 In what sense God hated Esau and loved Jacob, p. 65.
72, 73 That the Church of the Gentiles shall never totally depart from Christ,
as has the Church of the Jews. p. 122. 123 In what sense God has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. page 74 How man comes now to be
necessitated to sin. p. 83. 84, 85 What most properly is Gods Book of Life.
page 88 That in heaven amongst the Saints there is no difference of degrees of
glory. page 89 90 That God gave rules how he would have man put Christ to
death, so as he would be well pleased with them that did it. page. 82. 83 That
the Saints faith is not the condition of the covenant of grace, page 87. 88.
The Law of Moses distinctly explained. page 67 What absurdities do follow the
misapprehending of Moses Law. page 78. 79 What made the way to eternal life
narrow to mankind, yet in that narrow way man might, and some did attain
eternal life. Chap. 7. That God directed the second Adam as well as the first
by Allegories to his eternal happiness in the work of the worlds redemption,
to which he was borne, in five relations. P. 100 A definition what that truth
is, to which Christ was the faithful and true witness. page 101 What
righteousness of Christ it is, which is imputed or accounted to man in
general, or to the Saints more special. page 113 That God never reprobated
man personally to unavoydable damnation. page 112. 113 That his pouring out of
his spirit extraordinarily upon all flesh was twofold. page 115. Of the Jews
rejection in wrath. page 85. 86 Of the Jews reception to mercy. page 86. 87 Of
the Lords Supper, or in what sense Christ's flesh is meat indeed, and his blood
is drink indeed. page 66 Of Baptism. page 37. 38 A definition when the spirit
of a man under the covenant of grace is dead in sins and trespasses. page.
121 A definition what man is a righteous man, Chap. 11. A threefold degree of
justifying faith. page 128 Justifying faith defined, and also the perfection of
it. page 131. 132 Other faiths distinguished from justifying faith page 130 In
what sense Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck. page
123. 124 The different operations of justifying faith perfect and imperfect.
page 138, 139 What reward God renders, to the Saints for their good and evil
works done in the body, page 140. 141 142 The manner how God perfecteth
Justifying faith in the Saints. pag^ 134 to 138 That the natural liberty of
the will, is no bar to keep man from an undissoluble union with God in the
object of justification. page 150 151 Of Manass^s, Salomons, Paul's and Peter's
different backslidings. page 149. 150 God loved Abraham, Daniel and David,
being considered personally, no more then the persons of other men generally.
page 150. 151 In what sense the Saints reigned with Christ a thousand years.
page 166. In what sense justification is referred to faith. page 77. That the
will of man is no more freed from sin and free to righteousness, then it is
freed by Christ, therefore to attribute any thing well done by man from the
force of his pure naturalls absurd. page 150. 151 That God willed not Adams
fall to the damnation of man, yet God wills the damnation of all that perish
eternally. page 150. 154 A brief description of the Antichrist. p. 155. 156,
157 From the whole Treatise, as opening the maine scope of the Scriptures, is
definitively laid down what was Gods decree before the world was, after the
counsel of his own will, concerning the eternal state of mankind. page 167.
168
Errata.
PAge 5 line 15. for God read good, p 6. l. 32. erfections r. perfections. p.
7. l. 4. boded, r. lodged. p. 11. l. 12. Adaras. r. Adams. p. 13. l. 42. farth,
r. earth. p. 19. l. 36. conditi^n, r. condition. p. 23. cap. 4. l. 5. after
work, r. of. p. 73. in marg. untorne r. unborne. p. 79. l. 29. blot out far.
p. 86. in marg. external, r. eternal. p. 93 l. 25. wrath r. worth. p. 99. l.
9. type r. high. p. 114. l. 8. uncircumcised r. circumcised. p. ib. l. 29. God.
r. Gods. p. 117. l. 14. at Ephesus. r. to the Ephesians.

A TREATISE OF FREE GRACE.
CHAP. I. Opening the first Adams pure Naturals, which was his first Estate.
THe first Adam in this world, passed through four Estates: two before his
fall; the third was his fall; the fourth was that estate after his fall.

The first produced him good, and not evil; and this was the estate of the
creation.

The second propounded to him good and evil, and this was the State of the
Covenant between God and him.

The third was his transgression, namely, his fall; and this produced him the
loss of all good, and an hereditary possession of evil totally and eternally.

The fourth was the State of the Restoration of the world by the second Adams
Redemption, and this propounded to him and all mankind good and evil.

The Estate of the felicity of the Cre^tion produced to Adam a fourefold good:

First his Personal perfections: secondly, his continual support of the same:
thirdly, an oneness or selfenesse with the parts of the whole creation:
fourthly, the perfections of the whole creation, led his reasonable soul in
love by his senses to a perfect union with God: Of these in their order.

First, his Personal Perfections are described by Moses, Genesis 2 7 in three
particulars; first, the Lord God formed man of the dust of the earth; and that
was the perfection of his body: secondly, he breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life, and that was his souls creation by infusion: thirdly, man
became a living soul that is completely composed in his Vegetative, Sensitive,
and Rationalls: or in his Personal perfections, rightly disposed to operate
according to that estate; so that Adam might truly say to God of his
workmanship in him, I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made; mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well, Psalm.
139. verse 14.

Secondly God rendered to him by the whole perfections of the creation, a
continued supportation of his Personal perfections, and therefore he made all
first, and man last, Genesis 1.26. implying man could not subsist one minute It is
true, man now subsists, but not perfect in nature; but as the creation is
subject to vanity, so is the body of man.
in his Personal perfection out of it; Therefore as the spangled sky with
Lamps of light in their order, was of his House but the seiled roof: so also
the earth with it is most perfect fragrancie and ornaments, was but the pavement
of his habitation.

And as the creatures vegetable being his appointed food, rendering their
spirit or life to his nutrimentall support, so also the virtuall force of the
celestial and terrestrial globe, in a mutual efflux, did not only with
their most sweet imbreathings, internally maintain that compound of Adams sweet
an^ subtle life in his Personal perfections; but also to his body externally
naked, by their mutual touch, was to it raiment, not only comfortable, but
also honorable and glorious: for (says the Text) They were both naked, the
man and the woman, and were not ashamed; implying the foresaid support, as
needing no other, Gen s. 2. verse. 25.

Thirdly, an oneness or selfenesse with the parts of the whole Creation; It is
true, Earth, Air, Water and Fire, were not the nature of Adam, yet every one
of their natures was in his, as the principles of his Elementary body, and so
were to him as himself.

Again, the nature and lives of vegetable Plants and Trees, was not the nature
of Adam; yet their kind of natures and lives were resident in his: as in the
growth of his bodily stature the nails of his fingers, toes, and other parts,
as parts of himself.

Again, the nature and lives of sensitive Creatures were not the nature of
Adam, as in the Beasts and Birds and other of that general nature; yet their
kinds of nature was in his: as in his touch, taste, hearing, smelling and
seeing, as parts of himself; but the woman's nature was his, and his hers; as
flesh of his flesh, a^^ bone of his bone, and so the most proper root to
produce their own kind.

And from this universal oneness or selfenesse of natures did naturally The
first original of the second Table of the moral law.
spring in the mind of Adam in his pure Naturalls, the second Table of the
moral Law, namely, To love thy Neighbor as thy self.

As for the Essence of Adams reasonable soul, although he knew it far more
then we do ours, yet he knew it not but by it is effects: So also, the
intrinsecall forms of all creatures, although he knew them by their effects
more then we can, and in that respect saw a kind of selfenesse of the souls
of all creatures with himself far more then we can; yet in respect of their
specificating form, which internally gave this thing to be this, and that to
be that.

This to him was invisible: as was his own reasonable soul, which was his
intrinsecall form primarily specificating him from other creatures.

And the reason why the internal form or soul, or being of all creatures
even to the being of a stone is invisible, is this, because man's reasonable
soul being involved in an Elementary body, although perfect, is clouded to
perceive his own nature, or the like: For as Gods essential perfection, by
reason of his unmeasurable perfections, is removed far from sense and weak
reason; and therefore unperceiveable and invisible to man; so also is the
manner known only to God, how all things subsist in him, and receive the
continuation of their subtle lives and beings individually.

And the universal ground of this selfenesse between all creatures and Adam
in the creation, is this; because the whole creation consisting of many parts,
was but one effect or offspring of God, as his Generation; yet not by any
derivation of his Essence essentially, but by his powerful production by
creation wondrously.

As first, from a mere nothing to a formlesse mass, and from thence to that
perfection which then it was, and so now all things subsist and continue in
him, but the manner how, is invisible and unperceiveable to man; if to Adam in
his innocence, much more now to all mankind, but we must believe it, because
God has said it, Acts 17. verse 28.

Fourthly, the perfections of the whole creation, led Adams reasonable soul,
by his senses, to a perfect union of love in God, which was his most proper
blessedness in the state of creation: for although the souls infusion was the
best o his being; yet it was no part of his blessedness, for that was but the
uniting of two created natures to make his personal being, which a man may
have, and be accursed.

But this was the union of the creature with the Creator, by perfect love in a
mutual concordance; for as God created Adam fitly and rightly disposed to
operate to God as his chiefest good, so also God did excitively draw him to
this union by leading him, from the effect to the cause, from the creation to
the Creator as from the drop to the Ocean.

For God to Adam was not only transparently agreeable (by the perfection of
the creation) to his senses, but also to his understanding and his will: first
to his understanding, by the truth of that perfection; and secondly to his will
in the perfection of goodness.

For, first to his understanding, by all his senses was conveyed the truth of
Gods power and wisdom, in the wonderful composure of all creatures, in their
several shapes, natures, kinds, qualities and virtues, harmoniously amyable,
but chiefly Adams personal perfections so beautiful, and his reasonable
soul, the mirror of Gods work of power and wisdom; and all jointly together
gave Adam a concludent proof, that God in himself was infinitely beyond all
this that he had communicated to the perfection of the creation, and therefore
this demonstrative Principle of truth was agreeable to the natural property of
his understanding, which naturally looks at truths.

Secondly, also to his will was an agreeableness in goodness: First in
respect of the things themselves; all good, yea very good by Gods own
testimony: Secondly to Adam as an Ocean of good universally terminating all
their forces and virtues of their perfections to his harmonising support, as
before is declared.

Again, Adam himself being both in nature and authority over all creatures,
as their Lord and King, (under God) so that by his senses, to his understanding
and will, was declared the good will of God to him in all, by all and above all
creatures.

Therefore here was an agreeableness, universally to his will, which naturally
looked at God as the eye does follow the light; So that if Adam was created in
knowledge, after the Image of him that created him (as certainly he was) then
man's original righteousness in his pure naturals was this, namely, Col. 3.10.
Ephesians. 4.24.
man Man's original righteousness.
operating understandingly from the effect to the cause, from the whole
creation to the Creator, according to the rules of the perfections of the
creation, as to him in whom he and they did live, move, and had their being.

The reason why thus to operate, was his natural righteousness, is, because
it was right according to the perfection of that truth which shined in the
perfections of the creatures to him.

Again, his holiness in his pure naturalls was this: his operating according
to the perfections of the creatures in the Man's original holiness.
purity of his perfect love to God, in all, through all, and above all, living
not so much amongst the perfection of the creatures, where he was as in God
whom he so loved, and the reason why, in these perfections of love was
contained his natural holiness, was this: Because by it he did not only set
God above all creatures, but also by it he did rightly dedicate himself to
Gods use only, and alone with all his soul, with all his heart, and with all
his strength; for it is the property of love to add to the perfection of the
thing loved, more then to it self, as we see in Jonathan and Moses, etc.

That Adam had this in the perfection of it, is proved thus; if all love in men
generally does arise from that agreeableness which is between the subject and
the object; as certainly it does, then in Adam most of all, because to him (the
Subject) God (the Object) did shine in all the perfection of the creation in a
suitable agreeableness, in all things in all respects, as before is proved.

Therefore in Adam there was the truth of that perfect love to God again; and
not only the truth but the uttermost extent of love in the strength thereof:
for if the beauty of the Object being transparant to the Subject, will draw
forth all the strength, which is in the Subject to it self, as in I^nathan to
David, 2 Samuel 1.26. Exodus 32.32.
and Moses to God then much more did it draw forth Adams love to God, as the
most transparent object of beauty, being an object of infinite goodness
excitively drawing out his soul in all his strength in a liking and uniting
affections in all, through all, and above all.

And from this Principle in his mind did naturally The first original of the
first Table of the mo^all law.
spring the first Table of the moral Law, namely, to love God with all the
soul, and with all the strength: and here I will note these five observations
for conclusion of this Chapter.

First, that man in his innocence, in the perfections of his righteousness and
holiness was but the receiver of all his good; as his being passively by
creation; and his blessedness actively by reception, as by his sense, his
reason, will and affections, he enjoyed God.

And what had he that he had not received? for it is proper to God alone to
be being and blessedness in himself and of himself; Therefore both men and
Angels are but receivers of all their good from God.

Secondly, here observe, that the perfection of the creation in the estate of
pure naturalls, had no dependancie upon Adams Personal perfections; or his
perfect operations, whereby they could keep, or lose their created perfections
by him; therefore it was from some other cause, whereby they became subject to
fall into vanity; for in this estate Adam depended upon them for the support of
his Personal perfections and operations, but not they upon him; for they were
created in their flourishing perfections before Adam was: All being made, first
in their immediate dependancie upon God; but he last: therefore in this estate
they had no such dependancie upon him.

Thirdly, here observe, that man perfect in holiness and righteousness, did
not by false apprehensions, interpose the good in the Creatures, betwixt God
and him, to cut off his blessed union of love to God, nor God from him, for he
by that perfect love loded himself, and all that created good in Go^ from whom
it came, and so returning to God the glor^ of all his works which he had
created and made, and so gave God full content.

Fourthly, observe that in the estate of perfect Creation of God established
his Glory to return to him, in a mutual concordancie of man's good, and no
otherwise; and therefore the state of Creation produced man good, and no evil;
for God looked upon all, and saw it was all good, as liking it well.

Fifthly observe, that although Adam did believe God to be being and
blessedness in himself and of himself, and communicating Adam was not an
estate of Faith, for Adams belief of all this, did arise to him by natural
demonstration, from the perfections of the Creation, according with the
perfection of his Senses, and Reason, and so to his will.

Therefore all to him was but Natural; but in an estate of Faith, to live by
Faith in God.

First for the thing believed, it must be Supernatural.

Secondly, man his mind must depend for the attayning God, which only declares
the thing to him, but so was not this Estate, and therefore this was not an
Estate of Faith to Adam.

But his next estate to this, was an Estate of Faith; namely, the work of the
Covenant, which is the next ground to be treated of.

And so much for Adams first Estate, being naturally perfect in all.

CHAP. II. Opening the Covenant between God and man.
GOD having revealed to Moses the Creation of the World, he in the next place
makes known to him a Garden, that was Planted by God himself, without the
help of man, in which place comes in the second Estate of Adam. before his
fall, and his entrance into this Garden, was to enter into Covenant with God,
and God with him, for good and evil, for this Estate did not propose good only
to Adam, as did the Estate of Creation Adam was by God fitly enabled to perform
the Covenant, in the behalf of God and the world, before God called him to so
weighty a b^sinesse; and the reasons why God led Adam from one perfect State to
a higher, a^e primarily two, first because the created perfections of this
world, could not direct or admit him to enjoy God, answerable to his vast
comprehension, being a Spirit so near the Angelical nature: secondly, because
God was delighted to receive his glory at as high a pitch, as his reasonable
creature could apprehend or comprehend its felicity, to all eternity.
; but good and evil, was in the Covenant propounded unto him. I call it a
Covenant,

First, because here was Conditions between God and Adam for life and death; I
say for life and death, to Adam and all mankind comprehended in general,
under the names of good and evil, good to be rendered, if he did obey the
Rule of the Covenant, evil if he did disobey it.

Secondly, those conditions were agreed on by Adam, with a full consent, he
being then not only in the perfections of the second Table of the Law, as to
love his Neighbor as himself; but also in the perfection of the first Table
of the Law, namely, in the truth, and utmost extent of his love to God. with
all his Soul^, and with all his Strength; therefore he readily concluded this
Covenant with God for the world in this different Estate from the former.

But for the clear opening of this Second Estate, I will propound four things.

First, what this Garden was.

2 What its signification was.

3 What Adams obedience in it was.

4 What was the end God intended by Adams obedience in this Covenant,

First, this Garden was but a part of the Terrestrial Globe, for says the
Text, The Lord God planted a Garden Eastward, in Eden, therefore but a part.
Genesis 2.8.

This Garden was planted by God with Plants, some for Adams delightful
consolation, and some for his nutrimentall sustentation; for, (says the Text)
Out of the ground, the Lord God made to grow every tree pleasant to sight, and
good for food, Verse 9.

In the midst of the Garden, God planted two trees distinguished God caused to
grow the tree of life also in the midst of the Garden, and the tree of
knowle^ge of good and evil Genesis 2.8.

Into this Garden came a River to replenish it in fruitfulness, And a River
went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it was parted, and came
into f^ure heads, etc. Genesis 2.10.

This Plantation or Garden being thus finished, Adam by God was thither
conveyed, and the perfections thereof, was to depend upon his operations; for
says the Text. The Lord God took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden
to dress it, and to keep it, Verse 5.

And so much for what this plantation was.

Certainly this was for some further end and use, then

And the signification in general, was but this; that as in future time the
land of Canaan, with all it is fruitful splendour, did prefigure the celestial
Canaan. As to the second Adam, as appears Chap. 8. So this to Adam in the
beginning of time did prefigure the same Angelical felicity of Divine glory in
the Heaven of heavens.

From this ground God made the Garden to excel the glory of the whole
terrestrial globe, that by faith Adams soul might be raised to work by love
to God, feeding on Angels food by belief of truth.

So much for the general signification.

Again, more particularly: First, whereas God did not commit the whole
terrestrial globe, but only this part, (as the glory of the world) to Adams
dressing and keeping.

This figuratively implies, that now by virtue of Gods Ordinance, the creation
had it is dependence for it is good, natural and supernatural; or for an evil
equivalently contrary upon Adams operations in this Covenant. And here came in
the only ground, how by Adam the creation could be raised higher, or lose it is
supernatural perfections, and become subject to vanity, Romans 8.

Adam, that he (to his natural posterity, in obeying the work of the Covenant
by belief of truth) should (from Divine Justice) be as a tree in his branches
of natural perfections, growing up to a celestial life; or as a flourishing
tree of eternal life. But now this tree of life is only in Christ Jesus the
second Adam, to all right believers, Rev. 2.7.

Adams faith Gods justice, as pure streams of waters of celestial life; for
his obedience (according to the Covenant) should successively run down to
render eternal life: first by faith, and secondly by fruition to his
posterity, through all generations to the last of mankind that was to descend
of his loins; but now this River only issues from the second Adam in the
doctrine of truth and mercy conveying Gods gift of his imputed righteousness
as the tree of life, Rev. 22.12.

Adams faith summarily, all contained in the Covenant; that is, the Knowledge
of good equivalent to Angels; or the knowledge of evil equivalently contrary
in either, as he did obey or disobey.

And the ground why God instituted this Garden thus, in all these
prefigurations and significations was this: Because, the heavenly glory to
Adams terrestrial perfections, was supernatural; for it is one thing for Adam
to k^ow by the perfections of the creation; that God was able to create a
supernatural glory, he appearing by it Infinite in Wisdom, Power and
Goodness.

And another thing, that he had created it, and would bring him to it, if he
did obey the rule of the Covenant; for the perfections of the creation did
demonstrate to Adam, that God was able to do such a thing, but no more but the
Covenant by God Word was expressed for a contrary evil.

And all those prefigurations and significations from the agreeableness of the
type with the antitype, did make known to Adam, that the supernatural glory
was made, and in being also from the word knowledge of good, that he should
ascend to enjoy it to all eternity, if he did obey the rule of the Covenant,
or an evil equivalently contrary if he did disobey; and therefore, because
supernatural, all was needful to strengthen Adams faith, to withstand the
temptation, in point of trial, See this point cleared to the 13. Objection in
Chap. 12.
for God does nothing in vain.

And so much for what the Garden or Plantations signification was, with respect
to Adams work in the Covenant.

Thirdly, now Adam was to obey two rules in the Covenant; Of every tree of the
Garden thou may eat freely, Genesis 1.29. Genesis 2.16.

The negative rule was it by which he was to improve his strength of body and
mind to God by obedience, namely, the forbearing to eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil; but of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat, etc. Genesis 2.17.

And this rule led him to be both passively and actively obedient, passively in
two things:

First, although in the perfection of the creation, all things good for food
was due to him by Gods allowance without restraint, yet in this Garden or
Plantation, by this rule he was to suffer this restraint, namely, to deny
himself to eat of the fruit of this Tree of knowledge of good and evil, upon
pain of most dreadful consequences; for, says the Text, In the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall certainly die the ^^^ath, Verse 17.

Although in the perfection of the creation, God rendered this Garden the
obedience of these rules bound them to suffer the imbreathings of the assaults
of Satan that evil one in point of trial. As did the second Adam, Luke 4.3,
2.3.4.


And here lay the life of their obedience; for without this assault their
trial had been no trial to the improvement of their natural perfections of
righteousness and holiness to Gods Covenant in point of good and evil.

And again, this negative rule led them to active obedience in two
particulars: first the fruits of this tree of good and evil being naturally
good food, it required of them a diligent observation of their natural
appetite, lest it might dispose them to transgress the rule of the Covenant.

This rule led them in stead of feeding their bodies with the fruit of this
tree, to feed their souls by belief of the signified knowledge of good,
equivalent to Angels in glory; or with the signified knowledge of evil
equivalently contrary in eternal misery.

So much for this point, what Adams obedience in the Covenant was.

Lastly, the intended end of Gods Covenant with Adam, was of great consequence,
for it respected God, all mankind, the World, and the Devil; for what if
Satan's lie to the woman, pretended that there was no truth in Gods word, for
their death, if they did transgress, saying, ye shall not die at all: and
what if Satan did make God to them to be but a mere imposture, as only
pretending, that Angelical good, but never intended it, for to the woman (in
the Serpent) he said, God does know that in the d^y that ye eat thereof, your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. He not
denying a higher good intended in the Covenant, but implying Gods command, was
the only thing that kept him from attayning it.

I say, what of all this? for if he had (in belief of Gods word) abstayned
from eating the fruit, according to the rule of the Covenant, then they had not
only freed themselves, from being murdered, the world had not been destroyed,
Gods word had not been nullified Satan had not (in the belief of his lies) bin
magnified b^t on the contrary, from their belief of truth working to God by
love; God (over all by his word of truth) had bin glorified in two respects. 1
Because So that Gods just^ce would have bin glorified to all eternity in the
first, demonstrating his righteousness and goodness in the eternal felicity
of all mankind with Angels. 2. righteously demonst^ating his wrath in the
Apostate Angels o^ Devils, by Adams repeling their lies, yet not but that
justice precede^tly did in the right of Gods glory, pass to immediate
execution on those Apostat Angels, and by their murdering of Adam, Gods
justice from thence did sup^rabound upon them by Gods giving way to them to
bruise the heel of Christ in the aggravation of their malice, so tha^ ^hey
we^e not only ^^cluded Angels glory at the (...) but shall d^^w upon themselves
the lat^tude of Gods Attributes, glorious in wisdom power, and his i^efull
justice to all eternity, when God shall loose their chains of darkness by
which they are reserved unto that day, at the remembrance whereof they tremble.
by his Justice according to the Covenant, the natural perfections of the
Creatures, together with man in his pure Naturalls, for wages to Adams work
should have received a quickening Spirit, and man in the perfection of faith; So
travailing together toward their celestial perfections. 2. And Satan's lies
(by belief of Gods truth nullified, and consequently Satan most justly
condemned, for a liar, and murderer of mankind, the destroyer of all the
works of God, and adjudged for a most impudent blasphemer of God, and all this
would immediately have followed upon Adams perfect repelling of Satan's
temptations.

For the Justice of the Covenant was express, for immediate execution, even
the same day and minute, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely
die the death. Genesis 2.17.

Again, a second reason is drawn from the nature of the Covenant, which was
for good and evil, therefore no middle Estate, but good or evil immediately,
even as upon Adams offense, judgment passed upon all to condemnation: So on
the contrary, if Adam had obeyed the Rule of the Covenant, there would have bin
produced a posterity through all Generations, ascending successefully to the
Elect Angels in Angelical glory in perfect union, in soul and body, for the
Covenant was for all mankind alike in good.

But it may be objected, man's body in its pure naturalls, being but flesh and
blood,

Although man's natural body could not inhabit that Kingdom as St. Paul
affirms, 1 Cor. 15.50. Paul affirms. 1 Cor. 15.43. And therefore it could
both ascend and inherit with Angels; for if Adam had ^^ept the negative Rule
of the Covenant as is declared, then as in the perfection of nature, he was
made a living Soul, so in the justice of the Covenant, God would have made him
to his posterity a quickening Spirit, not only in the perfection of Faith,
living a spiritual life in his pure Naturalls, but would also have quickened
his natural Elementary body, with a spiritual Nature, powerful to ascend and
inherit the glory of Angels, successively to the last man that should live on
the Farth; but now in the second Adam only, is this twofold quickening Spirit
found, who only is the Resurrection and the life of man, as St. Paul affirms 1
Cor. 15.45.

Adams body and soul were separated, and his body raised from the grave, not a
spiritual, but a natural body of flesh and blood, therefore man's natural
body of flesh and blood, does inherit the Kingdom of God in the glory of
Angels.

The second Adam must be considered as a sinner, not in his nature, God, given
us imputatively in him.

But if the first Adam had kept the Covenant, then no sin; therefore no
separation of God from him, or the soul from God which was his death, nor of
Soul from Body, which was but the shadow of death, but he should have ascended
in perfect union of love, natural and supernatural to God and his Neighbor,
in the perfect union of Soul and Body, and should have known no separation in
either, for their bodies should have been made spiritual by a change, as shall
all men's which shall be found living at the general judgment of the second
Adam, as Saint Paul affirms 1 Cor. 15.33.

Christ's body being raised a natural body of flesh and blood, and continued so
forty days on earth: it was for a special end, that his body was detained
from being glorified that space, namely to be a firm object of Faith, even to
men's senses to confirm belief in them, that He was He, that had fulfilled
all righteousness for the restoration of the world, that he might say to
doubting Thomas and truly to^ reach hither thy finger and behold my hands, and
reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side, and be not f^ithlesse, but
believe; and therefore to this purpose he showed himself to five hundred
Brethren at once. John 20.27. Lu. 24.39.

But that touch which he propounded to Thomas, he denied to Mary, saying,
touch me not, and gives her this as a reason why she must not touch him,
namely, because he was not ascended to his Father: implying by his speeches to
these two, Thomas and Mary.

First, that to man doubting the truth of him, as the object of justification,
the touch of his crucified body was a help.

Secondly, to Faith confirmed in his Resurrection, as was Mary's, his body
spiritualized and Christ body being now made a spiritual body Essentially
considered, and not a body of flesh and blood, then how can that be true, that
he will come in the flesh and reign in this Elementary world, 1000 years?
glorified by his Ascension, was its most proper object of belief, Ioh. 20 17.
Col. 3.1.

Yet I do not mean, that the glorious body of Christ is, or that man's body
should have bin, nor shall be made a mere Spirit, as is the reasonable Souls
of mankind; but I mean, that the Lord Jesus Christ is, and man's body shall be
changed into a Nature far nearer the nature of the reasonable Soul, then it
was created, or now is, yet a body still, and every man his own body, but every
way more able to answer the righteous desires and motions of the reasonable
Soul much like the Angels which immediately accord to do Gods will to his
eternal praise and glory.

Again, as concerning the creation, I do not mean, that it should have bin,
if the first Adam had stood, nor now shall be by the second Adams fulfilling
the same Covenant and more be made so spiritual a Nature, as are the highest
Heavens, the most immediate expressions that shadowed forth the Divine glory,
to men or Angels; but I mean, it should have bin and shall be partaker of the
same general nature, supernaturallized, as shall be the bodies of mankind in
some degree. But if Adam had kept the Covenant, then it should not growingly
have travailed, as now it does, to be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, for then because no sin, no
corruption or vanit^, but in its natural perfections together with mankind in
his pure Naturalls, it should have more sweetly travailed to its
supercelestiall perfections.

And so to Man it should have bin as the Suburbs of the Celestial glory but
now as must man's Body, As man's elementary body shall be changed into a
spiritual body, so shall the elementary bodies of the terrestrial and and
caelestiall Globes, be changed into a spiritual nature, and thus much of the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God shall this universe be partakers of.
so it must be changed, as says the Text, Thou shall change them, and they
shall be changed; that is, as says Saint Peter, into a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, implying, it shall then no more detain
man evil or unrighteous, or Devils, as now it does, but as it was made for
man righteous in perfection of the Creation, and ordained by the Covenant to a
supernatural perfection, with man supernaturally righteous, in the improvement
of the Covenant, so it now shall be again by the second Adam, restored to the
glorious liberty of the Children of God as Saint Paul affirms, it travailes
until now. Romans 8.21, 22, 23, 33. So much for the fourth point namely, what is
the issue or intended end, of Gods Covenant with the first Adam?

Here observe,

First as God shaddowed out himself to man's perceivance Or these shadows may
be called discoveries or light, because the Apostle gives this definition, that
that which manifests is light, Ephesians. 5.13.
. 1. by the perfection of the Creation. 2. by the supernatural prefiguration
of the Covenant. 3. and will in the glory of the elect Angels, by the most
immediate expressions of his essential perfection, whence observe.

That Gods essential glory, essentially considered is unperceiveable by men
and Angels, and only known to himself: and the ground is by reason of that
vast distance that is between an infinite Essence, and creatures that are at
best but finite.

But yet further observe, that so far forth as God does expressively manifest
himself to men and Angels, by objects suitable to their apprehensions, so
far forth he is to them an object of Love, and most tranquil Consolation;
and so far forth as he appears, such a good, and much more then they can
comprehend, so far forth he is to men and Angels, an object of divine worship
and adoration; but on the contrary, so far as God does shadow out himself to
men and Angels in objects proceeding against them, and contrary to them and
more then their apprehensions can comprehend, so farreforth he is to men and
Angels, an object of dolor, dread, and ever sinking desperation.

Secondly, observe, that in either Estate Adam could not convey to his
posterity, more then what himself enjoyed, therefore, as in his second Estate
by Covenant, he could not convey his natural perfections alone, if he had
kept Covenant, but both natural and supernatural jointly together, because
then his natural holiness was a means by improvement to a supernatural end.

So also in his first estate of the perfection of the creation, he could not
convey to his posterity the supernatural good jointly, but his The law of
nature properly so called, never was since the fall in any man in it is pure
naturals, but only in the second Adam, therefore now to refer any thing well
done by men to the st ength of their pure naturals is a gross mistake.
pure naturals alone: For before he was put in the prefiguration of the
Garden, his natural holiness and righteousness were alone, and not by Gods
Ordinance related a means to a supernatural end; but on the contrary, by his
transgressing the covenant, he had power to conve^ the loss of both of means
and end, not only the loss of right and possession in the knowledge of all
good both natural and supernatural things either in faith or fruition with
Angels, but also by force of Gods justice in the Covenant to convey the
knowledge of evil, every way equivalent in evil to all the foresaid good.

But this evil was Adams third estate, namely, his fall, which is the next
ground to be handled.

So much for the second ground.

CHAP. III. Opening the State of the world by Adams fall.
AS the fall of Adam extended to himself, and to all his posterity, Romans 5.12.
so it brought him and his posterity from the highest spire The infinite God
bound himself for Adams further assistance, according as he did apply his
personal perfections by the rules of the Covenant, and the reasons why he did
not so, see from page 17. to page 20. and in cap. 12.
of the knowledge of God, to the deepest gulf of the knowledge of evil.

And whereas both are referred to the knowledge which is in man; the reason is,
because man is most capable of his highest felicity, or of his deepest misery,
only by his knowable powers, which was also employed in this, that the tree of
trial was called the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

But here may be demanded, what Adam and we his posterity lost, and what we
lost not, and what we found by his fall.

First, we lost the perfection of the whole creation wholly.

Secondly, we lost the garden of Eden, as it was an object of faith, the figure
of the felicity of Angels.

Thirdly, we lost totally our pure naturals, that is, the perfection of both
Tables of the Law, as containing our righteousness and holiness, the most
express Image of God by creation.

Fourthly, we lost the beginning of our supernatural righteousness and
holiness contained in the institution of the Covenant for we lost that estate
of faith.

We lost the ultimate perfection of supernatural holiness by which we should
enjoy God in his most immediate

Secondly, that which we lost not, in brief was this:







So much for what we lost, and what we lost not.

Adams transgession?

Adams remissness of this second state contained in the condition of the
Covenant; and this appears by his sin of omission, which brought on his
sin of commission, generally in two things, but particularly in six things.



Adams faith, the pleasures and felicity of Angels, how could he then have
omitted this universal help, if he had not been remiss of the conditions
comprised in the Covenant? So much for these in general.



And how could he then omit this prefiguration for a help, if he had not bin
remiss by a sleepy faith in this particular.

to him his natural branches or offspring, depended on him in the work of
the Covenant for celestial felicity, how could he then have omitted this help
to lead his faith to the negative rule of the Covenant, if he had not been
remiss in this particular?

Thirdly he knowing all the fruits of the trees in the Garden

God threatening him most expressly with death, yea, a

His eyes seeing that River coming in but one way into

When his eyes beheld this tree of Knowledge of good

Now, as Adams remissness brought on this sin of omission, so his sin of
omission brought on his sin of commission, namely, the eating of the forbidden
fruit; for when the devil in the Serpent told them, saying, ye shall not die
at all; and also that their obedience to Gods commandment, denying themselves
that fruit, was the only thing that kept them from having their eyes opened to
be as Gods, to know good and evil, thereupon the Woman seeing the Tree, and
that the fruit was good for food (says the Text) and that it was pleasant to
the eye, and a Tree to be desired, to make one wise, Genesis 3.16 She took the
fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave it to her Husband also, and he did eat
to Gods great dishonor, esteeming his truth as false, and God himself to them
as a mere imposture, and so magnified Satan as faithful, believing his lies
for truth, because they embraced them with a plenary consent, and thereby they
ventured the world, their posterity and themselves, upon his lies, and so
became the Generation and Offspring of reprobate Devils, for it was with them
now, as it was with the Devils; as the Angels became Devils not by change of
their Essence, but by change of their operations, not abiding in the truth; so
this made them and us And as we a^e p^rtakers of the dia^olicall nature, by
union with his will, and ope^ations, as John 8.44. so on the contrary, are we
partakers of the divine nature, not essentially, but by the union of our will
with his word, by which we fly the corruptions that are in the world through
lust. 2 Pete 1.4. and 17. John. 17.21.22, 23.
as Devils, by full amity to Satan's will, and enmity to God, in belief of
Satan's li^s. And thus was this sin finished.

And so much for the first branch, namely, The evil of Adams transgression.

Secondly, the evil of punishment follows, yet not evil punishment, because
it was just, and therefore good, and just because according to the equal
Balance of the conditions of the Covenant that was good or evil, as Adam did
obey, or disobey, and therefore because Adam transgressed the Covenant justice
now required these particulars.

First, the extinguishing the perfections of the Creation from us, because it
was dependant on Adams work in the Covenant and he by eating the forbidden
fruit denied its perfection, therefore it to him in justice must not only be
stripped of a^l perfections but on the contrary by Gods power turned into
defections, cross operations and hideous representations to man's to^turous
torment, as the first fruits of his remote damnation, because th s was the
contrary evil.

In this third ^^tate, man was more deeply dead in sins and trespasses, then
he can be in this world in his fourth Estate although he be twice dead and
plucked up by the roots.
Secondly, under this dreadful Estate. Justice now required, that in it, be
that could of stones tell how to raise Children to Abraham, should find a way
to raise a Posterity of A^a^, which to the last of man kind must have b^n
produced in conceptions, births, breedings, d^spositions, and operations
totally evil, like the generations of Serpents, yea as reprobate Devils; for
if all must have bin equivalently contrary in evil to the precedent good, as
we see it must, therefore so in this particular.

Thirdly, as the prefiguration of the Plantation, was the most immediate means
to lead man by Faith to his highest

As Adam by refusing Gods truth, refused the place and fellowship Mat. 25.41.
for now all mankind and Devils were in Reprobation.

As the Latitude of Gods glorious Attributes, are displayed Gods pure justice,
we must ever have bin sinking in despair, never to come to the bottom
thereof, for the wrath of God must have bin feeding it, as with Rivers of fire
and brimstone to our tor^urous torments to all eternity; therefore endless,
easelesse, remediless, in darkness never seeing light. Esaias 30.33.

Again, man's conscience beholding the evil of his sin, how easily, really,
certainly he might once not only have avo^ded this torment, but on the
contrary might have attained to the height of all felicity to all eternity.

This worm would to Adam, and will (to all men which will needs be perishing)
be ever gnawing with grief and never cease; and so all mankind should
hereditarily (throughout all generations descend, as travailing together to the
foresaid place of their ultimate misery, and infelicity with this Creation, as
stripped of its precedent perfections, into cross defections and operations, etc.

Yet man not then sunk down to his ultimate misery, by Separation of his Body
from his Soul, as now man does, but in a personal union both of body and
Soul together.

For the justice of the Covenant could not admit so much rest to man's Body, as
to sleep in the dust, nor any time of respit of execution for a day to come to
judge the world, bu^ immediate execution was to pass according to judgment,
In the day ^hou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. But this Judgment
passed not to execution according to justice, because that as by the offense of
one, judgment passed upon all men to condemnation, Romans 5.16.
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to the
justification of life.

And so we are come to Adam and our fourth Estate, in the restoration of the
world by Redemption in the second Adam; and that is the next general ground to
be handled.

Observation.
If this dreadful judgment was not executed, as most certainly it was not;
then here observe, that for Adams offense or evil of sin in transgressing
the Covenant by eating the forbidden fruit, not one of mankind was ever
damned, or ever shall be, because of the second Adams righteousness,
interposing that judgment by Gods gift imputed to all mankind, as will more
appear in the next Chapter.

Observation.
Although mankind was so dead, As is described in Cap. 3.
yet no man but Adam and Eve in the justice of the Covenant, was individually
so dead, but radically, all men was so dead, and that two ways, as first in
their loins, as in our natural root, but this was not properly it, from
whence we came to be totally evil as the Devils, as is described, for this
Estate simply considered propounded us no evil but good only, as is proved:
Secondly, that wherein they were our most proper root in this point, was the
Covenant, for in that God propounded for us evil as well as good, and from this
ground came our evil, in which we might and did become so deservedly, deeply
dead in sins and trespasses: but because Christ took off the execution of
that judgment, therefore although we were deservedly radically so dead, yet
therefore neither radically inherently so, neither individually That is not
totally according to justice in neither.
so, therefore praise to God ever in him, and for him, Amen.

CHAP. IIII. Of the fourth estate of Adam and all mankind, under the second
Adams Restoration.
IN this Estate is handled six points, whereof five are finished in this
Chapter, but the sixth point is handled in the eight ensuing Chapters.

The first is, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the second Adam.

2. That God appointed him so to be, before the world was.

3. That in that very point of time that Adam failed in the work the Covenant,
the Lord Jesus (the second Adam) first entered upon the work of the Covenant.

4. That by the same entrance, he removed for ever, that judgment which passed
upon all men to condemnation, and therefore it never proceeded to execution.

5. By him also the world, together with all mankind, was estated to go on
travailing toward that perfection which by Adams fall it l^st

6. That in this fourth State, the proceedings of God is equally alike
intended, and extended to all mankind, for eternal life and death without
respect of persons.

That the Lord Jesus was the second Adam. Saint Paul speaks expressly, for
(says he) the first man Adam was made a living Soul, the second man Adam was
made a quickening Spirit: The first was of the Earth, Earthly, the second was
the Lord from Heaven.

And the same Apostle says further, as by one man came death, by man came also
the All mankind first had a dependence on the first Adam, he being a public
person by Covenant, whence all fell in him, so also on the second Adam did all
mankind depend to be raised from that fall, and so were all, and therefore non
perished for Adams transgression, so shall all be raised by him out of the
dust, they first which by Faith have submitted to receive life in Gods gift of
Christ's righteousness, shall rise to eternal felicity, and they which refuse
so to submit, shall be raised by him to perpetual shame.
Resurrection of the dead, for as in Adam all die, even so by Christ shall all
be made alive, but every man in his own order, etc. 1 Cor. 15.

Again says he, If by one man's transgression death reigned, by one, much
more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the free gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the
offense of one, judgment, came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to the justification of
life: for as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Romans 5.17 18, 19. Therefore
Christ was the second Adam.

Paul affirms that that felicity which was lost, and which men now or ever
hereafter shall attain unto, was appointed with him for them by God before the
world was, Titus 1.5. Ephe. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9.

Again says Wisdom, or Christ of himself, The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way; before his works of old was I set up from everlasting,
from the beginning before ever the Earth was. Prove. 8 22.

Again, Christ prayed his Father to glorify him, by his assistance in the
work of the Restoration of the world, to attain the glory he had with him
before the world was. John 17.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.

Again, Saint Peter says, Our Redeemer was a Lamb, without blem^sh or spot,
who verily was foreordained before the Foundation of the world, but was
manifested in these last times for you. 1 Pet 1.19.20.

And the ground of God his revealing to the world, that he did fore-appoint
Christ before the world was to this work, was not only to give us to
understand, that in him he works all things after the council of his will,
but also that we should know by his merciful appointment he stood ready, as
the Ram in the Bush, to save Isaac from his Fathers executing knife, as the
Male-Lambe without spot, to take off that most dangerous judgment, which was
to pass to execution, immediately to the worlds unrecoverable misery, for Adam
his transgressing the Covenant (man's misery being Gods opportunity) for in the
Mount will the Lord be se ne. Genesis 22.13. and 14 verses.

Adam failed, in performing the work of the Covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ
the C^^ist was not the second man by natural production, and so the second
Adam; for if so, then must Ca^^ have been the second Adam, therefore Christ
was the second Adam, beause he immediately followed the first Adam in the work
of the Covenant to the restoration of the fallen world.
second Adam, then first entered the work of the Covenant, although Saint Peter
tells them to whom he wrote his Epistle, that Christ was manifested in the last
times for them, yet Christ the second Adam in this work was manifested by God
in a figure the same hour that Adam fell, which is implicitly expressed in the
new Testament; for, says the Text, Then they sought to take him (meaning the
Lord Christ) but no man laid held on him, says the Text; and gives this to be
the Reason, because his hour was not yet come, Joh. 7.30. So also himself
says, the hour is come, Mark. 14.41.

Again, and the very hour in which he did finish all righteousness by the
expiration of his life, as a satisfactory sacrifice to Divine justice, as the
Lamb of God, is expressly set down to be the sixth day of the week, and ninth
hour of that day, implying this was the day of the week, and hour of that day
in which he first in the Lambs blood did render up his life figuratively, then
in the type, and now in the truth, the one answering the other in the
circumstance of time in the agreeableness of the type with the antitype. And
therefore rightly does Saint John take it for granted, that Christ was the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. For the world received
that sixth day a threefold beginning:

The first was the spire of perfection by creation.

Secondly, the world received the beginning of supernatural perfection,
founded in the covenant with Adam.

When all being lost by Adams fall, the foundation for recovery Adams work of
the Covenan^, the same sixth day and ninth hour of the same day, and therefore
he was the Lamb slain in the beginning; for to God and to faith the work of
a perfect rest was then finished by Christ from the foundation of the world,
although unbelieving man enters not this rest, neither by faith here, nor by
fruition hereafter, as Heb. 4.

Again, the unconceiveable danger required, that Christ as the second Adam in
the Lambs blood, must enter the work in that minute that Adam fell, otherwise
justice must have proceeded immediately to bring the judgment past to
condemnation to an unconceiveable execution, therefore he entered the work of
the Covenant the same minute that Adam fell, rendering his dearest life to
Divine justice figuratively in the blood of the Lamb as slain from the
beginning of the foundation of the world, Revelat. 13. verse. 8.

Again, he only and alone in that point of time, did undertake this work,
because he only and alone, was the spotless Lamb, or the sinlesse man, in
that figure, and therefore only and alone fit for that work.

Again he only and alone, was the lamb of God personally God-man in this
figure: therefore he only and alone, fitly able under flames of scorching
wrath, to undertake the satisfaction of the justice of the Covenant, by perfect
flames of burning love in his pure naturalls, as a means by love
supernatural, to attain the supercelestiall felicity of the glory of Angels
by taking upon him the imputed guilt of Adams sin, and that dreadful execution
which immediately must have past for the same. So much for the third point.

Adams transgression.

For Christ no sooner undertook to answer the justice of the Covenant in the
type but in stead of immediate execution, God in Christ manifested himself,
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sin, seeking to save
that which was lost, saying to Adam, Where art thou? What have thou done? etc.
Genesis 3. verse 9.

I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between her seed and thy
seed, it shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

Thirdly, whereas the justice of the Covenant required, the production of all
mankind unnaturally, from cross operations in the powers of the whole
creation, as is described, Chapt. 3. yet now comes God and gives us a natural
production of all mankind, by a merciful promise in a twofold respect.

Adam, of every creature restoring Gods Image in all, Genesis 3.15. Col. 1.15.16,
17, 18, 19.

Secondly, a promise of a natural conception and production I will greatly
increase thy sorrow and thy conception, In sorrow shall thou bring forth thy
children, verse 16.

Fourthly, justice from the Covenant required man's personal

But now God gives a nutrimentall support by food natural, and only with a
taste of the sour herbs of sorrow, Genesis 3.17. For unto the man, says God,
because thou have harkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the
tree which I commanded, saying, Thou shall not eat of it, but says not in the
words of the Covenant, thou shall certainly die the death, but says only
this, Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of thy life, etc.

Fifthly, the justice of the Covenant admitted no separation

But now there is a separation, and man's body has a time of rest in the dust:
this is employed in this Text, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return
again.

And now put all this sorrow together, and then it is no more but this, Even
sour herbs for man to relish his sweet mercy in the Lamb of God by whom he
passes over all his wrath, for Adams transgression, by which we were
unrecoverably rejected and reprobated with devils from God by the justice of
the Covenant: but according as God foreappointed Christ, and chose us in him
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love; so he elected us in his beloved, from reprobate devils,
with whom in justice we were to remain. But because this deep mystery is
wrapped up in that of Genes 3.15. and Romans 5 18. therefore I will briefly open
these two Texts, before I pass to the fifth point. viz. Unto Satan he said. I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

And whereas God says to the Devil I will put enmity between is first employed
that God only could, as the case then stood, produce this enmity in this word I.

Secondly that his will was resolved so to do, in this I w ll.

That the Devil formerly conceived, if he could but get the woman into amity
by belief of his lies, then the justice of the Covenant would not admit to
dissolve that amity, much less to put enmity: but to Satan, says God, I will
put enmity between thee and the woman.

Now, here arises a threefold quere: first, what is meant by this word put:
secondly, what is meant by this word enmity: thirdly, what is meant by this
word woman:

First, this word put implies this that by divine Justice, all righteousness
and holiness, natural, or supernatural, to the least disposition in either,
was lost and gone by the fall of ^dam, and left in the contrary evil;
Therefore (in mercy) comes God, and says, I will put, (that is) I will This
gracious and merciful infusion, is only that that since the fall does
originally bend the nature of man toward his ultimate felicity by Christ, yet
although it does so bend nature, it is not therefore the Law of nature prope^ly
so called for what that is is described, cap. 1. John 1.4.9.
infuse some disposition into man's spirit toward me in Christ, in whom I have
chosen them.

Or by this word, put, I will write or imprint some principles, which shall
dispose man to my Law in Christ the second Adam, in whom is life, who is the
life of men, and enlightneth every man which comes into this world, and in a
word, God in Christ now put into the universal nature of man, the effect of
the Law written in his heart, from whence he does by nature the things
contained in the Law of Christ and that it is the Law of Christ See in cap. 4.
and in cap. 6.
. And the truth is the natural force of this infusion being by man improved,
he having not the written Oracle of God, it will terminate in the circumcision
of man's heart, as is clearly proved in the seventh Chapter following:
Secondly, and answerably as there is any disposition of the law in man's heart,
tending toward God by Christ, answerably the same tends to this enmity with
Satan but more, as the same disposition is reduced to act toward God,
according to truth; for the same disposition is enmity to Satan even as the
Amity of this world is enmity with God, so amity with God is enmity with Satan;
and in a word, this infusion is most properly this enmity with Satan, when it
comes to the degree of faith, actually to receive Christ his imputative
righteousness, as Gods gift to salvation, and his rule for imitation.

Thirdly, by Woman in this Text is not meant woman's individual person
restrictively but this word Woman, is the woman collectively meant, as drawing
all mankind in Adams transgression, into condemnation; for example, in the 16.
Verse, when God said to the Woman, I will greatly increase thy sorrows and thy
conceptions, in sor^ow shall thou bring forth children.

Here by Woman he speaks Relatively, as to all women which shall conceive and
bring forth, and of all mankind which shall be conceived and borne; so is this
word Woman collectively in this Text, to be understood of all mankind,
implying, that this amity by internal disposition to God in Christ, was by God
infused universally into the nature of mankind, to descend hereditarily in
their natural conceptions, whereas in justice, none was left before in the
fall, but contrary dispositions to evil.

Secondly, in the next word, God says to Satan, and between thy seed and her
seed, and because the Text says not only, I will put enmity See this point
cleared to Objection 10. in cap. 12.
between thee and the woman, here is a further matter employed.

First, by this word Seed, what seed soever it was, it was certainly the seed
of the Devil, contained in this word, thy seed, and in a word, this seed was
the foresaid dispositions and man's acquired operations, which entered originally
into the nature of man, by Adams sin totally and eternally, to remain
according to the justice of the Covenant, as is declared, Chapt. 3.

And because in this Text God calls it by the name of a seed, it further
implies, that by Christ's answering of the justice of the Covenant, in the blood
of the Lamb, the nature of Devils (namely original sin) in the nature of
man is by grace reduced but to a seed; and it must needs be so, because Gods
foresaid infusion did imprint the principles of amity to himself.

And therefore from this ground only mankind now is conceived and borne, but
with the seed of original sin, and not devils, totally and eternally, as
justice required; and this is the only ground, why men are in natural
dispositions better than devils.

Again, by this word her seed, is implicitly meant. Christ, the second Adam in
one nature, and essentially; the one God and second person in the sacred
Essence: and also in his other nature, the nature of all mankind in the Woman's
seed; and in a word, here is meant his personal union, as God-man, by this
restriction, her seed, not of seeds as of many, but of one which is Christ, Gal
3.

Again this word (and) relates the precedent words, Put and enmity, to Christ
also, to be between the Serpent and him, for as I noted before, that the
promise of his conception, was without the promise of addition of the taste of
sorrow, so also this word, put, as related to him, implies his conception and
birth, not only without the internal principle of original sin, but also
that his conception and birth was in its pure naturalls, totally disposed to
righteousness and holiness, in all perfections, for his Mother being
overshaddowed, by the holy Ghost, by which God put this enmity in Christ.

This Seed therefore which was borne, was called a holy thing, and so enmity in
a superlative sense; I will put enmity between thy seed and her seed: but here
note, that that Amity with God, which was enmity to Satan, which was put into
all mankind by infusion, and into Christ's humane nature, more then
miraculously, was in the general nature one and the same disposition: for as
Christ is pitiful, so mankind is naturally inclined to pity; likewise as
Christ is merciful, so mankind is naturally inclined to mercy; and as Christ
worshipped God purely, so mankind is inclined to worship a Deity, etc.

Yet in another respect far different, for that in men there always remains
some seed of the Serpent, at best in this life, and therefore perfect but in
part but the perfections in Christ from his conception to his expiration of his
life, was in all the degrees of natural righteousness and holiness, a means
by Faith and love supernatural, witnessing the truth of God against Satan's
lies, or Serpentine seed in men or Devils, dissolving the works of Satan, all
comprehended in these words, It shall break thy head, as will appear in the
eight Chapter.

Again, in the third place, to the Serpent says God, thou shall bruise his
heel, and in this point Christ is considerable in a four fold respect.

First, as him in whom God elected Note that this universal election is
grounded upon the mere favorable mercy of God, so is also that second
election or predestination in the beginning of the 6. Chap.
from reprobate Devils, all mankind to grace and glory, when in the justice
of the Covenant, all stood rejected and reprobated from him with Devils to the
contrary evil, as before is proved. Yet as God then left them, and chose us in
Christ from them; so by him then were all men saved from the imputative
damnation of Adams transgression: wherefore in this respect, all mankind is
the heel of Christ in this relation. But from this relation Satan draws us in
our remissness, by lying vanities to forsake our own mercies, and so to
perish, not for Adams transgression, but for our own, against this grace in
Christ, and so are bruised by Satan, for thou shall bruise his heel.

Secondly, as God is the Savior of all men from Adams imputative damnation, so
more especially he is the Savior of them that believe, and that in two
respects.

First, by pardoning their own personal transgressions, against this
universal mercy.

Secondly, by estating them in that eternal life by Faith in Christ, which
they lost by their own sin, and in Adams, for says Christ, he that
believes in me, has eternal life, and is past from death unto life: And
because these men by belief of truth, set to their Seals that God is true in
his gift of Christ and his righteousness imputed, and in the perfection of
parts in some degree of inherent righteousness, witness Gods truth against
Satan's lies, or lying vanities; Therefore Satan by tentations, and other
envyous operations, as by Cain to Abell, does bruise this heel of Christ, or
but his heel, for this company of the Faithful here Militant in comparison of
that with Christ triumphing in heavenly glory, is but the heel of Christ, and
thou shall bruise his heel.

Thirdly, because the second Adam did apply all the power of his pure Naturalls
of holiness, and righteousness, a means witnessing Gods word of truth for
good, and evil, opposing Satan's lies: therefore Satan by himself, or men
adhering to him, did by envious operations (as he did by Cain to Abel) crush
Christ himself, yet it did not extinguish his Faith and love to God and his
Neighbor in the least degree, but drew it out the more, as in due place it
will appear.

Yet all these envious operations, being but extended to the affliction of his
body and soul, being his nature humane, the lowest nature in his Sacred
Person, therefore it was but his heel, as it was foretold, thou shall bruise
his heel.

Fourthly again, as if God should say to Satan, true it is, that in the first
Adams faithless fall from me, thou did devour all, both heel, body and head
but against this the second Adam, whom I will raise up in the nature of all men,
of the seed of the woman, to him do thy worst, yet thou shall but bruise his
heel, at the most, and thou shall bruise his heel.

So much for opening of this first out-breake of the object of Faith; once
given to the Saints in this fourth estate of man, Genesis 3.15.

As Adams tra^sgression and the guilt and punishment was from the justice of
the Covenant, reckoned or imputed to al mankind in the fall, even so by Gods
mercy in the free gift of Christ's righteousness, reckoned or imputed to all,
was that sin, guilt, and punishment removed from all, and therefore no^e ever
perished for that transgression; for although Adams eat ng the forbidden fruit,
and the demerit of it, was not any man's ind^vidually, but Adams; yet God in the
justice of the Covenant, did reckon or impute it to all and every individual
of mankind, as if it had bin their own act and demerit: even so, although
Christ's righteousness and merit of it, was his own only and alone,
individually considered, yet that righteousness and merit, being to satisfy
Gods justice in behalf of the world, it was therefore by Gods free gift in
mercy, reckoned or imputed to all and every individual of man generally, and
to man believing more specially, as is declared; but what this righteousness
is, which was so imputed, see the end of the 8. Chap.
Again, Romans 5.18. the Apostle says, for as by the offense of one, judgment
came upon ^ll men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the
free gift came upon all men, to the j^stification of life: from these words I
will make these brief observations following.

First, that in the next verse before this, Christ's righteousness is called
the gift of righteousness, but in this Text it is spoken as if Christ's
righteousness were the procuring cause of the gift of it self, as imputed to
come upon all men, and the truth is so it was, for had not Christ's
righteousness in the figurative lamb, to the justice of the Covenant in every
respect, answered the imputative unrighteousness of Adam, the righteousness
of Christ could not imputatively by free gift, have come, as it did upon all
men, to the justification of life, for till the justice of the Covenant was so
satisfied, (although God was willing to impute it to life) yet he could not,
for as God cannot lie, so he cannot deny his truth, but all mankind must
certainly have dyed, (according to Gods-word) that death in the day that Adam
did sin.

Secondly, here note, that this free gift of Christ's imputative righteousness
came at this time on all men unfought for, or unthought on by them; for when
God brought this gift to them, Adam run away from him, therefore here, God
wa^ found of them which sought him not.

Thirdly here observe, that this free gift of righteousness came upon al men,
when there was not any See this justification before man's faith, and without
faith cleared in the answer to the 10 Objection in Chap. 4.
Faith in man, for we by Adam faithlessely betrayed Gods truth, and at this
time as in our natural root in his loins run from the God of truth.
Therefore Faith foreseen, was now no cause or isntrumental means of all men's
salvation or election from Devils, in Adams imputative damnation.

4. Again observe, that this gift of imputative righteousness,
justification, for says the Text, It came upon all men to justification,
Therefore man's Faith can be but the receptive instrument of this justification,
and justification with Faith. or justification without Faith is all one, except
that in the last man's receptive instrument is of use.
and this presents unto us two things, first a definition of Justification,
what justification then was; men having not as yet the gift of Faith.

Secondly, what it was not. And first in a word, this justification by Chri^ts
imp^tative righteousness, was this, the pardon and the removal of the
imputative sin, guilt and punishment due for Adams transgression, as far as
the East is from the West, and so gave man a gracious acceptance, and at this
time this was the justification of all men.

Secondly, man's own works of righteousness was not his justification, nor no
good works foreseen; for as now man by the fall, his works were only so evil
as the Devils, so all men's works but Christ's works in this fourth estate of
Restoration, at best are but in the perfection of parts, by reason of the
Serpentine seed, which hereditarily runs down, in the nature of all mankind;
and therefore rightly says Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 1.9. God has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose, and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
World began.

Again observe that this justification not only freed all Adam sinned, but
also brought life upon all men, for says the Text, it came upon all men to
justification of life.

But here arises a question what in this Text, life, which came upon all men?

The meaning is no more but this, gift of righteousness the life of glory, in
the world to come.

So much for the fourth point, Namely, that Christ entering the work of the
Covenant as the second Adam, removed that judgment that was due to all
mankind. So as never man perished for Adams eating the forbidden Fruit.

Again the second Adams first entering the work of the Covenant, Creation
travaling toward that perfection it lost in Adams fall, so says man believing
truth. To. 8.19 For says S. Paul, the earnest expectation of the Creature,
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. And in the next verse, gives
the reason why the creation is in hope, because says he, the Creation it self
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God: and then concludes in the minds of al men which believe
truth, for (says he) we know that the whose creation travaileth in pain
until now: and not only they, but our s^lves also, who have the first fruits
of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption (to wit) the redemption of our bodies. ver. 23.

So S. Peter (in the minds of men believing truth) says, and we look for new
Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. 2 Pet. 3.13.

And that this travailing of the whole Creation, together with man, was by
Christ, is most clearly proved, by what is formerly delivered, that is, when
this glorious Image of the Invisible God, 2 Cor. 4.4.
was lost by Adams fall, then the second Adam the Son of God, restored the
Image of the invisible God, by coming into the work of the Covenant, as the
first borne of every Creature, the beginning and first borne from the dead fall
of Adam in the promised seed, that in all things he might have the preeminence.
Coloss. 1.15.18. All which, when Adam by Faith in the State of the restoration
by Christ did see, thereupon he named his wife Eve, which signifies life:
First because in Christ she was now become the Mother of all living, Genesis
3.20. wherefore she also in belief of truth says, when she had conceived and
brought forth Caine, I have gotten a man from JEHOVAH, meaning, not by the
force of Gods word in the State of Creation. Genesis 1.28. for that was lost by
the fall, and therefore God in Christ gives a second word of production to
them, which was now a word of grace and object of Faith in the promised seed,
Genesis 3.15.16. By force of which word, she now obtained from Jehovah a man by
Christ, in whom was life, and therefore she named him Possession, for so his
name signifies, implying she was now again by Christ, in Possession of a
living race of mankind, in this day of grace, and so the Mother of all living.

Secondly, the Mother of all living, together with Adam, by belief of truth,
in the object of Faith, namely, in the Promised seed, and so was to Christ, his
first borne Church, begotten not by blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of GOD: for to them was delivered by him this object of
Ea^^h, once given to the Saints, from whence they received lif^ natural and
supernatural, by Faith, as here you see, and therefore nursed up by
instruction, their Posterity to the same object, for both Cain and Abell came
to offer unto God. and therefore in this second respect, she was also the
Mother of all living.

And so much that this travail of the Creation was by Christ.

But here arises a question, [Quest.]
at what time began this travail of the whole Creation, lead the faithful
befo e the flood, to rest in
together with man believing truth, to their supernatural end?

The answer is, (ans.]
that God having the sixth day about the ninth hour or three of the clock in
the afternoon, the pe^fect works of the seed of the woman, which then was to
be accomplished in time to come, that is, to rest in belief of it, for the
remove all of all misery, and in hop^ ^f fruition of t^^nall glory, and it was
the same mystery of this seventh day, which God renewed by Moses to Israel,
but the eight day now leads the faithful to rest for the same things on that
work, of the seed of the woman, as it is now already perfected, the which (as
I conceive) was the ground of the change of the day, and therefore nominated to
be the Lords day.
established the foundation of the Restoration of the world, in the second
Adams satisfactory righteousness, figuratively in the blood of the Lamb, the
seventh day morning next ensuing, being then the first day and hour of a
days beginning in the Estate of Restoration of the Creation by Christ, as he
was the first borne of every Creature opening the womb of its tendencie to all
perfections, therefore that seventh day morning in the first minute thereof,
was that first particle of time, wherein the Creation began to put forth its
first most proper step in this travail, together with man believing truth,
from the bondage of corruption, to the glorious liberty of the ^onnes of GOD.

And from this ground God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it, because
that in it he rested from a^l his works which he had created and made, so
dependant upon Christ, implying, that God rested fully contented in the
perfections of Christ's works, for the R^stauration of all his works, to that
perfection intended in the Covenant, to which it now but travailed, and The
Original of the seventh days Sabbath and al Sabbaths.

Therefore this seventh day sanctified by God, Genesis 2. did in a figure


therefore God set this seventh day apart for man to rest, figuratively
leading him also to Christ's imputative works for the perfection of al his works
here by faith, in hope of a full perfection, in fruition of glory to come.

From this ground the Author to the Hebrews takes it for granted, that this
rest to God, and to Faith and in fruition, for man was finished from the
Foundation of the world, although man unbelieving enters not this rest, and
then with reference to this point says, God spoke in a place of the seventh
day on this wise, that, God rested the seventh day from all his works, The
reason why Moses in the 2. of Genesis does bring in all Gods works as made on the
seventh day, ver. 2. is because all which was made perfect on the sixth day, and
lost by Adam, was (as it were made anew by Ch ists satisfactory righteousness
imputed, and so declared the seventh day morning to Adam by the Creations
putting forward its first step toward perfection, to which it travailes until
now.
and then says he, there remains a rest for the people of God, meaning by
Faith here, and in glory hereafter. Genesis 2.2. Heb. 4.3.9.19.

And from this ground the number of seven in holy Scriptures is a figure of
perfection, as in the seventh of years, namely the Jubiles, and the seventh
years of the Lands rest, and in the seventh months rest, and this seventh
days rest, etc. and in Enoch the seventh from Adam, by ascending into eternal
perfection in Soul and Body jointly together, figuring out the Angelike glory,
intended to man in the In the 12 Chapter and ^3 Object. you may see this Covenant
defended. Observation.
Covenant, by the work of the first Adam, but now given to the world in the
righteousness of the second Adam imputed.

So much for the Proof of the fifth general point, namely, that the second
Adams first entrance into the work of the first Adam put on the whole
Creation, travailing together with man believing truth, to that perfection it
lost in Adams fall.

Hence observe, because the imputative damnation of Gods Covenant through Adams
transgressions was fully removed, and taken off by the second Adams
satisfactory righteousness, imputed as ours by Gods free gift upon all men to
justification of life, so as none of mankind ever, perished for that
transgression, as precedently is proved.

Then consequently, all mankind which in Infancy or childhood depart this
world, they ascend to eternal life in Heaven to Angels glory, notwithstanding
original sin which is in them, for that running sore of original sin, in
which they are conceived and brought forth, does but fit them successively to
receive the salve of salvation in Christ, to their eternal felicity, for if
they had not bin conceived, and borne in that seed of sin, and but a seed,
then they had bin in their production Devils in dispositions totally,
according to the justice of the Covenant, and so capable of no good, but evil
only, or else they must have bin by production conceived and borne in their
pure naturalls of holiness and righteousness, in an Estate of perfection,
according to the tendencie of the Covenant, and then they had not bin capable
of eternal life in Christ by salvation, for the whole need not the Physician,
but the sick.

But because the Serpentine seed is derived to Infants in their conceptions and
births, and in them reduced but to a s^ed by grace in Christ, because God put
the foresaid principle of enmity, between the seed of the woman, and the seed
of the Serpent: therefore this running sore of original sin in them
implicitly pleads for the salve of salvation, in Gods free gift of Christ's
righteousness imputed, to ascend by it to eternal felicity.

Therefore all mankind departing this world in Infancy or Childhood ascend by
death through him to eternal life.

Again, the passage of all Infants from the misery of this world by the sharp
separation of Soul and body, is to them Likewise so is the sharp separation
of Infants from their Mothers bowels in their birth, so notwithstanding that
sharp travel the mother shall be saved, if she continue in belief of the
object of justification, and in the inseparable companion of that belief,
namely inte^nall holiness issuing it self into external sanctification, as
is proved by the Apostle. 1 Timothy 2.15.

Therefore Circumcision precedently was, as the dipping or washing in Baptism
now is, viz. a witness, that Gods Covenant in Christ, reaches Infants that
cannot by Faith reach him, wherefore they were and are received into the
visible Church, by cutting and washing, the^eby witnessing, that the grace of
the Covenant gave to the whole nature of man, in the promised seed immediately
upon the fall, a meetly disposed nature in all, to receive eternal life as
saved creatures; but man remiss passes by this witness, and the like
mercies, but so did not the Queen of Sheba, although excluded from the
residence of the like mercies from her Kingdom.


but an implicit taste (by a figure) of Adams imputed sower herbs of punishment
for sin, to relish Gods sweet imputed mercies in Christ the Paschall Lamb to
Gods praise in him by the salvation of them to all eternity, therefore all
mankind dying in Infancy or childhood, ascend through death to glory for ever.

Again, these sower herbs by this Separation of Soul and body of all Infants
which departed this world before Christ came, by it, they then were but a
figure of him then to come, as says the Apostle, Romans 5. and the 14 to taste
not only of this Separation, which is but a shadow of death, but a figure of
him, as he was an imputed sinner, to taste of death, for all men in the
substance, according to the justice of that Covenant, and more, therefore it
being but a figure of him, it was only a passage to them to eternal life by
him.

Again, when God the second time renewed his promise of the Seed of the woman
with Abraham to the universal mercy of the Apostate world, as will afterward
appear, he then instituted Circumcision, namely, to cut off the foremost skin
from the member of generation of Infants, implying his only mercy in the
promised seed, was it, that cut from the Nature of mankind, the nature of
Devils though not totally. So fitting them to receive their Eternal felicity,
by Christ therefore they do enjoy it to all eternity.

Again But they which attribute so much to baptism, as that no baptism, no
salvation, it is b^t to assume the more seemin^ su^e stitions sanctity to draw
from the people the more respect to their aspired Antich^stian Priesthood.
also the Male Infant was precisely to be cut the eighth day after his birth,
this implicitly told their So baptising of Infants now is an outward seal to
the Church that although man's nature at once, was totally d abolicall, yet the
reduction of it to a seed by Christ, is the Principle of man's new birth.
Baptism further implies the spirit of Gods help to bring it to perfection in
his own way, that is, to the pe^fection of parts in this wo^ld, and to
perfection of degrees in the next.
parents that Gods merciful infusion by putting the foresaid principle of
enmity into the nature of all men was the original principle of man's new
birth, as risen with Christ, whose first step to glory, was to be on an eighth
day by his bodies resurrection, and therefore then on an eighth day precisely,
Infants were to be admitted visible members of Christ's mystical body on earth
in the Kingdom of grace, implying their right by him to his glory Then Infants
have much more right to be ^eceived into the Church Militant by Baptism
triumphant in Heaven.

From which ground when people brought little Children to Christ that he might
bless them, he was angry with the Apostles which kept them from him and
commanded them to suffer little Notwithstanding the males only were admitted
to be visible members of Christ's body by circumcision; yet not only the women,
but all the female Infants were then members of Christ's body, though they
received not the seal of the Covenant, they being not capable of it in their
flesh, yet the Grace of the Covenant in Christ received them to be visible
members, and the ground why that sign of the Covenant was precisely related to
the males, was to figure, that the Lamb of God of the seed of the woman was
not to be a female, but a male; therefore this hind eth not, but that the
Infants of believing parents under the Gospel, much more may be admitted
visible members by baptism, and from the beginning of the world, as appears
in the practice of the ten fathers before the flood, they esteemed their
Infants visible members of Christ; for in their infancy, they stablished upon
their persons by their names, the conveyance of the Oracle of life, or the
object faith once given to the Saints variously to ensuing posterities, as
appears at large in the fifth Chapter of this Treatise.
Children to come unto him, and renders this as a reason of his command; for of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore so departing this world, they ascend
to that Kingdom which so belongs unto them.



Christ's righteousness imputed, the^r sin should not only be cut off, in
the habit of sin in them against Christ weakened in this world; and in the
next world none Hence it is, God adding the law to the promise, gave this one
law, viz. that the Paschal Lamb must be eaten with sour herbs, Exodus 12.8.
to remain, but also that they in glory with Christ, should ever remain;
therefore God to Abraham called the sharp cutting of the foreskin of the
member of Generation, his Covenant, meaning, that to man believing truth that
sharpness was a seal of Christ's imputed righteousness, which they received
by faith, including their vivification and mortification, and the ground of all
happiness; for so it was to Abraham being circumcised at a full age, as Romans 4
And therefore says Christ, he that believes in me has eternal life.

Again, although God cut off the foreskin of the Member of generation, yet
but the foreskin; for he left the next innermost skin uncut off, this
implicitly told men capable of reason, that although the grace of the Covenant
did cut off the serpentine nature; yet he left a seed to remain, to let men
understand, that as Abraham could not be justified by works, having this
serpentine seed remaining in him, therefore in this life man must submit to God
gift of Christ's righteousness imputed, as did Abraham for justification, and
his rule for imitation; therefore says the Apostle being justified by faith,
(meaning men capable of reason) we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom also we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we
stand and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.1.2.

But the question may be here, Adam?

I answer no, for in the second Adam only, after the fall, justification in
him, and a rule for imitation for us; and therefore all our sins are against
that law of righteousness so manifested to us in him by the Covenant of grace,
and not as the law was in the first Adam a Covenant of works, and man capable
of reason stands bound so to receive it by belief of truth, in Christ Jesus,
or the rejection of this rule cuts him from Christ, for be that believes not
is condemned already, and that by just consequence, because he that is guilty
of sin in one, is guilty in all; for he that rejects it in point of
justification, rejects it also as his rule in point of sanctification, and from
this ground Moses pronounced that man accursed, which did not do all things
contained in the Law, that is, as not intentionally aiming to do all things
contained in that Law, as leading to Christ, as hereafter in due place will
appear.

Yet, if man did then, or now does, but at least intentionally respect this
object of Faith, as the truth is in Jesus, he is guilty of none, although he
actually sin in many things, wherein we offend all, Iam. 3.^.
and the ground of the point is this, that in Christ's righteousness imputed,
and by belief of truth received, as the truth is in Jesus, this man wants no
righteteousnesse, which in heart he desires to have in Christ, nor is guilty
of no sin which in heart he desires to be freed from, Romans 7.22.25. and Romans
8.1.

Adams sin, then how far forth does it also extend, to take off the guilt
and punishment of men's own sins, individually committed against the Law of
grace, as it is in Jesus Christ?

gift of righteousness, as the truth is in Jesus; for then it takes off all
manner of sin committed against him, (one sin only excepted) for, says
Christ, All manner of sin and blasphemy against the Son of man shall be
forgiven unto men, but the sin against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven
unto men, Mark. 3.

And the ground why God thus foreappointed Christ before the world was, to be
ready as the Ram in the bush, in that point of time, to enter the work of the
Covenant, to take off the just destruction of the world, and to state it thus,
to travel together with man-believing truth, to it is desired felicity, was
only this: namely, Gods love to the world; for, God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

Therefore the world must be only considered, as an object agreeable to Gods
will, because it was to him an object of love; for the truth is, God did so
consider it, and that in a twofold respect.

First, in all that good which God communicated to the good every way agreeable
to Gods will, and an object of love to him.

But if the justice of the Covenant had passed to execution, then God had
proceeded to annihilate all this good, not only in part, but totally and
eternally; but this went against his mind, therefore, he so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

That glory which was to result to God out of all the Adams supernatural
operation, was Gods final end for which he made all, namely, his glory, and
this was to God the object of good in the highest respect.

But if God had in the justice of the Covenant proceeded to execution, then
this his final end had been separated from him, and he might in the ruin and
destruction of the creatures to all eternity have glorified himself.

But from the creatures good his glory could never have returned to him in any
degree, much less from the highest spire of perfection intended in the
Covenant, as was Gods desire, but this was contrary to his mind; therefore God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, as his Lamb, to
take away the sins of the world, by regaining his glory in the redundancie
thereof, to the eternal praise of his mercy.

Is it so, that by this second Adam, Observation.
his satisfaction of Divine justice, God in mercy gave to all mankind alike,
the means and end, namely, Eternal life, and that the good of this world is a
remote means to the same end, as here we see?

Then hence observe, that all men, either poor or rich, which desire or
endeavor to attain the good of this world for them and theirs, and not as a
means to this end, they then in their imaginations and all their labors, are
but a mere lie and vanity; whence rightly says the Psalmist: Surely men of low
degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, Psalm. 62.9.

Again, is the good of this world, Gods gift in Christ, Observation.
a comfortable and remote means amongst many, to lead man to Christ, to
receive in him eternal life? then take this rule for a direction, not to be
dismayed to see some in want for their chastisement, and some for trial, and
some to abound; for those men which terminate their rests in wealth, and in the
pleasures and delights of this world, shall attain but a brutish rest here,
and never receive eternal rest in Angels glory hereafter; for this is but a
means and a remote one too: therefore he that sits down in this means, must
needs lose the end, and so perish eternally.

Here follow some Objections made by a Reverend Divine, which are accordingly
answered: and the Objections made by others, are answered in the twelfth
Chapter.
Object. 1. If Adams omitting to eat of the tree of Life were a Sin, and
that Sin of omission brought on her Sin of commission, she was not the
first occasion of his Sin, but first Sin a rose intrinsecus.

Answ. Neither in this page nor in any other is it said his omitting to eat of
the tree of Life was a sin, nor is it said, he did omit to eat the fruit of
this Garden, or of the tree of Life, but it is said, he was remiss of the
different end from his former Estate: why he was to eat of these fruits, as a
means thereunto, and his remissness to eat these fruits as such a means
brought his sin of omission, and that brought on his sin of commission.

Because of the natural liberties of their wills, therefore sin might arise
from within: Also because their righteousness and holiness did spring from
natural causes internally and externally, as Chap. 1. therefore righteousness
and holiness being not their nature they might mutually turn to good or evil.
Again, why might not sin in both of them arise from within, this second
Estate being so far different from the former Estate of creation? if their
understandings were not carefully applied to Gods rules in the Covenant, to
keep them from evil, and their wills to God, as a good more fully to be
communicated to them, then by the perfections of the creation: and the truth is
from the remissness of them both, it was that she was the first in the
transgression, with Satan by the Serpent, and he the second in the same by her.

Object. 2. Page 21.
Where you say all mankind were in reprobation, if you mean the case of
reprobates or guilt of damnation, it is true; but if you mean of Gods decree,
it crosses the doctrine of Election.

Answ. I mean, as it is explained in the page, namely, that in the fall of
Adam all mankind alike were reprobated under the guilt and due punishment of
eternal condemnation joined together with reprobate devils, as opposed to our
conjunction with elect Angels, in eternal glory, by virtue of the intended end
of Gods Covenant with Adam.

Again, I deny any such decree, and in the prosecution of the sixth point, I
have (as I believe) explained those Scriptures which reverend Calvin and you (I
suppose) do think, do prove that decree and case of Reprobates, and as for
that doctrine of Reprobation, the Scripture proves it no more then it does that
word Decree, which neither in the old Testament or the new is so much as
mentioned with reference to the point of Election and Reprobation, as I suppose
you mean.

Object. 3. Page 22.
The judgment was executed that very moment that Adam eat of the forbidden
fruit, in that instant he was dead in sin, and mortality seized upon his
body, and he stood guilty of eternal damnation.

Answ. True it is, judgment was executed the very moment that Adam eat the
forbidden fruit, yet not upon the first Adam, but only upon the second Adam,
as his Savior and ours, as page 24. and 25. figuratively in the blood of the
Lamb; or, if not, how, or why was he (as Saint John affirms) the Lamb slain
from the worlds foundation, Rev. 13.8. Or how was it, that as by one offense
judgment passed upon all men to condemnation; even so by one, righteousness
the free gift came on all men to justification of life, as Saint Paul
affirms, Romans 5.18. and as is explained in page 32. Or how was the work of a
perfect rest in Christ, by Faith, and in fruition by hope, finished from the
foundation of the world, as the Author to the Hebrews affirms, Hebr. 4.3. and
as is explained page 25.

To the second part of the Objection, true it is, by Adams default he was as
is described, page 30. dead in sin, far more deep then I suppose you
mean, for man being dead in sins and trespasses. against the universal grace
of God in Christ, is far different from that in Adams fall, as to be twice
dead and plucked up by the root, is different from them both, as in the
prosecution of the sixth point will clearly appear.

To the third part of the Objection, true it is, mortality seized upon his
body; but it is also as true that by mercy in the blood of the Lamb, man's body
came but thus to be mortal; for this mortality does but at most separate the
soul from the body, which is but the shadow of that death intended in the
Covenant for us in the fall of Adam, as is described, page 21. 22. 23. and as
will more appear by the death of the second Adam in the eighth Chapter
following.

Object. 4. Your observation is refuted, Romans 5.12.13. etc. Are all Infants
that die saved? if not, what is the cause of their condemnation?

Answ. To the first part, Romans 5.12.13. the Apostle to the praise of Gods
universal grace, parallelling the first Adam to the second Adam, he there
lays down a double Argument, the first, that although by Adams sin, sin
entered into the world, that is, originally, as the cause of all men's perishing
when they were dependant on him in the Covenant; for afterward he was (as are
all men, Christ only excepted) but a private man, cap. 5. So that Adams sin,
as now it is, is but the occasion of man's sin, by his own default to his
eternal destruction, and their own sin, is the only cause thereof, as
committed against Christ, and the ground thereof is expressed by the Apostle in
the 18. verse following.

Secondly, it is further employed, in these two verses, that that man's sins
now so committed, that is, against Christ to whom all power is given, and to
whom all stand related for good and evil, that the prevalency of their sin
against him, does increase the prevalency of the shadow of death unto them,
namely, the frequency of the separation of the soul from the body, and also of
death in the substance, namely, man's separation from God his chiefest good, in
this relation, and united to the contrary evil, and by his own remissness,
being ignorant of all; yet then God in mercy to the promise, added the Law to
reveal, to reckon or impute man's sin unto him, that he might see how he
run on his own misery; wherefore, in the 20. verse, rightly says the
Apostle, The Law entered, that the offense (as the spring of misery) might
abound, that where sin abounded, grace might much more abound, that as sin
had reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ, verse 21. Therefore my observation is confirmed
by the Apostle in these verses, and not refuted.

See these verses further explained in cap. 9. to the second part of the
objection: yes, all Infants are saved, and therefore I can show you what once
was the cause of their condemnation, namely, Adams one offense, when he was a
public person, and the sign of it now only remains in their nature, to meet
and dispose them as fit subjects, successively to receive salvation in the
universal grace of God by Jesus Christ as saved creatures, namely, the poison
of the Serpent, as reduced but to a seed, the foresaid infusion flowing from
the estate they are now in, namely, Gods universal mercy in the promised seed
imputed righteousness, as is further described, page 36. 37.

Object. 5. If Adam fell the ninth hour of the sixth day; Page 25.
how did God in the end of that day see all his works to be very good?

Answ. I demand of you, how he did see all his works the sixth day very good in
the end of that day seeing it is not mentioned so in the Text; and Moses says
expressly, that on the seventh day God ended his works, which he had made, and
therefore it remains for you to prove that God said so according to your
inference at the end of the sixth day; and in what sense Moses means that God
ended his work on the seventh day, see page 34.

Object. 6. The exposition of the particle, Put, Page 28.
savours of Semipelagianisme; so does the phrase of internal disposition
infused universally.

Answ. If that exposition which tends to demonstrate God only in Christ Jesus,
an unversall good to man, and that it pleased the Father, that in him all
fullness should dwell, and so in all things Christ must have the pre-eminence
to communicate even the least good to man, as a means to his chiefest good,
and all restored by Christ, then surely if this doctrine savor of
Semipelagianisme, it becomes you and I to be not only half, or almost, but
altogether Pelagians.

And that this does so demonstrate God in Christ, besides the maine scope of
this whole Treatise, see in cap. 6. and cap. 12. in my answer to the tenth
Objection, cap. 12. the which does most clearly prove the point.

Object. 7. The last clause is false. Page 30.


Answ. It is not so, until you have proved it so.

Object. 8. The universal election is false. Page ibid. Page 31.


Object. 9. Men perish for Adams transgression and their own.

Answer to both Objections: Both these Objections are answered in my answer to
the 21. and 22. pages precedently.

Object. 10. That justification without Faith, Page 33.
is against the current of Scripture.

Ans. That this text nominates justification, I am sure is true, Romans 5.18.
and that the Apostle relates this justification without relation to man's
receptive instrument of belief, is as true, for here the Apostle relates this
justification to man, as merely passive, when God was found of us that sought
him not, even when we as Adam received this imputation to life, and glory,
when God came to seek and to save that which was lost, not imputing out sin
to Adam according to the justice of the Covenant.

Therefore this justification as opposed to the ordinary reception of it by
man's instrument of belief, called justifying Man's belief receiving this
justification is therefore called justifying faith.
Faith, was extraordinary, and therefore although not according to the current
of Scriptures, yet according to the Scripture, as for example, that light which
was before the Sun, was made in an ordinary course, to communicate light unto
the world, was true light; so this truth is truth, though not according to the
current of Scriptures in an ordinary course.

But as for this justification, as related to man's receptive instrument in an
ordinary course, I have explained in the prosecution of the sixth point.

First in three degrees of justifying Faith.

Secondly, differenced other Faiths from that.

Thirdly, defined what justifying Faith is.

Fourthly, defined what is the perfection of justifying Faith.

Fifthly, how God brings the Faithful to that perfection.

And this will resolve the point according to the current of Scriptures in an
ordinary course.

Pa. 33. Pa. 34.
Object. 11. The last clause is erroneous.

Object. 12. The application of Evahs name to life in Christ, is erroneous.

Answer to both objections. Neither of them is erroneous, till you have proved
them so to be.

Pa. 36.
Object. 13. The assertion of the salvation of all Infants is without ground.
All are by Nature the Children of wrath, therefore guilty of damnation.

Answer. The first part is answered sufficiently in p. 22. and as for the
second part, that text Ephe. 2.3. the drift of the Apostle bears not your
application as to Infants, as appears in the explanation of that Text, Cap. 7.

Pa.
Object. 14. If the sixth point be meant of every individual, it is untrue.

Answ. You cannot well tell how to judge, until you have seen the point, for
the naming of it is one thing, but the point made good by proof is another
thing; and I do mean of every individual, and also do believe you will
find it to be true, and firmly proved, if you will well weigh the prosecution
of the sixth point, in the eight ensuing Chapters. And so much for the fourth
ground.

And now I proceed to the sixth point, Namely, That in this estate of
Restoration of the world by Christ Jesus the second Adam, God intends and
extends eternally life to every individual of mankind alike, without any
personal respect.

CHAP. V. Being the beginning of the sixth point of the unpartiall proceedings
of God for eternal life, intended and extended to every individual of
mankind, without personal respect in any kind, in this fourth Estate of
Restoration by Christ Jesus the second Adam.
WHereas all mankind alike, deservedly stood reprobated and rejected to perish
with the Devil and his Angels for ever, by due justice in the fall of Adam,
and from all relation to God in any good; Even then God elected from them all
in Christ, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: I say,
all and all alike, for he then removed from all the imputed guilt and
punishment of Adams offense, and Estated all mankind alike in the means, and
end of eternal life, by his free gift of Christ's imputed righteousness,
because it came upon all men to justification of life, as before is amplified:
and in this he proceeds through all times and generations of man, without all
respect of persons, which times I will ^o^erre to three heads.

First, from the time that Adam was cast out of the Garden, to Abraham's time.

Secondly, from Abraham to Christ his coming in the flesh, manifested in the
Gospel.

Thirdly, from that time to his coming to judge the world.

Of these in their Order.

To the first point, God having clothed the man and the woman in the skins of
man's comfortable redemption, He then cast them both from the Demonstrative
signification of the Garden, in a demonstrative vilification, for says Moses,
the Lord God said of the man, behold the Man is become like one of us, to know
good and evil, and now least he put forth his hand, and take of the tree of
life, and eat and live for ever. Therefore the Lord sent him forth from the
Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. Genesis 3.22.

And because God said, man is become as one of us, etc. herein the sacred
Trinity derideth man for his belief of lies, and unbelief through pride and
vanity, for refusing God his sacred verity.

Secondly, whereas God says, Now least he put forth his hand and take of the
tree of life, and live for ever, herein God contemptuously cuts him off from
the touch or taste of eternal life, according to the precedent figures of the
Covenant.

Again, when the text says, Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the
Garden of Eden to till the ground from whence he was taken: It implies, that
then God gave Adam to understand, he was now but a private man, as all his
offspring should be, Christ only excepted, and therefore neither the Creation
nor mankind, had dependancie upon his work for good and evil, as in the
Covenant precedently they had.

Again, when the Text says, God placed at the end of the Garden of Eden
Cherubins and a flaming Sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of Life: This implicitly told Adam, that if he turned back from Gods free
gift of the second Adams righteousness imputed, to attain eternal life, by
his own works of righteousness, as in the Covenant precedently he might: This
then should be his destruction in the flames of Gods consuming wrath, and
therefore the flaming Sword turned every way, implying Gods impartial
proceeding in this fourth Estate of man, and so leaveing Adam, I proceed to his
ensuing Posterity, Cain and Abell, and both of them we find instructed in the
principle of eternal life, namely, the Object of justification, which is Gods
gift of Christ's righ^eousnesse imputed, and therefore both bring to God an
atonement, and in this respect God declares his proceedings to be without all
respect of persons to either, for as their minds were different in this Sacred
object, so the manifestation of Gods mind was different to them, for says
Moses, Jehovah had respect unto Abell and his Offering; but to Cain and his
Offering he had noe respect, whereupon Cain was very wroth, and his
countenance fell.

And Jehovah said unto Cain, why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance
fallen? Implying, that his disrespect of Cain and his Offering was just, for
says God unto him, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
Interrogatively implying, yea most certainly, thou shall, as is Abell thy
Brother, but if thou do not well, sin lies at the door. Genesis 4.4.5.

The Question will be, what was well in Abells Offering? Cains Offering?

For Abell, this was well, Justifying faith believes the universal good of man
really included and intended by God in the object of justification, and does
not only assent to it, but also submits to receive his particular felicity to
all eternity, as included in that general me^cy.
implying his belief of the seed of the woman, the Lamb of God, as taking
away the sins of the World, and consequently his own.

Again, because the firstlings; this further employed, his belief in the seed
of the woman, as the first borne, from the dead fail of Adam, opening the womb
of all perfection, by whom he hoped to attain all blessedness.

Again, His Offering being of the fattest, this implied his high respect of
this sacred Mystery, by belief of truth, for by Faith says the Text, Abell
offered unto God, a more acceptable Sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained
witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gift. Heb. 11.4.

As concerning Cain it is also employed, what was well in his sacrificing; as
first, the thing which he brought, he

Secondly, he offered it not to Idols, but to Jehovah; and this was well: and
because the Text relates his offering with no further commendations, it implies
that no more good could be spoken of it, according to truth: So much for hat
was well.

Again, this was not well that his love to this mystery according to truth, in
the second Adam, brought him not to offer, for the Text implies that process
of time brought him to this business, Genesis 4.3.

Again, because the Text says, he brought the fruits of the ground to offer
to Jehovah; this implies his too high respect of things Terrestrial,
consequently, his profaneness to this Supernatural Mystery in the promised
seed, and in a word all his Religion at the best, was but to be conversant
about the object of Justification, and no way consonant to faith in that
object; For (says Moses) be was not only wroth, but very wroth, because God
gave no respect to his offering, which as before I noted, employed Cains too
high esteem of his Earthly offering brought unto God, but he whose heart is
so l^fted up, his mind is not good nor upright in him. Hab. 2.4.

Again, his heart was so fallen as appears by his countenance, because his
personal operations were rejected: this employed he came not to be accepted in
Gods gift of Christ's righteous operations as imputed, but in his own supposed
righteousness, wherefore his own sin lay upon him in his attracted habit,
guilt, and punishment, for he that believes not, the wrath of God abides upon
him.

But on the contrary, that if he did well, he should be accepted; God makes it
further apparent, by removing all persona^l respects from Abell, for as
concerning him (says God) to Caine, unto thee shall be his desire subject, and
thou shall rule over him, implying two things.

First, whereas thou art the first borne, and so a figure of the first borne of
every Creature, in this respect Abells desire shall be subject unto thee, in
love and reverence to that mystery.

Secondly, as he is thy younger Brother, so thou art his protector, supporter
and instructor, in which respects thou shall still rule over him, for I look
not to his person more then to thine, but with respect to his submitting unto
me, in the fullness of my mercy; and if thou do well shall thou not be
accepted? if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: but Cain remissely
harkened to this reproof, and gracious encouragement, for in the next place
Moses says, Cain talked with his Brother, but tells not what talk it was, yet
implicitly points, it was some hateful speeches, because it ended in his
blood, for says the text, It came to pass when they were in the field, that
Cain rose up against his Brother and slew him. From whence Saint John rightly
affirms, that Cain was of that evil one, as implying Cains amity with Satan,
in the Spirit of concision, cutting from his soul, the foresaid infused
enmity, derived in his natural conception, therefore he was of that evil one,
lifted up in the Spirit of Satan against Gods way of salvation, by Christ's
righteousness imputed for says Saint John, he sl^w his Brother, because his
own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous. 1 John 2.12.

And for this, God comes against Cain, for says Moses, Jehovah says unto
Cain, where is Abell thy Brother? Cain answered in the Spirit of a liar and
murderer, saying, I know not, am I my Brothers keeper? but God charged the
Fact upon him, saying, what have thou done? the voice of thy Brothers blood
cries unto me from the earth, wherefore God turned the flaming Sword of his
wrath (which turned every way against Cain) by pronouncing this sentence,
saying, now thou art accursed from the earth, which opened her mouth to receive
thy Brothers blood from thy hand: when thou tillest the ground, it shall not
from henceforth yield to thee her strength, a fugitive and Vagabond shall thou
be in the earth.

To which Cain replies, (for says Moses) Cain said unto JEHOVAH, my iniquity
is greater then can be forgiven, and so my punishment is greater then I can
bear, because it shall never be removed, ver. 12.13.

Again, he bids God behold or consider, what was his punishment? for says
he, thou have driven me out from the face of the Earth, and from thy face
shall I be hid, and shall be a Fugitive and Vagabond in the Earth, for it shall
come to pass, that every one that finds me shall slay me.

To which God answers him to this effect, So that one and the same person
individually considered, may at one time be the subject of Gods unfeigned or
entire grace and mercy in Jesus Ch^^st, and another time the subject of his
consuming and everlasting wrath.
as for my precedent sentence, it is now unrevocable, for thou who did refus^
acceptance and pardon of sin, and life eternal upon my interrogative
affirmation, if thou would but apply thy self to me in my mercy to thee:
But thou instead of circumcising the seed of the Serpent, have cut off from
thee by custom in sin, my infused principle of Amity toward me, from thy
Spirit, and joined to Satan mine adversary against me, in my salvation so
freely tendered and fully intended unto thee.

For thou have slain thy Brother, only because he submitted unto me in my
gift of righteousness imputed for his salvation, therefore as I told thee, if
thou did not well, sin should lie at the door, so thy guilt and punishment
now shall rest irrevocably upon thee to all eternity only this will I do for
thee in this worlds contentments for a time, I will assure thy abode, therefore
says God, whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven fold,
and Jehovah set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should k ll him.

Thus when the noble Spirit of man departs from Gods presence of grace, it
setleth its abode in ^er^est^iall con^entments, suitable to the corporal body,
or corruptible part of man but they that sow to the flesh, of the flesh shall
^eape corruption.
Whereupon Cain went out from the presence of Jehovah, and dwelt in the Land of
Nod, on the East side of Eden, and his posterity on Earth began to spring out
and multiply: he built a City and called it by the name of his Son Enoch.
And so now I descend from this Model of Gods impartial proceedings in these
two, as to the whole mass of mankind.

And Cain thus remaining under wrath, Abell being translated to the glory of
Angels by his receiving Christ's righteousness the object of life; Adam and
Eve now remained alone, to possess this day of Grace, namely this world as a
day of Grace, for only with them remained the Oracle of eternal life, that is,
a Promise of the seed, to break the Serpents head: therefore this Oracle or
object of justification as the ground of all true Religion, to descend to
posterity, was altogether unsettled, by reason of Abells ascent to blessedness,
and Cains abiding under cursednesse, as cut off from Gods presence of Grace,
for says he, from thy face shall I be hid, so went out from the presence of
God: therefore Cains Posterity, as borne and bred remote, from the pillar of
truth, and life of Religion, under their Fathers exemplary concision, were
carried as a stream to all ungodliness, wherefore when God gave Eve the next
man-child, Genesis 4.25. she called his name Seth, that is, settled sure, as says
Reverend and Learned Broughton, in his Treatise upon the first ten Fathers.

And, says Moses, Adam knew his wife again, and she bare a son, and called
his name Seth; for God said she, has appointed me another seed ^nsteed of
Abel, whom Caine slew.

Again, Genesis 5.3. the Text says, Adam begat a son in his own likeness,
and called his name Seth, implying the production of this Child every way
answered the image of A^ams desire, that is, to enjoy issue, which might stand
in the same image or likeness that himself did, to enjoy this day of grace,
as a day of grace, to convey the Oracle of life to ensuing posterity, and
therefore he joined with Evah, in this childs name, and called his name Seth:

So leaving his mind to posterity in his sons name, that the conveyance of
the pillar of truth, was settled sure to future generations.

Again also, to Seth was borne a son, and he called h^s name Enos: Kings
translation adds, that then men began to call upon the name of the Lord, that
is, Seths posterity began to multiply, being the visible Church, containing by
tradition the pillar of truth, or object of Faith once given to the Saints.

Yet learned Broughton says, the letters of the name of Enos in the
appellative signifies sorrowfull-grievous, that is, then began corruption,
touching the calling on the name of God.

The truth is, this ground also is good; The Kings translation and Bro^ght^ns
^econciled.
for then began the multiplication of Cains posterity, as in number, so in
corruption by concision, touching the calling on the name of the Lord; For by
their exemplary evil, it came to pass that those which were the sons of
God, in the profession of this object of Justification, fell away by affinity
with them, and this is employed, Genesis 6. where it is said, it came to pass when
men began to multiply upon the face of the Earth and daughters were borne unto
them, then the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair,
and they took them wives of ^ll that they chose, implying not what God liked
etc.

Wherefore, Seth seeing the beginning of this evil, he in the appellative
letters of his sons name, left by tradition his mind to the world, telling
them this was sorrowful and grievous unto him, and all godly men; for so it
was to En^s, wherefore he named his son, Cainan, that is, to lament, says
reverend Broughton, and yet he whose name signified Lamentation, named his
son Mahalaleel, that is, as the same Broughton says, a praiser of God,
implying notwithstanding this lamentable object, yet to man believing truth
there was remaining a twofold ground of praise to God:

First, for the light of eternal felicity which shined in his gift of Christ's
righteousness imputed, the Lamb figuratively slain from the foundation of
the world, and all included in the promised seed, as the object of Faith once
given to the Saints.

Secondly, to praise God for his firm truth in the certain destruction of the
power of Satan, although then it remained in a world of sinful men; for, it
shall break thy head, wherefore this Praiser of God also leaves his mind to
the world by tradition, in the name of his son, calling him Iared, that is,
descending, says Broughton, foretelling the worlds descent in ungodlines to
misery as without hope of return; wherefore this hopeless man names his Son
Enoch (as says Broughton) signifying dedicated, or consecrated to God,
implying he would dedicate him and his to God, according to truth, though the
stream of the world run a contrary way, following lying vanities, forsaking
their own mercies.

And God answered this happy resolution in his son, for he by Faith in the
faithless world that then was, walked with God, and he was not says the Text,
for God took him away, that is he never died, but in soul and body jointly
ascended to the glory of Angels, by which figure being the seventh from Adam,
God condemned the faithless world, that he really and mercifully prepared
that glory in eternal felicity for them; But they cast it away by their
Apostasy from him and gave themselves up to fleshly and terrestrial
contentments, implied when God says, My spirit shall not always strive with
man, for that he also is flesh.

Therefore Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied of the destruction of that
world, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to
execute judgment, and to reprove all that are ungodly among them of all their
ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against them, Jude. 14.

Wherefore this man leaves his mind by tradition to the world in the name of
his son also; for he called him Methusalah, that is, (as says Broughton) God
sends, that is, his certain judgment upon the wicked of the world.

And Methusalah therefore named his son Lamech, as says the same Author,
signifying striking, implying, Gods final stroke to the destruction of the
world did now draw near.

Again, Lamech prophesied, that God would after that destruction, by Christ
give a comfortable restoration of the world, and left it by tradition in the
name of his son whom he called Noah, which signifies comforter, or restorer,
as says Broughton.

Again, by Noah God prepared the Arc, which in a figure was Christ, implying,
that although now God set up his flaming sword, turning it every way, that none
could escape, namely, the flood, signified by Noah's building the Arc.

Yet by this Arc so long a building, was farther signified, that God would
rather glorify his mercy in their salvation, then his justice in their
deserved destruction.

Wherefore Genesis 6. although he says. My spirit shall not always str^ve with
man, for that be also is flesh, as the bruit beast (for that is employed) yet
then he says, his days shall be an hundred and twenty years, implying so
long time he would give them to return to be accepted in his beloved son the
Arc of salvation.

And this he did, although he knew that from Caines exemplary concision, the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, yea, every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, then it God is said to repent
not in any respect of his internal divine glory, for in his unmeasurable
perfections, he is one entire serene stillness, but God is said properly to
repent according as he does d^aw back that good or ev ll which he
communicates to man by that second definitive rule of truth, mentioned, ca. 8.
by which he ordinarily wills his glory, to ^eturne to himself from man.
repented the Lord that he had made man in the earth, and yet all the said time
of Noah's preparing the Arc before their eyes, God did by it excitively draw
them, implicitly telling them, yet there was mercy for them.

But this mercy they despise, minding only earthly contentments, agreeable to
sense, as the bruit, as is further employed by the words of our Savior, F^r,
says he, in the days of Noah that were before the flood, they were eating
and drinking, and marrying, and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the Arc. And that all this time God did excitively draw them to
return to him by Christ, is witnessed by Saint Peter; for, says he, God (in
the spirit of Christ) preached to them who sometimes were disobedient, when as
once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was
in preparing; and as I said before, this grace they despised, wherefore God
spared not the old world of the ungodly, but brought in the flood, etc. Mat.
24.38. 1 Pet 3.19.20. 2 Pet. 2.5.

Yet here we must not judge, that all that perished in this temporal
judgment, perished eternally: For godly men sometimes in Gods general
judgments, are swept away for their great remissness to Gods great mercies,
extended to them, and yet pass through that shade of death to eternal life,
as did good old Eli and as did meek Moses, whose carcass fell in the
wilderness amongst the rest, yet God let him see the terrestrial Canaan a
figure of the celestial felicity, as a pledge of his sure passage through that
shade of death to eternal life: so also all in this flood who perished being
Infants or in childhood or natural Idiots or the like passed through this
dreadful flood to eternal felicity.

Therefore, O Lord, thou punishest unwillingly, nor grievest the children of
men, to crush under thy feet all the prisoners of the earth, Lam 3.33.

Again, where Saint Peter referres salvation to Noah, saying, that Noah the
eighth person was saved, he means not but the other seven in that Arc,
which was the figure of Christ, were also saved in it from the stood.

But in the number eight another thing is meant namely, as an eighth day was to
be the promised seed, his resurrection day, therefore here the number of eight
as referred only to Noah, employed, that although the other seven were saved
from that flood in the Ark, ye: Noah only then was saved in it as risen with
Christ by faith in the object of justification, by which he built the Arc to
the saving of his house, by which he condemned the world, and became heir of
the righteousness which is by faith, Hebr. 11.7. figuratively implying, that
God in Christ is the Savior of all men, from Adams transgression, and more to
live in this day of Grace, to receive by faith his free gift of life in glory,
yet his salvation is more special to them that believe, as here in Noah we
see, and as before is noted, Cap. 4.

Again, God having in the Arc saved both man and beast, at least paires of
all kind: At their coming out of the Arc, then Noah, that by faith rested
only upon the pillar of truth, and object of life; for the good of this life
and a better, he no sooner comes out of the Arc into the world, but he
refreshed his heart by faith in the seed of the woman's satisfactory
righteousness, as the only ground of all blessedness, Genes. 8.20.

In Adam pu^e naturalls man had a natural ^ight to the creatures and the good
of the^ afterward by the Covenant not only that, but also a right to the
Creatures in a supernatural relation and then that right in the fall being
l^st, then the second Adam as the firstborn of every c^eature, opened the
womb of all perfection, toward which it does travel til now, and then God by
g^ft conferred upon all mankind divine right of this life, and that to come; so
likewise, when by the universal apostasy of man, that right was deservedly to
be cut off, yet, then God established by Ch^ists satisfactory sacrifice to man
a right, as to the world to come; so to the creatures till time shall be no mo
e, as here we see, therefore all mankind have a divine right to the Creatures.
Wherefore God manifested to all of them, that on it he rested also fully
contented and satisfied toward the world yea, although now God did foresee
the concision of the hearts of the children of men for future times against him
as it precedently was in Caines posterity; yet upon Christ's satisfactory
righteousness, he now ratifies to all mankind this worlds good, till time
shall be no more, to be man's day of Grace, to receive Gods gift of eternal
glory, for, says Moses, Jehovah smelled a Savor of rest, and Jehovah said in
his heart, I will not again curse the earth any more for man's sake; for the
imaginations of man's heart is evil from his youth, neither will I any more
smite every thing living, as I have done, while the earth remains; Seed-time
and Harvest, and cold and heat, and Summer and Winter, and day and night, shall
not cease verse. 21.22.

And accordingly in the next Chapter, God again renewes his merciful
production, of mankind: for, This is the third production of mankind given by
God: the first before the fall, Genesis 1. the second by Christ the second Adam,
and restorer of all, Genesis 3.16. the third is this, merciful restoration.
says Moses, God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, be fruitful
and multiply, and replenish the earth.

Also he gave man right over the Creatures, and a Law to eat flesh, letting
out the blood thereof: also a law against murdering of mankind, Verse 2.3. And
commands them to consider all this, to be the renewing of his Covenant of Grace
universally to all mankind.

For, says Moses, God says unto Noah, and his sons with him, saying, And I,
behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you for
ever, and with every creature that is with you v. 8.

Also God gave them the Rainbow as a witness of this mercy to perpetual
generation, Verse 13. and Verse. 16. says God, the Bow shall be in the cloud, I
will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting Covenant between God
and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth, etc.

And in the next place, Moses tells us the manner of the proceedings between
God and this new Generation, Chap. 11. Verse 1. He tells us, the whole earth
was then of one language, and also in process of time, whither they journed
and at length settled; For he says, it came to pass as they journied from the
East, they found a plain in the Land of Shynar, and they dwelt there: Also he
tells what they said, and what they did with an unanimous consent. They said one
to another, Go too, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly, and they had
brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar.

And they said, go too, let us build us a City and a Tower, whose top may
reach unto Heaven. And then he tells us to what end and purpose was this great
building set up, by all these great Counsel, cost and labor, namely, that
their own imaginations, and the work of their own hands might get them an
immortal Name and Fame on earth; For they said, Let us make us a name, lest we
be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole Earth.

This implies they all were now in this plain Resident, and also their
apostasy universally from God in the Pillar of truth in which Oracle was wrapped
up the gift of mortal and immortal good; for from it we see upon Noah's
sacrifice he conveyed to them and theirs, all happiness present and to come:
So here you see the manner of the proceedings of this new generation toward
God for all his gracious mercy by the promised seed his satisfactory
righteousness.

Again, it follows in what manner God proceeded for this to them, says
Moses, Jehovah came down to see the City and the Tower that the children of
men builded, and Jehovah said, the people are all one, and they have all one
language, and this they begin to do, and nothing will restrain them from that
which they have imagined to do.

These words imply two things; first, that this building to the foresaid end,
was very offensive to God: secondly, that they were so far gone in this
transcendent mischief, as no ordinary means could restrain their desired
purposes, and therefore God resolves upon an extraordinary means to divert
them: For, says the sacred Trinity, Go to, let us go down, and there
confound their language, that they may not understand one another, and this did
effect it; For says Moses, Jehovah scattered them from thence abroad upon the
face of all the earth, and they left off to build the City, therefore is the
name if it called Babel, because Jehovah there confounded the language of all
the earth.

And in the tenth Chapter Moses relates in what parts of the world these
scattered families did first settle, and then concludes, saying, These are the
Families of the sons of Noah, after their generations in their Nations, and
by these were the Nations divided after the flood.

And so much for the first part of the time of Gods impartial proceedings to
mankind, from which precedent premises observe these particulars.

First from whence all heathenish Paganism or Gentilisme did originally
spring, namely, from Gods just punishmen^ of this peoples universal Apostasy
from the Pillar of truth, and Oracle of life and glory, descending so famously
to them by tradition from Adam by Noah, and renewed to them by Covenant from
God; therefore for this universal apostasy, he left them universally to
walk in the vanity of their own minds, as without God in the world, about
eighteen hundred years.

Secondly, observe that for man's turning from God in this object of
Justification; therefore the sacred Oracle was three times confined to narrow
bounds.

First, when Caine had killed Abel, then it was confined to Adam and Evah, and
so down to the Families of the ten first Fathers before the flood.

Secondly, then confined in the Arc to Noah and his Family, when God drowned
all the offspring of the ten Fathers, together with Caines Posterity, being
partakers in apostasy from truth to lying vanities; so by punishment in woeful
miseries.

Thirdly, confined now at Babel, when God cast off all the Nations for casting
away him in his truth and special mercies, then was the object of life and
glory confined to the Family of Shem, impleyed, Genesis 11. from the 10. verse to
the end of the Chapter, by Moses, recording Shems Genealogy in the Book of
Life, and none else, mentioning their births, their days of life and their
particular deaths.

Thirdly, observe how that righteous Noah lived, and saw the apostasy of the
old world, and their punishment; his Babel, and their punishment, the apostasy
of Shems Family, and so left this world, and that family languishing so far,
as worshipping the Idol Gods of the Heathen, Josh. 24.23. And says Broughton,
in his consent of Scripture, Noah died but two years before Abraham was borne;
therefore he lived to see all this.

Fourthly, observe, that notwithstanding all these apostasies, yet by tradition
God upheld the Oracle of life in the world to this time; For Shem now
personally continued constant in the truth, figuratively, personating Christ as
King of Peace and Priest of the most high God, after the power of an endless
life, although man unbelieving descends down to endless death.

Therefore Gods proceedings in this first part of time was to all mankind
alike without respect of persons: as he originally said to Caine, If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? But if thou do not well, sin lies at the
door, as precedently is explicated.

CHAP. VI. Opening the second part of time, namely, from the time that God
called Abraham, to the time that he called the Gentiles by Christ in the Gospel.
Whereas all Families of the earth at this time were cut off from the Oracle
of life, and Shems Family, to which it was last confined, by apostasy, lay now
perishing in their own corruptions; yet then comes God, and renewes his gift
of Christ's righteousness imputed to come upon all men to justification of
life; for now he predestined all mankind to life and glory, the second
time, to enjoy this day of grace, namely, this world, as a day of grace, to
receive by belief of his gift of Christ's righteousness, imputed the day of
eternal glory.

This extraordinary mercy thus universally renewed by this second pr
destination, not only proves the sufficiency of Christ's imputed
righteteousnesse, as the Fathers gift for the salvation of all and all alike,
but also Gods willingness to have it effectual, as to a reasonable creature
to bring him to happiness according to his kind, not only in an ordinary
way, but sometimes extraordinarily, as appears in the 9. and 10. chapters.
I say all, for I mean, both Shems Family and all the Families of the Earth,
which at this time comprehended all mankind (none excepted) and for proof of
this point Genesis 12. says Moses concerning this Predestination, Jehovah had
said unto. The Covenant in Christ which God renewed with Abraham is here
distinguished into its parts.
Abraham, get thee from thy Country and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers
House, to a Land that I will show thee, and then at that time says God to him,
I will make of thee a great Nation.

In which words, in Abraham's Loins, God did now predestinate the Jews
unborne, to Grace and Glory in Jesus Christ.

Again secondly, says God to Abraham, Thou shall be a blessing, and I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee: In these words,
in Abraham's Loins, is employed the glorious exaltation of Christ the second
Adam, and savior of the world, as proceeding therein without respect of
persons.

Again thirdly, says God to Abraham, In thee shall all the Families, of the
Earth be blessed: In these words is comprehended the Gentiles Predestination to
Grace and glory in Jesus Christ, for to him restrictively were all these
promises made, as witnesses Saint Paul, for says he To Abraham and his seed
were the Promises made, yet said he, God said not unto Yet Christ and right
believers is th s most p^oper seed c^nsidered in his most peculiar mystical
body, for Christ is co^siderable in diverse respects.
seeds as of many, that is, to all the Offspring of Abraham in the flesh, but
as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ, Gal. 3.16.

Therefore at this time all mankind was Predestinate to Grace and glory in
Jesus Christ, without difference, as upon the immediate fall of Adam For from
the time that God promised Christ to Adam till the Gospel was unveiled this
mystery lay as hid. Col 1.26. Ephesians 2.7.
, when this righteousness came upon all men to justification of life, so now
in this predestination, to be Vessels of mercy, being by their own Therefore
it must needs follow, that when we were enemies to him, God communicated his
love and mercy upon man, out of love to the glory and praise of his grace, by
the second Adam Christ Jesus
Apostacy Vessels fitted to destruction: wherefore when these Gentiles were
called to the reception of this grace in the object of Justification: rightly
does Saint Paul then say. God made known the riches of glory on the vessels
of mercy, whom he had before prepared unto glory, even us whom he has called,
not only of the Jews but also of the Gentiles, Romans 9.23, 29.

Also when the Apostle called these Gentiles according to Gods purpose, about
18-hundred years after this Predestination, he then says, those whom he did
foreknow, them he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his
Son, that he might be the first borne among many brethren.

And in the next verse he tells, the Gentiles God now accordingly had effected
it, for he says moreover, whom he did predestinate, them also he called, and
whom he called them also he justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. Romans 8.29, 30.

And from this ground, the Apostle rightly concludes, that this promise of God
to Abraham contained the Sum of the Gospel concerning the Gentiles for says
he the Scriptures, All these Texts referrs Predestination not to any decree
before Abraham's time.
foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, Preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. Gal.
3.8.

Again, to proceed from this general ground to a particular proceeding in
this universal mercy, and to begin where God begins, that is, at the
Restoration of Shems Family to glory.

And because this glory is restored to this Family from one man's Loins only,
namely Abraham this directs us to two things. First, that the precedent
Apostates of Shems Family were cut off by God from Christ, therefore he would ra
s^ the Jews as a new generation, but from this one man's loins of Shem,
Offspring to enjoy this mercy.

Secondly, it implies that man's deepest misery is Gods most proper object of
mercy, therefore from this Son of Terah, of Shems Appostate Family, he now
promises to make not only a Nation, but also a Nation great and glorious, and
from this ground of Free Grace in future times, when this Nation was a great
People and famous, but ungrateful to God for this honor, God then tells, thy
birth and thy Nat^vity is of the Land of Canaan, that is, an Idolatrous brood
for says God, God would have them to consider what they were, when he
predestined them to this glory in the promised seed with Abraham.
thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother a Hittite, etc. as Josua 24, from
the 2. ver. to the 6. and Ezekiel 16. from the 3. to the 15. to the 15. yet in
the mercy of this promised seed, God gave to the Son of this Idolatrous brood
three things.

First he gave him a Land.

Secondly, from his own Loins, a Nation great and glorious to inherit that
Land.

Thirdly, The seed from his own Bowels, in whom that Nation was to be heirs
entailed to that Land for ever.

To the first point, Genesis 12.7. Moses says, Jehovah appeared unto Abraham, and
said unto him, unto thy seed will I give this Land. Cap. 13.14. Jehovah said
unto Abraham, lift up now thine eyes and look from this place where thou art,
Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward, for all the Land which
thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. Chap. 15.18.
Jehovah made a Covenant with Abraham saying, Unto thy seed have I given this
Land, from the River of Egypt, unto the great River Euphrates, etc.

Again to the second point, namely the gift of a great and glorious Nation,
from his own Loins to inherit this Land, as Chap. 13.16. I will make thy seed
as the dust of the Earth, So that if a man can number the dust of the earth,
then shall thy seed also be numbered, likewise Chap. 15. and 5. he brought him
forth abroad and said, look up now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if
thou be able to number them, and he said unto him, so shall thy seed be.

Again to the third point, namely the gift of the seed in whom this glorious
and great Nation should be heirs entailed to this promised land forever: for
when Abraham had thought that he should be Childlesse, and therefore determined
to make Eleazar his heir, to what God had given him, then Gen, 15.3. behold
the word of Jehovah came to him saying, this shall not be thine heir, but he
that shall come forth of thine own bowels shall be thine Heir, and
accordingly from him did spring this numberless Nation to inherit this
Promised Land in the right of the seed promised precedently to Adam and now
renewed to be the Son of Abraham after the flesh by promise 430 years before
the Law, as it is Gal. 3.16, 17 and Genesis 13.15. the Land was not in-tail'd by
promise in the Plural to seeds, but to thy seed for ever, meaning in Christ
as figured in Isaak the Child of Promise.

Therefore this Terrestrial Canaan was intaild to them in Christ for an
everlasting inheritance, as it was a figure of the Caelestiall Canaan, yet
eternal life entailed with this proviso, implicitly of their right submittance
in belief of truth, and so to enjoy this day of grace as a day of grace: and
therefore at this universal Predestination in Christ, God gives this general
rule, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. That
is, blessing more special to them, which by belief of truth, rightly receive
all good in the imputed righteousness of this seed, as did Abell, the first
ten Fathers, and Abraham their Father, or the contrary to them that believe not
this truth, as to Cain, the old world, the Offspring of Noah, Shems Posterity
and Terah Abraham's Father: So that Gods proceedings by this Covenant in the
promised seed, was here laid down without all respect of persons, Jews or
Gentiles, both being comprehended in this Covenant.

Again to go on, for in the raising of this Nation from misery to mercy in
Christ Jesus, God expressed himself in diverse figures, as first in the manner of
Isaacs conception and birth, he being the Child of promise, therefore that God
might by this figure lead this Nation by a straight line, to receive by belief
of truth this land, as their terrestrial day of grace, and to receive by Faith
in Christ's righteousness, the celestial day of glory; therefore he gave the
natural being of this Nation, not so much from the force of nature, as from
Faiths object, for Abraham's natural force in the flesh, especially Sarahs
womb was now as good as dead to this production, yet she by belief of the
promised Messiah in Isaac to spring figuratively So that Isaac was borne after
the Spirit and therefore as a right figure of Christ's b^th^ so also of all
believers which are borne after the will of God, and not of the will of the
flesh, as was Ishm^ell, the figure of all which, walk after the will of the
flesh in terrestrial contentments; and so Hagar in Arabia, and Sarah in the
Land of Promise, were figuratively two Testaments, as Gal. 4.24, 25.

Romans 4.19. Heb. 11.12. Genesis 12.12.


from her womb, she received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a
Child, from whence sprang this numberless Nation to Christ as head, and his
national spouse elect, as members, being promised to issue as numberless from
Abraham's Loins, then dead to tha^ production, (...) were a figure of Christ
and his numberless members of right believers, yet A^^aham to be such a Father
in these three respects believed God was able and faithful to accomplish that
p^omise, and therefore humbly submitted in belief, to receive in that gift the
righteous seed: his satisfactory righteousness imputed all that felicity,
according to this fourth estate of man, and therefore God reckoned or imputed
or manifested to Abraham, that that act, was very suitable or agreeable to his
mind, as in another case, he expressed to Phineas, Numb. 25.10, 11. See this
further explained at the end of the exposition of the ninth of the Romans in cha.
6.
this honor.

Yet when Sarah would cast out Ishmaell from inheriting this honor with Isaac,
this to Abraham was grievous, then said God to Abraham, let it not be grievous
in thy sight, because of the Lad, and because of the bondwoman: In all that
Sarah has said unto thee, hearken to her voice: for in Isaac shall thy seed be
called, that is, figuratively in him to Christ by this straight line, to
receive the riches of mercy only in him, in whose righteousness imputed, I
received all upon Adams fall, as now by Restoration, I intend to receive all,
wherefore Abraham accordingly in this righteousness received the riches of
grace to him and the whole world, and it was imputed to him for righteousness)
as says the Apostle, Romans 4.3.11.13. Genesis 15.6.

And hereupon God gave Abraham circumcision as the Seal of the righteousness
imputed in the object of Faith, which he received by belief of truth, and then
God gave this rule, that that man or Family which refused to receive this Seal
of righteousness, which is by Faith, should be cut off from the national
spouse of Christ, Genesis 16.14. implying Gods impartial proceedings toward
them, as precedently to Abell and Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? if thou do not well sin lies at the door.

Again, to go on with this elect Nation, and then we meet with another
remarkable figure, when Rebecca also had conceived twinns by Isaac, God then
considered these two babes in her womb, as two Nations and two manner of
people to be separated from her bowels, for so to Rebecca God explaines
himself. Genesis 25.

And because God by tradition intended to lead this Nation by this figure, as
by a straight line of truth, to know in future times, that that rise from their
Idolatrous den, to this honor in Abraham's Loins, was with no respect to
Abraham's person more then to any other man's, but only to Gods merciful
election, as before is described: therefore before the Babes were borne, God
elected the youngest Babe and his posterity to this honor, but he rejected
from this honor the eldest babe and his posterity, although he was the
firstborn in the natural line, as hateing this Elect Nations rise to this
mercy, with any respect to Abraham's or Jacobs fleshly line, as any cause moving
him so to do.

Therefore he did this, that the purpose of God, according to the Election
might stand only, according to his call of Abraham from an Idolatrous den by
mercy from that misery.

Again, this Election and rejection of these babes and their posterity, was
before the babes were borne, as here we see, and therefore as says Saint Paul,
it was before they had done good or evil, and so this figure told this Nation,
that as their evil works in Terah (from whom in Abraham's flesh they came) did
not hinder God from showing mercy to them being miserable, so neither on the
contrary, did any good As not works so not faith foreseen in Abraham or any
other, is any ground of Gods election of miserable man to life and glory, but
only Gods love to himself in the glory of his free grace in Jesus Christ, is
the ground of election, as when God elected all mankind from reprobate devils,
we being the same with them in Adams fall, so also the second time when he
elected both Jews and Gentiles in the promised seed by Covenant with Abraham,
when they were all gone out of the way of peace, and became abominable by their
Apostasy from that grace, as in this Chap. does appear.
works of Abraham's or theirs foreseen, further or bring on this honorable
election, to temporal and eternal felicity in Christ Jesus.

And therefore that the purpose of God might stand, not of works, but of him
that calls, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Genesis 25.22, 23. Malach.
1.2, 3.

Thus to this Nation God set up Abraham, Isaak and Jacob; persons for three
pillars, to preach through future Generations, that not with respect to their
persons more then others, but only in his gift of the seed of the woman's
righteousness imputed to them, he raised them from an Idolatrous brood,
perishing in the examplary concision of their Ancestors corruptions, to be
Christ's National Spouse elect: See page 72, 73.

Again, to descend with this Nation, we find them then in Egypt under great
opressions by the cruelty of Pharaoh, but from thence with a high hand God
delivers them, figuratively in the bloodshed of Christ, the Paschall lamb
leading them thereby to Christ, his acceptable righteousness imputed by God to
them, as the only ground of removing their deserved miseries, conferring upon
them undeserved mercies as he promised to Abraham in this promised seed, about
400 years before, Genesis 25.13 14. Exodus 14.13.

And so God leads them from Egypt through the Wilderness, with his high hand
of providence, toward the promised land, the figure of eternal felicity; for
says God to them, You have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare
you on Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self. Exo. 19.

Yet to God by belief of his truth in the promised seed, so famous by
tradition descending to them from Adam, by the ten Fathers before the Flood
down to Abraham, with whom he renewed this mercy for them; they nevertheless
by remissness, passed over all this, preferring the Onyons and fleshpots,
and pleasurable treasures of Egypt, before the riches of the promised land,
their day of grace, and figure of Gods gift of their eternal glory in Christ
Jesus; for when God tried them, their minds were but flesh, that is, only
agreeable to sensual objects, as the bruit and no higher: For neither reason
nor Faith of Gods gift in Christ was of any use, wherefore God swear, they
should never enter the figure of eternal rest: implying, his impartial
proceedings to them as to Cain and Abell.

Again, yet because of their remissness (they being thus habituated to
transgress the oracle of life and glory, in the promised seed) therefore to
the promise, God added the law in holy writ, to convey through their
generations, this object of Faith more firmly, that so they might eat the same
Spiritual meat, and drink the same Spiritual drink, in right belief of
truth, as did all that lived by Faith before them, and as do all that now live
in right belief of truth after them: for the flesh of the Sacrifice which they
did eat at their Feasts; also the flesh of the Paschall lamb, was the flesh
of Christ to them in a figure, therefore in belief of truth in that figure,
they did or might eat the flesh of Christ, as now believing man does
Sacramentally, in bread and wine, and so to them: Christ's The flesh of Beasts
was not then turned into the flesh of Christ, nor was the Rock which followed
them, turned into the nature or person of Christ, although that Rock then was
Christ, as 1 Cor. 10.4.
flesh was meat indeed, and his blood was drink indeed; for the truth is, the
Law that then was added to the precedent promise, was but their Schoolmasters
to lead them to Christ to be justified by Faith, Gal. 3.19.24 1 Cor. 10.3.

But here the question will be, Adam, and renewed to the world with Abraham.

He means the whole Law of Moses with all its parts, Exodus 12.8.25. Exodus
13.2: And I will briefly touch 4 heads:

First, the Law Judicial.

Secondly, the Law of the Sacrificing Priesthood.

Thirdly, The Moral Law.

Fourthly, The penal Law. Of these in their order.

First, the Judicial Law, as executed by Moses the Judges Abraham and David
was successively in them, governing his Isreal's Common wealth, as King on Sion
hill: So Schooling them by belief of truth, and the agreeableness of the Tipe
with the Antitipe, to submit to his government, to cherish each other, as the
National members of the mystical body of Christ, Exo. 21.1.

Secondly, the sacrificing Priesthood with the Leviticall Ordinances, as
successively continued unto them, figuratively led them to Gods gift of Christ's
satisfactory righteousness imputed, and received by belief of truth, was it
only that cleansed from all sin: that is, the guilt, punishment and the
prevalencie of it, in Terrestrial Canaan, and from the inherencie of sin in
Canaan Celestial.

Therefore when the sacrifice was to expire its life, they were to lay upon its
head, the hand of belief, of remission of sins, sometimes of ignorance,
sometimes for sins against conscience.

And also they had the daily Sacrifice, all Schooling the National Spouse of
Christ by belief of truth to submit to Christ's righteousness imputed, for her
continued acceptance, and her etern^ll life, only by Salvation, Levit. 4.2,
4.15. chap. 6.1, 2, 7, 8. Esra. 3.4.

Thirdly, the Moral Law as incloased in the Because the perfection of the
Moral Law, is only resident in Christ the true Arc, and from him conferred
to man's justification and sanctification therefore the Moral Law then was as
under the veil, and now is without the veil an Evangelicall rule, and not
legal, as communicating no grace nor mercy.
Arc, with diverse interminglings, Schooled this elect Spouse to Gods gift of
Christ in six particulars.

First, as all these words were spoken by God with a relative remembrance of
their redemption from Egypt, by the blood of the Paschall Lamb: this tended
implicitly to sweeten their obedience by belief of truth, to all the ensuing
commandments, as the redeemed Spouse of Christ, as appears by the forefront
of the Tables of the Law Exo. 20.1.

Secondly, because the Moral Law commands this National Spouse, not only in
Moses presence, her Mediator in the Tipe but also because he put these
commandments into the Arc, there to remain, as Deuteronomy. 10.5. This implicitly
Schooled this Spouse, that here, God in Christ commanded her to a holy life, in
the perfection of parts by love to him, and each others as themselves, saying
in effect, be ye holy as I am holy.

The Apostle Rom 7. describing the conflicts of a godly mind, thankefully
co^cludes its victory to be by Christ, and in the 8 chapt. that there is not
condemnation to all such, and his reason i^, because the Law as it is
accomplished by Christ, is in him: to them the Law of Spirit and life, and
freeing him from the Law of sin and death, and that by Christ's fulfilling the
Law in our flesh; our nature in him has not only judged sin to be vile and
naught, but also removed the dark ve^le of Moses, and those m^ltiplicity of
Ordinances and operations, through which our frail nature c^uld not with that
clearenesse and neerenesse communicate with Christ, to walk after the Spirit,
as now we may; as 2 Cor 13.18. Rom 8.4.10, 11.
Thirdly, the Rod that budded with Almonds of ripe perfection, as enclosed in
the Arc, together with the Tables of the Law: this implicitly Schoold this
Spouse, that the Spirit and life of the perfection of the Moral Law, was
conferred upon her, by Gods gift of Christ's righteousness imputed, and that
is, only freed her from the Law of sin and of death, Romans 8 1, 2, 3, 4.

Fourthly, the Moral Law as interminglingly closed in the Arc, not only with
the Rod, but also with the pot of Manna, as overshaddowed with the wings of the
golden Cherubims, wing touching wing: This Schoold that Spouse by that figure,
that Christ was as resident with her on Earth, to feed her by belief of truth
with the bread of life as with Angels food.

Fifthly, because in this glorious oracle of the Moral Law, one precept
commanded the seventh The seventh day Sabbath, or the keeping of a seventh day,
as from the Moral Law was extinguished, when this mystery, as included in this
Arc, was abolished, and now only remains the Lords eighth day to be kept yet
not by any direct precept, but from the Apostles by tradition in all ages and
by consequence from the Apostles Doctrine; therefore Princes, who by Law
confirm it to be kept holy to the Lord, their fame shall remain through all
Generations.
days rest: This Schoold this Spouse elect of Christ in two particulars.

First, that she had bin precedently forgetful of this seventh days glorious
mystery, and therefore in this precept was inserted a clause of remembrance.

Secondly, because this Arc was named Gods mercy-seat, or resting place this
figuratively told them, God rested only on the perfection of Christ's works for
the perfection of all his works which he had created, and made, so to depend
for perfection, as Chap. 4. hereby leading his Spouse not to rest in the wroth
of her own righteousness, as did Caine, but to rest only and alone for all
perfection upon Christ's as imputed, from whence only was conferred all her
mercies.

Sixthly, God made this Arc his Seat of mercy, in which being wrapped up both
the Tables, and so entermingled, and from thence by Moses he spoke to them:
this figuratively schooled this Spouse to two things; first, that on these two
Tables (as in the perfection of Christ's works) did hang all the Law and
Prophets, that is, all the Laws, prefigurations and the Prophetical
significations: secondly, because from this glorious Oracle, by Moses, (the
Mediator in the Type) God spoke to this Spouse of Christ; this implicitly told
her, that by her applying her self to this sacred Oracle, that thence in
Christ's righteousness imputed, God will so speak peace to her through all
generations, as to the Israel of God, Exodus 25.20, 21, 22. Gal. 6.16. So much
for the moral Law.

Fourthly, the penal Law, as cursing this elect Spouse, in Hebr. 12.26.
because this Law of Gods curse was as the flaming sword, turning every way,
telling her, that if she did not here submit, she must perish in the flames of
Gods consuming Legal terrors calls to man to turn to God, either after faith,
or before I say, to turn to Gods gift of Christ and his righteousness imputed
for safety and s^lace from the horrou^s of Gods wrath, and this o dinance of
God is of use to his Church millitant to the worlds end, for Gods wrathful
curse under the Gospel, and the Law, is one and the same, but mo e severe under
the Gospel then it was under the Law, Heb. 10.29. yet not now so frequently
demonstrated to sense as then it was the gro^nd of it is this; because then all
the good of terrestrial Canaan, was a type of the super^^^^^all grace and
glory, as it was morefully to be communicated under the Gospel un^a^^ed.
wrath for ever, for he delivered his Covenant to Abraham in the promised
seed, saying. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee, and renewes the same with Moses to be a penal Law, whence says the
Apostle, as many as are under the Law are under the curse, for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 28.45. All implying this, that
Gods procedings to her in Christ was without all respect of persons.

So also in the manner of the delivery of the Law to this elect Spouse; for the
moral Law being delivered in the negative so largely, implicitly reveals her
precedent sin against the promise to which now the Law was added, because of
her transgression, and so the Law revealed sin, or caused sin to appear,
Romans 7.11.12. and Rom 5.13.

The Apostles styled the Law of Moses the ministration of death, because the
manner of the delivery of it was some sign of Gods displeasure, and also as
opposing it to the manner of the delivery of the Gospel, which was in
mildness and love, so that it is but comparatively with some respects, but
not properly the administration of death, but an ordinance of life by Christ,
it being the substance of the Gospel under a veil, as Hebr. 8.
Again, the Law given to Moses (the Mediator in the Type) in smoke, darkness,
thundrings, lightnings, the shrill sound of a Trumpet, sounding louder and
louder, to the great amazement of them all, and they not to touch the Mountain
upon pain of death; all implicitly declaring this Spouses deserved punishment
for her precedent transgressing of the Oracle of life and glory, descending
from Adam, and renewed with Abraham, and that she was therefore worthy to be
cut off from Christ, by the execution of the curse, as she was now threatened in
this dreadful demonstration of it.

Yet, as the Law revealed sin and wrath, or caused wrath here to appear,
then ( Moses the Mediator in the type, that is Christ in the truth) obtained,
that this Law should be for life, that is, as leading unto him, and not the
administration of death, as she had deserved, Romans 7.9.10. Gal. 3.19. So
likewise, although God esteemed this Nation Israel his elect Esaias 45. and 4.
yet if the Mediator in the type had not interceded for her, God would have
destroyed all excepting him, and from him raised a great Nation unto Abraham
according to his Covenant in the promised seed; for says God to Moses,
concerning them, when he would have destroyed them, I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy, and compassion on whom I will have compassion, as if he
should say, I respect none of them, but with respect to my imputed gift of the
Lambs righteousness, which they reject, and apply not themselves to me in it.
Therefore all those which had seen Gods great works in the wilderness and
were remiss, not answerable by belief of truth to this mercy. God, cut them
off from the figure of eternal felicity, and caused their carcasses to fall in
the wilderness, yea, he spared not Mirriam, Aaron nor Moses, nor any save
Caleb, the Son of Iephuneh the Kenite, and I^shua the Son of Nun, for they
wholly followed JEHOVAH, says the Text, clearly proving, that God is no
respecter of persons, but to all and alike, Deuteronomy. 9.14. Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15.
Numb. 32.10.14.28. and Deuteronomy. 32.28.

Again, about 407. years after the Law was added to the promise, then God
gave them a twofold figure more to lead them to Christ, the only ground of
all their good.

As first that the ^romised seed should come of the seventh son of Ish^i, and
the son of David, King on Sion hill to sit on his Throne, figuratively
shadowing out in Salomons thronized glory: So leading this national Spouse by
right belief of truth to pi^ch her ultimate felicity in the eternal Throne of
the promised seed God-man blessed for evermore, 2 Samuel 7.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 45,
6. Luke 1.32. and 33. Heb. 1.8.

The second figure was the glory of the Temple standing in the midst of the
Land, which also was a figure of the promised seed, as to it was related the
worship, and the most especial presence of God, for to it must the sacrifices
be brought, and to it did this elect Spouse bring all her divine worship and
adoration, yea, although remote from thence; yet toward it must they worship,
figuratively leading this Spouse in the promised Land, to feed on the promised
seed, as on a tree of life by right belief of truth, as in the Paradise of
God, Psalm. 122.4. 2 Chronicles. 7.12. 1 King. 8.44.45. Rev. 3.7. Prove. 11.30.

Yet although God gave all these several lines of truth, leading by belief
thereof to the imputed righteousness of the seed, as it in which he only
This is the true ground of Election.
elected them, to enjoy this Land to be their day of grace, and there to
receive his gift of eternal glory. Notwithstanding, they in the spirit of
concision, referred their election not to the object of faith but These are
false and erroneous grounds of Election.
to Abraham's flesh whence they were descended, and to a worth in their own
works to the Law, as but conversant about the object of Faith, and for that
cause resisted the doctrine of Christ, Esai. 8.25. Heb. 10.21. Romans 10.3.
as leading them to submit to that righteousness of God, imputatively given in
him the ground of all their good.

And therefore Saint Paul, Romans 9. punctually encounters both these errors from
the light of Divine truth; for having in the 8. Chapter beheld the stable
felicity of some Gentiles, by bel^fe of this truth, he therefore in this ninth
Chapter reflects upon this elect Spouse, as near to the rejection for this
resisting of Christ, and therefore his grief for them was beyond measure,
because they were Israel, to whom appertain the adoption and the glory, and
the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises, of whom are the Fathers; and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for evermore, Amen, Verse. 1.2, 3 4 and 5.

Yet he implies that these glorious privileges did not make him so conceive
of them, as if Gods Word of curse, according to his Covenant with Abraham, had
taken none effect upon them to their rejection; for says he, all are not
Israel that are of Israel, implying, all are not of Isreal's faith that are of
Isreal's flesh; consequently Gods Word of curse, might be of force to them which
refuse Christ, as the object of Faith, notwithstanding their precedent election.

Wherefore he further says, neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are
they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, says he,
they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God,
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed; for says he, this
is a word of promise, etc. Verse 6.7, 8, 9. implying this figure of Isaac, as
the promised child was intended to lead them to Christ the promised seed, as
precedently is declared.

And so he goes on to the next figure, namely, the manner of Esau and Jacobs
conception and birth, for, says he, not only this, but when Rebeka had also
conceived by one, even by our father Jacob; for the children being not yet
borne, neither having done any good or evil that the purpose of God according
to By election in this text, is meant only of the Jews, to be Christ's elect
Spouse Nationally, and not of any of the Gentiles.
election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said unto
her, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated, that is, God to manifest his mind rightly in this
mystery, loved to prefer the younger in the fleshly line, and hated to
prefer the first borne to the greatest honor, namely, to the National
election, as the first borne after the flesh; wherefore God not only expressed
this between Ishmael and Isaac, and primarily between Esau and Jacob, as
before, but also in Joseph's seed, God preferred the younger to the greatest
honor, and the eldest to be inferior in honor, purposely, Genesis 49. So
likewise in his choice amongst the sons of Ishai, he passed by all the eldest
to the lowest, in the natural line, even the seventh to David, and preferred
him to the throne, therefore it is evident by the testimony of God, this love
and hatred to those two babes, was but to delare his purpose, So that God hated
not Esaus person, nor hated he him in respect of the foresight of his sin,
nor did he love Jacobs Person more then Esaus, nor loved he him for the
foresight of his Faith and righteousness, but the truth is, God then looked
upon them both alike, with love to his present and future purpose, that is, by
those Babes to declare, that not from any respect of foresight of faith or
righteousness, nor to Abraham or Isreal's person as they were the natural root
of the Jews, which moved him to extend his mercy to them, and to declare on
the contrary, that the evil of their father Terahs Idolatrous Apostasy
hinde^ed him not, from predestinating them then untorne, and to call them in
Isack to espouse them nationally to Christ, from that Idolatrous den, but that
the only moving causes, was for the glory of his grace, by the promised seed,
as precedently is clearly explained.
namely, to lead this elect Spouse from her erroneous works and from Abraham's
line after the flesh to Abraham's faith in Christ's works the object of
blessedness, and no more.

For in Scriptures we find some that were rejected from inheriting this
election to life and glory with the promised child, as well as Esau, and yet
we find them admitted, and counted with the true seed of Abraham, namely,
Christ's; as for example:

In the Esterne Countries, whither Abraham sent his sons which he had by
Keturah, and gave them portions, and sent them thither purposely, that they
might not inherit this election with the child of promise Isaac, Genesis 25.6.
yet there we find just Job and Eliphaz, who was descended from Esau's loins, 1 Chronicles. 1.35.36. Also Bildad the Shuite descended of Abraham's son Shuah, and
thererefore called the Shuite, 1 Chronicles. 1.32. Also Zophar and Elihu, all
worshipers of God with just Job, figuratively in the satisfactory
righteousness of the seed imputed, which was promised to Adam, and renewed by
Covenant to Abraham, for the future mercy of the whole world, as precedently is
declared.

Therefore, if one of Esau's offspring, who in his loins was rejected from
this election, as were others, as here we see, and notwitstanding that
rejection were true worshipers in the acceptable righteousness of the seed:
consequently much more might Esau himself: therefore let no man be profane,
as was Esau, Hebr. 12.16. So I pass this point, being before explained, page
62.63.

Again, to go on, verse. 14. the Apostle says, What shall we say then? Is
there unrightousnesse with God? God forbid, for says the Apostle, he says to
Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion
on whom I will have compassion, that is, as before is explained, God no ways
had any respect to this elect Spouse more then to others but only in the
promised seed, the object of faith, as before, page 70. So then it is not in
him that wills to have it from Abraham's flesh, nor in him that runs, to
have it from the wrath of his erroneous works to the Law, but in God that
shows mercy in this election of you from your Idolatrous den, to give you
the Land of promise your day of grace, and his gift of eternal glory, to be
received by you in belief of truth; and not for works conversant only about
the object of faith, and under the pretense thereof to extinguish the glorious
works of Christ, as now you do.

Therefore in stead of mercy, you shall receive the contrary from God, even his
proceedings to your remar^eble confusion; for the Scripture says unto Pharaoh,
For the same For God by Moses sent his Commandments to Pharaoh not to return
him to God, by obedience, but occasionally by those commands to bring his just
punishments by drawing out Pharaohs precedent habits of pride to be known to
his shame in the woe ld, and to clear Gods justice in his remarkable
destruction, as appears, Exodus 3.9.19.20. and 6.1. and 7.3.4.
purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my
Name may be declared through all the earth, and thereupon he concludes against
them saying, therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens, as if he should say, you know your forefathers were as now are you,
them to whom was committed this Pillar of truth, the Oracle of the seed
promised to Adam and Abraham, and how proudly Pharaoh attempts to extinquish
them, and consequently this seed the object of faith in the pillar of truth as
now do you more directly then ever did he.

Therefore much more will God give you up, as he did Pharaoh, to you own
insolences, and then provokingly raise you up to a height therein purposely to
make his name famous in power and justice by your remarkable destruction,
through all the world, notwithstanding your descent from Abraham's flesh, and
his precedent election of you: For he will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will be See this Text further explained in the ^^rgent
toward the later end of th^s Chapter.
hardens, even amongst you, as to Pharaoh, for that is employed.

Again to go on, Verse 19. Thou will say unto me (says the Apostle Why does
he yet complain, for who h^th resisted his Will? as if they should say, if
Gods will be so irresistible to glorify his justice and power in our ruin,
notwithstanding our peculiar and glorious and ancient privileges, why does he
so needlessely complain on us, by the Prophets and others, for who has
resisted his will?

To this he answers, Nay, But O man, who art thou that answers or disputes
against God? Does the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter power of the This word the same lump has no
relation to the common mass of all mankind.
same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? As if he
should say, when you were all in the son of Terahs loins namely, Abraham as
one mass or lump of Clay, semenally in the hand of God? Had he not then power
by Covenant with him in the promised seed thus to shape you for honor or
dishonor? that is, to cursednesse or blessedness, according as you proudly
turned his own talents and mercies against him, refusing his abundant mercy,
and therefore leave you to your own stubbornness, as vessels of dishonor,
fitted to this destruction? as was Pharaoh; or on the contrary, if you would
but apply your received talents, to receive more grace, even to his gift of
Faith, by it to receive the imputed righteousness of this seed, as it only,
in which he received you to grace and glory; Therefore, O man, who art thou
that disputest against God? And hereupon the Apostle inferres, saying, What if
God willing to make his power known, endured with long suffering, the vessels
of wrath fitted to destruction, and that he might make known the riches of
his mercy on the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory,
even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles,
as God says in Hosea, etc. As if the Apostle should say, what of all this; if
it be the will and pleasure of God, as indeed it is, thus in justice and mercy
by his covenant with Abraham, to fore-appoint you either to honor or
dishonor, and to proceed accordingly, without respect of any man's person more
then another.

In what can you charge God of injustice; or excuse your selves? as to say: Why
have thou made me thus to honor or dishonor? But God may justly say to you,
Thy salvation is of me, but thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel.

Again, verse 25. as God says there, I will call them my people, which are
not my people, and her beloved, which was not beloved, and it shall come to
pass, that in the place where is was said unto them, You are not my people,
they shall be called the children of the living God: The Apostle citing their
own Prophet against them, implicitly refels their precedent errors in diverse
respects; as first, because the Gentiles were not Abraham's seed of Isaac and
Jacob, and yet were to be children to the living God.

This therefore proved that Abraham's natural line after the flesh, was not
Gods ground of electing Children unto him, but the election must be in Christ
as before.

Again, because these Gentiles were to be Children of God which had not Moses
Law to obey, no not so much as in works conversant about the object of faith,
and yet were to be Children unto God, consequently their works of righteousness
to the Law, was no ground of their Election but the election was of him that
called them from their Idolatrous den, and gave them the election in the
promised seed.

Again, the Apostle cites the Prophet Isay against them, saying, though the
number of the Children of Israel be as the sand on the Seashore, but a remnant
shall be saved. And because the Apostle referres salvation but to a remnant,
consequently their descent from Abraham's flesh, was no ground of their
election; for if so, then not a remnant but all Israel must have bin saved, but
being referred to a remnant, therefore the election must be as before.

And says the Apostle, the same Prophet, says, God will make a short cut in
righteousness, and except God had left a remnant, they had bin as Sodom, and
like unto Gomorrah, implying Gods impartial proceedings (ordinarily) with this
elect spouse of Christ, as between Abell and Caine, and as to Abraham in the
Covenant for cursednes and blessedness. Therefore to this elect Spouse God was
no respecter of persons.

Again, Verse 30. the Apostle says, What shall we say then; that the
Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith? by force of Gods
precedent predestination with Abraham, for that is employed: but Israel which
followed after the Law of righteousness, says he, has not attained the Law
of righteousness; and then he gives the prime reason wherefore, because they
sought it not by faith, but, as it were, by works of the Law.

And he says, they stumbled at that stumbling stone, as it is written, Behold,
I say in Sion a stumbling stone, and a rock of offense, and whosoever shall
believe on him, shall not be ashamed; these words imply three things:

First, that Isreal's glory (as Gods Israel) was grounded only upon Christ, the
Stone laid, as a pillar of truth on Sion hill.

Secondly, that by remissness Israel fell to pride, and so from this stone to
Abraham's flesh, and their own works of the law, to be the ground of all their
glory, and so stumbled at the Pillar of truth, Christ's righteousness imputed,
to their own destruction.

Thirdly, to those of this Nation, that in right belief did submit to the
righteousness of God that is, the righteousness of Christ imputed, the ground
of all their glory, them God would uphold in honor; for says the Text, he
that believes, shall not be ashamed.

So much for opening the ninth Chap. to the Romans And here by the way observe,
that this Chapter gives no ground to Reverend Calvin's error, namely, that God
before the world was, did personally reprobate the greatest part of mankind to
unrecoverable damnation, and personally elected the rest to unavoydable
salvation.

Again, to go on against their works of righteousness to the law, about the
object of Faith: the Apostle opposes Abraham's example, who by Faith in the
object of Faith, by this Pillar of truth, terminated in it as the only ground
of all felicity: Romans 4. Of him he says, What shall we say then? that Abraham
our Father, as pertaining to the flesh has found, for if Abraham were The
ground of man's Justification in this fourth estate, is Gods gift of Christ's
righteousness reckoned or imputed to man: yet the Justification of a Sinner is
this, v^^. Gods pardon of his sin, guilt, and punishment, for that
Righteousness so reckoned or imputed as to all mankind upon our fall in Adam,
and as new to all Infants departing this World: but when Justification is
reckoned or imputed to Man's Faith, it is because that act of right belief is
more connexively related immediately to the object of Justification, then any
other act of a believer: And when sometimes Justification is attributed to
Faith, it is because a right beleeve^s submissive receptive instrument of Faith
is opposed against the pride of man's supposed works of righteousness; and in
this sense S. Paul Romans 4. br^ngs in that text Genesis 15. saying it was imputed
to Abraham for righteousness.
justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God, for what
says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness: Implying, he believed all his good from Gods gift, in the
righteousness of the seed imputed, and so was that righteousness imputed to
him, to the remission of his sins, which was his justification, and the
ground of all felicity: Therefore says the Apostle, Now to him that works is
the reward not reckoned of grace (as it was to Abraham) but of debt, but to him
that works not, but believes on him which justifies the ungodly, his Faith
is counted for righteousness: Implying, that God was Abraham's exceeding great
reward, only by his gift of the righteousness of this seed imputed in the
object of Faith which Abraham by belief, submissively embraced, even as David
describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works saying, Blessed are they, whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose
sins are covered; blessed is the man to whom thee Lord will not impute sin:
from verse 1. to the 8.

Again to go on, the Apostle in diverse passages of his Epistles shows this
elect Spouse, what absurdities do spring from her conceit of the worth of her
works, conversant about the object of Faith in the Law.

First, as if he should say, suppose you do believe the Law to be Gods Law,
and therefore to the Judicial Laws are obedient to live in some orderly
manner: Suppose also from the same grounds you are at pains and costs to bring
your Sacrifices to the Priests and Levites for your offerings (the Law
commanding it) Also suppose you love God for the wealth of Canaan, and love
each other, being joint inhabitants of that land, yet in all this to you, these
Laws are not of Faith, because you by belief rest upon your deed done, to be
accepted of God, as did Cain, and terminate in sensual delights, for you are
not led from the letter of the Law in right belief, to rest in Christ his
acceptable righteousness, the proper end of the Law for righteousness to man
rightly believing truth: The same is ^he Gospel now ^o man, not rightly
believing truth, for the Law and the Gospel for substance was one and the same,
therefore men merely Moral, and of a civil life, must beware left they perish
eternally by this deceit, for man may not be far from the Kingdom of God,
and yet fall short thereof. as Mark 12.34.
Therefore because you stick in the letter, to you the Law is but a dead
letter, revealing sin and wrath, because you reach not the sense and scope of
the Laws prefigurations and significations, for the truth is acceptance with
God is not of works, therefore it is of faith, that it might be by Grace, to
the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed: implying Gods gift of
Christ's imputed righteousness, is the only stable ground of felicity in it
self for man, and also, so to man rightly believing truth, for man may believe
divine Testimony as divine Testimony, and yet not believe justifyingly, as
chap. 10.

Again, their election to inherit the Temporal felicity of Canaan, as the
figure of eternal felicity, could not be a debt due to the worth of their
works, and to the imputed righteousness of Christ too, for these are
contraries, Wherefore says the Apostle, if the election be by grace, then it
is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be by works,
then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work, Romans 11.6.

Again, the worth of their works by the Law, did tend to overthrow the
Foundation of the salvation of the world, because it makes void the object of
Justification, and also the use of Faith to that object in a justifying
relation; and therefore says the Apostle, if they of the Law be heirs, Faith
is made void, and the promise of none effect. Romans 4.14.

Again, this conceited worth of works to the Law, put a nullitie to the Son
of God, his glorious expiration of his life, for the completion of all
righteousness, to the salvation of the world: for says the Apostle, if
righteousness come by the Law, (that is as they would have it) then Christ
died in vain. Gal. 2.21.

Again, he gives them to know, the Law is not of Faith, his meaning is, not to
any living man on Earth, but only to Christ, as bound to believe and do the
perfection of the Law in every tittle, as their Doctrine of works did import,
for in this respect he only and alone, is the man that could do them, and did
live in them as a perfect man, to take off the cursednesse from all that
believe his righteousness imputed. Gal. 3.11, 12, 13, 14.

Again, when Christ is manifested by the Apostles Doctrine, without the
prefigurations of the Law, yet now this People would believe in Christ his
righteousness for salvation, but would then join their righteousness in the
obedience of the Law to his, as necessary to their salvation, and by this they
run upon a twofold Rock at once.

First, they bind themselves to observe all the Laws, from which now by
Christ's perfect obedience they were freed.

Secondly, by this they made a nullitie to themselves, of all happiness by
Christ, as says the Apostle Gal. 5.2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye
be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, for I testify again to every
man that is Circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law; Christ is
become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye
are far fallen from Grace.

And Romans 7. he shows, that this error of theirs, is as if one should join a
dead Corpse to a living man, and as if a woman should esteem her self bound to
the Law of her Husband when he is dead, we are says he, now delivered from
the Law, that being dead wherein we are held, that we should serve him in
newness of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. from verse 1. to the
6.

Again, although Christ by the Apostles Ministry, was now manifested without
the authority of the Law, it being abolished, yet Romans 3.21, 22. he grants to
the Law and the Prophets still this honor, that they witness to this
righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, that it only is it
which is man, Justification to salvation: wherefore verse 27. says he, where
is boasting then? it is excluded by what law of works? Nay, but by the law of
Faith: Therefore we conclude, says he, that a man is justified by Faith
without the deeds of the law: That is, without such deeds, as their erroneous
Doctrine of works did import.

In what sense Moses laws are of perpetual use to Christ his Church on Earth?



Secondly, as the Moral laws expiration is in Christ Jesus, so it is of a
double use.

First, we are to receive by Faith the Moral laws perfections in him, as given
of God imputatively to justification, and so to receive the remission of sins
and salvation.

Secondly, we are to apply our selves to it, as our rule of imitation in love
to God and our Neighbor, and having done our best continually to submit to
his, as imputed for our continued acceptance here, and for eternal life
hereafter. Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4.

And the ground why the perfections of the Moral law only in Christ Jesus,
does free man believing truth, from the law of sin and of death, so conveying
to him eternal life by salvation, is this, because the Moral law originally
in its pure naturalls, was instituted by God, a means in the Covenant to a
supernatural end in the first Adam, as is proved; wherefore no sooner did the
Moral law in Christ his sacred person by his birth in the promise subsist in
him, as the spotless Lamb, but in that instant of time, it was engaged in him
being the second Adam, as a means to attain that supernatural end by perfect
love to God and his Neighbor; and therefore it was immediately put upon all
mankind, freeing man from the law of sin and of death, because it came upon
all men to justification of life: for it removed Adams imputed damnation, which
was to pass according to the justice of the Covenant, and so it removed the
total nature and prevalency of sin, and obtained the foresaid dispositions
of Amity to God, and enmity to Satan; as also the good of this world, to be
man's day of grace, to receive in Gods gift, the day of eternal glory.

Again, I say it must be by belief of this truth, in the object of Faith, or
the object of Justification: And the ground why man capable of the use of
reason, must receive all blessedness by belief of this truth is:

First, because as Gods word of truth giving this object of life, is as Gods
hand or instrument to reach this gift to man, so also man his belief of that
truth, is as it were, man's hand or instrument, to receive this gift from God;
therefore it must be by belief of this truth.

Secondly, it must be by belief of this word of truth, as conveying the object
of faith, because man his reasonable soul, is but a receiver into it self,
all its supernatural felicity from external objects believed, as in Adam we
see, and therefore so in this object of justification.

Thirdly, it is by belief of this truth, because the aforesaid principles of
derivative Amity which God put in the nature of all men, does internally
dispose them to this Amity with God, as well as to enmity to Satan: wherefore at
first, God requires man to come to him in belief of truth, but according to
sense and reason, as he does excitively draw out that Principle, so to give
man's reasonable soul a further internal power to receive his gift of Christ,
namely, a power to believe divine testimony, as divine testimony; that is, to
receive it from God as from God, for as God gathers not where he strewes not,
so he gives this power to man that had it not, to receive his gift of Christ,
the ground of all his happiness: Wherefore because this Elect Spouse, did not
so apply her received Talents, to receive more Talents in Gods way, to receive
life in Christ the object of Faith, but contrarily applied Gods talents and his
law against him in his own way, to have all their own way, namely, from
terrestrial felicity, and from Abraham's flesh, and from the worth of their
own works, at best, but conversant about the object of Faith, and no way
consonant to Faith in that object: therefore God rejected this elect Spouse, to
the remarkable praise of his justice in all the world, sixteen hundred years
and more; therefore he respects no man's person, but according to his first
Model, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? if thou do not well
sin lies at the door.

And from this ground it is, the Apostle cries out at the vast depth of Gods
wise providence as being not able to comp^ehend the depth of that righteous
dispensation in his justice and mercies, interminglingly e^tended to the
Generations and Nations of man, Romans 11. from ver. 28 to the end. And to this
point may be referred Ezekiels vision of wheels full of eyes, running one
within another, etc. as Reve^end brought on rightly observes in his Consent of
Sc iptures. Exodus 33.19.34.6 and 7.
And by this Nations rejection we may take occasion by the way, to observe the
manner of Gods proceedings with the Sons of Adam, for as he would not give
this Nation possession of the Land promised to Abraham, until the sins of
the Inhabitants, namely, the Canaanites were full, to their final destruction:
so neither would he call in the Gentiles to inherit their promised blessing in
the seed of Abraham in whom he predestined them to it, until the sins of
this Elect Nation was full, and transcendent, by slaying the Son of God, in
which promised seed they received all their good as was prefigured to them,
when God said to Moses, the Mediator in the Tipe, I will cause all my good to
pass before thee, meaning Christ, and upon his death, then come on their
universal rejection totally, but not finally for ever.

But it will here be objected, Because God fore-appointed Christ to be slain
in the truth to answer the figurative Lamb in the Tipe, consequently this did
impose upon them a necessity, that Christ must be slain as he was, and
consequently this may seem injustice in God to make that fact the fulfilling
of this Nations sin, to their remarkable destruction.

I grant, that Christ must be slain in the truth, to answer the figurative
Lamb in the Type: I also grant, that they were in some sort necessitated to
slay Christ as they did, but that necessity came not from God, for God gave
them several demonstrative rules to the contrary. As

First by this exemplary punishment upon Cain, that the blood of the just shall
not go unrevenged by him, and this was recorded to them by Moses.

Secondly, by giving a law to Noah and to his Sons, that that man which spilt
man's innocent blood, his blood should be required of him that spilt it. This
also stood upon Record to them.

Thirdly, to this elect Spouse God gave a figure how he would have her to
demean her self, in this fact of the death of Christ, by the manner of their
Father Abraham's offering Christ Tipically in Isaak as first to Abraham, Isaa^
was his dearly beloved, although he used the knife to bereave him of life,
Genesis 22.

2. Abraham never intended nor attempted this fact, until from God he received
an express commandment so to do.

Thirdly, he did slay him unwillingly in respect of his love to the promised
child, yet willingly in respect of his love to God, and his commandment, and
so his unwillingnesse became a harmless nay-say to God.

But the fact of the children of Abraham in the death of Christ was a most
wrongful nay-say to God, in all they did, and therefore says Christ to them,
Job. 8.40. this did not Abraham, presenting implicitly to their remembrance
Abraham's Typical fact in this business.

First, that as Abraham slew Isaac really in his intention, so might they
intend and accomplish his death in the truth.

Secondly, as Abraham did love him whom he really slew in his intention, so
much more ought they to love him in his death, as the most proper child of
promise.

Thirdly, as Abraham never intended nor attempted to slay the promised seed,
until there came an extraordinary command from God to do, so neither ought
they much more in this fact of the death of Christ. So it is one thing to do
that which God before determined to be done by them, and another thing to do
that thing as God would have them to do it.


Fourthly, but when that commandment came, then although in respect of their
love to him they had been unwilling, yet in respect of their faith and love to
God in this Mystery, they should have been obediently willing to kill him, as
God should prescribe the manner, as to Abraham he did for God in Abraham's
typical fact, not only intended to confirm their faith, that Christ the seed
promised should by the expiration of his life, aspire the completion of all
righteousness, for the redemption of this world; but also to teach them how to
demean themselves in the manner of Christ's death, in a harmless nay-say to
God as did Abraham their Father.

The Negative precept of the Moral Law, forbidding

Therefore this fact committed against these transcendent rules, thus
manifested to them, justly called to God for their transcendent punishment, and
they were no way necessitated to this fact by God, but the contrary: secondly,
I grant also, that in some respect they were necessitated to this unrighteous
fact, but it was from themselves: and the first step that brought on this
necessity, The first step to fall from Christ totally.
was this their remissness to God in all his ways for their good; for to
them God made it manifest, that in the satisfactory righteousness of this seed
as imputed; he conferred all good to the universal world, figured in the Lamb
slain, famously descending by tradition to them from Adam, by the ten Fathers,
as before is proved.

Likewise God manifested it to them by renewing the same to the universal
world by Noah and his sons.

Likewise by renewing the same with Abraham, by predestinating in this seed,
both Jews and Gentiles to glory.

Likewise he manifested it to them in the satisfactory righteousness of this
seed sealed with his blood, figuratively in the paschall Lamb, that he
delivered them from the bondage of Egypt, and brought them to the blessedness
of Canaan, a figure of eternal felicity, for applying the Lambs blood upon
their dwellings figured, that only in the righteousness of Christ imputed,
God was their safety in the day of wrath, Exodus 12.13. All this, and more
successively was presented before their eyes, in that glorious addition of
Moses Law, to the promise in those prefigurations and significations, and all
left upon record in holy Writ through their generations.

Therefore it must needs follow by undeniable consequence, that their first
step to this ungodly necessity, proceeded from their own remissness to God
in all his ways for their good; for had they considered these things, they
would never have destroyed him, by whom all felicity came to them.

And then their remissness to that object of faith Celestial, brought on
their inordinate intensnesse to sensual objects terrestrial, and to
Idolatrous imaginations, and so came on their second step necessitating them to
this transcendent fact, The second step.
as for example: their remissness to Moses the Mediator in the type, brought
on their Calfe, and terminating in things sensual and terrestrial, and
consequently their crucifying of Christ to themselves, by absenting their
minds from Moses in that mystery; for they then not only worshipped the
Calfe, but also they did eat and drink, and rose up to play:

The third step.
Likewise they so brought on a further necessity, as a third step for the
future, namely, custom in evil, hence it is God said to them, can the
Blackmore change his skin, or the Leopard his sp^ts, Ierem. 13.23.
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil; and now, sense
commands reason under the pretense of the doctrine celestial, to terminate in
a good adequate to sensuality: Mat. 26.61.
for from this ground they made the Temple and Moses Chair their plea against
Christ and his doctrine, not from love to the mystery included therein as
leading to Christ, but only in love to the glory of the Temple, as a
terrestrial magnificence of their Nation. Likewise in their princely
Priesthood, as it was a worldly ordinance correspondent to worldly pomp and
dignity, but rejected Christ the enclosed mystery of that figure.

Thus by voluntary choice in the spirit of concision, they became necessitated
to evil, in things that were good in themselves, as the felicity of Canaan was
good in it self; and to kill Christ in the truth, as Abraham did in the type
to the redemption of the world was good, but to them evil, because they did it
in hatred to him, as John 8. and 40. because his doctrine was an enemy not to
them, but to their pride in terrestrial felicity, and proud consanguinity and
operations.

And therefore they slew the Lord of glory in the same mind, as Cain slew Abel,
Mat. 23.35. Thus we may rightly conceive how Pharaoh is said to harden, and
God to harden Pharaohs heart.
Wherefore, instead of giving them the Spirit of Faith from the special grace
of the Covenant, God delivered them to their own wills, from the universal
mercy of the Covenant made with Abraham for them, The fourth step.
and so came on a fourth step of their necessity in sin, and consequently their
universal rejection from him as the just punishment of their precedent
apostasy from Gods salvation, implied in the words of the Lord Jesus Christ,
saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
as a Hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not, therefore your
That is, the Temple, implying their separation from Gods favor in Christ, the
most proper Temple of Gods special presence in the Truth, as the Temple was in
the Type, Luke 13.34.
house is left unto you desolate.

And he further says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye shall not see me
until the time come, when you shall sa^, blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord. These words imply two things; the first is because they
precedently refuse to see him according to their light, as their reason was
able in their day of grace; therefore God now denied them the gift of Faith, to
see his glory in belief of truth, even when their eyes did look upon the Lord
of glory, and saw his great works, Luke 10 8.22.

Likewise when he beheld Jerusalem, he wept and said. O that thou had known
even in this thy day, those things which belong unto thy peace, but now they
are bid That light of truth which formerly men did see and would not, for that
there may come a time when the light Eternally, by Gods spirit shines more
clear, yet the sight thereof shall be denied to them as in this elect Spouse we
see.
from thine eyes, Luke 19.24.

Likewise Saint John in his 12 Chapter says, although Christ had done so many
miracles before them, yet they believed not on him, that the saying of Esayas
the Prophet might be fulfilled, that he said, Lord who believed our report? and
to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? and Saint John says, therefore they
could not believe because: Esayas says again, he has blinded their eyes,
and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should save them.
And further says Saint John, these things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory
and spoke of him, ver. 37. That is, These things he spoke of their rejection,
when in the Spirit of Faith he saw the Lord of Glory rejected by this elect
Spouse.

Likewise Saint Paul Acts 13.40. speaking to this people rejecting the Doctrine
of Christ says, behold you despisers and wonder, for I work in your days, a
work which ye in no wise shall believe, although a man declare it unto you.

Likewise says Christ unto them, ye believe not, because you are not my
Sheep These Scriptures by Gods spirit are intended to this national Spouse
for her transcendent sins, and not to most of mankind as denied his grace,
because appointed by God personally to unavoidable damnation.
Joh. 10.26. All plainly proving, that God now when Christ was come into the
world, denied them the gift of Faith, for their precedent refusing Gods way for
their salvation.

Secondly, it is further employed in these words of our Savior, that there is a
time limited for this their blindness and hardness of heart, when he says,
Ye shall not see me until the time come, when you shall say, blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord: Implying, that although this National
rejection was to be universal, yet it should not be Although it were not
final to them nationally in respect of the time to come, yet it was final to
all or at least to most in the Interim.
final for ever in the Spirit of unbelief.

God sometimes to the glory of his grace, e^tends his mercy universally to all,
as in the call of the Gentiles, and as in time to come he will to these Jews,
yet sometimes when men are alike dead in sins by Apostasy, he will leave
some of them to perish finally, and receive some of them to mercy, although
alike wicked, yet not for any hatred or love to the one more then the other,
personally considered, but only in love to himself, in the one from his love
to Justice, in the other from his love to mercy, that is, to the love of his
glory in either, as he^e we see some received to mercy and reserved alive, to
confer a future call of their posterity to Christ, and the rest were blinded,
and in this ease and the like falls that of Moses, and the Apostle he has mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.
Likewise our Savior gives another close glance to this point, speaking of this
elect Nation, Mat. 24, 22. he says, the days of their vengeance shall be
shortened in the destruction of Jerusalem, for the elects sake: Implying, else
no flesh of Abraham's elect stock, would be reserved for a future call to mercy.
Likewise for any mercy showed to this Nation, Saint Paul referres it rightly,
when he says, Isr^^ll obtained not what it sought for, but the election
obtained it, and the rest were blinded. Romans 11.17.

And he says, as touching the election, they are beloved for their Fathers
sakes, meaning, Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, with whom in Christ the promised
seed: This National Election, was first established ver. 28. And he also
speaks to their restoration saying, all Israel shall be saved, as it is
written the deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away the
ungodliness from Jacob. ver. 26. And then gives a general ground of all this
future mercy, because the gifts and callings of God are without repentance,
ver. 29.

And in the next verse he gives a demonstrative reason thereof in the
Gentiles, who although by their precedent Apostacy were so long rejected, yet
now God gave Christ to them, and calls them to him. ver. 30. Thereby implying
likewise, God would not repent his gift of Christ to this Spouse, and therefore
call them to him again.

And therefore it is most clear, that Gods proceeding in this second part of
time, is without all respect of Persons.

And for a conclusion of this Chapter, take these observations following.

First, that to refer any man's faith and obedience to be the condition of
the Covenant of grace, but Christ his faith and obedience, is to derrogate from
him and to arrogate to man that which is not his.

Because as the first Adam his second estate before his fall, was an estate of
Faith and obedience active and passive, the sum of the conditions of the
Covenant as precedently is proved Chapt. the 2.

So likewise the Son of God the second Adam, his obedience passive and
active, was an estate of Faith, the condition of the Covenant for the
Redemption of the world, from whence the Covenan^ was changed by him, from a
Covenant of wrathful justice, to a Covenant of Grace and mercy to all the
world as Chap. 4.

Likewise in this Chapter we see he and he alone was the man, which by says
and love to God and his Neighbor, did live in the pure naturalls of the Law to
every tittle to redeem man which by Apostasy brought himself under the Curse.

For although the life of all believers, besides Christ's is in this world an
estate of faith and obedience, and although Gods word of truth is his
instrument to give to man Christ's righteousness, and man's faith his instrument
to receive in that righteousness his blessedness, yet between God and
mankind, neither of these are the conditions of the covenant of grace: For as
God on his part has not bound himself to either of these as a condition, so
neither has he bound all mankind absolutely to believe or not to be saved:
For if faith were the condition of the Covenant of Grace, God in justice could
not save one of mankind which did not believe.

But it is already proved, Chap. 4. that an innumerable number of mankind
departing this world in Infancy, childhood, or the like, by the universal
grace of the Covenant in Christ Jesus our Savior, are saved: Likewise so was
all mankind without faith saved from the damnation of Adams sin to the praise
of Gods grace to all eternity.

Therefore, although to man capable of the use of reason, faith It is one thing
that God require it is exercise, as a necessary isntrumental qualification, and
another that he should require it as a condition of the Covenant.
is the necessary instrument as his mouth to receive his meat, and must be
applied to the object of Justification in some degree, or he must perish, yet
his faith and obedience is no condition of the Covenant of grace, no more then
man's mouth whereby he receives his meat.

Secondly, is it so, that as first upon Adams fall, so the second time in the
promised seed with Abraham by Covenant, that God elected, predestined, and
fore-appointed all mankind alike from perishing in misery to grace and glory
in Christ Jesus, as here we see.

Hence observe, what is Gods most proper book of life, namely, the promised
seed; for in him all mankind were both times only written for grace and
glory, as in a book of life, not only when Adam fell, but the second time, as
is registered by covenant with Abraham to life and glory, therefore Christ Jesus
is Gods most proper Book of life, out of which all that perish are blotted out
for despising this gift of grace and glory, Psalm. 69.28. Rev. 20 12, 13. Rev.
5.13. etc.

Thirdly, is it so, that although at one and the same time, God in Christ with
Abraham by covenant thus predestined Jews and Gentiles to glory, yet called
not the Gentiles till about eighteen hundred years after, but called the
Jews to inherit this glory in the birth of Isaac.

Hence observe the only ground, why the Jews were first in this honor in
respect of time was, because God for his own names sake was pleased then to
begin the execution of that blessed predestination; and from ^his ground,
Christ gave them the priority, commanding the twelve, saying, go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any of the Cities of the Samaritans enter ye
not, but go ye rather unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 10.5.
Likewise at Antioch Saint Paul and Barnabas rendered the same priority to them,
saying, It was necessary the Word of God should first have been spoken unto
you, Acts 13.46, etc.

But when Christ in the expiration of all righteousness upon the cross, had
made open the way to bring in the Gentiles, so making both one general
assembly and Church of the first borne enrolled in heaven, Hebr. 11.25.

Yet our Savior in a Parable foretelling the Jews of this joining the
Gentiles to them, implies his proceeding in this general assembly, shall be
without all respect of persons, choosing and refusing, as between Cain and
Abel, for he concludes his discourse, saying, Many are called, but few are
chosen, Matthew. 10.14.

Further, implying, notwithstanding the extraordinary flux of grace and truth,
which was then to be powered out upon all flesh; yet if they did not apply
themselves therein, to receive his righteousness imputed to be their wedding
garment for acceptance, they should not be respected.

Fourthly, is it so, that the second Adams faith and obedience

Hence observe, that the fruition of that eternal life in Heaven, is to all
alike without degree of glory to one more then another, although here the
degrees of grace are different, some more, and some less, as they apply more
or less their talents to Christ, as the object of Justification.

Yet the fruition of that glory depends only and alone on Christ's righteous
works, which is man's by free gift; therefore that glory is enjoyed there by all
alike, without degrees (Christ only excepted) who in all things must have the
pre-eminence; for one man's reasonable soul is not more incapable then another
in it is essential faculty simply considered, but all the difference of
capacities arises from error, transgression and sin, or the effects of
sin: but in the fruition of that glory, all this for Christ's his
righteousness sake is removed, and not remaining consequently their capacities
being then alike, their enjoyment of that glory is all alike, without degrees,
to the praise of Gods grace to all eternity.

Yet it is not so, on the contrary, to mankind in eternal death, because
their sin abides upon them, so that they descend to eternal death, not for
another works, as men ascend to eternal life; but for their own despising
Gods grace leading to eternal life.

Therefore, as they more or less were in sin, consequently Justice requires
more or less punishment for despising eternal felicity Gods way.

Christ Jesus, for their eternal felicity; for as we all in Adam by
remissness to Gods Covenant, fell so low in misery, as never any mere
creature could raise us from thence, as Chapter 3. Likewise, in this last
Chapter we see Christ's elect Spouse, by her remissness to her felicity by
Christ Jesus, brought upon her self a connection of causes, necessitating her
self to unavoydable rejection from Christ, as a fugitive remarkeably
despicable here on earth, this sixteen hundred years and more.

Abraham did transgress the object of Justification given in the promised seed
to Adam, and renewed to them with Abraham.

Hence observe, how rightly speaks the Apostle, that the Law was not given to
the righteous man, that is, as unto Abraham, who terminated his operations by
belief of Truth, and Love to God and man, by a right relation to God in the
object of Justification; for here in this Chapter, we see Moses law added to
the Promise, to school Abraham's lawless offspring to Christ, because they
precedntly transgress the promise.

Adam natural perfection by creation and celestial perfection by the
Covenant; yet here observe, that God never restores any of that to mankind,
but by mercy, ever turning his eyes only upon Christ, and his satisfactory
righteousness: for as before the world was, it was appointed for all alike in
him by redemption, so accordingly upon the fall in him, he chose us to life
and glory from perishing with reprobate devils, to whom in respect of our
selves, we were unrecoverably joined: So likewise, when with Noah, he renewed
this mercy to the second world, it was by turning his eyes only upon Christ and
his satisfactory righteousness; so likewise when with Abraham he predestined
both Jews and Gentiles to life and glory, from being fit vessels of wrath, as
lying in their own apostasy, from the grace of God; yet then only in the
promised seed, God turned his eyes in mercy to the world, in the precedent
predestination, as in this Chapter clearly appears.

So much for the second part of Time; I now should come to the third, namely,
the calling of the Gentiles; but here will arise a necessary question, viz. In
what estate for eternal life stood the Gentiles, from the time they were
scattered at Babel, until they were called to mercy in Christ? but by Gods
help I will answer it in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Showing, in what estate or condition were all the families of the
earth, from the rejection at the Tower of Babell, to their call to Christ, in
whom they were elected.
ANswer. In respect of the Object of Justification they were excluded, not to
have it resident amongst them and therefore in that respect they lived as
without God in the world, and so the day of grace in this world was to them not
as a day of grace, being left to walk in the vanity of their minds, they
wanting the pillar of truth, or Oracle of the promised seed, and so remained
under wrath about 18 hundred years, This text Ephesians. 2 3. no way excludes
infants departing this world from eternal life: See the last Observation in
the 7 Chapt.
and therefore when some of those Gentiles, by the Gospel were returned from
their Apostacy, and received life in the object of Faith: The Apostle says
unto them, ye were the Children of wrath, even as others: therefore they were
so under wrath, throughout all those precedent generations. Ephesians. 2.3.

But it may here be objected, God threatened to visit the sins of the Fathers
upon the Children but unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate
him;

Answer. This visitation is spoken restrictively, only with respect to the
Sons of Jacob, as to continue the elect National Spouse, till Shilo came:
and if God in mercy had not cut short their deserved visitations, Jacobs seed
after the flesh, as this National Spouse sometimes, had bin utterly extinct.

Therefore their visitations for their Rebellions, in mercy were limited but to
three or four generations: Hence says God to Rebellious Israel, I am JEHOVAH,
I change not, meaning his Covenant with Note, that although this visitation be
intermingled with the negative part of the Morrall Law, yet it issued from
grace and mercy in Christ the seed of Abraham.
Abraham, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed, Malachi 3, 6, 7.
Wherefore all Nations o^ the Gentiles might be under wrath the time precedent,
notwithstanding this limitation.

Again, all the time that they were under wrath, yet God intermingled his
wrath with mercy, leaving them a narrow way to eternal life, by salvation in
Jesus Christ.

And the narrowness of this way is to be considered in a twofold respect,
namely, in means internal and external.

The internal means was the remainders of the aforesaid infused principle,
hereditarily descending in the Nature of man, which as it disposed them to
Enmity with Satan, so also to Amity with God, from whence, although they had
not the Oracle of God to direct them, yet Saint Paul implicitly grants some few
of them did attain Circumcision of the heart, virtually at least in their
obedient seeking of God, Romans 2. He preferres the best of these Gentiles,
although excluded the Law against the boastings in the Law of the Children of
Abraham, for says he, if the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law, these having not the law, are a law unto
themselves, which says he, show the effect of the law written in their
hearts, their thoughts in the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another. ver. 14.15.

Again says he, if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law;
shall not his uncircumcision be counted circumcision? and says he, shall not
uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the law, judge thee, etc. ver.
26.27. And he then concludes the Point in the behalf of the virtues of those
Gentiles, in opposing the proud formalitie of the profession in the Law by the
Jews, saying he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the flesh.

But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision which is of the Heart
in the spirit, and, not in the letter, whose praise is ^ot of men but of God.
ver. 28.29.

And the ground why the Apostle esteems these virtues by Nature amongst the
Heathens, to be the circumcision of the heart, is this, because it did
implicitly and vertually lead the hearts of these Heathens to God in Jesus
Christ and the ground why it did so is this.

Because the foresaid principles of Enmity and Amity was derivatively put into
their hearts, issuing from Grace in Jesus Christ, for it was given in the
promise of Christ, when God said, I will put enmity, etc. Therefore if it be by
man, put forth to seek for God, as God extitively draws it out, but in
natures voice, it will implicitly and virtually at least move to God in the
wrath of Christ's righteousness, imputed under the Notion of mercy, for
according to the nature of a thing, such is its operation.

But here in Christ we see, was its root, therefore the cicumcision of the
heart, was its fruit. So much for the internal means in this narrow way to
eternal life by Christ.

But secondly, the external means of this narrow way to life, was twofold:

First, the oracle or pillar of Truth, as included in Isreal's commonwealth,
for by this God did as it were, reach forth his helping hand of mercy to these
miserable Gentiles under wroth: for at first when God gave the Law of
Circumcision, he then gave a Law of admittance, not of Circumcision to go out
among the Gentiles, but for Gentiles and strangers to come to Abraham's Eternal
blessedness by Christ's imputed righteousness, is the bosom of rest to
Abraham and all right believers.
bosom. I mean the Church in his Family so famous for Godliness, in the
imputed righteousness of the promised seed.

And here by Gods Law they might receive the seal of righteousness, which is
by Faith: Genesis 17.12.27. Romans 4.11.

Secondly, about four hundred years after this, when God reared up the
Mosaicall Ordinances, a partition wall, by handwriting upon Record,
differencing the uncircumcised Gentiles more exclusively then ever before, and
the Jews more inclusively to the Oracle of life: Psalm. 147.9, 10. Ephe. 2.
ver. 11. to the 16. Yet then also God made a Law of admittance for Heathens and
strangers, to Sojourne in Isreal's Commonwealth, and gave them the same Rule to
come to him in the satisfactory righteousness of the promised seed, as he did
to his elect Spouse, Levit. 19.33, 34. Numb. 15.15. And accordingly we find of
them, 43600. furthering the glory of the Temple, possessing a glorying heart
with the Israel of God, at the Yet the Sinagogues of the Jews were holy to
the Lord, as now are on Churches, that is, as set apart only by the direction
and care of the Church, for convenient and mutual meetings to worship God, yet
not set apart, and holy, as was this Temple by Gods commandment; neither in
respect of the place, nor the materials, not the form, nor the final end, as
to typifie Gods special grace by Christ, as him in whom all worship must
terminate in God by right belief of the object of Justification; yea the word
and Sacraments are but holy instruments instituted by God to communicate by his
Spirits manifestation his special grace and favor in Christ as the object of
Faith.
dedication of the Temple to God. 2 Chr. 2.17. 1. Chr. 22.2. 2 Chr. 30.25, 26.

Likewise by Traffic and Marchandizing with this Nation from far, the Fame
of Jerusalem, and the worship of the Temple, with the Princely Priesthood, so
correspondent to worldly Glory, by these remarkable figures, God reached out
his hand, pointing as it were by his finger to the world that the desire of all
Nations should come to answer the implicit seekings, to all among the Nations,
who by patience in well doing did seek honor immortallity and eternal life.

So much for the first external means.

The second external means was more universal even to all the Families of
the Earth, namely, God speaking kindly in the voice of the Creatures, to them
in Jesus Christ implicitly; for from God his Covenant in Christ, first in the
Promised seed with Adam, and secondly renewed with Noah, he gave all mankind
the fruitful Seasons, communicating unto them food and gladness, so by a good
Terrestrial, drawing them by Christ Jesus, implicitly, to look up for a good
Celestial in him.

Hence it is the Apostle affirms, God left not himself without witness, in
that he gave them rain from Heaven, and frui^ful Seasons filling their hearts
with food and gladness. And says he, this was that they should seek the
Lord, if happily they might feel after him and find him. Acts 14.16, 17. Mat.
25.24. Acts 17, 27.

And the ground why Gods voice in the creatures, does excitively draw unto
Christ in the distilled influence of his Spirit, as the dew to the tender
herb, is this because the whole creation, is as it were, wrapped in the imputed
righteousness of Christ, as in a mantle of mercy, for from thence it came to
pass, that this world is as now it is, man's day of grace, to receive the gift
of eternal glory, and therefore as thy tender mercies oh Lord are over all thy
works, so do thou by thy kindness therein excitively draw man to thee in
Christ the hope of glory. Psalm. 145.9. Col. 1, 27.

And from this ground the Apostle brings in Gods voice in the creatures,
jointly cooperating with Gods voice in the Gospel, begetting Faith in the
heart of man: so then says he, Faith comes by heareing, and heareing by the
word of God; but I say, have they not heard? yes said he, ver^ly their sound
went into all the earth, and their words unto the end of all the world: compare
Ps. 19.3. with Romans 10.17.

And from this ground he tells the believing Romans at Heathenish Rome, that
he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.

First, because it was Gods power to salvation.

Secondly, because it revealed the righteousness of God from Whe^efore rightly
does the Author to the Hebrews lead man to receive the world by Faith, Heb.
11.3. and not as made out of that which did first appear, namely the Chaos,
and that perfection which it received, because it being lost by the first Adam,
it was immediately restored by the second, he being then the first borne in the
Promise, of every creature from the dead fall of Adam: wherefo^e Saint John
Rev. 4.24. rightly brings in Christ to be Gods faithful witness, and the
beginning of the Creation of God jointly together, and aluding to the same
ground in his Gospel, Chapt. 1. he brings in Christ as Christ, to be the
maker of all which was made it being involved in darkness, by the justice of
the Covenant for Adams fall, and that is employed, be^^use he brings in the
second Adam personally God man, and so the light and life of man, enlightening
every man which comes into the world, and alluding to this principle i^ is;
that God remembers forgetful man of his six days works, as involved in Christ
the true Arc of rest to God for man, and in him to since all days, as t^ri^ed
into an eternal Sabbath of rest, here by Faith, and there by Fruition.
Faith to Faith; that is, from Faith implicit, as most weak, to Faith
expressive, as most strong.

Thirdly, because that truth which most Gentiles did detain in
unrighteousness, God rendered the same to them by his works in nature: for,
says he, God showed it them, and then shows us by what; namely, the
invisible things of God from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, Romans 1. from verse 16. to 20. not
that Gods works does naturally excitively draw man to God in Christ as
natural, but as related supernaturally by Christ's opening the womb of all
perfection as the second Adam and first borne of every creature; from whence
ever since the first blessed seventh day morning, it travaileth until now to
be pertakers of the supernatural glory, as precedently is proved: So much for
the second external means in this narrow way, leading to eternal life.

Again, that this means was efficacious to bring these Gentiles thus by
nature to eternal life, is from Scripture proved implicitly, and also more
expressively.

First implicitly, by Gods bending his merciful ear to the Idolatrous
Mariners, praying so confusedly unto him, and yet he gave them a temporal
salvation; likewise to Abimilech, he pleading to God his uprightness according
to his light. God accordingly acknowledged it to be so, and gave him a
temporal salvation: Likewise the Heathenish Ninivites, whom he threatened
with unavoidable destruction, The faith of the Ninivites was a ce^taine belief
of Gods Word for their temporal destruction, mingled with a dependant hope in
him for mercy to remove that misery.
yet they imploring him under the notion of mercy, he removed their misery, by
giving them a temporal salvation, implicitly, touching upon the spirits of
them all, that if they did but by patience in well-doing seek for immortality
according to their light; he would give them an eternal salvation, Jonas 1.
from verse 5. to 16. Genes. 20. from verse 3. to 7. Jonas 3. to verse 9.

Secondly, the Scriptures speaks more expressively; for the Apostle speaking
of these Gentiles, excluded the Law, having it only written in their hearts by
nature, says, That God will render to every man according to his works, to
them who by patience continue in well-doing, seek for glory, honor, and
immortality, eternal life, verse 6. and 7. and verse 10. he says, Glory
honor and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also t
the Gentiles; for there is no respect of persons with God: as many as have
sinned without the Law shall perish without Law, and as many as have sinned in
the Law, shall be judged by the Law, verse 11.12.

And the ground of this point is employed in the first Chapter, and 28. verse,
from the rule of contraries, he speaking of some of these Gentiles, which did
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, says, even as they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, so God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to
do things not convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness, implying on
the contrary, that if they had carefully retained God in their knowledge,
according to the truth which they had received of him, that then God in mercy
would have kept them from the power of their sins in this narrow way to life;
for before the Apostle says, God would render to them eternal life, having
not the Law, as well as to the Jew.

Therefore this means was efficacious in this narrow way to eternal life to
some, and might have been to more of these Gentiles under wrath: for the
Apostle having thus proved, that the uncircumcised Gentiles doing by nature the
things contained in the Oracle of God, might attain eternal life, as well as
the national Spouse of Christ, he supposes, that from hence they would
imagine, that he made no difference between them and the uncircumcised
Heathen; therefore in the third Chapter says he, What advantage then has the
Jew, or what profit is there of circumcision, that is, of all their peculiar
and glorious privileges? To this he answers, much every way, because unto them
was committed the Oracles of God; for what if some of them did not believe
(that is, Gods Oracle) to be true in the seed promised, shall their unbelief
make Gods object of Faith, or Gods faithfulness to man in that object of none
effect? God forbid, yea, let God be true, and every man a liar: yet verse 9. he
concludes, the Jews by reason of their proud Apostasy to be no better
generally then were the Gentiles, as it is written, says he, there is This
must needs be understood of all for the most part, and not that none did
understand aright, nor that none were righteous, for then there was a time when
God had no Church nor Christ, no Spouse in this world, and that is unpossible;
for Christ till time shall be no more, will in this world be a Priest after the
order of Milchizedech, to continue a Church on earth, see ca. 10.
none righteeus, no, not one, there is none that understands, there is none
that seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, etc.

But it will be here objected, that the Apostle contradicts himself, because
that as in this Epistle to the Romans, he affirms man by nature does the
things contained in the Law of Christ to eternal life, but in his Epistle to
the Corinthians, he says the contrary, namely, that the natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Corinthians. 2. verse 14.

Romans, by nature he means, as not having the Oracle of life, as it was
among the Jews, but only the foresaid internal principles in their nature,
and the voice of God speaking implicitly by Christ in the creatures but to the
Corinthians he means men naturallized in the spirit of Satan, according to the
course of this world, for they esteemed the wisdom of God in the creatures as
leading to God, and especially the Apostles Ministry in the Gospel to be
foolishness; and therefore the Apostle says to those of Corinth, where is the
Disputer of this world, has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? 1
Cor. 1.20.

Therefore here is no contrad^ction, but Gods proceedings also in this narrow
way to eternal life, is according to the first model, if thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted, if thou do not well, sins lies at the door.

Observation: If the virtues of the best of the Gentiles or Heathens, having
not the Oracle of life, did thus by nature obtain the circumcision of the
heart and spirit hence observe, that the virtues of the best Heathens, were not
shining sins, but of the same nature and kind as are the most holy men on
earth.

Secondly, is it so, that when the way of life was so narrow, that few did
find it, yet some did find it without the Oracle of God, by retaining the
truth of God in their knowledge, consequently so might all the rest.

that they are left without excuse, Romans 1.10



Hence observe, how just that other dreadful sentence is which the Apostle
applies to all mankind, saying, Christ in fl^ming fire shall come taking
vengeance on them which know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2 These. 1.8.

I^wes and Gentiles from the object of life; the way to eternal felicity at
Christ's coming into the world was (as it were extinguished. Hence observe,
that well might the Lord of glory then affirm and exhort mankind, saying,
enter in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat, because strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be
that find it, Matthew. 7.13.

Again, here observe, although God does visit the sins of the fathers upon
the children through many generations, yet he does not extend that visitation
to their unavoydable damnation; but he only shows his type and just
displeasure against their apostate parents for contempt of his gracious mercy
by making narrow and strait the way to eternal life to them and theirs; yet a
way is here, we see, and those children are not delivered up from Gods
universal grace and mercy, nor from receiving his more special mercy to life
in that narrow way except for their own detaining that truth in
unrighteousness; wherefore righteous art thou, O Lord, in all thy ways, and
merciful in all thy works.

CHAP. VIII. Being an Introduction to the third part of time in which the
Gentiles were called to life and glory.
I Call it an Introduction, because, as Christ being slain figuratively in the
Lamb, in the point of time that Adam fell, his righteousness being committed
or imputed to to the world then made way for all blessedness to man: So now
also being slain in the truth and finished all righteousness, it being in
mercy imputed to the world this second time, it then brake down the partition
wall of the Moysaicall Ordinances, which before excluded the Gentiles, and so
made an open way to bring in the Gentiles to inherit with the Jews the
blessing of Abraham.

Therefore it is requisite I should now first show how the Son of God did
this great work of restoring the world and so come to show the calling of the
Gentiles to that blessedness.

And first take notice that God not only led Adam before the fall, and Christ's
elect Spouse to Eternal felicity by Allegories, but also Christ himself: For
as the first Adam was by God assigned his place, for the improvement of his
perfect Excellencies, to Gods glory, for the Supernatural felicities of the
World, namely the Garden of Eden, with its prefigurations: So likewise the
second Adam by God, for the Improvement of his perfect excellencies, to the
said end had his place assigned him, namely the Land of Canaan, figured first
by Gods assigning the particular Place where Isaac the promised seed in the
Type was to be Sacrificed, that is, only in the Land of Canaan which God
appointed Abraham.

Secondly, It was likewise prefigured in this, that the Land of Canaan was
entailed to Isaac the promised Seed in the Tipe.

Likewise the Intaile descended figuratively to Christ as he was the Son of
King David, therefore the breadth of this Land, is thy Land O Emanuel, as says
the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 8. ver. 8.

Thirdly, this was likewise Typified to Christ, in that all Sacrifices in the
Type, were excluded from all places in the world, and included only in this
Land of Canaan near the Temple, restrictively to expire their lives in the
Type: Therefore in this Land, was the Lord Jesus Christ in the truth,
Personally to perform the work of the redemption of the world, the which
accordingly he did.

Again, Christ the Son of God, as he was man, was borne under five relations
to this work.

First, by promise, the Son of Adam, as the seed of the woman, immediately
upon the fall, and therefore bound by the Law of Nature to relieve his Parents
in their Lapsed condition.

Secondly, by promise borne the Son of Abraham, and therefore bound to the
Law of circumcision, figuring his cutting off the powers of Satan, that is, of
sin and the consequences thereof; for the Covenant was, that all the Sons of
Abraham must be circumcised in their generations: therefore he was borne in
subjection to that Law.

Thirdly, he was by promise borne the seed of David, therefore borne under the
Law of the Typical Mediator, as added to the law of circumcision; therefore
bound to love God with all his heart, and al his strength and his Neighbor as
himself, in the work of the redemption of the world.

Fourthly, as the Son of David so hereditarily to the crown of the
Terrestrial Canaan, figuratively leading him by Faith to his eternal Throne
in the Celestial Canaan.

Fifthly, at last all these relations meet in one issue by being borne of the
blessed Virgin Mary his Mother: for when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, that we might receive
the Adoption of Sons, Gal 4.5.

Sixthly, he was the Son of God also, by eternal generation, the second
person in the sacred Trinity, and so personally God man, and therefore bound to
the fulfilling of all the law and the Prophets, to the regaining of Gods glory
by restoration of the world by redemption, as it was said, it shall break thy
head, the truth is, and so he did; for as we first in Adam magnified Satan's
lies for truths, and nullified Gods truth for lies, so likewise at that time
when he came to this work, all the world, This definition is an answer to
Pilates Question, viz. What is truth? Ioh. 18.38. For Christ as he was the
faithful and true witness against Satan's lies, did undo what he had done,
and so destroyed the works of the Devil, but Satan's final bruise shall be at
the day of judgment in ^wo pa^ticulars; first when Satan and all mankind,
which from the beginning have refused mercy, to adhere to him, shall receive by
the seed of the woman, the sentence of their full damnation, in immediate
execution to all e^ernity, Mat. 25.41.46. Secondly, by rendering up to God all
mankind from Satan's power, which from the beginning has died in infancy, and
that through all Generations ha^h adhe^ed unto Christ in right belief of
truth, and so God by Christ's ministerial ordinance shall be all in all, that
is, fully glorified to all eternity, according to the simple and plain meaning
of his truth in the eternal life of the one, and in the eternal death of the
other, and as Christ's ministerial Ordinance shall therein terminate, so then
shall all Creatures be subjected to him, as Judge of quick and dead, and so all
knees in Heaven and Earth, and under the ea th, shall bow and bend to him for
ever. Romans 14.10.11.
both Jews and Gentiles generally, had made God a liar, as much as in them
lay, for they were all Apostates from Gods gift of Christ his righteousness
imputed, which came upon all men to the justification of life, not believing
it, but following lying vanities, so forsaking their own mercies; and the truth
is, the work of Christ was to witness Gods truth, which we thus betrayed,
wherefore of himself he says, to this end was I borne, and for this cause
came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: 1 Ioh 3 8.
and for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil John 18 37. And in brief, that truth which Christ made
good, as the faithful and true witness against Satan's lies, may be thus
defined, namely, that God never intended his glory upon m^nkinde to all
eternity, but according to two general Rules.

First, according to the Covenant made with the first Adam a Covenant of works.

Secondly, but according to the Rules of that Covenant, as now it is turned by
Gods gift of the second Adam into a Covenant of grace and mercy; and to the
last, Christ is the most proper witness in Gods behalf to his glory, by the
salvation of mankind, as John 3.16. says he, God so l ved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him shall not
perish, but have everlasting l fe: And he says, God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
Also he says, He that believes is not condemned, but he that believes not,
is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only
begotten Son of God: Implying, that although sin simply as sin, did not
at that time of grace condemn them, yet their persisting in their precedent
Apostasy from that grace, now light and life is manifested unto them; this
would be their Condemnation, wherefore he says, This is the Condemnation that
light is come into the world, and Men l^ved darkness r^ther then light,
because their deeds are evil. And of himself he says, Io. 8.45. I proceeded
forth and came from God; neither came I of self, but the Father sent me.

Also John 5.36. he says, The work which the Father has given me to finish
the same work that I do bear witness, that the father has sent me, the which
was his witnessing the truth as before is proved. And he did it in these
paticulars.

First against the Spirit of Satan's lies in the Saints.

Secondly, in Sinners.

Thirdly, against Satan hand to hand.

Fourthly, against Satan in flames of Faith in love under Gods most flaming
and dreadful wrath; of these in their order, and first in the Saints: as in
Nichodemus who in the Spirit of Satan being averse to his sacred doctrine, as
declaring this truth: Jesus said unto him art thou a Ruler in Israel and
understandest not these things, Ioh. 3.9.

Likewise to the Spirit of unbelief of this Truth in his Disciples, Jesus
answered and said, O faithless and perverse Gener^tion, how long shall I be
with you, how long shall I suffer you. Mat. 7. and 17.

And to the same Spirit in Peter, He turned and said unto Peter, get thee
behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me for thou savorest not the things
of God, but the things that be of men. Mat. 16.23.

And to the same spirit in James and John, He turned and rebuked them and said,
ye know not of what Spirit ye are of, Lu. 9.34.

To the same spirit in the two Disciples that went to Emaus, says he, O
fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; ought
not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his glory? Luk
24, 26.

Likewise says the Text, He appeared to the Eleven, as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them wits their unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16.14.

And to the Virgin Mary his Mother, Jesus says unto her, Woman, what have I to
do with thee, mine hour is not yet came, implying in her request, something
was not suitable to his Spirit of Truth, consequently so far forth, according
to the lying spirit of Satan. Ioh. 2 4.

Secondly, he also witnessed this truth of God against the lying spirit of
Satan in sinners: That is Man in the state of unbelief, as resisting this
truth, as for instance, he proving himself to be the light of the world not
only by Doctrine, but ^lso by a miraculous fact, giving sight to the man that
was borne blind; then the lying spirit of sa^an attempted to extinguish this
truth by saying, give God the praise, we knew that God spoke with Moses, as for
this fellow we know not whence he is?

But Christ in the mouth of the man retorts the argument upon them saying,
herein is a mavelous thing, for ye know not whence he is, and yet he has
opened mine eyes. Now we know that God hears not sinners, but if a man be a
worsh pper of God and does his will, him God hears, and since the world
began was it never heard, that any man opened the eyes of any that was borne
blind. Joh. 9.5.6.16.24.29. etc.

Likewise he being in the Synagogue, intermingling this Doctrine of truth with
another miraculous fact, called to a woman bound by Satan eighteen years, and
by the word of his mouth makes her free from the bondage of satan implicitly
telling them, that if by the call of his Doctrine they would (in belief of
that truth) but as they were able by sense and reason come to him, he then
would dissolve the power of satan in them, and so the truth should make them
free; but the lying spirit of satan in the Ruler of the Synagogue, resisted
this truth, for he answers with indignation because that Jesus had healed on
the sabbath day and said unto the people, are there not six days in which men
ought to work in them? therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath
day.

But this evil spirit so changed into an Angel of light, the Lord discovers
and said, Thou Hypocrite, does not each of you on the Sabbath day loose his Ox
or his Ass from the stall, and lead him to the water? and ought not this
woman, being a daughter of Abraham which Satan had bound, lo, eighteen
years, be loosed on the Sabbath day? and all his enemies were ashamed:
likewise he miraculously fed many with small parcells of bread, declaring
himself thereby, as by his doctrine, that he was the bread of life to man by
belief of this truth to nourish him to everlasting life.

Likewise, by raising up the widows son and lairus daughter, and Lazarus
four days dead, declaring by this, as by his doctrine, that he was sent of
his Father to them, the resurrection and life to man by their belief of truth
in him. Or, the resurrection of faithless man to everlasting death; for, says
he, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins (that is)
and rise to perpetual shame: but all this truth in the lyings spirit of Satan
they resist by pretense, that Abraham and God was a Father to them, but he
according to truth, witnessed the contrary against them, saying, I know you are
Abraham's seed, Joh. 8.37. but verse. 39. Jesus said unto them, if ye were
Abraham's seed, ye would do the works of Abraham, but now ye seek to kill
me, a man that have told you the truth which I have heard of God, this did not
Abraham, implying, that although they were Abraham's seed in the flesh, yet not
Abraham's seed in the faith, consequently not children to God, but to the
Devil, verse 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do. For although by light of sacred truth, they came to know
he was the heir, namely, the promised seed from God to Adam, Abraham and
David, and so heir to all; yet their minds by pride was lifted up with the
glory of the Terrestrial Temple and princely Priesthood, as a worldly
magnificence to their Nation, but not to the celestial mystery therein
leading to the imputed righteousness of the seed, as the only ground of all
their glory; for in their hearts him they hate and attempt to extinguish both
him and his doctrine, because it tended to put an end to that typical
magnificence and Man perversely prove by custom in sin to attain a glory
adequate to his corporeal part, namely, his mouldering body, is therefore an
enemy to Gods way, as leading him to an eternal felicity, suitable to his
unperishing part, namely, his soul and body made spiritual, but so far as
man is led by the spirit of Christ, he is of another mind.
worldly glory, Mark 12. from verse 7. to the 12. Matthew 21.38. and 45. But the
Lord Jesus Christ witnessed the truth in plain terms, and said, My Kingdom
is not of this world, my Kingdom If Christ refused to be an ea thly Monarch in
Canaan and Sion hill, and declaring by plainness of speech that his Kingdom
is not such, consequently this Kingdom of Christ's Spouse national elect was
but a figure of that grace that was most clea^ely powered out under the Gospel,
and also of his eternal throne in mo^e then Angels glory, and not a type of an
earthly Monarchy of his of one thousand years in length; see this point more
clear in cap. 9.
is not from hence, Mat. 18. and 36

Likewise he refused to be made a worldly King on Sion hill, so proving his
doctrine to be true by this fact; for, says the Text, when Jesus therefore
perceived they would come and take him by force to make him King, he departed
thence, etc. John 6.15.

Likewise, to his successo^s which were to witness this sacred doctrine of
truth, he gives the same rule, not to In the judgment of the Son of God, it
is a safe way to keep his ambassadors to the work of his embassage, by
keeping them from worldly government and terrestrial pomp, yet they must have
a complete competency, as is employed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.12.13, 14. but
the former is the ruin of simple godliness in Christ's Spouse; for says Gods
Spirit, Like Priest like People, Hosea 4.9.
aspire to dignities and glory in the government of this world: for says the
Text, Jesus called them unto him, and said, ye know that the princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
authority over them, but it shall not be so amongst you, Mat. 20. verse. 25.

Likewise, by a remarkable fact he condemned the pride of the priests and
others of this elect Spouse in their proud apostasy after the flesh, couched
under a pretense of the celestial doctrine, the worship and the Temple; for
the eternal Son of God rides upon an Ass in a contemptible manner into
Jerusalem, the Metropolis of this Nation, and so despised the vanity of all
that glory; yet this fact tended to the consolation of the meek in Sion, by
belief of truth, as was fore-prophesied, behold, thy King comes unto thee,
meek and sitting on an Ass and a Colt, the foale of an Ass, and the common
people and his Disciples gave him high praise and glory, at which the proud
apostate Priests, Scribes, and the like their hearts did rise; for to him they
said. Hear thou this? but he repelled this lying Satanicall spirit in
evidence of truth, and answered and said, If these should hold their peace, the
stones would cry: Also he fore-prophesied the destruction of all their
supposed present felicity, Mat. 21. from verse 4. to the 16. Luke 19.36. and
42. So much for the second point, his witnessing the truth against the spirit
of Satan in sinners.

Thirdly, Christ witnessed this truth hand to hand with Satan himself; for,
when he had denied himself not the fruit of one tree, as Adam was to have
done, but all food, forty days together, dedicating himself to the great
work of the Redemption of the world in obedience to his Father: so mediating
for mercy to the world, he afterward was an hungry, then came Satan to him,
and said, If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made
bread, and Christ by the word of truth, repells his assault; For, Jesus
answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, implying; that as
man's temporary life is maintained by an influence from God in bread, so his
life spiritual here by faith, is in every word of God from the influence of
his spirit: Likewise then the Devil taking him up into an high mountain,
showed him all the Kingdoms of the world in a moment of time, and the Devil
said unto him, All this power will I give to thee, and the glory of them, for
that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give it; if thou
therefore wilt fall down before me all shall be thine. Jesus answered and said
unto him, get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, implying, that himself was
personally God-man, and ought therefore to be worshipped by him.

Likewise he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the Temple,
and said unto him, if thou be the son of God (as thy words import) then cast
thy self down from hence; for it is written He shall give his Angels charge
over thee to keep thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at
any time thou dash thy foot against a stone; And Jesus answering, said unto
him, it is said, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, implying what he had
said before was his answer, Luke 4.

So that although the first Adam believed a lie to the destruction of all, yet
the second Adam was constant in Gods truth, dissolving Satan's lies for the
restoration of all, and Satan, says he has naught in me.

He likewise discovers to the world, what Satan's operations was and is, for
John 8. he says, Sa^an was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, because no truth is in him: when he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own, for he is a liar and the f^ther thereof, verse 44.

Fourthly, Christ now witnesses Gods truth against Satan's lies by faith and
flames of love to God under Gods most dreadful wrath, so offering himself as
a whole burnt offering to God, yet not but that Gods truth may be witnessed
under divine justice and not under wrath; likewise under mercy, and not under
wrath: Also under Justice in exceeding great wrath.

The first was Adams estate in the Covenant before his fall.

The second is the Estate of the Saints witnessing Gods truth in some
conformity to Christ, in which respect he which sanctifies, and they which
are sanctified are one, Hebr. 2.11.

The third was the estate of Christ, as the Redeemer of the fallen world; for
as he was for our sins in Adam, and for the Jews and Gentiles apostasy, a
sinner imputed; He therefore in this respect was a man as hated of God, as
himself says, reckoned amongst the transgressors.

And the truth is, so it was with him from his conception to the expiration of
his life; for although his conception and birth was not in sin, but Christ
partaking man's nature, as do children, viz. seminally in the womb, is a twofold
pledge to us: first, that it was to destroy the works of Satan in our behalf:
secondly, after man believes truth, to free him from the fear of death, to
which precedently all his life long he was subject, Hebr. 2.14.
conceived and borne an holy thing, the Son of God, yet his conception and
birth was from her, in whom was sin, the seed of the Serpent; wherefore she
rejoiced in him as her Savior and salvation.

So likewise no sooner was he borne but Satan in Herod attempted to bruise his
heel: Likewise his breeding under his supposed father was but mean, a
Carpenter: Likewise with his kindred, which nationally was his Spouse, he was
reputed but a mean fellow, a friend of Publicans and sinners, a mad man, a
conjurer, an impostor, a blasphemer of God, a Devil.

Therefore rightly does the Apostle encourage the Saints to undergo the hatred
of the world, to consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, Hebr. 10.13.

Again, the first Adam, by the justice of the Covenant in point of trial
against Satan's lies, was estated not only in the sweet perfections of the
glory of nature: but also in the splendour of the Garden relatively drawing him
by faith to enjoy God in the heavenly glory; but the second Adam not only
under wrath, but under exceeding great wrath, as appears in two particulars.

First, by his fears of the near approach of that wrath.

Secondly, by what it was when he was directly under it: first, when this hour
and power of darkness did draw near, although it was a thing greatly by him
desired; as his aspired end to his fathers glory; for when he comes into the
world, he says, Sacrifice and offerings thou would not have, but a body have
thou prepared me: then said I, l^e, I come to do thy Will, O God, Luke 22.15.
Heb 10. yet I say, the near approach of this hour and power of darkness was
dreadful to his apprehension, as appears by his fears. sorrow, prayer and
cries, who (as says the Text) In the days of his flesh, when he had offered
up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears to him that was able
to save him from death, was pitied in the thing he feared; for there appeared
unto him an Angel from heaven, yet not to take off his misery, but to
strengthen him to it, and there was need so to do; for his bones were sundred
in this agony his spirit waxed hot within him as melted wax, and from thence it
was that his sweat became as great drops of blood falling down to the ground,
Hebr. 5 7. Psalm. 22.14. Luke 22.41.

But he having resolved in belief of truth by flaming love to go on through
the apprehension of its near approach to him, to approach to it in resignation
of his will to his Fathers Will, in the worlds redemption: He demanded twice
of his apprehenders, whom seek ye? and affirms himself twice to be the man
whom they sought, and although they fell backwards before him, yet he goes
forward with them, to encounter this dreadful wrath which extended to a
twofold separation of God from him:

First, God separated himself from him in all natural good, either to soul
or body, and left him to the contrary evil.

Secondly, God separated himself from his soul and body in all supernatural
and celestial good, and left him to the contrary evil; and first of the first.

To his body, and so to the anguish of his soul; for it was torn with whips,
pierced with thorns, his hands and feet pierced with nails, and riven or rent
with the weight of his body hanging on the cross six hours, or thereabouts:
Likewise to cool his thirst, they gave him vinegar and gall to drink; the
people and Priest blaspheme him as a man forsaken of God, the whole powers of
nature, as it were, rising against him, extinguishing from him all things but
dread and dolor, for darkness from the sixth hour to the ninth covered him;
the Temple rent, the earth quak't, the Rocks rent, so that in respect of Gods
separating all natural good from him, leaving him to the contrary evil, he
might truly say in the dolor of his soul, All ye that pass by, be^^ld and
see if there be any s^rrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. Lam. 1.12.

Secondly, God likewise separated himself from him in all supernatural and
Celestial good, and left him to the contrary evil, for because this
separation of God from him in all natural good, leaving him to the contrary
evil, was in this place, namely the Land of Canaan; this employed, that God
also separated himself from him in all supernatural good, because this Land
in general, was to the second Adam, as the garden of Eden was to the first
Adam, that is, a figure by the Terrestrial good of the Celestial good in the
Heaven of Heavens.

Therefore this figured to him, that God shut the Kingdom of Heaven against
him, rendering him no light in that respect, but leaving his soul the only
object of eternal darkness.

Again; this being at Jerusalem the figure of eternal peace, this employed to
him, that no peace or consolation at that time was his portion from God, but
the contrary apprehensions of eternal woe, suitable to the damned Spirits of
men and Devils.

Again, this being also in the place of residence of his elect Spouse the
Kingdom of grace on Earth, this implied that he was to God, a man cut off from
the land of the living in all respects, consequently no place left to him by
divine justice, but the place prepared for the Devil and his Angels, for says
the text, he was reckoned amongst the transgressors. Luk 22, 37.

Therefore his cry upon the cross was according to truth, My God my God, why
have thou forsaken me; which words employed two things.

First, that this twofold Separation of God from him in his apprehension, was
more dreadful then he could reach in his humane comprehension and therefore
cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Again, his words further imply, that his separation was only on Gods part,
never on his; for he in this darkness where was no light, and this depth where
no humane nature could feel any bottom. yet he kept union in faith, and
flames of love to God and his Neighbor in a right relation to the worlds
redemption, and therefore he said, My God my God, as never letting him go: So
raising his Soul from that depth of death under Gods flaming wrath by Faith
and love, and so rendered his Soul to God from his body, and his body to dust a
whole burnt offering, saying, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
therefore this was the first and great Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ,
in which he raised himself by his own power, from the depth of infernal
death, yea the most certain death, that is, death in the substance, as it was
said, in the day that thou eatest, thou shall certainly die the death:

Christ knowing his Fathers power to be infinite, and therefore all things
possible to him, consequently Christ in his prayer willed this cup to pass him
absolutely.

Answer. It does not follow, for although Christ did know, as indeed he did,
that to God all things were possible, in respect of his power, yet he knew
this cup could not possibly pass him in respect of Gods justice, he being the
second Adam, and therefore he willed it not absolutely.

that Christ's prayer was vain, and consequently a sin.



But because in respect to Gods justice he submitted in Faith and love in a
full resignation of himself to his Fathers will, therefore he was right in
both, and wrong in neither.

that his prayer on the cross, employed some ignorance in this great work,
because he says, why have thou forsaken me? consequently he sinned.



Again, although he was at the nearest brink of a total and final
desperation, yet he sinned not, for the Covenant required faith in truth, and
love to God, in that relation he stood, but with all his heart, and all his
soul and all his strength, and no more.

Therefore though he was at the foresaid brink of desperation, yet he sinned
not.

Again, the strength of his humane nature being not able to keep up from
desperation, under that vast and dreadful separation, yet he in his unfeigned
cry, why have thou forsaken me, as the second Adam witnessed Gods truth,
namely, that God really intended death, that is, this twofold separation, as it
was said, in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall certainly die the
death This death of the second Adam proves, that God really intended the same
to man with the fi st Adam.
, and so dissolved that lie of Satan, who said, ye shall not die at all, for
he being personally God-man, and so more powerful then any mere creature,
therefore justice required his personal power so far as need was: and
therefore although as a mere creature he cried out. Why have thou forsaken
me, yet in the power of his personal operations he cries out, My God, my
God, and so Faith mightily Christ descended not locally into the place of the
damned, because his faith and love to the full sati faction of divine justice,
wrought up to God through all interposing difficulties, therefore it was
unpossible he should be held of the sorrows of death, and so he triumphed
over all the enemies of his Fathe^s glory, which was to result to him out of
the good of mankind. Psalm. 16.8.11.
working by love, reached the power of an endless life from under the most
vast depth of separation in an endless death.

I say, this was by Faith in Gods truth, and Gods righteous justice to him, in
that relation in which he then stood, for his eternal blessedness, for says
he to God, I set thee ever before me, and thou will open to me the way of
life, and so with a loud voice he renders his soul saying, Father, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit. Luk 23, 46. And so by the eternal Spirit, as says
the Apostle, He offered himself to God without spot, to purge our consciences
from dead works, to s^rve the living God: he so But now to this point there are
three which bear witness in heaven, namely, the th^ee persons in the one God,
in their several order, by uphold^ng and maintaining that created Angelical
glory, for the members of the second Adam to all eternity, which God from time
to time here on earth has promised them, and still does evidence it by three
witnesses on earth, namely, first by Christ's bloodshed as the seal of the
satisfaction of divine justice, which obtained that eternal life: Secondly by
water, namely the work of Re^eneration cleansing man's Spirit in Faith and love
to the mystery. Thirdly, by the Spirit in the ministe^y of the word and
Sacraments, most eminently witnessing the purchase and free gift of that glory
to man through a^l ages. 1 John 5.7.8.
witnessed that other truth of Gods against Satan's lie, namely, that God really
intended to man the knowledge of good in the glory of Angels by his Covenant
with Adam, and in the righteousness of the second Adam, and so dissolved that
other lie of Satan, that God only pretended it, but never intended it; and to
the same end he gave himself also a ransom for all men in the fourth estate
of man to redeem them from their Apostacy. And for conclusion to this
Chapter, observe these five particulars.

First, that when in common speech we say, that Christ fulfilled the Law, we
may rightly understand it only of the Moral Law, because he by perfect love to
God and his Neighbor, did fulfill all Laws; that is, not only the Covenant as
it was with Adam, but also as upon these two did hang all the Law and the
Prophets, with respect of man's fourth estate, as before is proved.

Secondly, is it so that Christ raised his Soul The first Resurrection of
Jesus Christ our Lord.
by belief of truth and perfect love from that vast depth of death, and that
that was his first and great resurrection, as the second Adam.

Hence observe, that the raising of his body was his second resurrection, and
most properly by the glory of the Father The second Resurrection of Jesus
Christ our Lord.
, and from Divine Justice his first step to his eternal happiness, for so
great a work as the redemption of the world. Phil. 2.9. in this fourth estate
of man.

Thirdly, is it so, that the works of the Son of God was so potent in belief
of truth to that blessedness which was set before him, Heb. 12. as that it
wrought up to God from under so vast a separation in flames of burning love to
Gods glory by the redemption of the world.

Hence observe, that to put any worth upon any other man's works as to affirm
they can deserve, by their obedience to God, that he should free them from
eternal death, or render them the reward of eternal life; yea, and that they
can supererogate for others also: I say observe, that any of this Doctrine is,
not only a blasphemous derogating from Christ's works, but also against the
gift of God imputing it, arrogating to man that which is not his: also it
overthrows the foundation of man's salvation, and that fundamentally, for it
not only makes void the object of Justification, but cuts off man's work of
Faith to that object, in a justifying relation, as before is observed against
the Jews, page 78.

Fourthly, is it so, that God estated the Covenant with Adam, that if it were
by him fulfilled. God by him should then receive the praise of his justice to
all eternity in the foresaid twofold respects, as Chap. 2. page 12.13. And
likewise if the second Adam did fulfill it, that by him under divine justice,
he also might receive the praise of his justice to all eternity, and that
Christ accordingly did render him his justice to every tittle, and pronounced
it finished.

Hence observe that God never intended, nor needed to make a personal
reprobation of most men to unavoydable destruction to the everlasting praise of
his justice.

For if the Covenant had bin fulfilled by either Adam, it it was to the praise
of his justice to all eternity, as here we see, and the Covenant of grace is so
full to this point that all mankind may ascend to eternal life by Christ, if
they will but apply themselves in what they have received, and to what they
might receive in him, yet by Christ Gods justice is eternally glorified, as is
proved.

Therefore God never made in vain, such a personal reprobation, to pass upon
the most of mankind.

Fifthly observe, that when I say, Christ's righteousness is imputed to all
mankind in general, or to man believing truth more special, as is described,
I mean not Christ his righteousness essentially as God, nor his perfect love
as naturally an holy man, without sin; nor all those manifold works he did
as personally God man, even to blood and death, but by his righteousness that
was imputed; I mean only this one work, to which all precedently named, were
but means, namely, his dissolving Satan's lies Our second Adam and Savior,
improved his personal perfections as our su^et^, against the spirit of Satan
his lies in Saints, Sinners, and Devils, and under the 2. fold Separation, and
so made good his fathers truth, namely, that God really and simply intended
Ete^nall glory for man with Angels, or the contrary according to his revealed
will in either estate, the which gave full satisfaction to divine Justice, and
was accepted in the behalf of the World, and therefore imputed to the worlds
felicity, and man's the chief part therein.
by witnssing Gods truth, as is described, page 101.102.111.

And the reason why this only was imputed, is this, because only this is it
which all men should set to their seals in this fourth estate of man, and was
the first Adams work in the Covenant, and then to be imputed to the
supernatural felicity of the world, as Chapt. the 2.

Therefore the second Adams witnessing Gods truth to the repelling all the
lying powers of Satan, is only that righteousness, which by God is imputed to
the supernatural felicity of the world in General, or to man believing truth
more special, as precedently is described.

CHAP. IX. Declaring Gods impartial proceedings in the third part of time to
the Gentiles, when by the Gospel he called them to the blessing of Abraham.
THe call of the Gentiles I will refer to two general heads.

First to the extraordinary call for a time.

Secondly, to the ordinary call, to continue till time shall be no more.

And in the first this was extraordinary, that upon the promised seed his
fulfilling all righteousness, the partition wall of the Mosaicall Ordinances
of God, should be abolished, by which the uncircumcised Jews, precedently had
insulted over the uncircumcised Gentiles, and yet those Mosaicall Ordinances
witnessed not only the Gentiles exclusion from the oracle of life, but also
against the Jews for their own Apostasy from Christ, wherefore he says unto
them, even Moses in whom you trust, does accuse you, Joh. 5.45.

But upon Christ's fulfilling all righteousness, this witness against the
Gentiles was canceld, for so Saint Paul writes to the Gentiles, remember, says
he, that you being in times past Gentiles in the flesh were called
uncircumcised, by that which was called the circumcision in the flesh made with
hands, that at that time ye were without Christ, being aliants from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promises, having
no hope, and without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who
sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, for he is our
peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us, having ab l^shed in his flesh the enmity, even the Law
of commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain,
one new man, so making peace etc. Ephesians. 2.11,

Likewise God pouring out his spirit upon all flesh was extraordinary, as Acts
2. says the Apostle, this is it which was spoken ^f by the Prophet Joel, it
shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will power out my spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your
old men shall dream dreams, etc. verse. 16.

And this pouring out of Gods spirit was twofold; that is external and
internal: first external; for whereas before God did in his external call,
excitively draw the Gentiles to Christ, it was but implicit by the voice of the
creatures, and as formerly is declared, likewise his external drawing of the
Jews was but by the Gospel as wrapped up in the glorious veil of Moses;
therefore the external way to eternal life to all the world, was then but
narrow and obscure, but now made broad and perspicuous by the naked external
demonstration thereof, as in the spirit of prophecy the wonderful gift of
Miracles by the Apostles, understanding the Oracles of life more clear than
ever before, and divulging the same in burning zeal for the glory of God, by
the salvation of the world, and in the wonderful gift of tongues by plainness
of speech, excitively drawing the Gentiles, or rather God in Christ by them
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their sins, and manifesting
to them, that their precedent ignorance he regarded not; but now admonishing
all men to return from lying vanities, to embrace their own mercies that the
confused fugitives of Babel, tasting the waters of life at Jerusalem, cried
out, saying, How hear we every man in his own tongue, wherein we were borne,
Parthiaus, Medes and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotomia, and Judea, and
in Cappadocia, and in Pontus, Asia, Phrygia and Pamphilia, in Egypt, and in the
parts of Lybia about Cyrene, strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, Cretes
and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues, the wonderful works of
God, and they were all amassed, Acts 2.8.

Thus from Jerusalem as from Paradise, or the throne of God, now did issue the
living streams of eternal life to the families of the earth, dead in sins
and trespasses, wherefore precedently Christ said unto his Disciples, Ye shall
be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the utmost
parts of all the earth, and accordingly at Jerusalem they first received this
power from above, which they thus divulged, Luke 24.49. Luke 2.39. and so God
persuaded Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem, and in this extraordinary call
he was found of them that sought him not, nor asked after him, all being gone
out of the way, and become abominable, none seeking after God doing good, no
not one.

Thus God, who keeps covenant and mercy for thousands according to his
purpose, as with Abraham, he predestined and prepared them to this glory. So
now he called them to it in Christ Jesus externally: and so much for the
external pouring out of his spirit upon all flesh.

Gentiles circumcising their spirits, as aforesaid, and as to the Jews but
sparingly in comparison of this pouring out in this day of Salvation, and
acceptable year of the Lord: It was but sparingly as by drops, and that which
the spirit did now internally power out upon the spirits of all men, may be
reduced to two general heads: first, wheresoever the Oracle of truth
manifested Gods gift of Christ's righteousness imputed, as it went from
Kingdom to kingdom by the conduct of the spirit like a Chariot of light and
life rising upon the nations as the sun of righteousness with health under
his wings: the first pouring into the spirit of man for health, was this,
namely, it did quicken or enliven the original principle of amity to God, and
enmity to Satan, even as it did upon the fall of Adam by Christ's restoration
of all in the type then put into the nature of man, hereditarily to descend, as
precedently is proved; so now likewise upon Christ his fulfilling all
righteousness in the truth, this infused principle which was now dead in
sins and trespasses, was by the imbreathing of the spirit of God, wheresoever
the Gospel came, it quickened and enlivened man in dispositions to harken to
the external call of Christ in the object of faith, to the end they might
receive the gift of faith, to receive life in Christ; wherefore says Christ,
If any man will do Gods Will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self, Joh. 7.17, 18.

Likewise he says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live, Joh. 5.25.

And the last clause where it is said, they shall live, leads us to the second
part, namely, the spirits internal, more special pouring upon all flesh, that
is, answerably, as men did come in the precedent enlivened or renewed
dispositions to Christ in the Gospel, as being the object of faith held forth
by the word of truth, as the brazen Serpent; from thence by the pouring out of
the Spirit, they should receive the spirit of faith to be able to receive life
in the object of faith, as before in the precedent P.

Hence it is the Apostle says, Awake, thou that sleep, that is, under those
renewed dispositions toward Christ, and stand up from the dead, that is, and
rouse up this grace to harken to Gods call, to the object of life, and Christ
shall give thee light, that is, the light of right belief, as the truth is in
Jesus, from strength to strength, and so to receive life in him, Ephesians. 5.14.8.

Hence it is, that at Ephesus the Apostle said of God, even when we were dead
in sins has he quickened us together with Christ, by grace ye are saved,
Ephesians. 2.5. and says he not of works, lest any man should boast, for we are
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them, that is, by his fore-ordination with
Abraham, as before is declared.

He also says to those Gentiles, Work out your salvation with fea^e and
trembling; for it is God which works in you b^th to will and to do of his
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. and the ground why God did thus extraordinarily
externally, and internally power out his spirit upon the spirits of the
Gentiles dead in sins and trespasses, was this, That as sin by their
apostasy had reigned unto death, even so might his grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life by Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 5.21.

A second ground was this, that unless God had so excitively drawn them by
pouring out his spirit, they neither could, nor would ever come to him by
Christ, which is employed by the words of our Savior, when he rebuked the Jews
in their proud apostacy being dead, to live in him, he says, no man can come
unto me, except the Father which sent me draw him, Joh. 6.44.

Likewise to those Jews, having the power of this enlivening spirit
imbreathing upon their spirits, and st^fled by them he says, Ye will not come
unto me that ye might have life, Joh. 5 40. So that we may plainly see, even
under this extraordinary pouring out of Gods spirit upon all flesh, his
proceedings are equally alike to all, without respect of persons; for then he
sends forth his great Commission into all the world, saying to his ambassadors,
go ye into all the world, and pre^c^ the Gospel to every creature; he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, he that believes not shall be
damned. Mark 16.15. and 16. Hence Saint Peter says, of a truth I perceive
that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him
and works righteousness is accepted of him, Acts 10.34, 35. all which is
according to the first model delivered to Caine; if thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? etc.

Hence observe by the way, that God is a God keeping covenant; for as he
ordained these Gentiles to glory by covenant with Abraham; he now accordingly
called them to receive it; wherefore Saint Peter urges the Gentiles upon this
ground, as well as the Jews, to return to God in Christ, saying, repent and
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and receive the holy Ghost; for says he, the promise is made to you
and to your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call, Acts 2.39.





First, because he knew Gods proceedings upon the kindreds and nations of the
earth, should be by degrees, calling some sooner, and some later, and not all
at one time, as all on a day, as we use to say, therefore he might well say,
as many as our Lord God shall call, although it be intended personally alike to
all.

Secondly, the Apostle might well say, as many as the Lord God shall call,
because he knew God from the beginning had ordained to deny the efficacy of
his call to some sort of men, as he did to Cain; for when he predestined both
Jews and Gentiles in Christ Jesus with Abraham, he then gave the same rule of
cursednesse to man turning this grace into wantonness, as well as blessedness
to man submitting to it in the obedience of faith, as formerly is declared,
therefore he might well say, as many as our Lord God shall call, etc. So
likewise our Savior alluding to this same rule of cursing and blessing, to
families and cities in the call of these Gentiles, he says, Some are the
sons of peace, and some are not, Luke 10.3.5.18. For, not only believers,
but all mankind in general, especially at that time of grace, were the sons
of peace, that is, in a reconcilable condition to God in Christ Jesus: as for
example, although Cain was not a believer, as was Abel, yet there was a time
when he was a son of peace, that is reconcilable in Christ his acceptable
righteousness by Gods own nterrogative testimony, although afterward he was
not for rejecting the spirits reproof of sin, and so gracious an
encouragement of him to submit to receive life and glory, as formerly is proved.

Likewise our Savior, according to this rule of cursing and blessing in his
peculiar prayer for his Apostles, as going in his embassage for the
reconciliation of the world, he then also prays for the world exclusively and
inclusively, exclusively, to those that persist in their precedent apostasy
against the imbreathing of the foresaid external and internal light when it
came unto them, and hated his ambassadors, and in this sense, (says he) I
pray not for the world, for so runs the force of the implication.

But on the other side, he prays inclusively, for them which were, as once
was Cain, the subjects of reconciliation; wherefore for them he prays which
shall believe in him through their embassage, directly according to the rule
delivered to Abraham, Joh. 17.8.9.14, 15.20. So likewise according to this rule
of cursing and blessing, Acts 13. the Apostles by distinguishing between them
which were the sons of peace, and them which were not, that is, between the
apostate Jews resisting the call of the Gentiles at Antioch, as men of old
ordained to that damnation, and between the concourse of Gentiles in that
great assembly, who also of old by covenant with Abraham were given to Christ,
and ordained to that salvation, wherefore the Apostle rightly referres the
efficacious call of the spirit by their doctrine to the level of Gods
fore-ordination with Abraham, as cutting between these two sorts of people,
saying, when the Gentiles heard this, that is, their doctrine of God, his
intended mercy to them, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and
as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, but they shook off the
dust of their feet against these Jews, thereby witnessing, that they stood as
men that were under the foresaid curse or ordination to eternal death, for
despising that grace which the Gentiles, according to Gods covenant, did now
embrace, verse. 41.46, 47.48.51. So that the point is clear, that Gods
proceedings is without all respect of persons, according to his covenant with
Abraham for cursing and blessing.

And the ground why man sinning through ignorance and unbelief is the sum or
subject of peace and reconciliation, and not obstinate refusers of the light,
is, because they are more properly subjectively disposed to mercy then the
others; for if the one knew the evil of the thing as does the other, they
would not so stand out; hence Saint Pe^er says, to some of the Jews, I wot
that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers, implying that had
they known, that is, as did some others, they would not have slain the Lord
of glory, Acts 3.15.17.19. So likewise, Saint Paul of himself says, I was a
blasphemer, a persecuter and injurious, but I obtained mercy, because, said he,
I did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. So likewise to the Gentiles, he
preached the same doctrine, saying, This time of ignorance God wincked at, but
now he commands all men every where to return. Acts 17.30. Wherefore the
Apostle might well say, as many as the Lord God shall call, and yet intend no
such thing as is pretended.

And for conclusion, here first observe, that there has proceeded from God a
threefold extraordinary call of mankind in Christ Jesus to enjoy their day of
Grace, as a day of grace to receive in his gift of righteousness the day of
eternal glory: The first was immediately upon Adams fall in the promised seed
of the Woman, Chap. 4. This was equally alike universally to all mankind.

The second was at Noah's coming out of the Arc, when God renewed this
covenant of grace to Noah and his sons with them and his seed after them,
which at that time comprehended all alike without respect of persons, as Chap.
5.

The third extraordinary call of the world was this of the Gentiles, as is
precedently in this Chapter enlarged, when God was found of them that sought
him not.

Secondly, is it so, that it is extraordinary mercy in God thus to be found of
them that sought him not; hence observe, that this is no ordinary rule for man
to rely upon, because, what is Gods extraordinary rule, is not his ordinary
rule to man.

Thirdly, observe, that in this extraordinary calling of the Gentiles to
receive the blessing of Abraham, when God has enlivened the aforesaid dead
principle of enmity to Satan, and Amity to himself, that he will then have
man to put forth this enlivened disposition to come to him, as he does
excitively draw forth that internal inclination, so to convey further mercies.

I say hence observe, that as God will crown one grace with the gift of
another, so also From this ground it is, that in this fourth estate of man,
what God commands man to do before justifying Faith, or after, he promises his
own efficiency to accomplish what he commands; that is, if man thus apply
himself, or otherwise not. as Prove. 1.23, 24. etc.
he will communicate by exercise of the inferior, the conferrence of a grace
more Superior, as to the first inlivened principle, he will add the gift of
Faith, and to Faith a power rightly to receive his gift of Christ's
righteousness accounted to be man's to remission of sins, which is his
justification, consequently his eternal life by salvation.

But it will here be objected, that one man has more because he works more,
consequently he deserves more.

Not so, but because he works to submit more, Cain) by pride so refused to
submit, or does it in the remiss degrees, he therefore receives less mercy,
or none at all.

Fourthly, is it so, that the force of Gods extraordinary pouring forth his
spirit raises the mind of man to him being dead in sins and trespasses?

Then hence observe also, when the spirit of a man is dead in sins and
trespasses, namely, when it is habitually habituated to seek its eternal
felicity for the worth of his own righteousness, or the like errors; or
habitually habituated to terminate his felicity in a terrestrial or sensual
good of bodily contentments, as Psalm. 49.20.

And the ground why this is so, is because these habitual errors or the like,
does When man is in his spirit dead, to live by belief in the object of
justification; if then Gods Spirit does not imbreath, to enliven man's spirit to
hearken, by some dispositions to Gods voice, and to bring him so belief in the
object of life, he then perishes eternally, for now man can do noe more to
raise his mind to God in Christ, as the object of justification to salvation,
then can the Leopard to change his spots, or the Black-moore his skin.
extinguish, even the least dispositions to true godliness Although it does
extinguish the inclination to true godliness, yet in some there may remain
dispositions to civility or the like.
namely, man's internal dispositions to God, and his enmity to Satan, flowing
from the universal grace of the Covenant; but what it is to be twice dead and
plucked up by the roots, appears in the 12 Chapt.

Is it so, that when Christ did thus power out his Spirit upon all flesh, that
yet at this time be denied the spirit of Faith to his National Spouse to the
most part, for their proud Apostasy to their ensuing rejection?

Hence observe, how rightly the Lord of glory returned the same upon them, But
I said unto you, that ye also have seen me and believe not; All that the
Father But at this time the Father gives me the Gentiles to gather by the word
of truth to salvation but of you but few, for your call is not given to be at
this time, but in the future, as Romans 11.25, 26, 27.
gives me shall come unto me, but not most of you at this time of grace, for
that's employed: John 6.35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.

Is it so, that when Christ came personally into the world, he then found Jews
and Gentiles generally both dead in sins and trespasses to him, as the object
of justification to their life and glory, yea even

Hence observe, how rightly spoke the Lord Jesus Christ to his proud Apostate
Spouse, saying, none can come to me unless the Father which sent me draw him,
meaning, his extraordinary mercy, Ioh. 6.44.

that Christ his righteousness as imputed by the Fathers gift, and conveyed
from Kingdom to Kingdom, by the word of truth, was and is the only object of
life and glory, and the removal of man's misery, which submitted by belief of
truth to receive that gift of righteousness in that sacred object?

Then hence observe, how rightly spoke the Lord Jesus Christ of himself,
saying, I am the way and the truth and the life, no man can come unto the
Father but by me. Joh. 14.6.

that this extraordinary calling of the Gentiles to righteousness, life and
glory, being dead in sins and trespasses by their precedent Apostacy, that
even the second Adams satisfactory righteousness obtained as upon Adams fall,
so at this time also, that this world should be man's day of grace again, as a
day of grace to receive in it the gift of eternal glory, the world of Gentiles
being under wrath?

Then hence observe, that from this ground Saint Paul in the 5 of the Romans
rightly brings in Christ's imputative righteousness as opposed, not only to our
unrighteousness and misery in Adams transgression, but also interminglingly
opposing it against all men's own personal sins, against the grace of God in
Christ, that whereas sin in both respects had abounded, so Gods grace by his
gift of Christ's righteousness did superabound, as appears from the 8. verse
to the end of that Chapter.

Again, is it so, that at the height of Isreal's Apostacy, and at the brink of
their rejection from Christ, that then God thus extraordinarily brought in the
Gentiles to be his Spouse, which were not his people?

Hence observe, how rightly Christ in his life time, Ioh. 10.16. opposed the
certainty of the Gentiles for life and glory, to his Apostate Spouse the Jews,
then to be extinguished, ver. 26. and in the three next verses, grounding the
stable felicity of the Church of the Gentiles only on his free gift, and his
Fathers power, opposing it to all contrary powers whatsoever: for although the
Church of the Jews became totally separated from Christ as now they stand, yet
so shall never the Church of the Gentiles, nor yet the Jews, when they are
again ingrafted into Christ's visible Church, as was before Prophesied by For
by this word, those days, is not only meant the first extraordinary light of
grace and truth divulged in the Gospel by the Apostles Ministry, but this
Prophecy also extends to those days of that extraordinary call of the Jews,
mentioned Romans 11.25, 26, and 27. when also shall come in the fullness of the
Gentiles.
Jeremiah, and the Author to the Hebrews, Ierem. 31.33, and 32, 40. Heb.
8.8.10.

CHAP. X. Opening what in the calling of the Gentiles was ordinary to continue
until time shall be no more; and that Gods proceedings therein, is without
respect of persons to all al^ke.
THe second Adam and Savior of the world, was not only a Priest in the days
of his flesh, after the order of Aron, Heb. 10. by offering his body of flesh
and blood, so putting an end to that fleshly or bloody Sacrificing Priesthood,
in which respect the Apostles in manifold regards, referres things to the The
Apostle attributes so much to Christ's blood and death, to lead us by sense to
the more firm faith in his blood and death, as it was the expiration of his
work, as the faithful and true witness, for Gods truth against Satan's lies,
to regaine Gods glory by the salvation of the world.
blood of Christ, and often reiterates the same; but also in his Militant
Church he was and is a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedeck, till
time shall be no more, that is, as Melchizedeck, (Shem I mean) descending from
the old world, did not only in the Apostacy of the new world at Abel, abide in
the Faith of the first ten Fathers, but also in the time of the Apostasy of
his own Family, remained durably constant in the oracle of life: not only King
of Salem, that is, of peace, but Priest also of the most high God, after the
power of an endless life, for he continued receiving (as appears in Abraham's
Tithes) the homage of the Sacrifice of praise, for God, and to God: likewise in
Gods stead, returning comforts and blessings from God upon man, Genesis 14.18. Heb
7.7.

Likewise so did Christ abide constant by tradition, discending in his spirit
on men, from the beginning of the old world, figuratively by the promised seed
of the woman, through all occurrents or times of the worlds Apostasy, remained
figuratively in the ten Fathers, not only King of peace, as Milchizedeck, but
also the Priest of the most high God receiving the Sacrifice of praise to God,
and for God, by man believing truth, and returning from God, blessings upon
them, not only by his acceptable satisfactory righteousness imputed, the
ground of all acceptance, but also in the oracle of life, divulging it by his
Ambassadors to the world, and the imbreathings of his Spirit into the Spirit of
man, as sometime reproving the world of sin, as to Cain and the old world, in
the ten Fathers, and in the Ministry of Noah, sometimes receiving in good part
the Sacrifices of the praise of his grace, as in Abell his offering by belief
of truth, sometimes pouring out his blessings of consolation as in Noah his
Sacrifice, he smelt a savor of rest, and comfortably renewed his gracious
Covenant, etc. Sometimes in gracious encouragements to submit to this mercy, as
he did to Cain, and sometimes enlivening the Spirit of man dead in sins and
trespasses, as to these Gentiles we see, so raising these dead bones to live in
his sight.

Therefore to continue this Priesthood successively after his departure from
this world corporall^, he made choice of men mean and contemptible for his
Ambassadors, that so the efficacy might app are to be hi^, and none of theirs;
to which end also, he loved them as his own, more The Lord Jesus having made
choice of twelve whom the Father had given him, of whom Judas was one, and
therefore Mat. 1^. he called him as the other eleven and gave him like power to
p^each the Gospel, and work miracles as to the rest, ver. 1.4, 7. yet Ioh.
13. ^e excluds Judas f^o^ tha^ choice, ve^. ^8. for as the call of Christ (...)
some^imes unive sally ext^ao^dinary, as was this of the Gentiles: and sometimes
his call and choice is extraordinary and special, as was that of the 70
Disciples, and to some extraordinary and more peculiar, as was this call and
choice of the 12 Apostles, for the Restoration of the world, by their labors;
but the most nearest choice and conjunction of Christ with man is in the object
of Justification, by his Spirit imbreathing upon their Spirits by right belief
of him, for so they are his Spouse in the nee^est relation; yet man's
ungodliness may be for t^anscendent, as that for it, God will cut him off from
the most glorious privilege, then much more to Iuda^. see Cap. 12. see Gods
decree in Chapt. 12.
peculiarly ^hen other men, Ioh. 13 1. only he excluded Judas because
treacherous, from that peculiar respect, ver. 18. But to those whom he had
chosen, as before is said, he gave promise of his residence with them in his
Spirit, for he breathed on them, and says unto them, receive ye the Holy
Ghost, whosoever sins you remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoever
sins ye retain, they are retained: implying, that in their Embassage, as
rightly divulging their Commission, he in his word by his Spirit will be
resident Excommunication rightly administered, is an external manifestation of
Gods internal and invisible proceedings upon the spirits and persons of men in
the visible Church, as did Saint Paul in cutting off the incestuous man from
Christ's body, and afterward admitted him again to be ingrafted.
loosing mankind from the guilt, punishment, and prevalencie of sin; but to
men obstinatly persisting in their precedent Apostasy in the light of truth
and grace, he will detain the influence of that efflux by his spirit from
their spirit, as men bound over in Chains of their own corruptions, to their
eternal damnation, Ioh. 20.22 23. likewise Jesus came and spoke unto them
saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth, go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe al things which I have
commanded you, and lo I am with you until the end of the world: Implying,
otherwise not, if you from my right Embassage depart. Mat. 28. and 28.

Likewise to continue the succession of this everlasting Priesthood to future
ages, Christ by his Spirit in Saint Paul at Miletus sent to Ephesus, and called
the Elders of the Church, and when they were come to him, Saint Paul said unto
them, Ye know from the first day I came unto Asia, after what manner I have
been with you ^t all seasons, Acts 20.27. and ver. 26. he says, wherefore I
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I
have rot shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God: take heed
therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you overseers to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood, for I know this, that after my departure, shall grievous Wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the fl ck. Also of your own selves shall men
arise speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, therefore
says he, watch etc.

Likewise to the same end in his Epistle to Timothy he says, I exhort
therefore, that first of all supplications, prayer, interessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in Authority, that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in ^ll godliness and honesty, that is, to
the end that from the efflux of of Christ his spirit in the Oracles of life men
may be drawn from the shade of death to life, for that's employed, because he
says, this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: 1 Timothy 2.4.
But what this truth is, I need not now stand to treat of, because it is but
the same which God preached to Adam in the promised seed of the woman, and to
Cain interrogatively, and the same which he renewed to Abraham in the
predestination of Jews and Gentiles, and which was wrapped up under the glorious
veil of Moses, and now preached with open face without the veil, therefore
Christ is a Priest for ever, after the order of Milchisedeck, in his own
Embassage, rightly delivered till time shall be no more. Wherefore rightly
says the Apostle, Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

Christ also manifests his impartial proceedings unto the Spirits of men,
intending and extending eternal life to all and all alike, in this ordinary
call of the Gentiles, as appears Luke the 8. for there he compares the Oracles
of life for Doctrine of the Kingdom of grace to seed, and all men's minds to
whom the Gospel comes, to ground variously disposed, and that from those
various dispositions in the hearts of men: the oracle of life ordinarily did
variously take effect by the influence of his spirit, and in the opening of
this parable, he referres those various dispositions of men to four heads, for
says he, the parable is this, the seed is the word of God. ver. 12. from
which seed of life, the first sort of men received only a glance of the object
of faith, and no more: for says he, those by the high way side, are those
that hear, then comes the Devil and takes the word out of their hearts,
least they should believe and be saved: therefore these do not believe in any
degree, they have only a glance and no more; and the reason is, because their
minds were as a common road for Satan his allurements, and persisting in
their precedent Apostacy, extinguishing all light of the enlivened principle
of enmity to Satan, wherefore says Christ to such, if the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? Mat. 6.23.

Again, the second sort of men's minds under the seed of life receive a
further disposition to the object of Faith; for they believe to consolation,
verse 13. they on the rock when they here receive the word with joy, and these
have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away,
and the reason is, because their minds by contrary habites were incapable of a
depth or settled reception of the seed of life, as is the rock to retain any
seed to fructification, and therefore these could abide no force of trial, but
fell away and came to nothing.

Again, the third sort of men's minds on which fell the seed of life, were
further disposed for reception of Christ the object of Faith, as verse 14. and
that which fell amongst thorns, which when they have heard, go forth and are
choked with the cares and the pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to
perfection, implying, they went forward in the profession of true Religion, yet
their fruit fell short of perfection, because they came too much in the spirit
of Cain, glewed to the possessions and pleasures of this world; so
extinguishing in their souls the operation of Gods spirit in the seed of life,
and therefore come to nothing.

Again, the fourth sort of men are further disposed to the object of Faith;
For they in an honest and good heart from the force of the Gospel which
enlivened. as in all the rest, the principle of amity to God, and of enmity to
Satan, and it being carefully preserved by them came to hear the Oracle of
life, and so they received the spirit of Faith to receive the object of Faith,
and so brought forth fruit with patience; For verse 15. the Text says, but
that on the good ground are they which with an honest and good heart, having
heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

Now, that all this was spoken by Christ with respect to future times, in the
ordinary course of his ambassadors in the administration of the seed of life is
plain in the 3 next ensuing verses: For when he had said that the end of this
heavenly light was to be divulged, implied in the 16. verse, and that by it all
secrets shall be discovered, as in the 17. verse. thereupon in the 18. verse
he exhorts, saying. Take heed therefore bow ye hear, for whosoever has,
that is, his principle of amity and enmity to Satan, preserved in dispositions
to God, to him shall be given, that is, the power of Faith to receive Christ
the object of life, and whosoever has not, that is at least his renewed
principle or disposition preserved in him, from him shall be taken away, even
that which he seemed to have, as we see in the precedent sorts of ground, all
was taken away, and came to nothing, only in this fourth sort of men, the seed
of life and glory remained.

Therefore, O man, be faithful in thy little, and God which gave thee that to
receive more; likewise will replenish thee with more, as from the first
disposition to the power of faith, and in it lead thee from degree to degree,
of an honest and good heart, to bring forth fruit with patience; for in it is a
threefold strength in the object of faith, A threefold degree of justifying
faith.
namely, of Babes young, Men and Fathers in the faith; and briefly of these in
their order.

And first of Babes, and of them there are two sorts, one by backsliding from
Christ the object of Faith, these I will only point at, as Hebr. 6. verse 4.5,
6. is employed, the strength which formerly they had, and Hebr. 5.12.13. is
expressed their weakness, into which they were fallen, even such as needed
milk unskilful in the word of righteousness, needing to be taught again
what was the first principles of Religion, even Babes, says the Text, but
these I pass.

A second sort of Babes are those, which for their union by faith in Christ but
newly begun, have not had time for further growth in Faith and love, to such
Saint Peter writes; as newborn Babes to desire the sincere milk of the word
that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. So Saint Paul says, he could not
write unto them as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, as unto Babes, in that
I have fed you with milk, 1 Cor. 3.1. So such were the Apostles themselves at
their first union with Christ by belief of truth: as for instance, James and
John esteemed the glory of this world before their sacred function, desiring to
be chief in it; but Christ instructed them the contrary, Mat 20.26. So
likewise Saint Peter childishly esteems his strength in faith and love to
Christ above his fellows, or what indeed it was, but Christ informed him to
judge better of himself and others, Ioh. 21 15.17.

And in a word, at first they in their undergoing their functions or belief of
the mysteries of Christ, were but weaklings, for he says, I have many things
to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, Joh. 6.12.13. So much for the
first degree.

In the second degree, they are more strong, as having overcome much of this
childishness; hence Saint John says, I have written to you young men, because
ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome that
wicked one, the first Epistle of Saint John 2. and 14. and in the 15. and 16.
verses, he leaves them a rule, to prefer this strength, as not to love the
world, neither the things that are in the world, etc.

And he foreseeing the danger in this second degree of strength in an honest
and good heart namely, to fall finally, from their union with Christ,
specially, when youth in nature and youth in Faith meet in one and the same
subject: whence S. Paul forbids a young scholar in Christ's School, to meddle
publicly with the mysteries of Christ, or with great wariness at least, and
his reason is, lest he be puffed up and fall into the condemnation of the
Devil: so Saint John lays down another rule to preserve this strength says
he, let that abide therefore in you, which you have heard from the beginning,
if that which you have heard from the beginning remain in you, ye also shall
continue in the son, and in the father. 1 Epist. 2. chapter 14. and 24. 1 Timothy
3.6. implying, if young men strong in the faith carefully avoid the reflect
acts of Faith, as tending to pride, and humbly follow the object of life and
glory, they may attain to a perfect age in the object of Faith: For, although
in this second degree, be more danger to fall by pride then in the former; yet
here is more strength to press forward to the sacred object of justification
for a continued acception in that righteousness imputed: also further power to
follow it in point of imitation in an honest and good heart, to bring forth
fruit with patience to a perfect man in Christ, and so much for the second
degree of justifying Faith.

In opening the third degree, I will first define what this justifying Faith is.

Secondly, define what the perfection of this justifying Faith is.

Thirdly, in the eleventh Chap. following show how this third degree, or this
perfection of Faith is attained in men of an honest and good heart; but in
opening the first point before I define what justifying belief is, I will show
what beliefes are not this belief, as,

First to be induced to follow the object of Faith, only Ioh. 6.25, 26, 27.



This is not to believe divine testimony, and divine as divine testimony, but
to believe it merely upon humane testimony, as did the misbelieving Jews, say
they, do any of the Rulers believe in him? implying their belief of the
Oracle of God was only grounded upon the Rulers respect or credit which they
gave to it: So this was but the second sort of ground on which the seed of life
was sowed wanting root, in time of temptation fell away, John. 7.48. Ioh. 4.28.

Again, to believe the Oracle of God from Gods own testimony, as Gods Oracle
in several respects, is not this justifying belief? for the devils believe
the Oracles of God, as Gods Oracle of truth in his gift of Christ to the world,
and from thence tremble at the certainty of their full damnation, when God
shall judge the world by the seed of the woman, to the final bruise of Satan's
power: So some men believe the Thus, although the foolish virgins have not the
internal lamp of justifying faith, which only has in it the right reception
of Christ's imputed righteousness, yet they have the internal lamp of belief
of divine testimony, as divine testimony, as here we see.
Oracle of God as Gods own Oracle, and from belief in God, produce great
miracles, and These men by the Scriptures are styled virgins, together with the
wise virgins, because in the judgment of charity, the Church judges them
visible members, until they discover the contrary.
glorify God by the confirmation of the object of Faith, and yet may be as
some have been, void of love to God. Therefore this is not this justifying
belief, 1 Cor. 13.2. Matthew. 7.25.

Likewise some men may, and do believe with consolation the Oracle of life to
be Gods true Oracles, and from thence in the spirit of prophecy power out
blessings upon men of an honest and a good heart, as from the Star of Jacob,
But these kind of prayers are strivings to bring Gods will to man's, and not man's
will to Gods will.
desiringly crave or pray for that blessedness to themselves, yet not rightly
submitting, to the reception of that righteousness in the object of
justification as imputed by God to a sinner, because in heart they are lifted
up either to the esteem of their own personal operations or terminate their
happiness too much in terrestrial blessedness, as foolish virgins, so perish
in the way of Cain, and wages of Balaam, being the third sort of ground on
which the seed of life was sowed as upon Cains spirit it was, and choked with
the cares and pleasures of this life, bringing fruit but not to perfection,
wanting the Here we see why the foolish virgins wanted oil.
right reception of Gods gracious oil of mercy running down, from Christ the
head, wherefore this is not that justifying belief in men of an honest and
good heart, Mat. 25.1. 2 Numb. 9.10.19. Numbers 24.2, 16, 17.23. Genes. 4

And now I come to define what belief is, justifying faith, and then to define
what the perfection of this justifying faith is: yet before I can do either, I
must briefly open the point of justification in four particulars.

First, as before is declared, Gods instrument is the word of truth by which
he conveyes the object of justification, to the mind of man, as from the
beginning till now in the word of promise to Adam by tradition conveyed by the
ten Fathers down to Abraham, then that word being renewed with him, it came
down to Moses, and by him committed to writing, and now by the Apostles
writings extant to the end of the world. So much for the instrument.

Secondly, The object conveyed or reached unto man by that instrument is Gods
gift of Christ's righteousness imputed or counted to the world in general,
and to man believing truth more specially. So much for the object so conveyed.

Thirdly, Man's necessary instrument by which he receives this gift of
righteousness from God, is his belief of Gods instrument, his word of truth
as aforesaid, by which God reaches to man that object of justification, as is
formerly described.

The reasons moving man to apply his instrument of belief to Gods instrument,
to receive his gift of Christ's righteousness imputed are these.

First, because he conceives God in that gift is Here ma^^ understanding
looks at truth.
unfeigned therefore he sets to his seal that God is true in the testimony he
gives of his Son, Ioh. 3.33.

Secondly, because he conceives that in this righteousness so imputed or
counted to be man's, is conferred the removal of misery, and conveyed all Here
man's will looks at goodness.
felicity. 1 John 5.19.20.

Thirdly, because he conceives his own Man which out of sense of his sin and
misery looks to God as merciful, has a right aspect toward eternal
felicity, Luke 18.13.14. Matthew 5.3. Romans 10.10. Romans 4.6.7.
poverty or need of that imputed righteousness so commodious to him, that
therefore he applies his hand of belief to receive that object for
righteousness to justification, and remission of sins to salvation. So that
in men of honest and good hearts, justifying belief, may thus be defined
justifying faith defined.
: Namely, it is man's heart in belief of Gods faithfulness, submitting to the
receiving his gift of Christ's righteousness imputed The oil which the ^oolish
^irgins wa^ted is Christ's imputed righteousness as received by faith, which is
the right issue of Gods most special grace to sanctification and
justification. A defin^tion of perfection of justifying says.
, as the only ground to remove all his misery, and convey all happiness upon
him.

And thus did Abel submit, as Chapt. 4. and as many as by faith thus submit,
they then are received and adopted Sons in Christ; and because Christ's elect
Spouse did not thus submit to the righteousness of God, Romans 10 3. she was
cast off. And so much for the definition, what justifying belief is.

Secondly, the perfection of justifying Faith is no more but this, the heart of
man adhering to Gods unfeyned gift of Christ's righteousness imputed for the
removal of all misery, and the conveyance of all felicity so firm and so
far, as to work up to God in that object, through all interposing
difficulties: And I will in brief prove this second definition by the
perfection of this Faiths operation in Abraham, who was a Father in this third
degree of justifying Faith as first, when God in his promise in Abraham's loins
gave Christ and his righteousness imputed to be the blessing of all Nations,
and consequently for his own; then to this object did he adhere by Faith,
working through all that did interpose between his belief, and this object of
life. Romans 4.18. says the Text, He believed even God who quickneth the dead,
and calls things which be not as though they were, who against hope believed
in bo^e, that he might become the Father of many Nations, according to that
which was spoken, so shall thy seed be, and says the Text, he being not weak
in Faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about a hundred
years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb; he staggered not at the
promise of God, through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving glory to
God; and being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able to
perform it: and says the Text, therefore it was imputed unto him for
righteousness; but what this imputation for righteousness is, is already
handled in the 4 and 6 Chapters therefore here I pass it over.

Again, Heb. 11.17. Abraham's faith is brought in working up to God in this
sacred object through the darkness of death, for says the Text, by Faith
Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaak; that is by death to be destroyed:
and he that had received the promises. i. of all happiness figuratively in this
Child for mankind, and for himself offered up his only begotten Son of whom
it was said, in Isaak shall thy seed be called; for Abraham accounting that God
was able to raise him up even from the dead, meaning, Christ also in this
figure whence also he received him in a figure as says the Text: Thus by
perfection of justifying belief, working to God through all difficulties; in
this sacred object says Christ, Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and saw it,
and was glad, that is, as the life of his heart for all happiness, I^h. 8.56.

And to conclude this point of Christ his impartial proceedings as Priest for
ever, after the order of Melchizedeck, without all respect of Persons, by the
operations of his Spirit, in his sacred ordinances is also employed, Prove. 8.34.
wherefore he thus says, blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at
my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors, for who so finds me, finds l
fe, and shall obtain fav^ur of the Lord, b^t he that sins against me, wr
ngeth his own soul, all they that hate me love death, etc.

Is it so That Christ now is to the end of the world with his Amba^sadors
ordinarily, and rightly divulging his Embassage, that he will be by his Spirit
so a Priest till time shall be no mo e?

Then hence observe, Observe.
that it is unpossible for men or Devils, or all the powers of darkness in
this world, to extinguish Christ in his word and spirit from the minds of all
mankind, because we see Christ will so be in the minds of some, as the
cornerstone to uphold his Ministerial Kingdom, as in the name of Peter, he
did Prophetically demonstrate Mat. 16.18 and from this ground God in eminent
and universal Apostasies from him in his truth, does preserve some men's minds
to him by his truth so secretly, as the best of men sometimes perceive it not,
as in the days of Eliah, and the like, Romans 11.3.4. wherefore this is
attributed to be Gods Seal, or peculiar foundation, in relation to Christ, to
know who are his in such In times of such Apostasy because one Saint does know
another, but according to the judgment of charity, and God only infall bly
knows who in pureness of heart adheres to him, and who not; therefore the
Apostle calls this knowledge of God, his foundation or seal, because it is so
known to him, and none else.
times; as 2 Timothy 2.18, 19.

And from this ground it is unpossible that the greatest seducing powers of
Satan to deceive the whole Church elect, or gathered by his word and Spirit, so
as to extinguish all truth from all their minds, for as Mat. 24.25. besides
his ordinary course, God in such times will extraordinarily reserve, as before
is said, some for the glorious praise of his grace in this world, to believe
his word in the object of justification; wherefore it is styled, the Faith of
Gods elect, implying the certainty of Christ's prevalency, as Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck, by his Ministerial ordinances in the Church
Militant, till time shall be no more.

Again, is it so, that the oracle of life, for the universal Apostasy of the
world, was not so much as to appear amongst the Gentiles about eighteen
hundred years, nor amongst Jews, but in Types, figures, and promises, as
obscured under the veil of Moses, for many Generations, until God according
to his purpose called these Gentiles.

Hence observe, how rightly the Apostle applies this Doctrine at that time,
saying, the grace of God, that brings salvation to all men, has appeared,
teaching us to Therefore the Negative part of the Moral Law, as enclosed in
the Arc, ove^shadowed with the mercy Seat, taught the same Doctrine of grace
under that veil, as now does the Gospel unveiled. Exodus 25.21, 22. Heb. 9.4.8.
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, that we should live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope, etc. Tit.
2.11.12.

CHAP. XI. Opening the third particular, how GOD brings man to be perfect; that
is, to the perfection of justifying Faith, in the object of justification.
AS it is in the perfections of nature, the life superior contains in it self
the perfection of all inferior lives, as in Adam, Chapt. the first, so the
perfection of justifying belief, contains in it self vertually, all inferior
beliefes; hence it is, that the improvement of this faith is various in its
operations, yet ever terminating to God in the object of justification, as its
most proper center, and so it comes to its full perfection formerly described.

Hence Saint James says of Abraham, See thou how faith wrought with his
works, and by works faith was made perfect, James 2.20. Wherefore to prove the
point, I will take a brief survay how by works Abraham came to his perfection
of justifying belief; The perfection of the man in righteousness is in the next
life, but faiths perfection and dissolution are both in this life, and what man
is a righteous man, see the last Observation of Chapt. 11.
for the perfection of justifying belief is one thing, and the perfection of
the man is another thing: as first, when God by commandment separated him from
his country, and from his fathers house; the operations of his faith then
began to put forth; for says the Text, He went out, not knowing whither he
went, Hebr. 11.8. but when he was come to the promised Land, there God tried
the strength of his faith; for he was driven to depart this land of his hope
to sustain his life in Egypt, and there fell into danger of death, so that his
strength began to stoop, as appears by his excuse to Abimelech, to save his
life, yet God that will in point of trial, lay as much weight as faith's
measure can bear, and work through to his faithfulness, yet he will lay no
more then it can so work through, if it be improved: So to Abraham with the
temptation, he gives an issue by his happy return to the land of promise; the
figure of eternal felicity, and there Abraham refreshed his faith in Gods
promise of Christ the object of all felicity in his satisfactory sacrifice,
Genesis 12.3.10 11, 12, 13. Genesis 13.3, 4. 1 Cor. 10.13.

Again, God having given Christ to Abraham figuratively in Isaacke, to proceed
from his own loins, yet deserring the accomplishment of what Abraham much
desired to see, his belief began again to stoop, for he pitched upon Eleazar
his servant to be his heir to what God had given him, yet God that will lay no
more then that strength will bear to work to him, if it be improved, gives an
issue with the temptation by confirming Abraham's operating belief, saying,
This shall not be thine heir, but he that shall come out of thine own
bowels, he shall be thine heir, Genesis 15.4.

Again, Genesis 18.14. God having further confirmed Abraham, belief, by setting
a certain time for the birth of the promised seed to be the blessing of all
Nations of the earth, who together with Abraham, God made of one blood, he then
further draws out Abraham's faith to work by love to all mankind, as to
himself, and accordingly Abraham's faith in operations of love wrought to all,
but especially to the household of Faith, I say to all, for he entertained
strangers in fervor of spirit, and received Angels unawares Genesis 18.4. Heb.
13.2.

Likewise, so kindly courteous was he to the children of Heth, his Idolatrous
neighbors, yet not as Idolators: for so they are contrary and a vexation to
man believing truth, yet he loved them as his own flesh, and as Gods in Christ
by right of redemption, wherefore they esteemed him as a Prince of God amongst
them, Genesis 23.4 5 6, and 7. Esaias 50.7. Genesis 27.46. Deuteronomy. 7 4. So likewise in
fervor of spirit, he humbly invocates for the safety of the ci^ies of the
Sodomites: Secondly, his Faith in fervor of love wrought more specially to
those, which in belief of truth were rightly related to the object of life,
together with himself; for it was for their sakes he prayed for the Sodomites
safety: So for righteous Lot, he ventured his family, and his person in the
peril of war, and rescued him out of his enemies hands, Genesis 18.23. Genesis
14.14.

Again, Isaac being now borne, and Abraham by Faith, having received the end
of the promise, namely, Isaac from Gods faithfulness to a fur^her
confirmation of all blessedness, hereupon God draws out his Faith to work by
love; also according to the first Table of the Law. It came to pass, says
Moses, after these things that God tried Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham,
and he said, here I am, and he said, take now thy son, thine only son
Isaac, whom thou love, Although faith and love in themselves be two
different virtues, yet the Scriptures includes love in justifying faith, the
one as receiving from God, the other as co-operatively working to God, and
therefore so do I^in the prosecution of justifying faith and so far forth as
man's affections dies to this corruptible world, so far forth his affections
lives to the inco ruptible God, and so on the contrary, 1 Ioh. 2 15.
and get thee into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there a burnt offering
upon one of the mountains, that I will tell thee of, Genesis 22.1.20. and Abraham
obeyed to extinguish the child of Promise upon whom depended the felicity of
the world, consequently his own; thus by exercise of belief to God in the
object of life; Abraham obtained the perfection of justifying Faith, for by
works was Faith made perfect, says Saint James.

And also thus by works variously terminating in Gods gift of Christ, and his
righteousness imputed for all happiness, was Abraham justified in the
receptive obedience of Faith to the object of life: For, says James; Was not
Abraham ^ur Father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son
upon the Altar, that is, Christ in that figure. Whereupon the Lord out of
heaven called unto him, and said, Abraham, Abraham, and he said here am I, and
he said, lay not thy hand upon the Lad, neither do any thing unto him; for now
I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine
only son from me. Thus to operate, is to be upright, and to abound therein.
And to this uprightness God in mercy has intailed the promulgation of the All
sufficiency of his favorable mercy, as to Abraham, Genesis 17.1.2.


And according to ths point says Christ, he that has my Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved
of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him; and we may
the rather believe him, because we see him so doing to Abraham, Joh. 14.21. 2
Peter 1.11.

Again, says Moses, the Angel of the Lord called to Abraham the second time,
and said, because thou have done this thing (that is) wrought up to me as the
object of life, through so great difficulties, and have not withheld thy son,
thine only son, that in blessing I will bless thee, that is in a
superlative degree: so Christ does not only say, I lead in the ways of
righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment, that I may cause those
that love me to inherit substance, and I will fi^l their treasures; but he
further says, him that overcommeth I will make a Pillar in the Temple of my
G^d, and he shall go no more out, Prove. 8.20. Rev. 3.12.

And the ground why God manifests himself so publicly by oath thus to bless
Abraham, so operating to him, leaving it upon record for the ages to come: was,
because God will^ng more abundantly to show unto the That is, to the heirs of
promise, not only as descended in Isaac from Abraham's flesh, but also to all
that are hey es of the same g^ft of faith with Abraham, therefore when St. John
says, in hi. 1. Epist. 2.19. they went out from us, because they were not of
us, he means, of us that thus follow faiths object, as here did Abraham, for
in the 17. Verse, he says, he that does the will of God, abides for ever,
therefore he means not men personally, but men whose persons are thus disposed
in the pursuit of Christ in the object of faith.
heyrs of promise the immutablenesse of his counsel bound himself by an oath,
that by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, that
we might have strong consolation, who fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope
set before us in the object of justification etc. Heb. 6 17. Wherefore says
the Apostle, the rather brethren give diligence to make your calling and
election sure; for if you do these things you shall never fall, that is, not
totally nor finally from the object of justification, and that is only implied
in this Text, for he that says he has no swarving from this sacred object by
sin, is a liar; for as he that says, he knows God, and keeps not his
Commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him, so on the contrary, If we
say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and the truth is not in us, 1 John
2.4.2. chap. Joh. 1.10. and the reasons why God not only thus makes perfect
justifying belief by operation, but also gives to the Saints, an undissolved
relation to him in the object of justification, to be as mount Sion which shall
never be moved are these.

The first is drawn from the nature of the exercising any ability, which the
more it is exercised the more it is perfected; for as use makes perfectness, so
custom breeds another nature. Hence says the Psalmist, I have remembered thy
name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy Law; this I had, because I kept
thy statutes.

Likewise he says, I have more understanding then the ancient, because I have
kept thy Statutes, and he says, Blessed is the man that delights in the Law
of the Lord, and in his Law does meditate day and night; he shall be like a
tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in due
season, Psalm. 1.2.3. Psalm. 119.55.100.

A second reason is because the most perfect operations of justifying faith,
brings man most passively subjective to God to receive in his gift of Christ's
righteousness imputed the fullness of all that leads or ends in blessedness:
therefore as every effect, the more it does subject it self to it is cause, the
more influence for it is perfection it does receive from that cause, so also in
this: Hence says God to his redeemed Spouse, I am JEHOVAH thy GOD, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it,
Psalm. 81.10 but by the way for further encouragement to men of an honest and
good heart to press forward to faiths perfection; I will here explicate the
different operations: between the perfection of faith in the one, and the
imperfections of the other; as, first between righteous Lot weak in says,
and Abraham perfect therein; for Lot being more weak in the spirit of faith,
was therefore more strong in the spirit of this world, as once were the
Apostles, desiring to be chief in sensual felicities, but Abraham's mind was
far more free from these intanglements; for he preferred his communion with
Saints in the bond of peace, and love in relation to Christ, before the fertile
pleasures of the plains of Sodom; for to enjoy this, he leaves Lot to choose
that, and takes for his abode what Lot refused, Genesis 13.8, 9.10.11.

So Moses perfect in faith, esteemed Christ in the object of Faith with
reproach, greater riches then the pleasures of Egypt: for he had respect to the
recompense of reward, implying, he esteemed Gods gift of Christ's
righteousness imputed to be man's exceeding great reward, consequently his
own, wherefore in Idolatrous Egypt he refused his relation to the crown of
Egypt, in that he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Genesis
15.1. Heb. 11.24.25.26.

Again men of an honest and good heart, yet weak in the object of life. They
then are in zeal against sinners preposterously pitilesse, as was James and
John, who for Christ's sake would have them consumed with fire from Heaven; but
take man more perfect in belief of this sacred object; then he knowing the
terror of the Lord does persuade men; for says the Apostle, the love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, if one died for all, then were all
dead, implying, because in love Christ died for all men then dead in sins and
trespasses, that this love of him constrained them to persuade sinners to life
and salvation in him, 2 Cor. 11 14

Again, being but weak in this sacred object they therefore savor the things
of men, and not the things of God, as did Peter's counsel to Christ, so he
stooped to please men, but not as man perfect in faith becoming all things to
all men to save some, as did Saint Paul, but basely dissembling, perverting his
trust which Christ put in him, so hazarding the salvation of men, as he did at
Antioch; but Paul more perfect in belief of this sacred object, openly
reproved him to his face, not caring what he or they thought of him in the
right discharge of his embassage to them, Mark 8.33. 1 Cor. 9.22. Gal.
3.11.12, 13, 14.

Again, men of an honest and good heart, yet weak in faith to this sacred
object; the cross of Christ will bring them to doubt, as did the men going to
Emaus; for they said, we trusted it had been he which should have redeemed
Israel, Luke 24.21.25. but on the contrary, man perfect in faith under the
cross, says. We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, even his Son Jesus Christ,
this is, the true God, and eternal life, 1 John. 5.20.

Again, man weak in this sacred object of justification, does over value his
inherent righteousness, telling Christ What great things he will do for him
more then others as did Peter; but man more perfect in belief of this sacred
object, is of another mind, says Saint Paul, who is fit for these things?
meaning to do great things for Christ, according to their embassage, and says
he, we know but in part darkely through a glass, 2 Cor. 2.16. 1 Cor. 13.8.
and says the Prophet Esaias, Woe is me, because I am a man unclean, because I
am a man of uncircumcised lips, Esaias 6. And the ground of the point is this:
man perfect in belief of Gods gift of Christ his righteousness imputed,
firmly believes according to truth, that the seed of the Serpent intermingling
his inherent righteousness (therefore makes it internally as a menstruous
cloth) and externally at the best but unprofitable: wherefore, as he desires
to be found in Christ his righteousness in point of imitation, to
sanctification; so also to be found in it, as imputed for a continual
acceptance for remission of sins and salvation, still referring all his
great works for Christ, to Christ his own efficiency in him, as Saint Paul,
not I, but Christ in me, Phil. 3.9.10.

Again, a third reason why God gives this perfection of faith to men of an
honest heart, which thus exercise to him more then to them, which to this
object of life, less exercise is not only because mercy pleases him, but
also because he loves to glorify his Here note, that from one and the same
principal proceeds in this life, the Saints undissoluble union with Christ,
and also their final dissolution from him, viz. Gods love to his justice in
the distribution of his mercy.
justice in the distribution of his mercy, because all his attributes are
displayed at an equal distance, as in the Parable of the talents does appear,
Matthew. 25.24.

And from this ground Saint Paul to the Saints at Corinth, says, that both he
and they must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man
may receive the things done in his body according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 1.1. and Chap. 5.10. But here will arise a
twofold question.





Adams transgression, not according to their own works, but according to
Christ's.







life, as saved men, therefore not according to their own good works, but
according to Christ's.

Sixthly, at Christ's Judgment seat they shall receive by Adam, therefore not
according to their own good works of righteousness, but according to Christ's,
therefore at that day Christ will say, come ye blessed of my father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. Matthew. 25.34.

Secondly, that which according to their own good works they shall receive, is
a fivefold good.

First, answerable, as they in the obedience of Faith subjectively operate to
the fountain opened to Judah and Jerusalem, namely, the sacred object of
justification, answerably from thence God will strengthen And in particular
first, as by that pureness of spirit they only see God Mat. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. So
consequently as it increases in the degree, so him more clearly they shall
see. Secondly, they shall more firmly know their present estate of
blessedness, 1 Ioh. 5.19, 20. Thirdly, as from hence will redound the more
glory to God from men, Mat. 5.16. So the more fulness of Heavenly consolation
will redound to the^. 15 Ioh. 11.
every grace of Christ in them, as in Abraham we see he did.

Secondly, he also will firmly relate them that so work to him in that sacred
object, as finally from him in it, they shall never depart, so that things
past, present and to come, shall not be able to separate them from him, or him
from them, according to the foresaid ground, he has sworn by himself, that
in blessing he will ever bless them, that But not to the Saints in a sleepy
and lazy Faith.
so operate to him, as to Abraham we see, he gave a further entrance into the
Kingdom of grace, 2 Pet. 1.11.

3. As in this world they have judged the sinful courses of unbelievers to
be wicked, and the ways of wisdom as leading to God, to be only righteous and
good, so likewise at Christ's judgment seat to judge the world, he will have
them then to adhere to him, for says the Text, the S^ints shall judge the
world, so says Christ, ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptation: verily I say unto you, that you which have followed me in the
Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in his glory, ye also shall sit
upon twelve Thrones, and judge the 12 Tribes of Israel: So that man rightly
believing truth, shall And may then say, we are thus blessed in submittance by
one grace to receive another, and so by faith and Gods power, are brought to
this you see; but you for despising this way do now receive the fruit of your
own way.
judge formal professors Luke 22.28. Mat. 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2.

Lastly, he will give them their hearts full desire by turning their enjoying
of him here by faith, into the fruition of his purchased gift of eternal
glory, this honor have all his Saints, praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 149.9. So
much for the good they shall receive according to their good works done in the
body.

Thus Gods justice rewards the In some places the Scripture speaks, as if any
degree of faith had his stability, because the first degree, and so the second
has a virtual tendency to the third, and will if it be improved, terminate by
Gods merciful distribution of his justice, in an indissoluble union with
Christ in the object of justification, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
imperfect image or likeness of Christ's righteousness wrought by the Saints
with a reward, which is but an Image or likeness of the reward rendered to
Christ's works, and because God loves to glorify this justice thus, in the
distribution of his mercy, it is that in this third degree, man is kept The
Angelical glory which Adam lost, was only due to Christ's works, and to be
possessed by him here in Faith, and there by fruition, but n^^ due to the
Saints works, to be possessed here by them in Faith, not in the next life by
fruition, but only in this life is due to their works, the possession of it by
their degrees of faith, in which they have some small efficiency, yet that is
not due unto their works properly, but only from Gods love to justice, in the
distribution of his free gift of mercy to miserable man.
from a final fall from Christ in the obj ct of Faith.

David, Solomon, and Peter, all pardoned in Christ's righteousness, but the
evil things done in the body (according to which the faithful shall receive)
is their backsliding so far before the third degree of faith, from this
sacred object, as that they destroy or crucify Christ to themselves, that is,
by a total separation of their Spirits from God in this object of
blessedness, for then they do all that a wicked man does, but not before, that
is, without any internal difference from an unbeleever But so long as any of
this seed of Gods word by faith remains, he sinned not without some internal
difference from unbeleevers, neither can he, because this seed remains, as 1
Ioh. 3, 8, 9.
wherefore that which they have made total, by justice, God will make final,
denying them repentance so blotting their names out of the book of life,
namely, Christ, in whom they were written.

And God in sacred Scriptures speaks to this point fully, First implicitly, as
in Exodus 32. and 32. blot me I pray thee, out of the book which thou have
written, and sundry other the like, which for brevity sake, I pass over.

Secondly, God expressed this in a figure, that is, figuratively in his elect
S^ouse, for to them, of them which did by an evil heart of unbelief depart
from the living God, he swear they should not enter the promised rest by Joshua
the Type of I sus, although they were the Children of promise in the Type, as
are all right believers in the truth, Heb. 3. Gal. 3.26.

Again more fully for the House of Israel, this elect Spouse, charging God of
impartial proceedings toward them, namely of imposing the sins of the
Fathers to the Childrens destruction, employed in these words, the Fathers have
eaten sower grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge: Ezekiel. 18.2.

But to remove this false surmise, because God could swear by no greater, he
swears by himself, As I live says the Lord, you shall not have any more
occasion to use this Proverb in Israel; therefore he explaines his mind in
this point, first in general, secondly in particular. In General in these
words.

Behold says the Lord, all souls are mine, as the soul of the Father, so
also the soul of the Son is mine, and therefore he refers the souls
destruction of either, to the sins of him that committed it, saying, the
soul that sins, it shall die, ver. 4.

Secondly, more particular, for says God, if a man do that which is lawful
and right, etc. but here we must remember, what to this Spouse was lawful and
right, as formerly is declared, Chapt. 6. namely, intentionally to follow all
the Laws of Moses, as Schooling her to Christ's righteousness in the object of
Faith, the ground of all their happiness.

Secondly, in love to cherish each others, as members of his Spouse elect or
mystical body; but from both these general Rules, they were now degenerated,
and therefore did not the thing which was lawful and right, for God to clear
himself from this aspersion, proves them faulty in both. And to the first he
implies it by speaking to them negatively, for having said, if a man be just,
and do that which is lawful and right, he then speaks negatively, He that
has not eaten upon the Mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the Idols
of the house of Israel: Implying, as they had done generally; there is proved
their Apostasy from the object of Faith to Idols, and the same is again twice
repeated in the 11, and 15. verses.

Again, he proves them degenerated from the second Rule, for instead of
cherishing each other, as Christ's mystical members, they had done the
contrary, wherefore says God, he that has not defiled his Neighbors wife,
neither has come near a menstruous woman, and has not opressed any, but has
restored the debtor his pledge, has spoiled none by violence, ver. 6, 7, 8.
and ver. 20. God cleares himself, and draws up the conclusion saying, the
soul that sins, it shall di^: the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the
Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the Son, and then God
expresses himself impartially, both to the righteous and to the wicked in
plain terms, saying, the righteousness of the righteous, shall be up n him
the wickedness of the wicked shall be up n him; but says God, if the wicked
will ^urne from all his sins which he has commi^ted, and keep all my
Statutes, and do all that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die, all his trespasses which he has committed they shall not be
mentioned unto him, in his right us^esse which he has done he shall live: And
have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the Lord God, and
not that he should turn from his ways and live, ver. 23. Then to this Spouse
by the rule of contraries, God speaks of the righteous Note that the
opposition in the Text, of righteousness and iniquity is in one and the same
subject, with this proviso, that if he turn from righteousness to sin;
therefore this cuts off that conceit that this righteous man was but seemingly
righteous, for then it must follow, this iniquity was but seemingly
wickedness, when he turned to embrace it, and consequently his dying in sin,
was but seemingly death, all which is absurd.
man in her, which is the thing that proves the point in hand, for says God,
when the righteous man Because God does in this Spouse of Christ, thus
distinguish between the righteous and the wicked in her, as that not middle
sort of people could remain in her, therefore by Gods own affirmative
testimony, the Saints may totally fall from Christ, and for that God will cut
them off finally from him.
turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does
according to all the abominations which the wicked man does, shall he live? all
his righteousness which he has done shall not be mentioned; in his trespasses
that he has trespassed, and in his sinn^s which he has sinned shall he die:
ver. 24. Plainly proving, the total and final falling away of the Saints
from Christ as the object of Faith under the old Testament, first employed by
the words of Moses. Secondly, by a figure. Thirdly, in plain terms.

Again, likewise in the New Testament also, our Savior Christ loved his own
to the end of his life, Ioh. 13.1.
therefore after his last Supper, having washed his Apostles feet, his
corporal departure from this world drawing near, takes occasion from thence
to express himself in several instructions to them, and amongst the rest in
this point.

And first says, ye are clean, but not all: Joh. 13.10.11. Implying, Judas
was not clean, and so explaines himself in the 26 verse, and Judas having
received the sop, being gone out from him and them to betray him, then to them
said Jesus, the Son of man is glorified, and God is glorified in him; meaning
by his death, and thereupon he exhorts them to cherish each others in love
according to his own example toward them, verse 30. and 34. Likewise Chap.
14. as for afflictions and sorrows, which would befall them in the execution
of their commission after his departure, he bids them, qui^t their hearts by
belief of God, and also in him, with promise to send the comforter to them,
etc. from verse 1. to the 32. verse And Chapter 15. he compares himself to a
Vine with branches, for that is employed, and his Father to a Husbandman, pruning
some, and cutting off some Verse 2. and verse. 3. he applies this doctrine to
the 11. Apostles, in particular Judas, being absent. Now says he, ye are
clean, and then shows them how they came so to be, says he, through the If
Christ's Word, then not Christ's washing their feet made them clean, only it
was a sign of Christ's love which did effect it, wherefore if Peter had refused
it so propounded, he had rejected Christ in his love, as did Judas, although
he suffered him to wash his feet, because the outward sign not received by a
right belief of truth, leaves man's sin in the guilt and attracted habit
unweakened and unremoved, as here in Judas, although Christ extended this
external sign of his love to him at his corporal departure from this world,
as to the other eleven.
word which I have spoken unto you, implying their justification and
sanctification by union with him, as the object of faith, wherefore says he,
abide in me, and I in you, and then gives them a reason why they should so
do, because, says he, the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me, Verse 4.

He then applies the point more close unto every of them; says he, I am the
vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me and I in him, the same
brings much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing, whereupon he gives
them a fourefold reason why they should so abide in him.

The first is drawn from the danger which will ensue, if any of these 11. do
not abide in him, namely, perishing from him for ever; for says he, if any
That is any of you eleven, or any other man, which is ingraffed into me, the
true Vine, as now are you, being clean through the word which I have spoken.
man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned in eternal
wrath, for that is employed: so that this first reason expressly proves the
point, namely, that the Saints shall receive according to what they have done
in the body for their evil works of crucifying Christ to themselves by a
total apostasy from him, as the object of faith.

The second reason, to abide in him, is intermingled with a direction how to
abide in him, the reason it self is drawn from the contrary good which would
redound to these eleven Apostles, if they did so abide in him; the direction is
this, that he by his Word of truth, should abide in them, and they by belief
of it, must abide in him; the good which will redound to them, they then shall
have their hearts desire, and both comprehended in these words, If you abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be
done unto you.

The third reason is also double, partly respecting God, partly respecting
themselves, and both comprehended in these words, herein is my Father
glorified, in that you bring forth much fruit, for so shall ye be my Disciples
that is, for so shall you come and be established to continue my Disciples, as
now ye are; wherefore he further says, Abide in my love; if you keep my
Commandments, you shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his love.

The fourth reason to induce them to abide in him as the object of Faith, is
drawn from that remaining tranquillity which will redound to them from him as
the fountain opened; wherefore says he, these things have I spoken unto you,
that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy may be full. Verse. 11.

All which arguments to enforce these eleaven Apostles so to abide in him
implies what formerly is expressed in the first reason, namely, that they other
ways will come to fall totally by their remissness and come to a final
separation from Christ by Gods justice: Likewise the Apostles themselves
rightly taught the same doctrine, both of themselves, and of the Saints in
general; as for instance, Saint Paul to the Romans, chap. 11. says, thou
stand by faith, be not not high minded, but fear; for if God spared not the
natural branches, take heed lest also he spare not thee, verse 20 and 21.

Again, he says, the just shall live by faith, but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. and says Saint Paul, I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I
have preached unto others, I my And those Scriptures which seem to speak
contrary to this point, see them clea^ed in these pages in the margent: page
122. and 123. 137. 142. 144. 145. and from 118. to 120. and 134. Also see those
Scriptures expounded in point of election on which the Saints stability is
thought to be grounded, as from page 85. to 87. and page 65. and from p. 72. to
77. and see the reasons why Salomons and Peter's fall was not total nor final,
and also the utmost line of Gods mercy to miserable man, see the second
Objection in the 12. chap.
self should be a Castaway. He further says, it is unpossible for those
which are once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come, if they should fall away, to renow them to
repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to open shame, 1 Cor. 9.27. Heb. 6.4. So much for the proof of the third
Reason, that God loves to glorify his Justice by the distribution of his
Mercy, even to the members of Christ, without any personal respect, therefore
much more to all mankind, and to all alike, as he preached to Cain in the
first model if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? if thou do not
well, sin lies at the door.

Hence observe, all mankind, none excepted, ever since Adam, was cast out of
the Garden of Eden, are, and so shall be to the end of the world, in one of
these three conditions or estates: first, either in the universal grace and
favor of God by Christ Jesus, and this is before the gift of justifying faith;
or secondly in the special grace and favor of God in Christ Jesus, and this
is when man by belief of truth is knit to God in Christ, as he is the object
of Justification.

Or thirdly, in the state of rejection from the first, as was Cain, before he
came to Faith; or from the second as are some of the Saints, for their
apostasy from Christ's own testimony by his doctrine to his peculiar Apostles,
Judas being absent, and Paul's testimony of himself and other Saints, and of
Christ's national Spouse by Gods testimony, Ezech. 18. and as we see by woeful
experience this sixteen hundred years and more.

Again, I having precedently defined what is the perfection of justifying
faith, I will now define what is the perfection of the man in whom it is; or
thus, what man is a righteous man. Man in his first estate was righteous,
because his intentions and operations was an exact perfection of degrees
according to natures most right rules in the estate of creation, as Chap. 1.

But now in this fourth estate of man, The definition of a righteous man.
he is a righteous man, who in any degree does by a right belief submit; so
as that he receives Gods gift of Christ's righteousness imputed to eternal
life by salvation, desireably endeavoring to conform to that righteousness
in some degree to sanctification. I say, in the perfection of parts When the
Apostle says, we speak wisdom, to them that are perfect, he means man in
the perfection of Faith and not perfect in righteousness.
of inherent holiness: for the perfections of Christ's righteousness, is not
attainable by men nor Angels, in the perfections of degrees. So that a
righteous man in this life, stands as an imperfect member united by faith in
love, to a head perfect in righteous works or righteousness.

CHAP. XII. Answering Objections made against several points precedently
delivered in this Treatise.
FIrst, it will be objected, Solomon's backsliding was total, yet not final,
though he did all that the wicked man does,

Salom^n under the Law of Moses, of a believer, went the farthest out from God
of any that ever returned to God again,

Again, his fall was not total, because God extraordinarily reserved some
virtuall seed of belief in him to the object of Justification, and therefore
his backsliding was not total, nor internally, doing all which the wicked man
does; for as long as the least degree of that seed remains that man is in
Christ the object of Faith, and that God did reserve a seed, is clear by his
special and particular promise made to David in Salomons behalf, saying, if
he commit iniquity, I will chastise him with rods of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men, but my mercy shall not depart away from him.

And the ground of this extraordinary mercy by promise was this, because
Solomon, as sitting King on Sion hill, the promised son of David, he so was
in those days a remarkable figure of Christ, the Son of David's eternal
throne; therefore God extraordinarily reserved in Solomon a light of belief,
virtually to Christ's righteousness, as imputed to the If for the glory of Gods
grace, then not for love to Salomons person, more then to any other man's
person; for Gods love to all men's persons is one and the same, as appears in
the grounds of Gods love in his gift of Christ to the world, page 40, 41.
glory of his own grace in Salomons eternal salvation; therefore his fall was
neither total nor final.

Secondly, it will be objected; Saint Peter did all that the wicked man does,
extinguishing greater light in himself Solomon; for he was an Apostle, and saw
the great works of Christ, and heard his sacred doctrine, as dropping from his
sacred lips, and he cursed himself, he knew not the Lord of glory, and swear
he knew him not against his own knowledge; so consequently, he did all the
wicked man does, crucifying Christ to himself totally, and yet was renewed by
repentance; therefore his fall was not final although total.

The Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to winnow you, that
he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not, Luke 22.32. as if he should say, Peter's soul, for his return to him in
the object of Faith, Luke 22. and 61. and the ground of this extraordinary
mercy was twofold.

First, because he being a believer; therefore as Christ is the Savior of all
men, so especially of Peter in this his backsliding, more then to Judas, who
was not a believer; for, says the Text, he is the Savior of all men, but
especially of them that believe.

Secondly, not only a believer, but a believing Apostle set apart to publish
the Gospel to the world, therefore more to Christ then an ordinary believer,
and therefore Christ's Prayer was for him more then ordinary, and therefore it
was, that his fall was neither total nor final; for whenever it is total,
it is final; and in some twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, and so none
can be but those which have been right believers; for to be twice dead,
implies to be twice alive: the first life is the precedent infusion of amity
to God, and enmity to Satan; or, if it be renewed, and this is a life preceding
faith flowing from the universal grace of the Covenant of life and glory, as
before is proved.

The second life is the life of justifying Faith, I mean man rightly united by
believing, to Christ, the object of life, and when he dies to the later, he
dies to the former also, and therefore twice dead, and never lives to God again
in Jesus Christ, Jude, verse. 12. And for the close of the point, here observe,
that as Manasses and Paul were the only two in sacred Scriptures that by their
apostasy from Gods universal grace in Christ, went the furthest distance out
from God before Faith that ever were received to mercy: whence Paul rightly
says, That Christ showed all long suffering and patience toward him, himself
being the chief of sinners, meaning, in this particular respect.

So on the contrary, Solomon and Peter, after true faith in Christ the object
of life, were the only two men mentioned in Scriptures, which by apostasy,
went the furthest out from God, that ever returned, and was received to mercy;
so that in these four in each condition, God has showed us the utmost line or
length of the riches of his mercy, in which he will be pleased to glorify his
grace to miserable man: For if Solomon and Peter's spirits had but degenerated
into Manasses and Paul's hatred, they had fallen into the unpardonable sin.

So on the contrary, if Manasses and Paul's degeneration had been from Salomons
and Peter's life of justifying belief, or but from belief of divine testimony,
as divine testimony, they had fallen into the unpardonable sin, wherefore
Saint Paul right says of himself, I did it ignorantly in unbelief, therefore
obtained mercy, implying, otherwise he had never

It will be objected, man's will is naturally seee, Yet the will of man is no
more free from sin, nor free to righteousness, then it is freed by Christ,
therefore to attribute any thing well done by man from the force of his pure
naturals is absurd, See the margent, page 16. and page 28. and 38. 121.
choosing, or refusing all objects vlountarily according to it is natural
liberty, consequently it cannot be terminated so firmly to Christ, as not to
fall finally from the object of life.

If in that general apostasy, God did reserve the wills of 7000 so to himself
as that they did not bow the knee to Baal, and also will reserve the wills of
men to be a Church to him amongst as Gentiles; so as that they shall never
depart totally from Christ, in the object of justification, as has the Church
of the Jews this 1600. years; and also in those days when he shall call
back the Jews, that he will then so reserve their wills to him in that
object, as they shall never more depart from being a Church; then why may not
the wills of these men, which so operate to God, be for the glory of his
justice in the distribution of his mercy, so reserved to God in the object of
justification, as that finally they shall never depart from him in it,
notwithstanding the wills natural liberty, which is always free in its choice.
freedom of their wills in the midst of light manifested to them as in the
rejected Jews we see formerly proved. Then why not on the contrary? cannot God
according to his promise reserve the will of man to himself, in the object of
life, so as it shall never finally depart from him in the object of Faith, and
reserve it is natural liberty free, as when he was found of the Gentiles which
sought him not, persuading Iaphet dead in sins and trespasses, to dwell in
the tents of Shem? as at the preaching of Peter, 500 in the voluntary freedom
of their will returned to him.

Again, as if it could not be done by God, because our reason does not
perceive the manner how he does it: 1 King. 66.
as for example, He made the iron to swim, and yet it was iron still, as it
was in its nature, when it did sink to the bottom of the river: By the same
reason we may question the growth of our bodies; for although we see they are
grown in height and bigness, yet the manner how they do grow is invisible to
us.

Likewise our corn which we sow, the manner how it grows is invisible to us,
and so is the operation of God to this growth of a reasonable soul, to him in
this object of life, as is employed by our Savior, Mark 4.28. Ioh. 3.8.

And from this same ground whence we know not the specificating internal
forms of things, it is, that we know not God his terminating of the will,
wherefore, we must in this point live by faith, that God does it according to
his Word and so rest.

It will be objected, that although, Mat. 25. Christ impartially

Yet in this unequal distribution, part for the good of the whole and for his
own praise in all: as for instance, when God gave to Bez^led and Aholiab and
others the spirit of wisdom, more then to the rest, was it not to build the
Tabernacle? and the Temple, those figures of his favor in this object of life
and glory, to build up the Congregation to him in this sacred object of Faith,
Exodus 31.2.6.

Likewise God honored Daniel, Mordecai and Hester, but was it not to continue
this national Spouse to himself in that relation? and so Moses, David, and
Solomon, to the same end.

Again, in the new Testament to some he gave the faith of miracles; some to
speak all languages, some the gift of prophecy, some Doctors, some Apostles,
but was it not for them whom he predestined to this glory with Abraham?
namely, the Jews, and also us the Gentiles; and for this end it was, why he so
highly honored Abraham, from the den of devils to be a friend of God; that so
God might become friends with us in Christ, to the glory of his own grace, but
whereas sin in us by our apostasy had abounded against him: so he on the
contrary by them might in Christ superabound in mercy to us; for if the means
as a means be inferior to the end, as certainly it is, then their superiority
was to make them subject to our good in Gods glory by Christ Jesus. Therefore
Gods proceedings is equally and all alike, without personal respects to any
more then others.

Adams offense once committed, consequently God willed Adams fall, as an
occasion or means to their damnation, consequently by them their damnation is
unavoydable; for who has resisted his will?

Adams fall so much as an occasion to the damnation of them that perish; for as
already is proved, God willed their rise to him in Angels glory, in as equal a
balance as our fall into misery, and God did not only excitively draw out
Adams faith and love to work up according to the covenant to partake of Angels
felicity; but also on the contrary, in simple and plain terms, told him of
the evil, namely, death, certain death immediately would ensue, if he did
disobey; therefore God willed not Adams fall so much as an occasion to the
damnation of them that perish.

It will be again objected, that God, if he had pleased could Adam unremoveably
to have repelled Satan's temptation, to attain that glory, but did not,
consequently. Adam wanting that strength, God therefore willed his fall to the
foresaid end.

I answer, he could, Libanus having not the local motion of the stately Lion
to attain their perfections, nor yet do they want it because in their kind
they attain their perfections with that power, and in that place, which is
assigned them by their Creator; so might Adam in that present condition
assigned him by God, as appears, Chap. 2. therefore God willed not Adams fall
to the aforesaid end.

Again, if Adam had had any more perfections and means to attain the end of
the Covenant, then what he had, it would have fallen in as a part of his wages
for the work before his trial, and that could not be, because the covenant
for any more good or any evil equivalently contrary, was to be as he did obey
or disobey; therefore God willed not his fall to the foresaid end; and if he
did, this would follow, that God only pretended that good in the Covenant, but
never intended it according to the conditions expressed, consequently, God was in
it, as the Devil employed to the woman, but an Impostor, and the Devil only
the true speaker; but this was the Devils lie from the beginning, and he the
father of it in all men which now so think or speak, but Satan and man
adhering to him, shall be found liars, and God for ever true in his Word
keeping promise, and covenant, simply Therefore God does not tender eternal
life by his revealed will to man, whom he by his secret will has reprobated to
unavoydable damnation.
and plainly according to the expressions of his mind to mankind, without
personal respects alike to all.

It will again be objected, God knew before he put Adam to that trial, that
he would fall in that work, and yet put him upon it, consequently he willed
his fall to the foresaid end.

Adam would do, so also he knew what himself would do, namely, show
himself faithful in mercy to his faithless creature, then in misery by his
own default, that then by his free gift of righteousness imputatively, he
would glorify his grace upon all mankind to justification of life, as is
described.

Again, it was needless for God to will Adams fall, so much as an occasion,
much less, as a cause to any man's damnation, to the eternal praise of his
Justice, because, as formerly is proved, if Adam had kept covenant, as he
might, he then had rendered God the eternal praise of his Justice by the
everlasting felicity of all mankind, and by Satan's just condemnation to all
eternity, as Chap. 2. page 12. and 13.

Again, suppose that which I will not grant, that by Adams fulfilling the
Covenant, God had not so received the praise of his Justice eternally, yet by
the second Adams fulfilling the Covenant, I am sure he has to the full in
every respect, as Chap. 8. therefore, though all men were saved by him, as
certainly they might, if they would but submit to receive that gift of
righteousness in the power of Gods grace, and merciful supportance, as is
proved, therefore God never intended that which was needless, that is, not
Adams fall, so much as the occasion of any man's damnation, much less as a
cause thereof.



Cain, the old world, and by his rejection of his elect Spouse the Jews, and
all Gentiles, which to this day turn the grace of salvation to wantonness,
walking after the flesh, proudly despising this day of grace, as a means to
receive his free gift of righteousness imputed to their salvation, and so
reject their own day of eternal glory; therefore as says Christ, as before I
noted; this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil, that is, in
winking at the light, that so they might the more fully follow their own Lusts
for that's employed Luke the 14. and 18 Ioh. 3.19.

Again I answer, that God so w^l^'s the damnation of them which perish for
ever that yet he would rather glorify his grace in their blessedness for
ever, then his justice in the eternal ruin of his creatures, as appears
through all generations of mankind, as is largely proved through this whole
Treatise from Gods word of truth, yet to his word he has added his oath to put
the point out of doubt, because he can swear by no greater then himself,
therefore he swears by himself. As I live faith the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live, turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for why will you die, etc.
Ezekiel. 33, 11. Therefore notwithstanding all these objections, the point stands
firm, that Gods proceedings is without any personal respect, intending and
extending to mankind equally and alike to all, for life and death eternal;
and because God from the time he cast Adam out of Paradise, has proceeded not
only in his universal grace in Christ Jesus, but also in his most specia^l
grace, even to the members of Christ without any personal respects,
consequently he will proceed so to all mankind, till time shall be no more.

Gods spirit in Paul foreprophecying man's ungrateful wickedness, and Gods
justice to proceed thereupon, therefore to this head may be reser^ed Gods
dealing with Ahab, and the Prophecy that went of Judas, and the like, Acts
1.16.20.
Wherefore Saint Paul prophesying of future times, concerning the Church of the
Gentiles, says, because they received not the love of the truth, that is, as
conveying to them the object of justification for life and glory, therefore God
would deliver them up also from his grace and truth, to their belief of Satan's
lies, and so leave them to perish in their own corruptions, for says the Text.
Antichrist his coming shall be after the working of Satan with all power and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in
them that perish.

But the ground why Satan thus prevailed, is expressed in the Text to be, because
the Gods justice upon the Church of the Gentiles, for their ungodliness
against him, in his great mercy toward them was it, which gave way to the
Machivill an rising of the Beast, namely the Roman Antichrist in Christendom,
therefore although it was against Gods will, a^ willing man's good in the
distribution of his merciful goodness, yet according to his will in the
administration of his justice, upon this ungrateful Church, for nothing is nor
can be directly against Gods will but respectively, as in Judas, it was Gods
justice to deny him his spirit of grace, to keep him from that treacherous
act, for denying Gods spirits operations to follow his covetousness, for faith
the Text, he was a thief, and had the bag; and to this case is that to be
referred, Acts 4.28.
Gentiles received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved:
Implying that the production of Antichrist, was from the Churches own
corrup^ion Therefore it is a dangerous tenet to make the Primitive Church our
pattern, for as witnesses the Apostle in his time the mystery of iniquity
began to work, therefore the safest way for Christ's Spouse, is to keep close
to the sacred Scriptures, and Gods Spirit for her guide, both for Discipline and
Doctrine.
, and Gods justice leaving them for their great ungodliness, and that to this
end, that they might perish in their own corruption, for says the Text, that
they all might be damned which believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness; that is, under Gods superaboundant mercies for that is
employed, and the ground how this great Antichrist became the great scourge of
Christendom, is this, because answerably as he did rise by degrees in the
pretense of the Celestial verity to Satan's Throne, in his mystery of iniquity,
so answerably he did extinguish that sacred mystery, which he did but pretend,
not only by enclosing it in an unknown tongue, and his false glosses in
Annotations upon the Remes Testament, but most specially by his devised lie of
the Doctrine of man's own meritorious works, for their justification to their
eternal felicity. For so he turned the oracle of life and glory into Satan's
darkness, as that liar and murderer from the beginning; but this prophecy of
Saint Paul gives us a demonstrative description of this great Antichrist in
three particulars.

First, by his place of residence.

Secondly, by the height of his aspired Throne.

Thirdly, by what shall remove him from his place, by his final ruin. Of
these briefly.

he sits in the Temple of God, implying his seat is where Gods most special
presence of grace in Christ, is most demonstratively resiant, as once it was in
the Temple at Jerusalem to his elect Spouse, more then in any place of all the
world besides, the which now is only in the confines of Christendom, Gods
visible Church of the Gentiles, therefore his seat at large, is only within
Christendom, but his most peculiar seat is in the second point following.

opposes all that is called God, or that is worshipped: So that he as God
sits in the Temple of God; showing himself that he is God. Implying that
the height of his aspired Throne in Satan's darkness is not only
demonstratively above the Thrones of Kings, and Emperors within Christendom,
but in the place where God most properly does demonstrate himself in the glory
of his grace, which is twofold, that is, in the object and in the Subject,
namely in the object of justification, and in the Subject, that is, man's
belief of that object, in both which respects Antichrist does aspire.

First, by extinguishing Gods gift of Christ's righteousness, as imputed to
man's Justification in the object, is God th Fathers gift of Ch ists
righteousness reached unto man by his instrument the word of truth, as was the
brazen Serpent by an instrument of wood: but justification in the Subject, is
man, which by right belief of truth does receive into his mind that object,
as the eye did the brazen Serpent, and in that instant of time, this man's sin
is removed from his person; as far as the East is from the West. I do not
mean a total removal of sin inherently, but a total removal of the guilt
and pun shment of sins, past, present, as long as he does so adhere unto that
object actually, or virtually, but no longer.
justification and salvation. which is the only object in which God sits most
properly, as in his mercies-seate, to the praise of his glorious grace in the
salvation of the world.

Secondly, not only by extinguishing this sacred object, but also the Subject,
namely the minds of mankind, to extinguish that belief from them, by which
God ought to sit as in his inner-most part of the Temple, by their belief in
the object of justification, so to receive his worship and glory in their
eternal salvation, but in Gods own most proper seat.

In both these respects has the great Antichrist set himself as God, by
bringing the minds of most men to embrace and subject to him, by their belief
of his lying doctrine, of their own meritorious works, yea of supererogation,
for their own and others eternal felicity, so in a mystery he is worshipped,
under a pretense of the Celestial verity, having made void this object of
justification, as also all obedience of faith to God in that justifying
relation: so has he subordinated God beneath himself, and advanced himself
in a mystery, above all that is called God, or that is worshipped within the
confines of the I mean the Greek Church with the rest, for although they are
in the Turks dominions, yet they are not of the Turcisme.
visible Church of the Gentiles. So likewise for a continued supply, to support
his blasphemous Throne, he has framed to himself several Religions, orders
of seeming sanctity, and his purgatory prayers to Saints alive and dead, his
abounding in superstitious and Idolatrous worship, all tending but to the
support of his Apostate Chair of Thronized glory in Satan's darkness under the
pretense of Gods Celestial verity, only to abound in what is Terrestrially
sensual and Divellish: Wherefore the Religion of the Papacy is rather after
the rules of Machivells Prince. p. 118. 139. 140.
Machivell, then after the rules of Holiness, from sacred Scriptures; and the
truth is, the whispering Divinity which is in Rome must needs be this that
there is no God; for if it were not so, how durst they thus adulterate the
sacred Oracles of the eternal Diety, and to send forth that cup of
Fornications, for the Kingdoms and Kings of the Earth, to drink down her
poisoned Doctrines. And so much for the height of the aspired Throne of this
child of perdition.

Thirdly, that which shall be his removal from this place by his final Ruin,
in a word is no more but this, that as his rising was by lies in all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, in the dark mystery of iniquity, under
pretense of Gods sacred verity; so on the contrary, his destruction shall come
on by an out-breake, or bright shining simplicity of the sacred verity to
mankind; and this is it which shall be his ruin: for (says the Text) that
wicked one shall be revealed whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Likewise as Saint John saw the rising of this great Antichrist by diverse
visions, so also he saw his fall, and final ruin in two particulars, suitable
to what Saint Paul speaks in this place. First, he saw Christ the faithful
and true witness, fighting against the Nations, which did adhere to
Antichrist, and that with the sword of his mouth: or as Saint Paul has it,
with the Spirit of his mouth, meaning, by his word and Spirit, Reve. 19. ver.
11.20, 21. So also in the 17 ver. he saw some one special instrument or
messenger of Christ abiding or standing in the bright demonstration of the
simple truth of his sacred Oracle, so excitively stirring up Kings and
Kingdoms to the destruction of the beast, for says St. John I saw an Angel
standing in the Sun, implying, Christ in the brightness of his coming, as St.
Paul has it, and says he, he cried with a loud voyed, that is, so exhorting
by way of triumph For when Christ shall thus replenish his Church by his word
and spirit, then shall she arise against the Roman Antichrist with fire and
sword, and so prevail.
to the final ruin of the Beast together with the bond and free Captains and
Kings of the Earth, which shall perish in the damnation of the great Whore, as
it is in that 19 Chapt.

Wherefore beware O ye Kings and Kingdoms of Christendom, that there be not
found in you the poisoned cup of the fornications of the Beast: for if the
eternal Deity do cut off the Spirit of Princes from this day of grace, Psalm.
76.12. Esaias 30.33.
and the day of glory, to sink them down into eternal Torments, because they
regard not his works, nor the operation of his hands, then whom will he spare
in the day of his fierce wrath, at the final damnation of this great whore?
And so much for what shall be her destruction.

Yet let no man be so bold to believe or judge, that all mankind which are
within the deluded Papacy, as entangled therein, that they are all reprobates
and certain to perish in the damnation of the great whore, for some men's
minds, even of them, thirst after truth as truth; because Antichrist must make
some show of the sacred verity in some respects, even against his will, for
that as he knows the show of truth is his help, so also he knows the
practice of it in simplicity, is his hindrance to his aspired end. Yet these
men's hearts in that small light in much confusion, implicitly desire Christ's
righteousness as imputed, wherefore God who is rich in mercy, will not break
those These precedently by their error in judgment, may be against Christ, as
apeareth by his truth in his reformed Churches, although for Christ in respect
of their affections according to that dark light shining in the Papacy; and
here we may admire and cry out, oh the depth of Gods justice and merciful
goodness in wisdom, so interminglingly administered to the children of men.
bruised reeds, nor quench the smoking flax, but even cherish and strengthen
their minds to him, for Rev. 18.4. Saint John says, I heard a voice from
Heaven saying, come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. Which words imply seven
particulars.

First, this voice from Heaven is some out-breake of the

Secondly, when it is said, saying unto them, it implies it

Thirdly, when it calls them to come out, it implies, they

Fourthly, it implies, that this voice to those people is come out from her, to
escape the eminent danger.

Fifthly, when it faith, my people, it implies, this heavenly

Sixthly, when it is said, lest ye be partakers of her sins, it in that
darkness, if they come not out, God will then impute those intanglements to be
their partaking of the sins of Antichrist.

lest you be partakers of her Plagues, it implies, God will glorify his
justice in the distribution of his mercy to them without all respect of persons
and to all alike, as is precedently described.

And if it be so, that Gods grace in Christ Jesus, is both intended and
extended universally to all, without respect of persons, and to all alike, as
here you see is proved, then hence observe, that those odious Aspersions that
disgrace this doctrine as false and untrue, are unjust; as that this doctrine
does usher in Popery into the Church of God, and that it is the doctrine of
Pelagius or of the Semi-pelagians, meaning, that it is the doctrine of
Arminius, for this doctrine of universal Grace, is Gods, and not man's, and
without this straight line of this doctrine, harmoniously flowing from sacred
Scriptures, it is impossible to raze out the foundation of Popery
understandingly, to the capacities of mankind; and the ground of it is this,
because the sacred Scripture in it self has no uniforme body, but in this
doctrine of universal grace in Christ Jesus to all mankind, and to all alike,
by which Christ in the brightness of his coming, and the spirit of his mouth
will consume and destroy the great Antichrist and monster of Christendom, as
formerly is proved; wherefore I must as the rule of truth binds me, thus judge
of that holy man Arminius, that he is not to be reckoned one of the least
worthies of the Lord Jesus Christ, because this man in those dark For Mr.
Peter Du. Moulin charge him with holding these points, first, that God
elected some men to eternal life upon his foresight of their faith. Secondly,
that God elects all men to eternal life, under the condition of faith.

Thirdly, that original sin in Infants, has no respect of vice or sin
properly called, for nothing is sin or vice, unless it be committed by
free will. Fourthly, hat Arminius against Mr Perkins affirms, that man's will
is free to good, as to evil without grace; the which points in this Treatise,
are clearly proved from Scriptures to be errors. See Peter Du-moulin against
Arminius Cap. 8. p. 48. and Cap. 17. and Cap. 18. Cap. 32. p. 256.


times of the knowledge of this point, put forth all his power according to his
light and talent, against great oppositions, to maintain and preach, that God
in his gracious mercy in Christ Jesus, does both intend and extend it
universally alike to all mankind, without respect of persons. Therefore in him
God accepted the will for the deed, and so must we.

And on the contrary, as for reverend Calvin, his stiff maintaining that
error, which made the waters of life bitter to mankind, namely, that God has
personally decreed before the world, to unavoydable destruction, the greatest
part of mankind, for the everlasting praise of his justice, Calvin Instit. 3
book 22. cap. 11. 3 book cap. 21.5.
and personally elected the lesser part unavoydably to eternal life, for the
praise of his glorious grace. I say, notwithstanding this holy man's error, his
works and great labors savor of most unfeyned Godliness, which setleth a
Crown of reverence upon his head through all ages; wherefore we are thus to
judge of him, that this error fell from him from love to Gods glory, in the
comforting of the distressed Church of God and therefore in him it was error of
love and not that he loved to err.

Ninthly, again it will be objected, he that loves another, Romans 13.8.


The conclusion is falsely deducted, for he that loves God by his rules or
Laws, Abraham, Romans 10.
for his further entrance into the glorious Kingdom of Christ's gracious mercy,
as is formerly declared.

Again, he that loves another, being his Idolatrous and wicked Neighbor, as
he is his own flesh, and Gods creature made of one and the same blood, and
Gods, as is himself, by right of redemption, or that does love another man as
a mystical member of Christ, as is himself; and in that love does cherish him
as Abraham did Lot: In both these respects he is kind to the unkind, to the
just and the unjust, and so is perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect, that
is, in a similie or likeness unto him, for as says our Proverb, every like is
not the same, and therefore but imperfect inherently still, for he that says
he has no sin is a liar, etc.

Again, the truth is, God never required such perfect obedience of any man,
but of those which were able so to perform it, and they were only two of all
mankind; the one was Adam when he was a public person before his fall, the
other was Christ, who was the second Adam in the work of the first to the
redemption of all.

Therefore do not derogate from his glorious works, not arrogate to thine own
inglorious For returning to God by belief in the object of justification is
right repentance only, therefore although faith is the receptive instrument of
that object, and mourning and weeping does accompany that repentance, yet
neither is the removal of sins guilt, or punishment; only Christ's
righteousness imputed, is the ground of acceptance, therefore beware of
ascribing sorrow to be repentance, of of faith for acceptance, lest we unawares
uphold the erroneously of the mystery of iniquity, maintained by the Roman
Antichrist.
works, nor be not deceived by that wicked one, who teaches this Doctrine,
whom Christ shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming.

that by those words, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, is meant,
the woman should envy Satan for the evil done unto her, and so one Devil may
envy another.

I will put enmity between thee and the woman, then have the damned Spirits
under eternal reprobation, which is absurd.

that all mankind since the fall, are conceived and borne with no better
internal dispositions tending to God, then is the nature of Devils.

Matthew the 8.29. Devils can ground their requests to God on his justice, not
to torment them before the time of their final bruise, by the seed of the
woman. Mat. 25, 41. but they are not naturally inclined as are all mankind, to
ground their prayers unto God upon his goodness and mercy; as for instance,
that innumerable company of Heathenish Ninivites, believed Gods word of wrath
to be true, for their present destruction, yet they invocate him entirely upon
a dependant hope of mercy from him. Jonah 2 9.

So the Mariners in their Idolatrous manner, implore the Divine Majesty in
apparent destruction, upon a dependant hope of mercy from him, Jonah 1.15.14.

Ninivites and Mariners, but also it is the ground why all Nations whatsoever
have some kind of Religious worship, even to those which are Devils, as to a
Deity above themselves, and also to God as unknown, Acts 17.23. which
internal dispositions are not in Devils, although the true God to them be
known, for as they cannot implore God under the Notion of goodness nor mercy,
so have they neither any set form of religious worship to God, but all
destruction and Idolatrous errors and lies in Gods worship amongst men
originally, arose from them, as well as from men's own remissness, by not
improving this internal principle of enmity to Satan, and amity to God, as
precedently is proved.

To this it will be objected, the devils know Gods Law, Hea^hen had not the
Law, yet by some means they might come to know the Law, and so the Law became
written in their hearts.

Suppose some did so come to know the Law, Chap. of this Treatise.

Again, as for the devils and men, so far forth as they adhere to him their
consciences may accuse them of evil but that the consciences of devils can
excuse them in any respect of uprightness to Godward, as did the consciences
of these Heathen, excuse as well as accuse; Romans 2.
but not so in devils by any testimony of Scriptures, therefore the spirits of
all mankind, were meetly disposed by the foresaid infusion and the serpents
nature as reduced but to a seed, to receive mercy from the throne of grace in
Jesus Christ.

But it will be objected, this disposition came not by Christ Adam, hereditarily
descending in the nature of man.

This contradicts the former, because it grants some good dispositions
naturally inclining mankind to God, which is not in devils.

Again, Adam, therefore man lost not the Law totally and eternally,
consequently not all holiness and righteousness, consequently some power
internally remains, by which he may return to God in the Covenant, as it was
in the first Adam; for no power is in it self of no use proper to it is end,
therefore not this.

Again, it implies the fall of Adam was not so irrecoverably deep, as to need
the second Adam to be a person infinite in power, by it to raise us from that
vast misery, consequently the restoration of the world may rather be
attributed to the dignity of Christ's Person, then to the absolute necessity of
his person so dignified in power, to make good his Fathers truth against all
the lies of Satan, to the full satisfaction of divine Justice, in the
improvement of his personal operations, as in the 8. Chapter is proved.

Again, it eclypseth the glory of Gods grace and mercy by Christ Jesus,
because it referres this internal inclination of the Law written not to Gods
universal mercy in the gift of the promised seed, when none but the Image of
Satan by his lies was written in man's heart by Satan's malice, and man's own
remissness, and by divine Justice totally and eternally so to remain.

And in a word, because this brings man to turn his eyes to look upon his
left, and remaining abilities; so that all he has before faith, is not
received from Gods mercy in Christ, but from his own store, and so by pride to
fall from grace: Therefore this internal disposition was infused by Gods
universal grace in the promised seed. And to conclude, as this opinion on the
one side lessens the glory of Gods Justice, in the fall of Adam, and also the
glory of Gods grace by the second Adam the restorer of all: so also it
continues an intermingled confusion in the body of Divinity,

Again it will be objected, although by Moses God does express the planted
and enclosed garden of Eden, was made with every tree, good for food and
pleasant to sight, and different from the perfections of the created globe, and
made in the midst thereof to grow two trees, and named the one the tree of
Life, the other the tree of Knowledge of good and evil.

Likewise threatened Adam with certain death, if he did eat of the fruit
forbidden him, yet because God did not in plainness of speech express that by
these two things he prefigured to Adam, that by his work in the Covenant, God
intended to raise the world from it is natural perfections to a supernatural
perfection, and man to the glory of Angels; or to an evil equivalently
contrary; therefore we are not to believe any such thing was then intended by
God to Adam as a public person by Covenant.

It does not follow by any just consequence, if we carefully examine Gods
proceedings in manifesting to mankind, the transcendent glory of Heaven; for as
to Adam in the garden before the fall he did not in plainnes of speech express
the same; so never after, till the fullness of time for till then, God at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers, has
in these last days spoken unto us by his Son in open face, and plainness of
speech, but never before, Heb. 1.2 3 2 Cor. 3.12.18.

But to proceed to a particular answer for proof of the point; and first, as
God did not by Moses in plainnes of speech declare what he meant to Adam before
the fall by those figures, so neither after the fall by Moses to the world was
Christ the second Adam in plainness of speech, expressed to be the first borne
of every creature, from the dead fall of Adam, opening the womb of all
perfection, but in figures, as by Cain, as the first borne, and by the Law of
the first borne of mankind, and the Law of the first borne of beasts, and the
Law of the first fruits of vegetables, as growing in the terrestrial Canaan.
Exodus 13.2. Exodus 22.29, 30. Neither was it ever in plainness of speech made
known by Moses, nor the Prophets, that the whole creation travelleth till now,
with man believing truth from the bondage of corruption to be partaker of the
glorious liberty of the s^nnes of of God, but only figured as by a Law for
the land to rest as well as for man's rest, and in the number of seven, as
pointing at perfection, as page 35. 36. Neither was it by Moses not the
Prophets made known to the world in plainness of speech, that Christ, as
God-man should second the first Adam in the work of the restoration of the
world, but inclusively in the promised seed, of the Woman, to break the
serpents head, and also as the seed of Abraham and David, etc. Neither as by
Moses in plainness of speech did God express that the garden of Eden was the
figure of Angels glory to Adam: so neither did he express by plainness of
speech to Israel, that the Land of Canaan, was to them a figure of the heavenly
Canaan, but by the agreement of the Type with the Antitype, as is employed, Esaias
51.3. yet the Apostle concludes, that God denied them rest in the Land of
Canaan by oath, because of their unbelief, Heb. 3.1.8.9. and therefore in the
next Chapter the Apostle applies the figure, namely, that Canaan was to them a
figure of their supernatural rest, in the kingdom of grace by faith, and the
kingdom of glory by fruition, Heb. 4.1.2.3.10.14. so that the Apostle implies
they were, and we are bound to belief, it was so to them, though it was never
declared in plainness of speech: So neither in the old Testament in plainness
of speech to the ten Fathers before the flood, neither by the Prophets after
the flood, was it made known that he intended the heavenly glory to mankind,
but figured that he intended it to man submitting to him in the obedience of
faith by the agreeableness of the type with the antitype, as in the first
world by Enoch, who in the obedience of Faith walked with God, and was received
into the highest heavens soul and body jointly. So likewise by Elias in the
time of the Prophets, Genes. 5.24. Heb. 11.5. 2 King. 2.5.11.12. So likewise
the particular place in which Christ should finish the work of raising the
world to what it travels till now, was no more expressed by Moses to man in
plainness of speech for that end, then was the garden of Eden for the same end
to Adam, but only by the agreeablen^sse of the Type with the antitype, as by
Abraham offering Christ in Isaac within the Land of Canaan upon the mountain
assigned him by God, as is further amplified in the 8. Chapter of this
Treatise: Likewise the garden of Edens glory, as Gods terrestrial Throne
before the fall prefigured to Adam, the eternal glory of God, so in the land
of Canaan Salomons thronized glory from the agreeableness of the type with the
antitype, by the Psalmist is brought in as a figure of Christ's eternal throne
of glory, and not in plainness of speech, Psalm. 45.6. Heb. 1.8. Likewise,
when Christ by the brightness of his coming, and the spirit of his mouth
shall have consumed the mystery of iniquity, now maintained by the great Roman
Antichrist, so as that the This is Gods fou^th extrao^dinary me cy in Christ
extended to the world, the other three are in page 120.
fullness of the Gentiles, and the miserable Jews shall hear the spirit and
the Bride say come, in the outbreake of the purity of the celestial doctrine,
and that most simple godliness universally shall abound, as the most immediate
emblem in the kingdom of grace of the Saints in glory that ever the world did
yet contain. Then that Church, or the city of the living God, or the heavenly
Jerusalem issuing the streams of this celestial doctrine, and so convey Christ
the object of Faith, to the health of the nations is likened to Adams first
original pattern in the garden of Eden: for says the Text, Rev. 22.17. the 1.
and 2. he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb, and in the midst of the
When ea^ Rev. 20. this most transcendent in largement of Christ's visible Church,
is called the Saints raign^ with Christ 1000 years, and it implies no more
but this, that this glory shall certainly he, and that it shall have a time of
du^ation, although since the world began, the Saints successively did only in
faith and love with Christ remain, but with him in this world they did never
reign, for the g ound of the point is this, because till now, Christ did never
sway the utmost end, of the earth for his possession, by his Scepter of truth,
for a^ Satan in the old world, and so to the time of Christ's coming, swayed
the greatest part of mankind in his lying operations, so after Christ's rising
as the Sun of righteousness to the nations, by the Scepter of his truth, and
then Satan extinguished the Saints reign with Christ by the Heathen Emperors
and the abundance of heresies, and by the Roman Antichrist in the confines of
Christendom, and so Satan's throne was advanced, and the Saints then only
remained with Christ, witnessing that of right Christ should reign, but did
not, but this reign of the Saints with Christ, shall revive that cause of the
martyrs, and so they shall now live in the glory of that cause for which they
then died, and by the force of divine truth in that transcendent reign, shall
Satan's lying operations in the prevalencie thereof be extinguished, and so
shall Satan be imprisoned in the said duration for 1000. years, that is a
certain number put for an uncertain, See page 14, and 15. and page 104, and
105.
street of it, and of either side of it, was the tree of life. Likewise to this
alludes the Lord Jesus Christ, Rev. 2.7. saying, I will give to eat f the tree
of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. All plainly proving,
that this last and greatest splendour of grace by the second Adam, was with
reference to the pattern of the first Adam in the Covenant, and that the
eternal felicity by faith and fruition was intended therein though not in
plainness of speech: And here observe two things from this Chap. Rev. 22.

First, that the Apostasy of mankind from Christ in that purity of the
celestial Church on earth, at the most immediate emblem of the glory of God
in heaven. God will therefore express more severe justice upon the world for
their apostasy from that then ever before. The first is, that God will never
more extraordinarily raise man out of his filthy apostasy from his grace in
Christ Jesus, but will leave him to perish in his own corrupt^on. And this is
implied in the 11. verse. when it is said, he that is unjust, let him be unjust
still; be that is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous,
let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

The second thing is this, that their apostasy from this greatest namely the
last day of the worlds general judgment, implied in the 12. verse, where the
Lord Jesus says, and behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give
every man according as his work shall be, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, I am the first and the last, whereupon says S. John, Blessed are
they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life,
verse 14.15. So much for the third part of time of Gods impartial proceedings
intending and extending eternal life and death to all, and all alike, without
respect of persons from the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, to the time
of his coming at the day of judgment in flames of fire.

And from the whole Treatise take this general observation consisting of five
particulars, namely, what Gods decree was, Observat.
after the counsel of his own will before the world was.

As first, Gods decree before the world was
that God purposed in himself to create this world perfect in all it is parts,
and man the chief thereof, as appears in Chap. 1.

That then God also purposed in himself, for the eternal praise of Adams
improvement of his perfections, being the chief part therein, to a celestial
perfection, or to sink it down to an evil equivalently contrary to the glory
of his Justice, as is described in Chap. 2.

then also God purposed in himself that the knowledge of evil, which he in
time pronounced to Adam, that in the day he did eat the forbidden fruit, then
that sentence should pass to immediate execution, for the eternal praise of
his justice, as appears in Chap. 3,

God then also purposed in himself, that by Adams most ungrateful fall, he
would glorify the riches of his mercy, and his communicative g^odnesse and
justice; and therefore before the world was, God covenanted with the second
person in sacred Trinity, Tit. 1.2. 2. Tim. 1 9. Ephesians. 1.4.
being essentially the one God and son of God, to assume in time the nature
of Adam, as the chief part of this creation, not only to be ready in point of
time, as the Male Lamb in the bush, but also that then the execution of divine
justice should, and did, immediately upon Adams eating of the forbidden fruit,
pass upon Christ to the fall praise of Gods justice, to all eternity, and so
brought in the glory of his mercy, by restoring the fallen world to the
promulgation of his communicative goodness; as first in the beginning of time
in the type, and secondly, in the fullness of time in the truth, in the
redemption of the world, as is proved, Chap. 4. and 8.

God then purposed in himself to glorify his mercy and communicative
goodness and justice, by the distribution of that mercy individually upon
every of mankind: first, by giving to all and all alike in Christ Jesus, both
the means and end, namely, to eternal glory. I do not say he gave any thing
to them to attain eternal life, but only as a means to receive his gift of
eternal life, as attained by Christ the second Adam and Savior of the world,
and so to glorify his gracious goodness and mercy in their salvation. Or, on
the contrary, to glorify his justice on them which abuse his grace by a proud
persisting in obstinacy, for terrestrial trifles to reject his gift of Christ,
and his righteousness the only ground of man's felicity.

And that God does thus impartially glorify his Justice and mercy individually
upon mankind, is proved in the threefold parts of time, as from Adams casting
out of Paradise to Abraham, from Abraham to Christ, from Christ's coming in the
flesh, to his coming in flames of fire; at the end of time, as Chap. 6.7, 9,
10, 11, 12. And as for any other decree of God then this concerning the
eternal state of mankind, the Scripture speaks it not.

Glory be to God in the highest heavens, on the earth peace, and good will to
men.
FINIS.

