THE POWER OF THE Christian Magistrate in Sacred things.

Delivered In some Positions, sent to a Friend, upon which, a return of his
opinion was desired.

With some considerations, upon the Answer; and a Digression concerning
Allegiance, and submission to the Supreme Magistrate.

By Lewis du Moulin, History-reader of the University of Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, for FRANCIS EGLESFIELD, at the Marygold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1650.

To the Right HONORABLE Bulstrode Whitelocke Esquire, Rich. Keble Esquire; Sergeant
at Law, John Lisle Esquire.
Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal of England.
My Lords,
I Pretend not by this Dedication to loosen any one link of the chains of
Civilities, and unmerited favors, whereby I am bound unto your Lordships: But
rather, finding my self insolvent, and as a stranger, destitute of other
Sureties; I have taken the occasion to give public suretyship of my professed
beholdingness: Besides this personal motive, there was another real; for
intending this discourse, only as a Hue and Cry after truth, which the self
interest of some has lurched from the knowledge of other Christians, I should
wrong this same truth, if I did not entitle your Lordships to her patronage,
who are upon all occasions her so zealous abettors. Your known goodness,
requires, I presume, no Apology for the incongruous address or composure of a
stranger: I pretend to truth; and if she be not, (as she ought to be) I am
sure my English is, stark naked: in which condition if you please to cast over
her, the mantle of your protection, the stormy age wherein we live, shall no
more hinder her production, then abate the zeal of

Your Lordships most devoted Servant, LEWIS du MOULIN.

To the Reader.
HAving occasionally made some Considerations upon the ensuing Letter, which
gave me in one place (page 20. etc.) a fair insinuation to speak of the
Allegiance due by Subjects to the present power, by Gods providence set over
them, I was the more willing to insist a little upon it, and particularly upon
the late Engagement, which, being tendered me in Oxford by order of the State,
by whose favor I am a member of that University; I freely acknowledge, I was
not so scrupulous as many of my brethren of the University were; men otherwise
of known piety, and integrity; but have subscribed unto it: for which
undergoing various censures, by many, who, either are not yet persuaded to
subscribe, or are engaged otherwise, and being not conscious to my self that
herein I have done against my duty, or disobeyed Gods word, or been
prepossessed with particular interest; I thought my self obliged to give
publicly an account from what Scripture, reason, and humane authority I have
received satisfaction and encouragement to subscribe, thereby hoping even from
the most averse, either to be pardoned or excused.

Errata.
Page 81. lin. 24. read (...). p. 107. l. 9 Acts read Arts. p. 110. l. 13. 14.
read, over few Bishops.

Positions concerning the Power of the Christian Magistrate in Church matters.
I. THat all humane actions, Natural, or Voluntary, even the most mechanic
and servile, so they be necessary, and not sinful, must be done in faith, and
are to be referred to the Sovereign end, which is to glorify God by words and
deed, and to obtain the Summum bonum of men, which is the love of God, and
union with him.

II. That the principal duty of the Sovereign visible Power, in regulating
the actions of men's society, is not to make new Laws, but to declare the will
of the Grand Legislator, (even God in his Word) for the right governing of that
society, according to his divine will; making Laws agreeable, or not repugnant
to it; holding forth to the people for a sovereign Law, that God must be rather
obeyed then man.

III. That since the Sovereign Power has right to regulate all humane
actions, which do tend to that Sovereign end, he alone must preside over all
Orders, Laws, Offices, Places, and Persons, which have any reference to the
said actions. Else, if two Supreme Magistrates were constituted, sharing
betwixt them the Supreme power, the one being over certain actions, they call
Ecclesiastical; the other over the Civil; such a State cannot be conceived
without a great deal of confusion: Humane actions, of what kind soever they
be, having so near affinity among themselves, and being included one within
another.

IV. That for the most part, the causes of Heresies, and Wars, which have
troubled the World, came from the Popes dividing the said actions, vindicating
to themselves the regulating of one part of them, leaving the ordering of the
other to the Emperor and Kings, and thus erecting Imperium in Imperio; and not
only so, but by reason of the great affinity there is betwixt humane actions,
reducing almost all of them under his cognizance.

V. That the Reformers have indeed repurged the doctrine from Popery, but still
have kept to themselves the Sovereign cognizance of the actions which they call
Ecclesiastical, assuming to themselves the power of the Keys, which in truth
is restrained to this sentence, That God must be rather obeyed then man; and
therefore, when the Magistrate was unwilling to have a hand in the Reformation,
or the exercise of the true Religion, as in the primitive times, or in France,
they have done well, even without, or against the liking of the Magistrate, to
make a body of Congregations, giving it an order, which they call purely
Ecclesiastical. Likewise, they did well to create Elders, who are the Deputies
of the people, for otherwise the word could not have been preached, the
Sacraments administered, and the souls saved: But where the Sovereign
Magistrate is of the same Religion with the body of the people, these words
Ecclesiastical, Civil, Spiritual, Temporal, Clerck, and Lay, ought to cease,
and with them the diversity of legislation and jurisdiction; and under such a
Magistrate the Commonwealth is a Christian Visible Church, these words having
but an accidental difference; but yet such as have caused a real difference.
Now such distinction of words, which parts things that should not be divided,
ceasing; the original of all order and power over all actions and things, is
seated on the Sovereign visible power, and does extend to, and over all kinds
of persons, none being exempted, nor any thing excepted, if it be not contrary
to Gods commands. In sum, the Supreme Magistrate is none other then the
Minister of God, for the good and salvation of those that are under government.

VI. These things being so, and the Christian visible Church being an assembly
of good and bad, which have need to be governed for their temporal and
eternal good, it is manifest, that under other words, it is the same thing
with the words of Christian Commonwealths, and that the legislatio^ and
jurisdiction which the Sovereign Magistrate has over it, is extended over all
persons and causes, and in all Assemblies, Synods and Classes; for even the
conclusions and canons of the ancient Councels had no force which constrained
to obedience, but as they were ratified by the seal, or supreme will of the
Sovereign Magistrate, who usually did call, and dissolved them.

VII. Although all power and jurisdiction in all things be annexed to the
Sovereign Magistrate; by that, we do not mean to diminish any thing of the
nature of the Empire, and jurisdiction which the Lord Jesus Christ, even in
this world, has over his Church, whose members he knows by name, and which
he does govern by his Word and Spirit.

VIII. But to believe, that the body of those that make an external profession
of the true Religion, must be governed by Laws made by persons distinct in
jurisdiction, or legislation from that power which belongs to the Sovereign
Magistrate, it is a thing which cannot be found in the Scripture, where we do
read that the Church and Kingdom of the Jews were the same thing, and that in
the Synedrium all causes were decided, and all kinds of persons convented.

IX. These things being premised as before, it is not understood that the
government by Presbyteries, Synods, Classes, or even by Bishops must therefore
be abolished; but only that all their jurisdiction is like a branch or rivolet
streaming from the fountain of power, residing in the Sovereign Magistrate.

X. Neither is it understood, that the Magistrate ought to give orders, or
preach the Word, (although magistracy and ministry be things very consistent)
no more then to create Doctrors of physic, or the like, but only that the
power to exercise any profession, or calling externally, is conferred by him,
and cannot be done without him.

XI. That the calling of Lay Elders is not of necessary use in a Country where
the Magistrate is of the same Religion with the body of the people, it being
more then reasonable, that so much, or more power be granted to the Orthodox
Christian Magistrate, then they yield to the Elders in France.

XII. Now because some think it unfit, that the ministers, and the causes which
they maintain to be of their cognizance, should in all things be subalterne to
the Sovereign Magistrate, the only expedient, if we believe them, to make the
Church and State to be one Christian Commonwealth under one Sovereign power,
were that the Rulers and Overseers of the Church, as Ministers and Elders
should have also the Commonwealth committed to them, in the manner as the
Waldenses, or Albigenses were governed; for it seems that such Ministers
would be contented that the Church and Commonwealth were one, so that they
might have the whole rule, and Government; but rather then to miss a share,
they become strong assertors of a distinct jurisdiction, whereof they may
appropriate one unto themselves. Sic hisuperiorem, illi parem non ferunt.

A Letter Examining the foregoing Positions.
Sir.
YOu sent me certain articles, touching the Ecclesiastical policy: and
thereupon are earnest to know my opinion: the which I was long in debate,
whether I should deliver or no; questioning, whether the declaring of my sense
in this matter be of any weight or moment: but since, by your last, you press
it further upon me, telling me that some persons of wisdom, and gravity, and
in authority in the state, are earnest to know my sense and opinion thereon. I
have at length given way to your importunity, leaving to your discretion,
either the suppressing of this writing, or making of it public.

The two first articles do lay down for a foundation, that all humane actions
ought to be done in faith, and referred to the sovereign end, which is to
glorify God, and to obtain salvation, and that the duty of the sovereign
visible power is to declare unto the people the will of the great Legislator,
and that the laws of the said sovereign power ought to be conformable, at least
no way repugnant to the Law of God. All this is just and honest, and it were a
sin against piety to contradict it.

The second article says, that the sovereign Magistrate has right to regulate
all humane actions which are tending to that sovereign end, and that he alone
ought to sway and preside over all means, Laws, offices, places and persons
appertaining to the said actions: else if there were two supreme Magistrates,
one over the actions, they call Ecclesiastical, and another over the civil, a
great deal of confusion would ensue: And that heresies, schisms, and wars did
arise, for the most part, from the Popes dividing the said actions, challenging
to themselves the regulating of one part of them, leaving the other to the
Emperor and Kings; thus setting up Imperium in imperio.

I am of opinion that there cannot be in a well composed State, (and so does
the scripture teach us) more then one sovereign power, and that all persons of
what quality and condition soever, are subject to the sovereign Magistrate, and
that the Pastors of the Church cannot be excepted or exempted from that
subjection: their duty being to exhort and dispose the people to be faithful
and obedient to that power by Gods providence set over them, and chalk them the
way by their example. 1. Josh. all the people (the Levites and the Priests
being comprised) speak thus to Joshua, All that thou command us, will we do,
and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go. 1 King. 1. v. 33. David says to
Bethsheba, Take with you the servants of your Lord. The context shows that
Zadok the high Priest was of the servants of the King. 2. King. 23. v. 4. And
the King commanded Helkiah the high Priest, and the Priests of the second
order. And there he chideth them for not obeying his command, in repairing of
the temple. S. Paul does appeal to Caesar acknowledging him his Judge.

Consideration.
NOte that S. Paul appeals to Caesar as to the supreme competent Judge, not
only in relation to his private person and cause, but the cause of the Gospel,
for the question was, whether there was any crime in preaching the Gospel? and
the Apostles acknowledge the worst of the Emperors, the supreme power and
Judge. Had Festus not been a competent Judge in Ecclesiastical matters, but
only in civil, instead of saying, I am judged for the hope, etc. that is, for
the resurrection of the dead, the chief point of Christianity, he would have
said, I am not to be judged before thee in these matters.

Letter.
THe same Apostle Romans 13. enjoyneth that all persons be subject to the higher
powers, acknowledging the powers that have the present rule to be given of God,
that is, such as by a special act of his providence have the soverain power in
hand. St. Pet. 1.2. v. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, and note, that the Emperor to whom obedience is commanded to be
rendered, was a tyrant and a most wicked man: Nebuchadnezzar had subdued Judea,
and lead the Jews captives, yet Jeremiah speaks thus to the remnant of the
Jews not yet transported, Submit your neck under the yoke of the King of
Babylon, and serve him.

Consideration.
I Shall take liberty to digress a little upon that passage of Jeremy, which
does not only justify, but command submission to the power, which by Gods
providence is set over us, for lo here the Israelits spoiled of their goods and
lands, driven from their habitations, and enthraled in grievous bondage, are
commanded to pray for the prosperity of their oppressor, and for a quiet
government over them, as if their peace had been included in his: for as says
Calvin in the 4. book of his Institut. chapter 20.. 28. when God has exalted a new
power, he does declare that it is his pleasure he should have the power and
sway. Detuli Nebuchadnesar regnum says God, 2 Dan. v. 37. God has given thee
kingdoms and power. See Calvin in the quoted place, who is much insisting upon
the words of the Apostle. Romans 13.1. Submit your selves to the superior powers
whereby (...) some would not have the unlawful powers, but only the lawful
understood, which though it were granted, the text will very well bear this
sense, that when God has exalted some in authority, his will is that his power
should be held for a lawful power: but the word (...) is for the most part
taken generally for (...) whether lawful or usurped.

We read in Steven out of Xenophon, (...), I have power to steal, where none
will say, that that power of stealing is a lawful power: Thus in the 1 to the
Colossians, St. Paul saying, That God has delivered us from the power of
darkness, that power being likewise (...) can no more be said to be good and
lawful, then the translation to Christ's Kingdom spoken in the following
words, be said to be bad or unlawful: And according to the best sense you can
give to (...), as the said Steven well observes, it is but (...), or as Cicero
defines, Potestas vivendi ut velis, a power to live as you list: Now, if the
potestas spoken of by the Apostle, be a privilege, or power to rule as the
Supreme Magistrate lists, I conceive, that this faculty, or privilege, is
as well, or rather proper to Tyrannical Governments, (as most of them were in
the time of St. Paul) both in the means to attain to the Supreme
Magistracy, and in the exercise of it, that is, as well in the adeption, as in
the fruition. But Calvin, both in the said place, and most expressly upon the 13
to the Romans, expounds the Supreme Power, that power, which by Gods
providence, permission, or approbation is set over men; yea, that power which
has gotten the upper hand by intrusion. These be his words: Hoc verbo videtur
Apostolus tollere frivolam hominum curiositatem qui saepe solent inquirere, quo
jure adepti fuerint potestatem qui rerum potiuntur; satis autem nobis esse
debet quod praesunt, non enim conscenderunt sua ipsi virtute, sed manu dei sunt
impositi. By that word, the Apostle seems to take off the frivolous curiosity
of men, who are wont often to enquire, how, and by what right have those in
Supreme Authority come by their Power? It ought to suffice us that they
Govern, and that they have not ascended by their own virtue, but are set
over, and appointed by God.

Learned Deodati gives the same interpretation. All those that attain to
dignity, do so, either by his manifest will and approbation. Now it is fitting
that men should approve and tolerate that which God approves and tolerates;
which sense, and words of Deodati; have so much the more weight, for being
approved, and in the same words upon the matter transferred, by the Reverend
Divines of the Assembly in England, into their Exposition and Comment upon the
place. Ordained of God, or ordered, that is, instituted of God among mankind,
to rule and govern men in order, as in Gods stead; for God is the author of
this order in the World: And all those which attain unto this dignity, or
excellency, do attain unto it, either by his manifest will and approbation,
when the means are just and lawful; or else by his secret providence, with
permission and toleration, where the means are unlawful. And it is just and
equal, that men should approve and tolerate that which God himself approves
and tolerates, which cannot by any lawful means appointed by him, decline and
avoid. All therefore, who resist Authority, make war after a sort with God
himself. But this acception of power in St. Paul, only for a lawful one, is
attended with unavoydable inconveniences, that I may not say absurdities: for
first, who shall be judge what power is lawful? shall all jointly, or every
particular man under a power, be judge whether that power over them is lawful;
which is to seat the Superior Power no where, and to erect a Tribunal within
every particular Dominion, distinct from that of the Supreme Magistrate, which
shall judge of the right they came by to their Superiority. Secondly, since
this lawfulness is as well in the adeption, as in the fruition, or the
exercise of the Supreme Power, it shall be presently lawful for Subjects, who
are to judge of both, to resist the Supreme Magistrate; not only because he is
an Usurper, but also for governing tyrannically, to which government, if we
believe the new Expositors of St. Paul's meaning, the Apostle forbids to
submit, and even to pay tribute; for whereas he commands to pay tribute to
whom tribute belongs, when the subject shall judge that submission is not in
conscience, and in obedience to Gods Word, due unto such a Magistrate, he must
by the same tie of conscience, deny to pay him tribute, and suffer his house
rather to be forcibly entered, and his truncks to be broke open, then to pay it
with his own hands, lest his will should seem any way to concur in the doing
of a sinful thing, as is to pay tribute to whom it does not belong. But, which
is much material, it has been often seen, that Subjects have refused to obey
the commands of the Supreme Magistrate, opposing by resistance of Arms the
unjust managing of the power; but seldom, or never, so much as questioning the
Title of the Supreme Power, or Magistrate, but yielding Fealty, or Homage to
him that had possession de facto, though not de jure, which has been always
practiced in England under all the Kings since the Conquest, who, although for
the greatest part they had no just title to the Crown; yet to avoid confusion,
and the itching humor of people, questioning the validity of Laws, and
Lawgivers, the Law has always provided, that Allegiance should be given him
to whom the Imperial Crown of these Realms shall descend, by which Imperial
Crown, the Person is not principally meant, but the Realm; no man owing other
Allegiance, but such as is yielded, in, and for the defense of the Realm. This
is made good by the Title of the Statute Eliz. 2. Cap. 1. All ancient
jurisdiction restored to the Crown, by which Crown, none will, I think,
understand the lawful Heirs and Successors of the Crown, but him, or them
that are actually in possession of the Government; or which is all one, by the
Crown is meant the Supreme Judicature of the Kingdom for the time being,
where the Crown is placed, and to which the Jurisdiction belongs, what ever
Title the Supreme Power for the time being may have; for sure, unlawful
possession of a Crown does not exempt subjects from the same Allegiance that
the most lawful Sovereign can challenge; for even I should much doubt,
whether Subjects may call any Supremacy of Power unlawful, or whether a
Supreme Governor is not a lawful Governor; however, possession is the great
condition required for the duty of Allegiance, which in express terms is said
Eliz. 10. and 50. Cap. 1. to be due to Kings and Queens Possessors of the
Crown: But still, the Laws made by Henry the 4th 5th and 6th were never the
less valid, and of no less force for being made by Kings called pretended. In
the Statute Edward 4.10. Cap. 1. where some of their Acts were continued,
others repealed, which word repealed would not so much as have been used, had
not these statutes been enacted in a lawful assembly of the three states. And
as the validity of the Laws under the said pretended Kings were never
questioned, so neither were the subjects blamed, yea, rather justified, for
bearing fealty and allegiance to the said Kings: of which we have a notable
example in the eleventh of Henry the seventh cap. 1.1. where in an act, the
Parliament declares, as a thing unreasonable, against Law and Conscience, that
the subjects going with their Sovereign (meaning such as Henry the 4.5.6. and
Richard the 3.) for the time being, and attending upon his person, or being in
other places by his commands within the Land or without, should in any thing
forfeit for doing their true duty and service of allegiance: But the main
reason why the people in England have always obeyed him who was in possession
de facto was because they were not to oppose the usurper, till he was so
lawfully declared: So that, I conceive had the Turk conquered England, though
no man can be so much divested of his reason, as not to judge of him as of an
usurper by a judgment of discretion; yet there being by Gods providence, who
disposes of Kingdoms as he will, not any judgment of authority left, that
can lawfully declare the Turk to be an usurper, I conceive I say, that every
Subjects duty is to impose silence to his own judgment, without murmuring, and
commune thus with his own heart, that God has left the Kingdom without
recourse, that he may dispose of it to another; upon Upon all these grounds of
Scripture, reason and authority, it being manifest that all powers that have
attained to the supreme dignity, are ordained of God, and are to be submitted
unto; it follows undenyably that every souls duty is to engage to be true and
faithful to such a power, and thereupon that their privilege is to be freed
from all other engagements made to other powers; I mean in such things that
salva fide are alterable, as to be ruled by this or that Magistrate, and to be
under this or that Government; (...) former engagement of that nature, how
circumstantially soever expressed, being able to dispense any man from his
present duty, or from this command, Let every soul be subject to the superior
powers which are ordained of God. Besides, that every promise or oath of fealty
and homage to a supreme power is a sinful act (and therefore better broken
then kept) If some condition be not employed as included in it, though not
expressed; as it may be made evident by the ensuing queries. 1. Whether an
English man transporting his estate and family into a remote country, and
being minded to return no more to England, is not loosed from the ties of the
oath of Allegiance. 2. Whether the same man may not tie himself by another oath
of fealty and faithfulness to the supreme Magistrate of that country where
his abode is, though occasionally, yea consequently this oath proves repugnant
to the oath of Allegiance. 3. Whether a war being kindled between England and
the country of his abode, he finding the wrong to be on Englands side, he may
not lawfully adhere rather to the later oath, and wage war against England,
in the behalf of those among whom he lives. 4. Whether in ease the supreme
Magistrate be expelled, and a new government settled; the same man not being
guilty of his expulsion, and remaining still in England, there is not par
ratio, and the like freedom and exemption from former oaths made to the
expulsed Magistrate, with that exemption when the same man leaving England does
swear Allegiance to another supreme Magistrate in foreign parts, where he
purposes to continue? 5. Whether the same man having continued ten years, as
for example, in Venetia, afterward making a journey into England, and finding
there a new face of Government, whether he must resume his obligation, and tie,
to the oath of allegiance, from which he was loosed, when he was subject to the
Venetians? 6. And since a man leaving England, is not only loosed from the
obligation to the Oath of Allegiance, but also, it is free for him to bequeath
his Allegiance to what Lord or Sovereign Magistrate he pleases; whether it may
not be indifferent to him for matter of tie of conscience, either to swear
fealty to Governors newly set up in England, or to other Governors in
foreign parts, whether they be new to him, or lately come by their
Sovereignty? 7. Whether a Tenant holding of a Liege Lord, his obligation of
fealty, and of paying a penny rent, do not cease, as to the person, though not
to the thing, so long, at least, as the Lord is out of possession; or that I
may better english such a querie, whether a freeman doing homage to his Lord of
whom he holds in chief, or otherwise, swearing to become his man from this
day forth for life, member, etc. and to owe him his faith for the Lands he
holds of him; whether the said oath of homage is not conditional, viz. so
long as his Lord has possession of the Land held by the Farmer. 8. Whether in
those relations that are accidental, as those between King and Subjects,
Master and servant, the promise, as for example, of the servant to be as long
as he lives faithful and obedient to his Master, does not imply many
conditions, which not continuing, do take away the obligation; such are the
Master decaying in his fortunes, and the Servant bettering of his; the Master
turning out the Servant, or being taken away from him? 9. Yea whether without
violation of faith and bonds, which are between the Master and the Servant, the
relation may not change terms, the Master becoming a Servant, and the Servant
a Master? 10. Whether the Duke of Normandy did break his Allegiance to
Chilperick his heirs and successors, when he did homage of his Dukedom to
Charles Martel, who expelled the lawful line? 11. Whether in case the Turk
should make such a conquest of England, as he has done of Constantinople, an
English man minded to tarry in England is not tied to engage to be true and
faithful to him, and consequently freed from former engagements? 12. Or if the
Englishman may wave and suspend his engaging so soon after the conquest, how
long time may be allowed to him before he do it? 13. Suppose, an Englishman had
15 years ago foreseen, and foretold by probable and possible conjectures, such
a turn of State as ours is, whether it had not been a sin in him to take,
without some condition employed, the oath of Allegiance? 14. Whether in case the
King had (as it was once very doubtful) clear overcome the Parliament and had
(as it is likely he would have done) abolished all future thoughts of
Parliaments, and had thereupon made a Proclamation and public Declaration of
his will and pleasure; whether, I say, in that case, he commanding a general
subscription to be true and faithful to him in the maintenance of his
Domination, every Englishman had not been obliged in conscience and obedience
to Gods word, to submit unto it, and thereby been loosed from his former ties
and obligations to maintain the privileges of Parliament, the liberties of the
Kingdom, the extirpation of the English Hierarchy, and the like?

These quaeries are of themselves so satisfactory, that they need no answer;
for even in all oaths, which are not of Allegiance, contracts, and promises,
though they be uttered, or written in absolute terms, there is always some
condition employed, and included, as is the mutual promise the first day of
marriage; and Seneca in his fourth Book de Beneficijs, Chap. 35. gives many
pregnant instances. Tunc fidem fallam, tunc inconstantiae crimen audiam, si cum
omnia eadem sint, quae erant promittente me, non praestitero promissum, alioqui
quicquid mutatur libertatem facit de integro consulendi and meam fidem liberat.
That is, I shall then break my faith, and incur the crime of inconstancy, if
I do not fulfill my promise; all the things being the very same that they
were, when I made the promise. And having made that good by examples, headdeth,
omnia debent esse eadem quae fuerint cum promitentes ut promittentis, fidem
teneas. That you may keep the faith, every thing must be the same it was when
you promised. And in the 39 Chapter, he is very full, and says, that in all
promises, subest tacita exceptio, si potero, si debebo, si haec ita erunt:
effice ut idem status sit cum exigitur qui fuit cum promitterem, si aliquid
intervenit novi, quid miraris, cum conditio promittentis mutata sit, mutatum
esse consilium: eadem mihi omnia praesta, and idem sum. There is a tacit
exception, if I can, if I ought to do it, if the things be thus: make that
good that the same state do continue, when it is demanded, that it was, when I
made promise; if some new things come in the interim, why do you marveil that
the resolution is changed, since the condition of him that promised is also
changed: see that all be as they were, and I am the same. This very subject,
that promises and contracts, are conditionally to be interpreted, though the
interpretation is not expressed, is handled by Queen Elizabeth, in a
controversy between her self and the Hollanders, in the clearing of which,
She makes use of this very place of Seneca. The whole passage is worth setting
down briefly, being more largely related by learned cambden in his Annals, in
the year 1595. The Queen being in a manner weary with the length of the war
that the States of the Low Country had with Spain, and the greatness of the
expenses, showed this unto the States by her Ambassador Sir Thomas Bodley,
resident in Holland, particularly, that England being exhausted of wealth and
military men, She required, not only ease of the charge of the charge of
maintaining Auxiliary Forces, but also that they would repay some part of her
expenses. They, after some complements, and a demonstration to the Queen, of
the great losses they lately sustained, and the heavy burden that lay upon them
in prosecuting a war against so potent an Enemy, desired forbearance, but so,
that they promised to pay a part of the money: when the Queen required a
greater proportion, they stood stiffly upon the Contract in the year 1585. by
which, the money was not to be repaid before the war was finished; and
pressed her upon her Honor not to start back from Her Contract: But She, by
the advice of her Counselors of State, replied, That all Contracts with a
Prince, are understood to admit an interpretation of sincere fidelity, and no
public d^triment, caused by the Contract: That it is no breach when it is done
by accident of a new case, concerning which, other provision would have been
made, if it had been thought upon: That every Contract, though sworn, is
understood if matters continue in the same state; but not, if they be changed:
That a man is bound more strongly to the Commonwealth, then to his own promise;
and out of the authority of Seneca, that a wise man does not change his
determination, all things continuing which were when he took it.

Letter.
Moses, by the same power by which he plagued Egypt, was able to take the
people out of Egypt, which yet he never attempted without Pharaohs permission.

Consideration.
FOr although God commanded the Sacrifice, yet since the place was not defined,
they could not be exempted from obeying the King.

Letter.
ANd because some might say, that the Christian people was bidden to obey the
Emperors merely out of necessity, and to avoid persecution, the Apostles words
alleged, commanding obedience to the higher Powers for Gods sake, takes away
any such thought: And St. Paul bids us to yield obedience to the higher Powers,
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; that is, not only for fear
of punishment, but because conscience, and Gods Word, does bind us thereunto.
Jesus Christ himself, appearing before Pontius Pilate, to be judged by him, by
that, acknowledeth that Pilate had received that Power from God.

Consideration.
WEre it not too much to disgresse from the subject in hand, which is, of the
power of the Christian Magistrate in sacred things; this part of the Letter
strongly asserting out of the words of the Apostle, Romans 13. That obedience and
submission is due to that Magistrate which by Gods providence has got the
Supremacy, would lead me to a further consideration of it; but having but now
taken liberty to digress upon the same, I shall only observe upon this part
of the Letter, that Jesus Christ did not except against the power that Pilate
took to judge him; but rather said, that that power was given him from God.
Thus in the fourth of the Acts Peter and John do not except against the
validity of the Court over them, but freely acknowledge their Judges: We are
examined (say they) of the good deed done in the impotent man. The state of the
controversy was, whether it was lawful to heal any one in the name of Jesus?
Peter, in the name of the Apostles, proved it was lawful, because Jesus was an
Head over the Church, and was author of Salvation, which they further
strengthened by proofs, from his Resurrection, and antecedent Oracles; and
when they were forbidden to preach any more in the name of Jesus, they replied,
Judge ye whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more
then unto God. Intimating, that even the power of judging, whether Jesus was
the Messiah, did belong unto them.

Letter.
Of the Power of Kings over the lives and calling of the High Priest, we have a
clear example in the 1 Book of the Kings, Chap. 2. Verse. 26. where Solomon
says to Abiathar, Thou art worthy of death, but I will not at this time put
thee to death; only was contented to thrust him out from being Priest unto the
Lord, and confined him to his house at Anatoth; and oft-times the Roman
Emperors, and the Christian Kings, have punished Bishops and Pastors with
banishments, stripes, yea, with death. The Emperor Constantius did remove
Liberius Bishop of Rome from the function of his Episcopacy, and banished him
to Berea.

Consideration.
THis example, and many more he adds, are sufficient to evince, that the
Magistrate has power to exauctorate, or degrade; and thereupon to put another
in the place. He that has power to expel a Bishop from his Dominion, has
also power to thrust him out of his Sea, which is within the Dominion; and if
the Election was not an Act of the Sovereign Power, either by his concession,
or delegation to others, the Minister, or Bishop could not be put out, but by
the power that invested him. Any Act, which may contribute toward the
security, peace and weal of the state, is of the cognizance of the supreme
power of that State, and the Jus sacrum was comprised under Jus publicum; for
the definition of Jus, is the knowledge of Divine and humane things.

Letter.
IN the days of Valentinian, Damasus and Ursicinus, being competitors of the
sea of Rome, the sedition being grown to that height, as that there was found
137 dead bodies in a Basilisk, but the commotion was appeased by the authority
of the Emperor, who expelled Ursicinus, and settled Damasus.

In the year of our Lord 420. there arose a great strife between Bonifacius
and Eulalius, competitors for the sea of Rome, by the clashing of the Suffrages
of the people of Rome, to whom at that time belonged the power and right of
election. But the authority of Honorius intervening, he thrust out Eulalius,
and preferred Bonifacius, and withal made this Law, that if it falls out, that
against right, and by the rashness of the contending parties, two are made
Bishops, we will not suffer that either of them be Bishops: this Law is found
in the Decree of Gratian. Distinct. 79. Canon, si duo forte.

Consideration.
THough the election of Pastors should naturally belong to other Pastors, or
Christian people, as naturally every one chooses a Tutour to his son; a
Patient, what Physician he likes best; a Merchant, his Factor; yet no doubt
but the Sovereign power may exercise such actions that have no definitive
bounds and rules prescribed by the dictates of nature; thus in many places, the
Sovereign power will provide Tutors for Pupills, public Schoolmasters for
youth; Physicians for Towns and Cities: Besides, the Factions, Schisms, and
Heresies, may so rend the State, that if the supreme power has not a chief
regulating hand in the election of Pastors calling, or convocation of Synods,
it will never be able to settle the peace and security of the State upon a
right Basis: The Canons about elections have no life nor validity, but what
they receive from the supreme power; much less the elections, which are
regulated according to the canons and decrees.

Letter.
IN the year of our Lord, 451. The Emperor Theodosius the II. (whose piety
and goodness is generally commended) expelled Nestorius Patriarch of
Constantinople, and banished him.

In the year 498. a great strife happened about the election of a Bishop of
Rome, betwixt Symmachus and Laurentius; the King Theodorick taking notice of
the strife, and hearing that Symmachus had been first named, preferred him
before Laurentius: but soon after Symmachus being accused of many crimes, he
appointed Peter, Bishop of Altin to judge of the accusations, and look to the
disorders of Rome.

In the year 525. King Theodorick sent John Bishop of Rome Ambassador to
Iustine the Emperor; but this John behaving himself contrary to his
instructions, Theodorick put him to death in prison. Gregory the I. Bishop of
Rome, who wrote about the year of our Lord 595. writing to Maurice the
Emperor, calls himself unworthy servant, and subject to his commands, yea dust
and ashes in his presence and a worm.

In the year 654. Constant the Emperor, put Martin the Bishop of Rome in
chains, and banished him to Chersonesus, where he died. Under Pepin, Charles
the Great, and Lewis le Debonaire, the power of the Roman Pontife grew by the
liberality of those Kings; yea, since them have they been often ill entreated,
punished, degraded and deposed by the Emperors of Germany, and the Kings of
Italy; and the Histories of Germany, France and England are full of examples of
Emperors and Kings, who have dealt roughly with the Bishops, putting them out
of their sea, etc. There is no doubt made, when the King Clouis was a heathen,
but that he had an absolute power over all French, both Lay and
Ecclesiastical, and, that retained still the a Christian, he being afterward
same power, else he had been a loser by his change, and suffered a diminution
of authority in his Empire: Under the first line of our Kings, Counsels were
assembled by their command, and the Bishop of Rome never intermedled, and had
neither Nuncioes nor Legates in France.

Consideration.
THat the Supreme power even of contrary Religion, challenged power as well
over Eclesiasticall persons as causes, and were acknowledged competent Judges;
we may see by the appeal of Saint Paul who appealed to Caesar, I stand (says
he) at the Judicial seat of Caesar; there I must be indged; and when Saint
Peter (not declining the Judgment of the Council) said, Act. 4. Whether we
ought rather to obey God or man, Judge ye? And the great controversy about
the Temples of Jerusalem and Garizin, between the Jews and the Samaritanes,
was decided by Ptolomeus King of Egypt, and which was most material by the Law
of Moses; and his judgment was right, pronouncing to which of them the Temple
and Priesthood did belong.

Letter.
GRegory of Tours, who wrote about the year of our Lord 585. the history of
France, in the 18 chap. of the 5 book, speaks thus to the King Chilperick, If
any of us, O King, go besides the path of righteousness, thou may redress
him; but if thou do transgress, who shall be able to correct thee, we speak
to thee, and thou hear us, but if thou will not, who shall have the power to
condemn thee, but he that is Justice it self. At that time the Bishop of
Rouen named Praetextat was in great reputation; yet was this Bishop being
accused to have adhered to Meroue, who rebelled against Chilperick, clapped into
prison by the Kings command, and sore beaten, and banished to Garnsey.

Consideration.
ALL this is sufficient to prove that the Sovereign power of the State, has
always challenged power over Ecclesiastical persons: by that which follows,
it will be as clear, that they challenge likewise the cognizance and ordering
of Ecclesiastical causes and actions.

Letter.
THE Greek Emperors, have called all the oeconomick Counsels, not expecting
the consent of the Bishop of Rome, and often against his consent, as the first
Council of Constantinople, and of Chalcedone. Yea, in matters of Religion, and
Ecclesiastical policy, one cannot deny but that the Sovereign power of the
State has made orders. David made twenty four ranks of Priests; Solomon had
the chief oversight of the building of the Temple, and bringing in all the
vessels. We see in the Code of Justinian, great number of Laws concerning, not
only, the policy of the Church, but also the purity of the doctrine; as be the
titles, de summa Trinitate and fide Catholica; de Episcopis and Clericis; and
ne sanctum Baptisma iteretur. By which Laws it appears, that the Emperors
had power to punish the Bishops, namely by the 123 Authentic chap. 1. the
Emperor speaks thus, Si quis autem extra memoratam observationem Episcopus
ordinetur; jubemus hunc Episcopatu depelli. Yea, he there adds pecuniary
Fines.

Consideration.
AS by these Laws in the code of Justinian, it appears, that the Emperors
had power to punish the Bishops, as the Letter says; so do they much more
clearly assert the right and power which the Supreme Magistrate has, not
only over all causes, they call Ecclesiastical, but to make Laws and
Constitutions, of the same nature as the causes be.

Letter.
A Great part of the Capitularies of Charles the great, and of Lewis le
Debonnaire, are Laws Ecclesiastical, like those we read in the Councels of
those days. The Council of Meyns, held in the year 813. begins thus: Carolo
Augusto verae religionis Rectori and Defensori Sanctae Ecclesiae: And the
second Council of Meyns speaks thus to Lewis le Debonnaire at the opening of
it: Domino and Serenissimo and Christianissimo Regi Ludovico verae religionis
strenuissimo Rectori and Defensori Sanctae Ecclesiae. I doubt not but these
Emperors made those Laws by the counsel of the Bishops and Prelates within
their Dominions; But they were willing to have them current under the name of
their Imperial Laws, and the stamp of their Authority; for the Sovereign
Magistrate is the servant of God, appointed by God, to see the Law of God
observed amongst men, and the pure worship of his name set up.

Consideration.
THe Sovereign Power is constituted by God, to the end that men might live
godly, justly, soberly, and peaceably. A Heathen could say, that in a
Commonwealth, the first care must be Religion, the (...), Arist. And there is
good reason that the Sovereign Magistrate should seek after that, which he is
in the first place to ask for, which is the Kingdom of Heaven, being the basis
of humane society; so says Cicero, Religio est humanae societatis fundamentum.
But that the duty of the Supreme Power is equally to order the religion, and
the civil government, St. Austin does plainly set it down in the third Book
against Cresconius Grammaticus. In hoc Reges sicut eis divinitus praecipitur
Deo serviunt, in quantum Reges sunt, si in regno suo bona jubeant, mala
prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad
divinam religionem. In that Kings, as they are enjoined by God, do serve God
as they are Kings, if within their Kingdom they command good things, and forbid
evil things, not only in things belonging to humane society, but also to
divine religion.

Letter.
ANd I do not believe, that in England there is any Minister of the Word of
God found, who does not acknowledge a subjection to the Sovereign Magistrate,
but is rather exceeding joyful that the holy Ordinances are settled by public
authority; and therefore, there is no fear that any of them should go about
to persuade that there must be an Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, differing from
the civil, and one Commonwealth within another: It Is all the fault we find
with the Pope, and his Clergy, that they have made Imperium in Imperio, and
that the Clergy by his Laws cannot be convented before the Royal Judges: for
they have Courts of Judicature, and Prisons severed from the civil; they have
their appeals to the Roman Court, and are freed from taxes and impositions.

Consideration.
THat power which the Ministers do challenge, in censuring, and punishing of
offenders, suspending from the communion, or excommunicating, as inherent and
intrinsecall to the Ministers of the word, and not being a branch depending of
the jurisdiction of the Sovereign Christian Magistrate; that power, I say, thus
challenged, is as much, as to constitute one Commonwealth within another.

Letter.
FOr I do not think, that Bishops, or Ministers, ought to render themselves
Judges in any cause, civil, or capital, to punish the offenders, by
imprisonment, taxes, or bodily penalties. Jesus Christ never authorized them so
to do, for he would not so much as accept of being an arbiter in sharing of an
Inheritance.

For these reasons, I do not believe that those, in whose hands God has now
entrusted the Sovereign Power in England, shall have any ground of fearing that
the Ministers, so long as they discharge their calling, making use of that
authority that Jesus Christ has given them, have any intention to entrench
upon the Power and Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate. But, because the
third Article, attributing to the Supreme Magistrate a right to order all
humane actions tending to the Sovereign end, which is the glory of God, and the
salvation of souls, might seem to draw this consequence, that the sovereign
Magistrate is judge of all actions about Ministry, and the Preaching of the
Word; therefore, the article adds a prudent cautition, viz. That we must obey
the Sovereign Magistrate, so long as his commands are not repugnant to Gods
commands; for if he should command the abjuring of the Christian Religion, or
bowing before an Idol, or should introduce another propitiatory sacrifice for
sins, besides the death of Christ, then such commands were not to be obeyed:
Nor do I say, that therefore the State must be embroiled, and the Magistrate
resisted; but, that one is rather to endure martyrdom, or all kind of
persecution, then to lose his soul, in giving obedience to such commands. Thus
have the three friends of Daniel done, and all the faithful martyrs. We see in
the Apologetick of Tertullian, that in his time, the Christians did fill the
greatest part of the Roman Empire, which might have been very empty, had they
gone about to flee for persecution into a remote Country. Read St. Austin upon
the 124 Psalm. Valentinian the II. was labored to take away the Temples from
the Orthodoxes, and give them to the Arrians; but Ambrosius, Bishop of Milan,
withstood him: but how? he tells you himself: Dolere potero, potero flere,
potero gemere, adversus arma milites Gottos, lachrymae meae arma sunt; talia
enim sunt munimenta Sacerdotis, aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere.

To this exception, I would add another, that the Magistrate must be obeyed in
the actions in which he acts as Magistrate, and for such a one taken: For, if a
Sovereign Prince be in a Ship, and a storm happens, I do believe, that the
Master Pilot ought rather to follow the rules of his art, than the will of the
Prince, who is not versed in navigation. The Magistrate indeed may forbid the
mariners to lanch out of the Port, and to sail into Spain, or the Indies; or
to import, or export such and such wares; but it does not belong to him to
order how the Ship must be steered, or the sails hoised up. Thus, a Prince
learning to ride, ought, if he means to learn, to obey the Master of the
horses; yea, as a Saveraign Prince, he has power over the person, life, and
goods of the Master of the horses; yea, I say, that the yielding of the Prince
to the Rider, is a kind of a command to the Rider, so to deal with him: I say
the same of a Magistrate sick, obeying the prescripts of a Physician; he does
obey as a man, and not as a Magistrate: whereupon, a question may be moved,
whether the Magistrate, being at public prayers, and partaker of the
Sacraments, is there as a Magistrate, or as a Christian.

Consideration.
THis similitude, or relation, betwixt a Prince in a storm, and the Pilot; and
betwixt a Prince sick, and a Physician, is very pertinent to declare, that the
power of the Pastor over the Sovereign Magistrate, is of the same nature, and
proportionable to that power which the Physician has over the Sovereign Prince
being sick; or that of a skillful Pilot in a storm over him, who may be his
King, but unskilful in the art of navigation. This power, is rather a friendly
counsel, though exercised, and uttered in a commanding way, specially, in the
mouth of a Minister, who, in the name of God, may command a Sovereign Prince
to redeem his sins by a speedy repentance; for in effect, it is but declaring
unto him what be the commands of God for the good of his soul. Thus, a
Physician following the rules of his art, and his long experience, may charge a
King his patient, as he tenders his own health, which he must not obstinately
cast away, to refrain from such and such meats, and doubtless, that King
would grievously sin against God, who, rejecting the counsel of the
Physician, and wilfully obeying his own lust, and appetite, should thereby
fall into a relapse. It might happen, in a storm, or shipwreck, that the Pilot
should use a kind of compulsion and violence toward his Sovereign, pulling
him (as it were) out of danger, and forcing him to hearken to the means of his
preservation: for which, he ought not to be blamed.

Letter.
I Think also, that we should make a distinction between a Magistrate that is
faithful and orthodox, and one that is an Ethnic, or an Heretic: for under a
heathen Magistrate, I do not see how it can belong to any but the Pastors of
the Church; to manage the Church: for shall a heathen Magistrate, and
persecutor, be a judge of the articles of the Christian faith, or make use of
suspension, or excommunication? Whence it follows, that the state of the
Church may subsist, although the power of the Keys, and the governing of the
Church, be not in the Magistrate: If the heathen Magistrate should forbid the
Pastors upon pain of death, to hold councels, or Ecclesiastical assemblies,
or to preach the Gospel; or if there be such an urgent necessity of calling a
Council, to stop the current of a pestilentiall heresy, or to degrade some
Pastors that disturb the peace of the Church, or that have crept in forcibly,
may the Pastors be condemned, if they do privately convene themselves contrary
to the will of the Magistrate?

Consideration.
THis is one of the strongest arguments that can be alleged, for the power of
the Keys, and Ecclesiastical Courts, and Jurisdiction, different, and
independent from the civil Magistrate, because there has been sometimes
Church Government, calling of Synods, and exercise of Jurisdiction, against the
will of the sovereign Power, and not complicate with the civil Power. But, in
mine opinion, it has no strength all: for first, I lay down this for a ground,
that the Magistrate, whether Orthodox, or not, does retain still the same
supreme power over all persons, and causes, of what kind soever. Secondly, that
in all persons, and actions of men, under the sovereign Power, this grand rule
must be first observed, that God must rather be obeyed then man. Thirdly, that
many actions, of all kinds, natural, or voluntary, even meetings, assemblies,
and orders, obliging some men, or society, may be done without the cognizance
of the sovereign Magistrate: For first; If heathenisme, or heresy, could
divest a man of the power he has over all persons, and causes, by that, unjust
laws should be no laws; a diseased man, by the same reason, should cease to
be a man; and a wicked Emperor, as Heliogabalus, should not have been ranked
among the Emperors, nor acknowledged for the supreme Judge of the Land,
because a bad one: I confess, that a Heathen, or heretical Sovereign, cannot
but judge amiss of persons, and causes, either out of ignorance, or malice;
but ignorance of what is right, does not divest him of his right, neither does
a wicked managing of his own right, hinder it to be a right still: Depraved
actions in nature, continue to be actions still. An Orthodox Sovereign
Magistrate, falling into heathenisme, or heresy, as Julian the Apostate,
loses no part of his supreme power, he that over all causes, and persons; no
more does the Sovereign Magistrate get any addition, or extent of power, if
from heresy, or heathenisme, he is converted to the Christian Religion. It Is
the duty of a Magistrate, to defend and propagate Christian Religion: It is the
Fathers duty to provide for his children; the part of the Supreme Judge, to
administer justice impartially, though any, or all of them, may fail in the
discharge of their duty: The King being a persecutor of the christian people,
instead of being their nursing Father; the Father leaving his children to the
wide world; and the Judge taking bribes, and being prepossessed with
prejudices: If men's sins should exempt exempt them from their duty, a wicked
man's duty should be never to be converted: None will say, it is not the duty of
a Governor of a strong hold, to defend it, although he lets in the enemy
without resistance: That it is not the office of a Magistrate to look to the
safety of the high ways, because he either neglects that care, or conniveth at
such as do commit robbery. For the second ground: Suppose that the Sovereign
Power does not impose any Law; or rather, suppose his Laws are unjust, shall a
man under such a power, live lawless? or shall not rather such a man, being a
Christian, be tied to be a Law unto himself; or rather, to make the word of
God a Law to his conscience: Sure, such a man must not expect the commands of
the Sovereign Power to abstain from stealing, or fornication, which may be, are
authorized by Law, but must avoid these, not for wrath, that is, not for fear
of punishment, but for conscience sake, as the Apostle speaks; thus when
Christ commands the Ministers to preach, baptize, etc. and the people not to
forsake their mutual Assembly; no doubt but that both the Christian Pastor and
people are bound to all Church duties, though they have the Sovereign power
opposite, and threatening all kind of punishment to those that exercise them.

If those in authority be wanting to their duty, I have no reason or ground to
be deficient in mine. As for the third ground, concerning meetings, assemblies,
etc. I say, that they may be such as (though it should be granted on all sides,
that the Church and States Jurisdiction were but one) that the very Sovereign
power needs not to pretend to have an eye over them; It being a kind of right
of nature for Merchants trading in the same commodity to meet; for acquaintance
to appoint a Randezvous. A man being a feciable creature, it is no marvel if
men are naturally desirous to converse together, without expecting any order
for so doing. Were not the Heteries and Meetings of the ancient Christians of
the same nature? And upon that account I see not, but the Meetings of
congregations of those called Independents are very commendable, and not to be
enquired after by the Sovereign Magistrate, nor by Synods which cannot be
proved to be of Divine institution, but have taken their original from those
kinds of natural and innocent meetings, which when they were about things
which were neither plots nor conspiracy to disturb the peace of the State,
needed not to be looked after by the Magistrate, except when being converted to
the Christian Religion, he became himself a principal member of those
meettings; for then, specially when the meetings are not only in houses, but
in public places, and are tending to have the holy Ordinances set up and
published as the main rule of life, and groundwork of humane society, his chief
duty was to govern the Empire as Christian, contributing his whole endeavor
toward the defense, maintenance and increase of the Christian Religion, Thus
Leo Bishop of Rome, Ep. 75. to Leo the Emperor, Debes incunctanter advertere
Regiam potestatem tibi non solum ad mundi regimen sed maxim ad Ecclesiae
praesidium esse collocatam: Thou ought soberly to consider that the Royal
power is not only committed to thee for the Government of the world, but
chiefly for the defense of the Church.

Letter.
ALL the difficulty then is concerning the Orthodox Magistrate, and one that is
endowed with the true knowledge of God, such as, by the mercies of God, the
Magistrate of England is; upon that the fifth Article says, that the Reformers
have indeed purged the Popish Doctrine, but have reserved to themselves the
Sovereign cognizance of the actions they call Ecclesiastical, challenging the
power of the Keys, which when all is said, is reduced to this sentence, that
God must be rather obeyed then men. The Author of the Articles thinks that the
Reforming Pastors in retaining the power of the Keys, have not obeyed God: he
does indeed acknowledge, that under a Prince of contrary Religion, the
Christian people have done well to establish a government, which they call
purely Ecclesiastical, and create Elders who are deputies of the people; but
he is of that opinion that where the Magistrate is of the same Religion with
the body of the people, there ought not to be any further distinction of
Jurisdiction; the Church and State concurring into one Christian commonwealth:
To be short, all his discourse is tending to that, viz. that in a State where
the Magistrate is Orthodox, the Keys and power which the Pastors had under
Magistrates of contrary Religion, does no longer belong to them, but does only
belong to the Sovereign Magistrate, whose power is over all persons and
things, and that in all Assemblies, Synods, and Classes, the conclusions have
no force, if they be not ratified by the will of the Supreme Magistrate by whom
they usually are assembled.

Consideration.
What he says from the Author of the articles, that where the Supreme
Magistrate becomes Orthodox, the power of the Keys does no longer belong to
the Ministers, ought to be understood with some explication; for the power of
the Keys is still, and ought to be the same whether the Magistrate be orthodox
or no; there is not in the Ministers any addition of that power under the
heathen Magistrate, nor any substraction of it under a Christian: suppose that
the Christian Magistrate and Orthodox should turn Apostate, I do not conceive
that it follows thereupon, that the power which the Christian Magistrate has
over the Church, is through his Apostasy devolved unto the Ministers; for that
Legislation or Jurisdiction practiced in Christian Congregations, Synods, or
Assemblies under the heathen Magistrate, is no more then a harmony of minds,
affections, and actions to holy ordinances and orders; by which Christians may
worship God more purely, and walk more closely with him, which ordinances are
either Gods word, or such as increase the power of piety; and as they are
published by common consent as the best rule to walk by; so are they in the
practice of them willingly, and unanimously consented unto, and every member of
a Christian society, submits himself to the rules, exhortations and censures
of that society or Church, not being awed or compelled by any coercive power,
which they cannot avoid, if they listed, but led by voluntary submission; to
which by promise, and pact, they are in a manner already engaged. Besides,
suppose that the Magistrate does not impose any Laws to restrain ungodliness,
or the current sins in the world; yea, suppose that vices are authorized by
Law; does either Pastors or society of Christians get an increase of power of
Jurisdiction and Legslation, if they be a Law unto themselves, and practice the
duties of piety, and exhort one another so to do; Plinius the younger, in the
97 Epistle to Trajan, and the tenth book where he speaks of Christians, says,
that one of their crimes was, that they joined themselves in a covenant, to
live unblameably, not to steal, not to commit fornication, not to defraud his
neighbor, and the like; I believe that none will from that practice of the
Christians, argue that they took upon them more power for so doing, then they
durst under a Christian Magistrate, except he were of the mind of some of late
in Authority, in England, who disliked and endeavored to suppress all godly
private meetings, under pretense of Factions. Sure if I mistake it not, it will
be found that the Pastors power of the Keys, had no life to compel the
disobedient to Gods ordinances, till they received it from the Sovereign
Magistrate, when he gave his name to Christ, who both more honored and exalted
Gods ordinances, raising them from the dust, and added weight to the heavenly
messages, by the mouth of the Ministers, by being a terror to the evil, and
punishing the ungodly. To the power of persuasion and declaration he adds
that of coaction; in which the Pastors have nothing to do. The Bishop, says
Saint Paul, must not be a striker, (...). And hereupon Chrysostom says well,
If a man is drawn from the faith, the Priest must undertake with patience to
exhort him; for he cannot redress him by force, only he must strive to
persuade him, to bring him to the right Faith. Pastors, says the same Father,
are appointed to preach, (...), not to rule or command with authority.

Letter.
HEre I dare say, that the Reformers of the Doctrine of the Pope, have not
retained the Keys that were under Popery. In reforming the Doctrine, they have
also reformed the abuses cleaving, to the Keys which are abominable,; for in
the Romish Church, they extend the power of the Keys, so far as pardoning
sins in a judicial way, saying to the sinner, I absolve thee from thy
sins. The Priest renders himself Judge, in a cause wherein God is the party
offended: By virtue of these Keys the Pope draws souls out of Purgatory; he
loses those he never bound, and which are none of his flock: he does loose
under earth, because Jesus Christ has said, what ever you shall bind on earth:
he does loose and dispense with oaths and vows, and freeth Subjects from the
obedience due to their Sovereign Prince; he separates marriages, exempting
also children from the obedience they owe to their Father, and Mother. These
holy men of God, who have reformed the Doctrine, have left off those Keys, and
kept those which Jesus Christ has given to his Disciples, and their
successors, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven; it was also
impossible to reform the Doctrine, without reforming the Keys, since those
Keys are a part of the Doctrine; they have retained to themselves, the power
to bind and loose, which Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples, Math. 16.
Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc which power goes no further then
Ecclesiastical censures, as the Lord Jesus Christ teaches, in the same place;
giving to understand, that by this binding, the rebellious sinner is put among
the Publicanes and sinners, who were excluded from the Communion of the Church:
Thus we must understand the power of remitting, or reteining sins given by
Jesus Christ to his Disciples. The faithful Pastors do remit sins when they
release men of Ecclesiacall penalties, and receive to the Communion of the
Church the repenting sinner who was excluded.

Consideration.
THe Reformers have done as Richard the third, in usurping a power which yet he
exercised with moderation, and making of good Laws; so did Augustus Caesar and
some more: Thus the Reformers have retained the Keys, to which they had no
more right, then the Pastors of the Romish Church, but have taken away those
adjuncts of abuses, and abominations, adhering to the power of the Keys. In
that sense, as Richard the third, may be said to have usurped the Crown, as
well as he, who to usurpation has added a tyrannical Government, and making
of wicked and unjust Laws; so may it be said that the Reformers, in reforming
the Doctrine, have retained the power of the Keys: the Article thus speaking,
having no further meaning then to say that the Reformers, in reforming the
Doctrine have still challenged to themselves an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
not belonging to the Civil Magistrate; even as the Pastors of the Romish
Church have donc; though not the same for qualifications. As for the meaning of
the words dic Ecclesiae, tell it unto the Church, it cannot have much strength,
what ever interpretation one may give to the words; whether by the word Church
we understand a Synagogue, or judicatory, as was that of the Jews, amongst
which there was no difference between Church, and State, or Commonwealth, or a
society of faithful men: and though by the Church Pastors should be
understood, I do not see here any Judicial sentence binding him that
trespasseth against his neighbor, but still he may, if he will, hearken
without fear of any coercive power seated in the Ministers; and the words, Let
him be to thee a heathen or a publican, have no further meaning then have him
for such a one in thy thoughts and estimation: a Publicans office was lawful,
neither yet could he be excluded from the communion, nor from the congregation;
the very heathen not being excluded from the latter; for how else could they
have been converted?

Letter.
THE Reformers then, in reforming the abuses in the Doctrine, and Keys, have
retained the Keys, and power to bind, and unbind, committed to them by Jesus
Christ: The Author of the Articles acknowledges, that the Pastors of the
Church have well done, to retain that power under the heathen Emperors, that
is, almost for the space of 350 years from Christ to Constantine, the first
Christian Emperor; since which Emperor, the said Author thinks, that the
Bishops and Pastors were to part with that Power; and that the Sovereign Power
of the Keys, did no longer belong to them, but that they were to desert it, in
obedience to God, which yet they have not done; for all the ancient Councels,
although convened by the will of the Emperors, are full of penitential
canons, prescribing the form, time, and degrees, for public pennances; in
the execution of which canons, the consent of the Emperors, nor of their
Lieutenants was never expected.

Consideration.
WE have seen before, that the power of the Ministers is neither increased, nor
diminished, whether the Magistrate be Orthodox, or no; and that the power of
the keys, given them by God, has more lively actings under the Orthodox
Magistrate. To that part of the Letter, which says, that in the execution of
the canons, the consent of the Emperors was never expected; I say, that the
Emperors themselves understood that their consent was not required in the
execution of the canons, which, as they were Acts of his, so might he disannull
them, add to them, or repeal them, by his Sovereign Authority he had over all
persons and causes. In the year 815. Charles the great is said to have added
something of his own to the decrees of the Synod held in Theodon Town; hoc de
nostro adijcimus: and for the authority of the supreme Magistrate, in
altering, changing, or expunging the decrees of Synods, Bochellus says, that
Charles the Bald, did reject a great part of what was set forth in Synods by
the Bishops, in the year 856. and, that it was the usual custom, when ever
Synods were assembled, that their decrees were not ratified, till the King in
his Privy Council had approved of them; the said King taking away what he
disliked, as it was practiced by the Councels of Tours and Cabilon, under
Charles the Great, and as P. Pithoeus has proved fully. And for the Power of
the Sovereign Magistrate, to make his Laws as valid as canons, and as
authentical as Synods decrees, I would go no further for a witness, then
what is related by the Agents and Orators of the Council of Trent, as may be
seen amongst the Acts. The most Christian Kings (say they) have made many
decrees about sacred things, following the examples of Constantine, Theodosius,
Valentinian, Justinian, and other Christian Emperors, and ordained several
Ecclesiastical Laws, which they have put amongst their own decrees. But, that
the execution of the ancient canons, were as much acts of the Emperors, as the
execution of decrees made in Chancery, or other Courts, are acts of the
Sovereign Magistrate, though he never hears of it. It can be easily proved, by
the liberty that the Sovereign Powers have always kept to themselves, to
dispense with pennances, imposed by the canons. Gervasius, a Bishop, being
excommunicated, was again received to the communion by Juo Carnutensis, by the
order and appointment of the King of France, Philip the 1. This scandalized
other Bishops; whereupon, Juo, though a great friend to the Popes, in a letter
to his fellow-Bishops, justifies himself, and the King; saying, That the
Assembly of Priests and people, ought to receive to the communion, whom the
Kings piety has thought worthy of it. In the like language speaks John,
Bishop of Rome, in the 181 Epistle, to Justinian; I beseech your Clemency, to
receive them to the unity of the Church, and to your communion, if they will
forsake their error.

Letter.
THose Reformers have believed, that the change of Religion in Soueraign
Princes, could not take away what Jesus Christ had given them, although it was
a change for the better: They remembered Christ's words, commanding him that has
received an offense of his neighbor, to tell it to the Church; that is, to the
assembly of Pastors and Rulers of the Churches; and they were persuaded, that
this command was perpetual, and to remain in force to the end of the world:
When the Lord bestowed upon his Disciples the gift of working Miracles, and
speaking Tongues; In this gift, they have not had any successors, because the
miracles done by the Apostles, are useful to this day, to confirm and
strengthen the Gospel: but the graces, and callings, granted for the peace of
conscience, and for reconciling penitent sinners, and maintaining the Church in
good order, ought to be perpetual, and the Apostles were merely trusted with
them, that they should transmit them to Posterity: and it is certain, that the
pardon granted by the Apostles to some in their times, (namely, to the
Corinthian incestuous person) cannot be of use to sinners of these days; these
graces and actions being personal. The same Reformers have considered, that as
there are various turns of the things of this world, and the wills of the great
ones of the world, are subject to mutability; it may fall out, that in a
country where the Magistrate is Orthodox, the same Magistrate may come to be an
heretic, idolater, or persecutor, and therefore it is not expedient, that the
spiritual graces and callings should depend of the instability of temporal
things, and of the changes which may happen in States and Commonwealths. If so
be the Pastors under an Orthodox Magistrate, had resigned to him the power of
the keys, no doubt but the Magistrate Idolater, who succeeds, would not
permit the Pastors of the Church to resume the authority, which they so
willingly did forgo.

Consideration.
Whether the Magistrate be Orthodox, or no, the maine duty, and action of a
Christian, depends not of the Magistrate; as, to fear God, and keep his
commandments, to bebeleeve in Jesus Christ; yea, even when the Magistrate is
most averse, he cannot hinder the last action of martyrdom, from being an
honorable badge of Jesus Christ, sealing the truth of the Gospel with his
blood. Now, whereas the letter says, that, had the Pastors quitted the power
of the keys to an Orthodox Magistrate, a succeeding Magistrate that were an
idolater, would not permit them to resume it; there can be no such fear, for as
an orthodox Magistrate permitting for some reasons of State, an Idolatrous
religion, will either disdain, or make a scruple of conscience to have a hand in
regulating an Idolatrous worship, but will leave to the Professors, the whole
ordering of their Religion, so it be not to the disturbance of the State. In
like manner will an Idolatrous Magistrate deal with Orthodox Christians within
his Dominions, and not so much vouchsafe to know what is that power of the
Keys, much less to have the handling of them: If he can but hold the Sword,
it matters little to him who handles the Keys.

Letter.
I Wish, the Author of the Articles had explained himself more fully, and
since he is of opinion, that the Pastors under a faithful and orthodox
Magistrate, ought in obedience to God, to render to him that power which they
had under a Magistrate of contrary Religion, he had alleged some places of
Scripture proving that such a command is laid upon them that God may be obeyed.

Consideration.
COmmon sense teaches us, that when a Prince, either through incapacity,
ignorance, or minority knows not the extent of his just power, he may upon
knowledge thereof extend it further, and behave himself otherwise upon better
thought or instruction. Thus if a Prince being a heathen knows not that his
chief duty and office is to govern, adorn, and defend the Christian Religion,
and people, and to promote the salvation of those which are under his
Government; who doubts but afterward giving his name to Christ he is above all
other cares obliged to care what heretofore he did not know to concern his
care; and if when he was a heathen; the Pastors did supply that, wherein he was
deficient, there is no question to be made, when afterward he is a Christian,
but that their duty is not only to render him his own, but also instruct him,
and make him know the extent of his power, and tell him his duty is to throw
his scepter at the feet of Christ, and mainly seek and care for the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God: And likewise if the said Magistrate upon
deliberation takes that charge upon him; who doubts, but that (although the
duties of the Pastors be never the less) their burden is so much the lighter
and that they have less to care for. The civil Lawyers tell us, that if a man
by Will, is appointed Guardian to a Pupil, and cannot produce the Will, the
sovereign Magistrate may ordain any one to be Guardian till the Will be
produced: This is the very case, and the application is easy, that the
Sovereign Magistrate is set Tutour over the Christian people, by the will of
God; now the while a Will is concealed, it is well if some body takes care of
the Ward; and it matters not much, who be the Guardian, so that the Ward do not
suffer damage in his person or estate; but when the Will is produced to the
Supreme Magistrate, good reason then, he should discharge the part of a
faithful Tutour, and the maine trust laid on him, and intended in the Will,
which is, that those that are under his tuition may inherit the Kingdom of
heaven. To that purpose the Author of the book de regimine Principum, ascribed
to Thomas Aquinas, has a golden saying, The end which principally the King
must intend in himself, and Subjects, is eternal beatitude, which consists
in the vision of God, and because that vision is the most perfect good, every
King or Lord, is chiefly to endeavor himself, that his Subjects may attain to
that end.

Letter.
ANd since the Scripture says, the Church is made up of two kinds of persons,
viz. Shepherd and sheep, he should have declared, whether he ranked the
Magistrate amongst the Pastors or Sheep.

Consideration.
THE Magistrate is among the Sheep in relation to the Pastor; as he is a
Patient in respect of his Physician, and a Disciple in respect of his master,
teaching him Arts and Sciences, and in a ship he is but one of the vectores in
relation to him that guides the Ship, and sits at the stern: Beside in some
regard, the Sovereign Magistrate is the Pastor, as David is so called, and the
Christian people the Sheep: these relations being mutable accidents, and not
inseparable properties, do not in themselves either abase, or elevate the
nature of the Subject.

Letter.
THis also is a point worthy the consideration. If when a Magistrate lives
disorderly, and is guilty of enormous crimes, the Pastor may not deal with him
with reprehensions and admonitions, and when the Pastor sees apparently that
such a Magistrate cannot be partaker of the holy Supper of the Lord but to his
condemnation, whether he may let him perish without reproving and advertising
of him. Consideration

AS a Magistrate being sick, is subject to the orders of the Physician; so as a
Sheep, he is no less, yea, more subject to the power of the Keys, then the
meanest of the flock: for the more he is exposed to contagious vices, which he
does countenance by his example, the more need has he of antidotes and
preservatives. It was an old and true saying, miser est Imperator cui vera
reticentur. The power of the Keys declaring from God a message; no doubt but
the Sovereign Magistrate is equally concerned to hear God speaking, as any one
of the common people.

Letter.
ANd since the Author of these Articles says that the Sovereign Magistrate,
ought to have in all causes and actions, and over all persons an absolute
power, so that he commands not any thing contrary to the word of God (for in
these cases he holds disobedience to be just,) it had been needful that the
said Author had told us, who shall be Judge, whether the Magistrates commands
are repugnant to Gods commandments, in case any difference be moved thereupon?

Consideration.
TO this question I answer, that none can be a visible Judge, but he that is
the Sovereign power of the Commonwealth, and though he judges erroneously
and partially, he has only God that shall judge him. Pastors or
Congregations, must either acquiesce to his judgment and decision as being
only legal, or they must suffer for righteousness sake. Now if one says,
the Pastors must be Judges, this Judgment must be, either of authority, or of
discretion. This latter judgment is that by which every man having reason and
conscience, is able to discern what is true, what is false, what is fit and
useful, and what is unprofitable and hurtful: by this judgment every Pastor,
yea, any other man, may judge of the wrong ways the Magistrate takes; and the
Pastor may go yet further, for being convinced in his judgment and
conscience, that the Magistrate lives in an ungodly way, he may and must
press unto his conscience Gods word, and his Judgments; but by the first kind
of judgment which is of Authority, I do not conceive the Pastors can judge the
Sovereign Magistrate, only they must strive to persuade him, counsel him, and
use no other forcible arms, then prayers to God and tears. Lachrymae meae arma
sunt, says St. Ambros to the Emperor Valentinian II. for it cannot be
conceived that two sovereign powers can stand together in a State; and
Civilians have ever so contrived Laws and Courts, as they do not justle and
clash one against another. Thus though paternall right is most natural and
ancient, yet have they always subjected it to the Sovereign Magistrate, and
make that yield to this; Now, as they make three kinds of actions,
Ecclesiastical, Judicial, and Military: suppose the Sovereign power
Ecclesiastical should bid a man to go to Church; the second power should bid
him to go to the market and the third power to the Leaguer; I demand, how shall
this man be able to fulfill all these commands at once; belike he will obey
none, for as says Tacitus, ubi omnes praecipiunt, nemo exequitur, when all do
command, there is none that obey, therefore, there must be an order among the
powers, one being subaltern to the other; else you can no more conceive a
parity of powers, then two Gods in the world.

Letter.
ANd because ofttimes, dicussions may happen in the discussion of the true
Doctrine, and upon points of great concernment to the Christian Religion, the
author of these Articles should have declared whether he understands that the
Sovereign Magistrate is to decide those controversies? and whether his meaning
is, that the Supreme counsel be made up of Divines expert in these matters.

Consideration?
THough the Sovereign power should have little or no insight in things
pertaining to the Kingdom of heaven; yet being by Gods providence the Supreme
Judicature of the Country; this must be taken for a Judgment of God, who, as
it is said in the 4th of Daniel in his wrath sets the most contemptible amongst
men; and children, for Kings, even children in judgment, over the people, that
they may depend more on the King of Heaven. Yet the most part what they want in
personal abilities to act of themselves, they recompense in judgment and
discretion about the choice of Counselors; many unlearned Fathers, and
unacquainted in the ways of education of children, will have a good sagacity
in choosing able Tutours for their children; In like manner the Sovereign
Magistrate may wisely order the course of Law, Sciences, Arts, Trades,
Manufactures, though he be litttle or nothing versed at all in any of them. And
if it were required that the Sovereign power should be exactly conversant in
all the actions they order, there had need to be in a State so many Sovereign
powers as there be acts and disciplines; and were they never so capable, yet
they will do wisely to choose able Counselors; much more in a matter of so
high importance, as is the deciding of controversies in Religion, and ordering
the actions belonging to the Kingdom of heaven, ubi magna negotia, magnis
egent adjutoribus: and amongst those Counselors, none will be so fit as
Divines, men of Learning, Gravity, and Piety. Thus if the Sovereign power
goes about to reform the abuses of several Professions, and Arts within his
Dominions, as for example of Physic, no doubt but he will join with his
Counsel, the most skillful of that Art. But that the Pastors or Ministers,
are not the fittest to have a Supreme Jurisdiction over persons and causes,
they call Ecclesiastical, reason, and the sad experience of former times
teaches us: for were they endowed with knowledge by Revelation; and had
Ecclesiastical Assemblies compounded merely of Divines, a non-erring gift not
communicable to any other Assemblies of men; I should willingly, and
necessarily admit that Divines ought to be assisting the Christian Magistrate,
not only as Counselors, but also as Judges coequall to them, yea, Superiors
in that Jurisdiction, which they challenge to themselves; but the gifts of
Government, being not inseparably joined with those of preaching, and the
Ministers not being endowed with (...), or infallibility more then those that
sit at the Stern of the State can be; I do not see but that their proper place,
and employment, is to be counselors to the Sovereign power in matters
belonging to the Kingdom of heaven. But being fallen insensibly upon the rank
and station that Ministers ought to keep in a Christian Commonwealth, because
it is a matter complicate with the question in hand, concerning the pretended
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction distinct from the Civil, it will not be amiss to
discuss, which of the Governments, either by Bishops, or only Presbyters is
most consistent, and compatible with the peace and safety of a Christian
Protestant State. If it be admitted on all sides, that there is but one power
of Legislation and Jurisdiction, in all causes, and over all persons belonging
to the Supreme Magistrate, I conceive that then Bishops and overseers set over
many Congregations; besides that they are more agreeable with the Primitive
institution, will much ease the Supreme power of the care they must take in
ordering persons and causes nearer concerning the Kingdom of heaven: for his
inspection being but over the Bishops, Factions and Heresies will not so easily
spread among the multitude of the Christian people; as if he were immediately
to overlook the actions of the great body of Presbyters, who being numerous,
may easily escape his eyes, and have a greater freedom to innovate. Therefore
Moses being Supreme in all causes, and over all persons, It was a wise counsel
of Jethro his father in Law to wish him to set under him men over the people,
who besides that, they bore the burden with him; those men being far less for
number then the people, it was easy for Moses to oversee them. But under those
Magistrates who should condescend to a divided and distinct Jurisdiction, one
being civil and exercised by themselves; the other Ecclesiastical and of
Divine right belonging to the Ministers of the Gospel; In that case I do
conceive that few Bishops set over Presbyters, and being Independent from any
other power, have a greater opportunity to Lord and tyrannize over the
Christian people, then a numerous company of Presbyters of the same rank and
equal Authority can have.

Letter.
NOw for that, the Author of the articles would have this distinction of civil
and spiritual abolished; it is a thing very hard to change and alter the nature
of things, as if one would take away the distinction betwixt black and white:
Let men do what they can, and say what they will, the questions about Faith
will be still spiritual things; and suites in Law, for money, or houses, will
be still civil and temporal matters: If we change the words, the nature of
things cannot suffer alteration.

Consideration.
THe Magistrate is no more head of two things, Church and State, then of
thousand kinds of actions in a Christian Commonwealth, which, for every one of
them, needs not a particular Sovereign a Power: Now, these two things,
Christian Church, and Commonwealth, cannot be so much as conceived to have a
real being without each other; for, as every man is a reasonable creature, and
every reasonable creature a man; so, every Christian Commonwealth is a Church,
and every Christian Church a Commonwealth; I speak of those Churches, that have
as large, and spacious extent of place, as the Commonwealth it self; for, in
some other sense, a family in a house is called a Church, and according to that
acception, every Church should not be a Christian Commonwealth; I think the
Church is not different from the Christian Commonwealth, more then the
understanding is from the Soul; for as powers and faculties are believed by
great Philosophers not to be distinguished really from the Soul; however,
though there should be a difference, it cannot be so distinct, as that the
power can have a distinct being from the Soul, but that at least all powers are
subaltern, and subordinate to the chief power, called (...), which sits at the
stern of all faculties, and directs and modifies all actions though never so
several, contributing as well to ratiocination, and vision, as to the coction
and expulsion. In the like manner, that Sovereign power, in a State, though
one in essence, has its several faculties or powers, from which several
actions do stream tending to the ordering of the whole man, in his being and
wellbeing, as well in things of the inward man, as the outward. And to follow
he analogy between the body of man, and the State, it is no little illustration
to beget belief; that as the primum movens, or Sovereign power is one, and
extends it self as far, as it is circumscribed by the cuticula or thin skin;
there being not one Sovereign power for the head, another for the lower
regions, and a third for the hands and feet. So in a State bounded, as England,
by certain limits, no doubt if it be one State or Comon-wealth, it has one
Sovereign power; reaching as well to Cumberland, as to Kent and Cornwall, over
all persons, actions and causes; for if some persons or causes were exempted,
as for example, the persons and causes they call Ecclesiastical within the
same limits of Land; I do not conceive that there can be any such power, nor
can I Imagine where that power in matters Ecclesiastical or ordering Church
ways should reside, by which the Supreme Civil Magistrate is bounded; but
there may be as well ten thousand Supreme powers and Courts Ecclesiastical
within England, as one single general power; for the Civil Magistrates
Jurisdiction being distinct from the Ecclesiastical, he may not hinder that
multiplication of powers; every one of these powers assuming to be sui Juris in
sacred things: or if he hinders it, and prevails to have but one Sovereign
power in Church matters in all his Dominions; this very act of prevailing will
be a sufficient demonstration that there is but one Sovereign power over all
causes and persons Ecclesiastical and Civil: and indeed the taking away the
branch of the Jurisdiction, and power of the Christian Sovereign Magistrate, in
things pertaining to the Kingdom of heaven, is as much as to destroy all
Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction; for besides that, this makes the
Magistrate but a cipher or zero in sacred things, it abolisheth all
Ecclesiastical Discipline, Parish meetings, public and uniforme exercises of
the ordinances, which cannot be performed, but by the supreme Magistrates
ordering, permission, or at least, connivence; and it reduces all Church ways
to the congregational; which way, though it cannot be disproved, all men
naturally having a power to associate themselves, upon their ordinary affairs,
without the Supreme Powers leave, or ordering: much more when those meetings
are pious, innocent, and without danger to the public weal: yet, if there be
no other Church Way within all the Dominions of the Sovereign Magistrate, then
the Congregationall; not only all Power of the Keys, and Jurisdiction in
Church Matters, is quite taken away from the Christian Magistrate; but also,
all Presbyteries, Classes, Synods, and with them, their Power and Jurisdiction
vanishes, and comes to nothing; and in truth, it will come to nothing, if you
do not make that public ordering of Church Way, setting up of Ordinances,
uniformity of Catechizing, confession of Faith, discipline, censures, to be a
branch of the Legislation, and Jurisdiction, which the Sovereign Christian
Magistrate is to have over all causes, persons, and actions: for, in Gods name,
where can that Power in Church matters be seated, but in the Christian
Magistrate? May be you will seat it in all the Christian people, within the
Magistrates Dominions: But, by this, the Christian people having the Sovereign
Power in Ecclesiastical, shall have the liberty, not only, as I said before,
to make, as in England, either one, two, or more, yea, ten thousand National
Churches, as far differing one from the other in Rites and Constitutions, as
the Scottish Church is from the English, and the English from the French: the
word of God not stinting, whether associated Christians ought to be many, or
few, in one body; or whether many bodies, or few, in one Nation, as England;
and whether they must be a collection of Churches joined in one body of a
National Church, or not? And, which is more, this absurdity, and great
inconvenience, will follow from this dividing of Powers, that it will be free
for Christians to erect in two contiguous Countries, under two distinct
Magistrates, as France, and the Territory of Geneva, one collective body of
Churches, ruled by the same Synods and Decrees, under one Sovereign Power in
Ecclesiastical; and thus shall you have, not Imperium in Imperio, but Imperium
in duobus Imperijs, a confusion of Empires; for, who may have right to keep
them from so doing? If you say, that both the neighbor Sovereign civil
Powers may hinder them; to that I say, either it is an usurpation in them to
do so, or if not, then that Power by which the Church is ordered, is
subordinate to the Sovereign Christian Magistrate, which is all I intended to
make good. But it may be said again, that all the Christians, or all the
Congregations, who are big enough to make a Church, (such as the little number
of two or three of Christ in the Gospel, gathered together in Christ's name)
within the Dominions of the Sovereign civil Power, will have that humane
wisdom, as to erect but one National Church, and of the same latitude and
extent that the Dominions are: To that I say, that this very liberty, and
humane wisdom, which they make use of, without a certain prescript from God,
does sufficiently evidence, that they make use of the same guide, which the
Supreme Power does employ in the governing of the State; and, that since
humane wisdom must be be called to help, for the ordering of these two
things, they will have to be distinct, viz. the Church, and State; none can be
better trusted with them then the Supreme Power of the State, where the Church
must be constituted; and indeed, the Christian Emperors have always modelled
the Church after the fashion of the State, or, if you will, the State after the
Church, because they were to depend of one supreme Power; for, as they had
Bishops in every City, whose bounds and extent was called (...), a Parish; so
had they a Defensor Civitatis; and in every Province, the Archbishop, or
Metropolitan, was answerable to the Praeses, or Proconsul: and in every
Diocese, the Primate, or Patriarch, was like the Lieutenant, or Vicarius, or
Legatus. To sum up all, as the primum movens in the natural body extends
it self to all parts and functions of the body; so the Sovereign Power in a
State, has an equal Jus Imperij in Ecclesiastical and civil matters: And as
the sensitive and vital parts are equally extended, and circumscribed by the
same limits; so all the causes, of what kind soever they be, are bounded by the
same supreme Power within the same limits of land, as if on the North side,
Barwick is the bound of the civil Power of England; so is it of the
Ecclesiastical. But it may be demanded, how the sovereign Power may be said
to have Jus Imperij in Divine Laws? I answer, that properly, the office of a
Sovereign Power is only ministerial, and in regard of God, it is rather an
administration, then a power; but in regard of men, because it binds to
obedience, it is a Power, and Authority: Now, his Law is either just, or unjust;
if unjust, yet the obedience to it, being not sinful, it must be obeyed as a
Law in force; for the strength of a Law does not consist in that it is just,
but in this, because it is a Law ordained by him who has Authority: Now, if
this Law be just, it must be obeyed for two reasons, viz. first, for conscience
sake, and for wrath, that is the tie of every Christian, in all the commands of
the Magistrate, is to obey God, and do whatsoever just and honest thing lies
in ones power; then, for fear of punishment; for any precept, though moral,
and never so just, although it binds the conscience, yet it is no Law binding
to obedience in foro humano, till it be reduced into a Law by the Legislative
Power of the Sovereign Magistrate; for even the supreme power, though
Christian and godly, cannot punish a theife for transgressing the commandment,
Thou shall not steal, except this Law be also a Law of the State. But again,
it may be demanded, what authority and power do you entitle on the Ministers
of the Gospel, to whom the Scripture commits the power of the Keys, and
gives high Titles, Names, and Eloges? I answer, that still they have the
highest honor in the world, even higher then the Magistrates and Kings; higher
then Judges; for all men shall be judged by their Gospel: they are Ambassadors
from Christ, to earthly powers: as the Kingdom committed to them, is not of
this world; so their weapons are not earthy, but spiritual, and sharper then
any two edged sword; they condemn, when they do denounce the judgments of God
to impenitent sinners; they pardon, declaring the mercies of God to penitent
and mourning sinners; they rebuke all kinds of men, teach, exhort, admonish,
and have a kind of power and authority; binding as much, or more to obedience,
then the commands of the Sovereign Magistrate; for a man once convinced by the
preaching of the word; the word of of the Minister, apprehended to be the truth
of God, or a command from God, will be like the Intellect, which being
enlightened does more powerfully work upon the will to act, then when it is
compelled by an external agent: and even civilly, the respect one has to an
Artist, binds in a manner to follow his prescriptions. It Is no marvel then if
Theodosius being rebuked sharply by Ambros, yielded to a censure, rather coming
from God, which he was willing to undergo, being conscious of his sinfulness
and deserts; then that it proceeded from a man endowed with a coercive power of
excommunication, to which not to yield had been a rebellion against God: as
Christ alone is the true spiritual Legislatour, so he alone does either
(withold or remit sins Solus (says Hilarious the Deacon) peccata dimittit,
qui solus pro peccatis nostris mortuus est, and the words of Lombard are very
express to show the extent of the power of the Keys. Sacerdotibus tribuit
Deus potestatem solvendi, and ligandi; id est, ostendendi homines solutos vel
ligatos, God gives the Priests power to loose and bind, that is to make known
they are either tied or loosed, li. 4. dis. 18. Saint Hierome upon the 26. of
Matthew. teaches us what this potestas Clavium is, as the Priest makes the
Leprous, either clean, or unclean, so does the Bishop or Priest bind or unbind;
and saint Cyprian, lib. de lapsis, and other where, says, that by the
preaching of Ministers men receive not forgivenes of sins, but are brought by
it to be converted, by getting a Knowledge of their sins. And saint Augustine
in many places says, that the Minister is some body in the administering of the
Sacraments and dispensing the word, but no body for the Justification of a
sinner, and for working inwardly, except he that made man, works in the man.
Were the nature of Christ's Kingdom well understood, I suppose that the power
of the Keys would be easily stated: I mean that Kingdom and power, by which
Christ works by his word and spirit upon the spirits of men, inclining them
to do his will, by persuading, and not constraining them by any coercive power
delegated to the Apostles and their successors in the Ministry: Christ himself
says, he is not come into the world to Judge the world, but that the world
should be saved by his preaching: And the comparing of Christ's Kingdom to a
grain of Mustard seed, and to leaven hid in the dough, shows manifestly, that
this Kingdom is propagated by secret persuasions, and workings, and not by a
Judicial external power seated in the Ministers constraining to obededience,
upon bodily or pecuniary penalties. Were the visible Kingdom of Christ, a
different Kingdom from that of the Christian Magistrate, we should read in the
Gospel of some Laws, besides those about the sacraments, for the regulating of
the said Kingdom: The precepts to believe, to repent, and to be baptized are
no such Laws, that for the nonperformance of them, men should incur
punition or damnation: for the not obeying of the Evangelicall precepts, is an
argument that the wrath of God is upon the transgressors, and not an effect
following upon the transgression. He that does not believe in Christ is
condemned already: man refusing to accept of the remedy in the Gospel, is left
to his former miserable estate; and the Law only takes hold of him. Now this
Law denouncing both temporal and eternal punishment to the transgressors, it
is evident that the power to judge in the world according to that Law, in
ordering all causes, and punishing all kinds of persons transgressing, does
belong only to one Sovereign power, subaltern, not to Christ as the Sovereign
Preacher and Mediator, but as God in Trinity, and Trinity in unity; or as God
Creator and Supreme Governor over all causes, persons, estates, and
conditions, temporal or eternal.

Letter.
A Midst all these difficulties, it will be a work pleasing to God, to find a
mean to keep the caling of the Ministry of the Gospel in the posture and
condition as it was established by Jesus Christ, without any abating and
diminishing of the dignity and power of the Sovereign Magistrate, and I
believe, that just and easy means may be found out.

Consideration.
THere is but one means, which is that of Queen Elisabeth, King James, and of
Hooker in his book of Ecclesiastical polity, wherein under the words of Royal
power, Crown and dignity, he teaches us, that all power and Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical is derived from the Supreme power of England, and is upholden
and defended by him: The words of the Act Elizab. 1. cap. 1. are very express,
omitting nothing which can be of Pastors and Synods cognizance, which be not
mentioned to be of the Jurisdiction of the Supreme Magistrate. All
Ecclesiastical and spiritual Jurisdiction is annexed to the Crown, to visit
reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such heresies, schisms, abuses,
offenses, contempts, and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner, spiritual
or Ecclesiastical power, authority or Jurisdiction, can, or may be lawfully
reformed. In the same statute, it is enacted and ordained that no opinion shall
be judged or determined to be heresy, but by the high Court of Parliament of
the Realm.

Letter.
WE have already laid down for a firm and constant ground and ordained by God,
that all Ecclesiastical persons are subject to the Sovereign Magistrate, in
whose hands God has put the Sword; and that he has power over the lives and
goods of the Pastors of the Church, and may justly punish them when they are
perturbators of the public peace, and become obnoxious by their wicked lives:
that the duty of the Magistrate is to restrain them if they behave themselves
tyrannically in the use of the Keys, and break the peace of the State.

Consideration.
THis alone is sufficient to evince, that in a Christian Commonwealth, there
can be but one Sovereign power, over all persons, causes, and actions, for it
is absurd to conceive that the Supreme Magistrate has power over the person of
the Minister, and not over the actions and causes for which he may, and must be
punished by the said Magistrate, and it is no less absurd to conceive that the
Magistrate may justly put to death a Minister, or punish him with banishment
and yet may not have the power to degrade him: it being a rule in philosophy,
that if the whole be in the power, much more a part of the whole; and if the
same Supreme Magistrate may justly degrade him; who doubts but he may as justly
challenge to himself the right of choosing him; else (which is all one as if he
had chosen the Pastor himself) he may put by, not only the said Pastor, but
so many, (one after another) as are substituted by the power they call
Ecclesiastical, till the Pastor chosen be according to his own mind.

Letter.
ANd because it might fall out, that in National, and Provincial Synods, the
overseers of Churches should transgress the limits of their calling, and
meddle with civil affairs, in which the Civil Magistrate is interessed; it
stands with reason, that these Synods be not convened without the will and
consent of the Sovereign: the ancient Emperors have yet done more then that;
for in the universal Councils, they have been present; as Constantine in the
Council of Nicaea and Marcian at the opening of the Chalcedoine Council: or in
their stead, they have sent Earls, Patrices, or Consuls, as we may see in the
Acts of the Council of Chalcedoine, and the II. Council of Nicaea; in the said
Acts we see that the said Patrices and Earls abated the insolency of some
Bishops, and commanded them absolutely. The title given them by the Council
was Gloriosissimi Iudices.

Consideration.
THis likewise proves the necessity of one Sovereign power over all persons,
meetings, causes, and actions: Synods, being assemblies, of wise and learned
Councillors, to advise the Supreme power, in matters of Doctrine and
Discipline: as the Supreme Magistrates power is to call them, so to determine
the members that are called to it, as Marsilius Patavinus says, Generale
concilium convocare personas ad hoc idoneas determinare pertinet ad
Legislatoris authoritatem. part 2. cap. 20. and not only so, he only does
preside, and reserveth himself the faculty of approving, disproving, examining
and rejecting what he thinks fit, even after the Synod is broken up, and their
conclusions and Canons are ratified by him as the Ecclesiasti-Historie tells us.

Letter.
AS for decisions of points touching Doctrine of faith; although the Emperors
never judged of these matters, yet did they maintain their authority giving
Judges to whom they commanded to decide the differences; as Constantine did
when the Donatists came to complain to him: for he gave them some Bishops for
Judges,, to whose Judgment they not yielding, he called a Council to
pronounce a definitive sentence; but these Judges which the Emperor gave to
decide matter of Doctrine, were always Bishops, and Ecclesiastical persons;
by that means, the Emperonr kept his authority over Bishops.

Consideration.
OBserve, that not the Churches, nor the Synods, but the Emperor names the
Judges. The difference was betwixt the Donatists, and other Bishops of Africa:
the Donatists, with a great deal of submission, besought the Emperor to give
them Judges out of France. The Emperor gave them 3 French, and with them,
Miltiades, Bishop of Rome: It Is here further to be observed, that (as the
Letter says) the Donatists did not condescend to the determinations of the 4
Judges, which is not to be understood, as if they rejected the sentence of the
Judges, or of the Emperor, as issued from incompetent Judges, or appealed to a
Synod; for quite contrary, they appealed to the Emperor, who indeed thereupon,
called another Synod, to compose the controversy, which was about Caecilianus,
accused by the Donatists of many crimes, and to have been unduly elected: from
that Synod, in which they were condemned, they appealed again to the Emperor,
who, for the second time, called another Council at Arles, of which, the
Donatists not being satisfied, that Caecilianus should be confirmed in his Sea
of Carthage, appealed the third time, from the Council, to the Emperor, who
condemned the Donatists, and banished them: Neither were the Donatists
ignorant, that the decision of the Emperor, should be the ultimate definitive
judgment. And the very Bishops did use to give account, of what passed in
Synods. Thus Constantine called the Bishops convened at Tyr, to him, to give an
account of what passed in the Assembly. Among the Councils of France, we read
that the heads of the debates in Synods, were referred ad sacratissimum
judicium, that is, the counsel of the King, or rather, the King himself; and,
that in the year 813. the addresses to Charles the Great, do refer the
determinations of the Council, to be examined, amended, and confirmed by him;
and, that by his wisdom, he would vouchsafe to supply what had been wanting
on their part.

Letter.
IF the Sovereign Counsill be minded to reserve to himself the decision of
points of Doctrine, and of all Ecclesiastical affairs, it were (in that case)
needful, that the Council should be composed, partly of Pastors, and Doctors,
and Ecclesiastical persons, skilled in these matters, as it was practiced in
the Palatinate before the late troubles; which is confirmed by the example
alleged by the Author of the Articles: We find (says he) that in the
Commonwealth of the Jews, in one only Synedrium, all causes were decided,
and all kinds of persons might be convented. In this Synedrium, the Nasi was
President, who usually was the High Priest, and most in it, were Priests, or
Levites. The same thing was practiced in England, before these late
alterations, there being a Sovereign Counsel, called the High Commission; in
which, the Archbishop was President, to whom were joined in Commission, as
Assessors, some Counselors at Law of the Country.

Consideration.
It Is sufficiently granted, that though it be admitted, that Ecclesiastical,
and Civil causes, are belonging to two distinct Jurisdictions, yet they may
confluere in unum, and be made of two, one, under one single Sovereign Power.
That the Powers were not divided in the Commonwealth of the Jews, it may be
easily gathered, by the Story of the Jews, from Moses, to the Captivity. Moses
himself was a Sovereign Judge, in all causes, and over all persons: no
prophet, in his time, prophesied, but the 70 Elders, who yet prophesied by the
spirit of Moses, communicated to them. In Joshuah's time, the Regal, or Civil
Supreme Power, was joined with the Sacerdotall, and seated in Eleazar, as we
may read, Numb. 27. verse. 18, 19. etc. And St. Peter, in his 1 Epistle, chap.
2. verse. 9. he coupleth them together, or rather, makes but one of them,
calling the Commonwealth of Israel, a Royal Priesthood. That these Powers
were no less divided in Samuel, appears by the word of God to him, 1 Samuel 8.
ver. 7. They have not rejected thee, but me: as if he should have said, this
people is weary to be under thy government, they must needs have a King of
their own; but in so doing, they have not so much cast thee off, as me, who
had set thee over them: After Saul, the High Priests attempted nothing, (except
it were by a special command of God) without the Kings consent: Thus when the
Book of the Law had been a long time lost, and then found, the Priests
enquired of the Lord concerning that Book, by the command and direction of
Josias; so that the supreme visible authority, to judge whether the Book
found, was to be received for the Law of Moses, and the word of God, did only
belong to the King, as we see in the 2 Book of King. chap: 22. and 23. where we
read, that the King called together all sorts of men, viz. Elders, Priests,
Prophets, and all the people, and read the Book of the Law before them all: and
withal, was the author of the Covenant, to which all the people stood; under
the word, people, all ranks of men being comprised: After the return from the
captivity, it is known, that the Sacerdotall Kingdom, was again set up, as
it was in Joshuah's time, and under the Judges.

Letter.
IN the 10th Article, he says, it is not understood, that the Sovereign
Magistrate ought to give orders; which concession, will serve to keep a part of
the authority belonging to the Ministers; for if the ordination do belong to
none but the Pastors only, it follows, that to them only belongs the
degrading, and exauctorating of Ministers, which are either vicious, or
heretics, or yet incapable. They may take away what they have given; but still
the punishing of them for crimes, is in the power of the Sovereign Magistrate.

Consideration.
THere might be yet a question made, whether, when the Supreme and Regal
Power is set in, it has not much of the Ministerial and Sacerdotall Office
annexed to the Regal calling, and paternall Right: for 1500 years together,
the Sovereign Power was joined with the Sacerdotall; and among the chief
Cities of Greece, the Kings were Priests omnino apud veteres (says Cicero) qui
rerum potiebantur, iidem auguria tenebant, ut enim sapere, sic divinare regali
ducebant. The division that was made to Aaron, was not of the Sovereign Power,
but of the exercise of the Office: Besides, Aaron was an express figure of
Christ, our great High Priest; which office, near the time of Christ, even
soon after the Captivity, was again confounded with the Regal: but not to
make use of this plea, I say it is of ordination, as of taking of the degree of
Doctor of Physic or Law, in an Academy: This co-optation, though made without
the special privacie of the Supreme Power; yet, in general, it is not done
without his consent and permission; and he has still an inspection over the man
quatenus Physician, or Lawyer, and so long as he exercises the profession: In
like manner, though the Sovereign Power does not ordain this particular man;
yet, is ordination of his appointment, and one of his Laws, though it comes
first from God; for so does the moral Law, which, notwithstanding, after it
has been published under certain penalties, becomes the Law of the Supreme
Legislator of the State: we have amongst the Constitutions of Justinian, some
bearing that title De ordinatione Episcoporum, and Clericorum.

Letter.
NOw, if the Orthodox Magistrate, under whose shadow the Church subsisteth, and
the true Religion maintained, should transgress the limits, vindicating to
himself more power over the Church, then God has given him in his Word, I
shall always give counsel to the Pastors of the Church, and to the people, to
bear that yoke with patience, without murmuring, giving thanks to God for
bestowing Magistrates, who are conservators of the purity of the Gospel, under
whose shelter and protection, the souls are directed to the way that leads to
salvation.

Consideration.
I Conceive, that if the Sovereign Magistrate takes upon him the care of
ordering Church matters, that the Pastor, and Church, have a yoke so much the
lighter, and therefore have need of less patience to bear it, then if they
carried it themselves: neither do I conceive, that the transgression here
mentioned in the Letter, can be any trespass in the Magistrate; and though it
were one, that it is not much material, nor of any dangerous consequence; he
having (as the Letter says) the maine qualification required in a Magistrate,
which is, to be conservator of the purity of the Gospel; and besides, the main
end being obtained, which can ever be desired, and aimed at, in any government,
which is to be directed to the way that leads to salvation. But suppose that
the Magistrate abuses his own power over the Christian people, in ordering the
things which concern the Kingdom of God; I do likewise conceive, that here
the Magistrate does trespass as a tyrant, and not as an usurper, and is like
him that is drunk with his own wine, and not with another; in which there is
yet a double trespass; the one against his own body, the other against the
good creature of God, which he spils to no purpose: But, as they say by way of
proverb, right, is right still, and wrong, wrong, in what ever disguise they
appear; So mischief is a mischief still, and as great a mischief in the
Sovereign Magistrate, whether his power exceeds in things they call Civil,
or things which pertain to the Kingdom of heaven; though the inconvenience be
far greater in mis-ordering the latter, God having equally entrusted him over
all persons, and causes, in a Christian Commonwealth: In the discharge of
which trust, it were to be wished, that all Christian Magistrates would govern
without that distinction of Powers, Ecclesiastical, and Civil.

FINIS.
February 25. 1649.
Imprimatur.

Nathaniel Brent.


